PRACTIQVE THEORIES: OR, Votiue Speculations UPON Abraham's entertainment of the
three Angels. Sarah, and Hagars Contention. Isaacs Marriage with Rebekah. John
Baptists Nativity or birth John Baptists Decollation or beheading. S. Peter's
Calling. S. Peter's Confession. S. Peter's Denial. S. Peter's Repentance. Upon
Saul's Cruelty. Upon Paul's Conversion.


By JOHN GAVLE.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper, for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear, 1630.

To the right Honorable, Robert, Earl of Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain of
England, long Honor upon earth, and in Heaven, Glory everlasting.
Most Honorable Lord:
A Tendrell, planted in your soil; yea, graffed in your Garden, watered with
your dew, cherished with your Sun; after some small growth, is
(notwithstanding an unhappy Remoual) bold to return you Fruit. Once was it,
when I had a perswasiue Faith, in a destination to your Lordships Service:
nevertheless cannot the injurious Distance, and discontinuance of Time and
Place (other cause, I trust is none) for bid mine utmost devotion thereunto. In
a weak manifestation whereof, I now presume to sacrifice this simple Offering
of mine, to your honorable Name: Confessing it worthless; beseeching that it
may be bettered by your Worth. So please it your good Lordship (together with
my Duty) to take notice of mine Endeauours herein: You shall see summed up in
their seuerals: An old hospitaller, kindly entertaining his new kind of
Guests: they hearfully accepting their but needles cheer. Two of one sex,
agreeing only to be Mothers; and yet as Mothers most disagreeing. A couple
coming together, to nature, and the promise: with a yoke, so wisely and
orderly undergone; that it proves not a more necessary, then delectable yoke.
A man, borne a Prophet, and more then a Prophet: a Prophet, dying a man, and
viler then a man. A Disciple taught his duty; confessing what he was taught;
denying what he confessed; Recanting what he denied. The wicked grassation of a
Tyrant; and Saints admired translation. All is (I confess) unworthy your
Lordships Name, or Notice; as being but a small thing, and occasional; Time (I
hope) and favor, may bring it as well to a Method, as to a volume.

Should I now commemorate your Noble Ancestors, and religious; predicate your
own virtues, and hopeful Progeny; it would be, but to light a Candle to your
Sun. I cannot speak, but (as the world knows) under your desert. Better
were I to say nothing; then not accordingly. Besides, I would be loath to load
your Lordships Modesty; which (I know) can content you, with the conscience of
your Worth. Let the World (that has known your Cost, Care, Toil, Hazard)
praise you; it shall be mine, to pray for you. That to your own Merits,
Honors terrestrial, may be repayed you: and for the only merits of Christ,
Glory celestial vouchsafed you. So vows

Your Honors most humbly devoted Servant, JOHN GAVLE.

Ad minus vulgarem, seu literatiorem paulo (quam pro lingua vernacula) Lectorem.
DEus bone! quam multifariae (nefariae pene dixerim) Mortalium hae Mentes? Adeo
in contraria eunt Homines studia; vt hic illi, huic ille, non vultu sane quam
Sententia diss^milior. In dijudicandis semper, ne vnus quidem, qui non est and
alius. Quasi discernere, non esset nisi dissentire: ne nullum videatur, solum
illius erit Arbitrium. Solum, inquam, aut diuersum? peruersum immo, and malum:
De industria facit, id est, Malitia; vt in deterius semper vergat trutina. Vt
vt erit Meritum; nigrum solummodo addit Calculum: Ne non intelligeret; quod non
condemnaret. Ingenium, quo quidem acrius, eo and acutius: Nec solidum vllum
putat, praeter rigidum illud Indicium. Verum enimvero, priusquam morosa haec,
and sternutantia; nutantia (rogo) illa, aut vaga, paulisper vide Capita.
Nunquam minus, sacra istiusmodi, and chara; quam cum conueniunt, conueniunt.
Est enim sensu forte; consensu nequaquam, quod accedunt. Hic illius, huius
ille, semper refragatur Sententiae. Dat vnus Album, alius Nigrum profert: Et
cui hic Calculum duntaxat, aut Limam; ille vnguem omnimodo, and Lituram.
Candide interpretatur hic totum; hic nihil non cauillatur: Alius adprobat, quod
and alius damnat: Nec eidem, de eodem, datur semper idem sentire. Breui dicam,
et plane; Iudicant plerunque homines, pro occasion, affectu, opinione; pro
ratione raro, aut cum delectu. Censent plerique omnes, prout est temperamentum
corporis, potius quam animi iudicium. Pro examine haud determinant, et
consideratione; sed pro impetu certe, and libidine. Estque hoc modo, pro
arbitrio, arbitrium. O varias, nec non vagas, and van as, ergo and imquas,
Mentium has Lances! Heu! qua temeritate vacillat, quaue iniuria vergit animi
illa statera? Vnum sunt (ne nescias) Bonum, et Verum: Quorsum iam de illis
aliud atque aliud Iudicium? Numsimul vary datur constituere, et vere? Levitas
profecto illa anim^ et temeritas; mentis non perspicacitas, non acumen. Futilis
est fallaxque illa mentis -- vnibra; qua e plebe quilibet male consulit, male
iudicat: Simplex tantum et solida illa Men's animi; discretivam dico rationis
facultatem. Non tantum Bona a Malis, sed etiam tolerabilibus; Neque Vera a
Falsis tantum, sed et probabilibus, perbelle nouit distinguere, prudens
Rationis facultas: Quae omnia male admiscet, a^t ineptius secernit, caecus
opinionis sensus. Nostis, nostis, vos auriti magis, et (vt nil dicam de barda
prorsus, et nescia examinis turba) vos, quam pro plebe literaria, magis
oculati: Nostis (inquam) Multum in multis excaecatum, Prudentiae huius (nempe
disceptatricis) Oculum: Fatuatum item Gustum, aut Palatum; Facem extinctam,
Lancem iniquam, obtusum Aculeum, et hebetatum valde Acumen. Ecaeteris animi
dotibus, seu Dei Opt-Max. donis; ista ipsa acie homines minus valemus. Pollet
aliquis intellectus capacitate, memoriae tenacitate, ingenij dexteritate,
sermonis item elegantia; Iudicij haud ita acumine. Quisque tamen (heu quanta
est hominum licentia) modeste parum, immo proterue nimis hanc Trutinam
praesumit sibi; Librandi etiam illam arrogat libertatem. Ab imis subsellijs,
quam petulanter summum scandit Tribunal? vel mediocriter doctus; iamque primus
ille arbiter: Quum non, aut quod non satis capit, carpit nimis: Eius enim est
dum non aduertere, praeiudicare. Attentionem fortasse desideras; ecce, ecce
Iudiciolum! Scalpere tantum nouit ipse, et quaerit Limam: Gnomonem accipit et
Regulam; artis licet expers, nec non operis ignarus. Sed heus tu (te enim
alloquor) Mime, aut M^me! Quid tibi Graculo, cum hac chorda? Asino (vt aiunt)
cum hac Lyra? Tali cum Speculo (perspectiuo scilicet) ecquid rei est caeco?
Maiora, Maioribus; aliena alijs mittito: tu (vt tuum est) intus te quaere.
Tibimet esto aliquando Iudex, alios qui iudicas. Attamen ipse, alibi Lynceus
cum sis oculos vt quid seponis domi? Hem Critice hypocritice! intus ego et in
cute te noui; teque tibimet tuis (quod aiunt) coloribus, equidem depingam.
Hypocrita, eijce prius trabem ex oculo tuo, and tum perspicies, vt eximas
festucam ex oculo fratris tui. Laruatus ades, O pessime omnium Histrio! et quam
inepte agis personam illam (Iudicis nimirum) quam induis^ Sycophanta! sub zelo
tuo, id est, velo pietatis, vt improbu^ agis? sub iustitiae, iniquu^,
veritatis, me^dace^; seueritatis, nugatore^; co^scientiae, temerariu^;
scientiae, ignaru^? Monstrum epicoenum! pendulus ipse, pensiculas; inter
veritatem et mendacium, laudem item et vituperium, saepius haesitas; inter
Iudicium et Opinionem, scientiam et inscitiam, fluctuas; eomet o^^ calidum
frigidumue sufflas; manuque eadem Cretam, et Carbonem portas; neque pro re, sed
pro tempore, das sententiam; et mutas. Aeque ac anser sibilans, aut serpens; in
occulto tua concoquis, tua euomis venena: et tacito nescio quo murmr, et
iniquo; quo clandestino, et nefando susurro, calumniaris. Neminem fere rodis,
praeter absentem, aut ignorantem: nec est a facie, cuius famam turpiter
collutulas. Sin coram (vt Canis) latras aliquoties; vaeh malum! mordacis et
rabiosae loquacitatis virus quomodo effundis? Non de aliquo, au^c^^m aliquo
tibi sermo; nisi contra eum: Neque hoc nisi merum (quod in alterius dicis
v^tiu^) tuum dico conuitium. Lan them forsan alicuius edis, et meritu^; sed
aegre, sed malign: vt modicae quadam laudis praefatione, dein magnis tantum
vituperijs viam tibi praestruas. Laudas et taces; laudas, et excipis: inuida
qua quidem reticentia, qua exceptione iniqua, sic totum (vafer) in suspitionem
vocares. Cucurbitula tanquam, et Hirudo; Nominum, Operumue, vitiosum sugis
sanguinem; prauosque solummodo abducis ipse humores. Apage, Musca vilis, et
improba; quae (flores praeteriens, et fructus) Factorum, Dictorumque sordes, et
vlcus teris tantum, et attrahis. Cedo Cynice! aliena crimina, tuosne meliorant
mores? alieni errores tuum (putas) nobilitant Iudicium? Erras profecto, vel
toto coelo erras; si propriam laudem, in alterius vituperio quaeris: si quod
cares merito, arrogas obloquio. Vecordiam alienam evulgas, aut ineptiam? tuam
prodis: Iudicas tu alios; te alius: vnus, dum de alio, tertius de ambobus
pronuntiat. Praeterea, carpenda (Critice) negligis; negligenda carpis. Quid
nisi Culicem excolas; dum syllabarum anceps, rei aequitatem, verbi laqueo
capis: dum quampiam minus cauta^ forte particulam (praedunculus) rapis: Nec non
in voeabuli cuiusuis Latebra Calumniae ansam quaeritaes: et verborum sensu, et
cord neglecto; de vesle tantum litigas, et velo. Denique Zoile (tu qui in
publicum quemque Laborem, pusillus, arietas; ad obuium item Splendorem,
obscurus, hebescis) in Rebus, nescio, quid mali est, quod agis; in L^bris puto,
Vatem agis, non Lectorem: etenim, sensum affers, non accipis: Alterius semper
intentionem, pro tua opinione, metiris; metiris? mentiris sane: eius enim
scopum, ex tua mente fingis; nec non (quasi Nasus cereus, plumbeaque Regula)
Authorem ipsum loqui prout lubet tibi Cauillator, facis. Sed quorsum ista ego?
Proh dolor, vt dicam! Non penitus me fugit, quod nugantes, nescio quos,
susurrones maleuole submurmurant. Obtrectatores (audio) istiusmodi (quibus non
in culpis, sed in moribus, et in artibus Calumnia) non solum Haereseos, sed et
(dictu nefas) Blasphemiae, horrendas tentarunt inurere mihi maeculas.
Calumniarum heu ferax aeuum! Haeresin egone Maledice! egone Blasphemia^? Tuis
forsan verbis; sensu nequaquam meo: Scelus apage vtrumque: Dedit cautiorem
(spero) mentem; mentem mihi meliorem (gratias Deo) Deus. Praecocem dicito (vt
sumus multi) Iuuenem; Tyronem (si voles) aut erronem, sciolum item,
subrusticum, crassum valde, and incultum, tenuem omnino, and ieiunum; en* mi
amice, confitente^ habes reum. Nihil grande est in me, fateor; praesertim hoc
aeuo dignum nihil. Non sum nescius quam multa sunt in nostris, vel iuuenile
pectus redolentia: Faue precor, saltem aut ignosce; Doctrina possum, simul et
Ae^ate consenescere. Raptimitidem in meis multa fateor, et retortim: De
industria feci, et pro ineo more; vt in quauis fere sententiola aut incipias
ipse, aut desinas. Quae autem (vt hausi) tanquam haeretica damnas, et
blasphema: aduerte quaeso, et Hyperbolica tantu^ est audacia. Sin aliud quid
piamerit, (quod absit) et peius; vt libere moneas, moneo. Coram argue, nec
clanculum obtrectes, Nolim, vt mihi sim Suffenus; nec, Simiae instar, proprios
ita osculor ca tellos; vt meis crasse indulgea^; quin vt veritati primitus
concedere^, veritate penitus acquiescam. Recte si mones; ecce, non solum audio,
sed et muto: Sin mordicus (vt soles) me lacessis; ad hoc, quic quid est (scito)
been iamiam occallui. Et satis hoc tibi (praeuaricator) ad monitionem; ad
vlteriorem vero calumniam, plus satis. Ad vos vero iam tandem (omni qua possum
reuerentia) me confero, Iudices etia^ integerrimos, Lectores nec non benignos:
ad euius solidioris iudicij Solemn, ealigo omnis errorum; scilicet, quicquid est
in Rebus fuci, in Verbis fallaciae, euanescit. Vt Prudentiae irrigamini satis
latice^ita et Clementiae been madescitis vos succo. Trutinatis cuncta in
aequilibrio; nec ex impetu terminatis, sed consilio. Nostis vosmet falsa
refutare, obscura luminare, salebrosa lenigare; erratis autem condonare. Eia
agite, et (vt vestrum est) quae opus sunt, corrigite. Est enim vt emendetis,
illud; non vt exprobretis. Foelix Lima! tam long quandoquidem a calumnia: Quam
Lydius vester Lapis, contra Theoninum dentem, nullum sane vnqua^ tutius
Patrocinium. Non vos clam est, quomodo Vitilitigatores isti, nihil non in
inuidiam vocant, rapiuntque in contentionem. Quotidie videtis (non de Scriptis
loquor, sed et Factis) ob res quasque minutulas, quam multum mouent vbique
litium, et calumniarum. Dextra quicquid porrigitur, accipiunt sinistra: Nemo
hominum non displicet; nihil non studiorum. Superiorum beneficia, inferiorum
officia; Authoris dictum, Authoritatis edictum; praepostere omnia ^t perverse
rapiunt in traductionem. Rerumiam nunc gestaru^, interpres quis non iniquus?
Quae liuoris indies serpit pestis? quae inuidiae, nobili praesertim ab obscuro,
docto ab indocto, sedulo ab ignauo, impendet (nostro sub climate) tempestas? O
Angulus nisi tibimet inuidus, omnibus terris inuidendus! Taceo autem de
factioso isto Lectores nec non benignos: ad euius solidioris iudicij Solemn,
caligo omnis errorum; scilicet, quicquid est in Rebus fuci, in Verbis
fallaciae, euanescit. Vt Prudentiae irrigamini satis latice: ita et Clementiae
been madescitis vos succo. Trutinatis cuncta in aequilibrio; nec ex impetu
terminatis, sed consilio. Nostis vosmet falsa refutare, obscura luminare,
salebrosa lenigare; erratis autem condonare. Eia agite, et (vt vestrum est)
quae opus sunt, corrigite. Est enim vt emendetis, illud; non vt exprobretis.
Foelix Lima! tam long quandoquidem a calumnia: Quam Lydius vester Lapis,
contra Theoninum dentem, nullum sane vnqua^ tutius Patrocinium. Non vos clam
est, quomodo Vitilitigatores isti, nihil non in inuidiam vocant, rapiuntque in
contentionem. Quotidie videtis (non de Scriptis loquor, sed et Factis) ob res
quasque minutulas, quam multum mouent vbique litium, et calumniarum. Dextra
quicquid porrigitur, accipiunt sinistra: Nemo hominum non displicet; nihil non
studiorum. Superiorum beneficia, inferiorum officia; Authoris dictum,
Authoritatis edictum; praepostere omnia ^t perverse rapiunt in traductionem.
Rerum iam nunc gestaru^, interpres quis non iniquus? Quae liuoris indies serpit
pestis? quae inuidiae, nobili praesertim ab obscuro, docto ab indocto, sedulo
ab ignauo, impendet (nostro sub climate) tempestas? O Angulus nisi tibimet
inuidus, omnibus terris inuidendus! Taceo autem de factioso isto aeuo; nolo
(quod difficile est non dicere) tragediam maligni temporis aperire. Dico tantum
et doleo. Publici, aut Priuati, cum sincere omnia et circumspecte dicimus, et
facimus: non tamen (vt hoc aeuum est) morsum effugimus. En qua gratia agimus
omnes, qu^ praemio scribimus, quo pretio laboramus! Ad m^ praecise; pro
praeterito tantum, morsus deprecor, et calumnias; in p^sterum, (dum aut Aetas
iubet, aut Authoritas) nescio quidn^ prohibeam. Et vt Poeta,

Interea arbitrij subiturus pondera tanti, Auson.
Optabo, vt placea^; sin minus, vt tacea^. Practique Theories: OR, Votiue
Speculations, UPON Abraham's entertainment of the three Angels.
AS it was not good for Man to be alone, without an help. So neither is it,
to be not alone, without God. For men to meet, and God not amongst them, this
were to throng, not to assemble; to swarm together, rather then accompany one
another. Except the divine instruction, and it i^ (at the best) but an human^
confusion: Societies are but tumults, if Religion be a stranger Unless God
covenant with us what help have we that we s^ convent amongst our selues^ Who
can best order, but he who first ordained the societies o^ men? And accordingly
(to speak now of natures first associacy) who so fit to be a Father of a
Family, as the Father of the Faithful? Every soul (whether nature has borne
him, or money bought him) that wears the Liuory on his back, as a servant to
Abraham; must also carry thy Covenant in his flesh, as one so to God. And his
no small praise was it, God was so well persuaded of him: Genesis 18.19.
I know him that he will command his Sons and his household after him, they
keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment. Even honest
Masters will look to instruct, as well as employ their Servants: A godly
Master especially will seek to have his servant as himself; Godly I mean,
fearing God, as well as reuerencing Man. Considering, he is a Servant, yet a
man; a Servant, yet a Christian, a Servant, yet his fellow-Seruant. He has
hired but his body under him; his soul has the same Lord together with him.
It is a Godly Masters choice, Psalm. 101.9.
Who so so leads a Godly life, he shall be my servant. There are unhappy
Masters, and vprofitable, that think their own service lost in Gods, that
grudge to hire for God, that never could find in heart to spare Wife nor
Child, nor Man, nor Maid, nor Ox, nor Ass, to do God a good days work.
Shall an humane bondage debar me of my Christian liberty? should I so obey
man, as thereby to disobey God? Rather would I suffer and it were, a bored care
in an Abraham's service, though for but food and raiment: then but abide the
third part of a triple apprentiship, under a L^bans slavery, though for th^^
parts of his Goods increase.

While Abraham was scarce yet the Heir of the world; Romans 4.13
he now was (as it were) the Master of the world. The world in his loins was
scarce hoped for, when the world in his house was had already: More the^
hundreds of servants had he, when not yet a Son. Servants he had many, and
trusty; no doubt, all well instructed, and accordingly employed. Each one had
his office, and so he^ did his duty. We read of the Steward of his house, Genesis
15.2.
but (for what we know) he was hi^ own Porter: Genesis 18.1.
for he sat in his Tent door himself. Yet sat he not there as a Porter,
to examine every commer, but to expect any Passenger, therefore sat he there.
Abraham's years were now but infirm, and the weather at that instant extreme;
and many his servants fitter for such a purpose then himself. Yet commits he
this courtesy to none: Kindenesses are cold in the conueyance, when but
offered at the second h^nd. His guests shall gather their entertainment from
himself, and therefore think them the welcommer, because of his own
inuiting. His it is to inuit, whose to entertain. Waters are better in the
Fountain, then the Channel. What need the Feet be sent anon, when now the
Head may speak. He that would have me his guest, I rather would he should
command me himself, then entreat me by another. I take it for more heart and
honor, that he does propound, then that he should convey mine inuitation.
Abraham bids his guests himself: it is he that intreates them, whom he would
entreat. He best may bid, in whom it is most to receive. Wisdom at once made
ready her Feast, and called together her Guests, Pro. 9.5.
Come and ea^e of my meat, and drink of the Wine that I have drawn. I thank
my Savior, he has himself both ordained a Feast for me, and withal
himself invited me to the Feast.

Now was it no one-tide, anvsuall time for repast and re^^. You would surely
guess the old man but drowsy after dinner, and look to have him napping on
his Couch, or nodding in his Chair. Nay, but (kinde-heart!) he minds m^^e
then himself. Either he stay^s for others to dine with him, or would have
others also to dine after him, or rather seeks for some to dine before him. It
was now the height of the sun, and heat of the day; Genesis 18 1.
a time when men would both be iourneying, and wearied in their iourneyes. The
heat of the day, the fittest time to entertain strangers in, for they would
now most need refreshment. There is an aptness to all things, and a due time
for every duty. Our best actions are more laudable, because seasonable;
and-then most acceptable, when most opportune. It is no courtesy to bid a man
eat, when his belly is full: nor is it thankesworthy to do a man an
unnecessary office. Hospitality seeks not whom to surfeit, but refresh; and
therefore takes her time when to feed, not cloy. What call ye it, to
surcharge men's superfluities? this is Charity, to relieve the necessities of
men. He that will only bid me eat after dinner, I will thank him as much, as
though I did; and but do as much as though I thankt him.

Not only is Abraham door open for any to comein, but he sits there besides,
lest any man might pass by. True Hospitallers are ready not only to admit,
but inuit their Guests. It is not enough that strangers are not neglected, but
this is i^, that they are entreated. That is charity indeed, not only to
take, but even seek out occasions to do good. And now while Abraham sits so
under the shadow of his Tent, whether naturally, to shield his body from the
airs, then vehement injury; ciuilly, to spy out Passengers, the expected
objects of his entertainment; of religiously, to contemplate upon Gods present
benefits, or future promises: now what a wondrous vouchsafement! The Lord loath
to let slip so ^ayre an opportunity, clad in pilgrims weeds, presents himself
on the sudden as an obuious guest to the expectation of so hearty an Host. God
takes his opportunities to utter himself to his Saints and Servants: And while
(perhaps) we think not on him, approaches us in that manner we think not of.
Abraham's eyes were fixed to a solitary meditation; yet can those rolling organs
no sooner remove their station, Genesis 18.2.
then behold good company at hand: He lift up his eyes and looked, and lo
three Men aloof before him. Even in the twin^kling of an eye, God gives us
occasion to do good. Who so wayt^s to do well, cannot long want matter to
work upon; the Head, or Members still administer opportunity to his
expectation. Now sees Abraham on a sudden, what his eyes have so long waited
for. He creepes not under the covert of his Tent, as one that would have his
eye as far from inuitation, as his heart is from entertainment. Nor sits he
still as a Porter in his Tent door, to demand their business, ere he admit
their entrance. He sticks not to stir out, for a wet shoe, or a sunburned
face. No weathers extremity can so iniure his body, as their now omission would
his mind. Wherefore (to let them know they are not come, ^re welcome) he not
only tarryes to expect them, but with like alacrity, and celerity, he ran
to meet them God intrudes not, where man inuites not. Neither is he then a
guest, save upon entreaty. His gifts are of more worth then to come uncalled.
He may well miss of Grace, that only sits him down to expect her. My Soul!
when the Bridegroom comes by thee, see thou carelessly stay not for him: but
(showing readiness, even beyond ability) do him this honor, as to go out
and meet him.

And must he himself needs go meet them? Why first sends he not forth his
servants to see who they were? to inquire whether they were friends, or foes,
neighbors, or strangers, unknown, or of acquaintance? to ask who they are,
and whence; what they intend, and whether they would? Free-hearts are plain
positive, little inquisitiue, or not at all. Charity is always more bounteous,
then curious: and Hospitality is not so busy to examine, as ready to
entertain. It is the common vie (I know) to question, rather then relieve. I
had rather miss such an ones kindness, then answer his objections.

But I ma^uell not so much that Abraham goes so to meet them, as that he
bows so to salute them. In all likelihood he should rather have looked for
that office from them, then done it to them. He was at home, and a Lord in
attendance; they but travelers, and (as travelers use) but mean in
appearance: he grave and gray headed; they (as Angels appear usually) but young
to see to: He one to entertain them; and they such as might be beholden to
him. And yet, as if he had seen and known them to have been more ancient
and honorable then himself; and they as ready to do him the kindness, as
he them: while he would be beneficial, as if he were bound to be thankful;
Genesis 18.2.
he bowed himself to the ground. Many are proud, though but to inuit;
Abraham is humble, even to entertain. Others think they have highly merited
in the offer of a kindness, or endeavor; he betokens how much he is obliged,
if so his courtesy may but be accepted. A man i^ not hospitable, vniesse
humble withal. Better not relieve, then therefore to contemn. To boast them
beholden to him for his cheer, this were to spill it in the bosoms of his
guests. N^ unkindness, to a hindenesse boasted, or vpbraided. I hate to have
roast, and be beaten with the spit. It could not but stick in my stomach,
that were so cast into my teeth.

Abraham ran toward men, but meets with Angels: that of purpose, this at
unawares. God honors and rewards good works in his Saints, beyond both their
knowledge, and expectation. Especially, H^spitality has this honor; who takes
in Strangers, has God his Guest. He that bids thus accept of all persons
without acception, vrges this as a sufficient recompense for such their cost
and courtesy: Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers, Heb. 13.2.
for thereby some (meaning Abraham here for one) have received Angels unawares.
How honorable are the hospitable, whom even Angels have graced with their
presence? Abraham was wonted to relieve men, and therefore worthy to receive
Angels. Had he not done that duty, this honor had not been unto him. Because
he bestowed on them that needed; He will also accept, that needs it not. In as
much as he did it to one of these little ones, he takes it as done to him: and
will therefore have him so do to him, as he did no one of those little ones.
Abraham was called the Friend of God: Never was there (as is usual amongst
Friends) the like familiarity betwixt them, as now when God sat, and are with
Abraham. Iam. 2.23.
Ah that old world, and innocent! they unawares entertained Angels in Men: Oh
this our evil age, and inhospitable! we wittingly in men exclude Saints. They
thought better, indifferently to admit the bad, then ignorantly to neglect the
good: we would rather, then admit any, neglect all. Our age I call it, and
inhospitable, wherein every man is grudging of his own, and envious of
another. No man is now invited, but to his own cost: none entertained, but to
his much reproach. Men's hearts, and harbors, are so cold, makes Angels keep
at home. God is rather refused in a stranger, then a stranger received for Gods
sake. O all ye merciless men! look whom ye neglect, nay despise rather in the
Stranger, Traveler, Poor, and Needy. You now thrust him from you with
rebukes, that shall once tell you to your shame; Mat. 25.43.
I was a a stranger, and ye took me not in. He shall then justly bar heaven
gates against you, whose bowels of compassion were so cruelly shut against your
Brethren.

Yet taking a narrow view of these his wished and welcome Guests, he not only
begins somewhat to perceive that his men are no worse then Angels; but also
one of his Angels, no less then God. It was He came now in the shadow, that
after was to come in the substance of the flesh. Abraham now saw him somewhat
with a fleshly, whom he wholly saw with a ghostly eye. He said it certainly
of this day more then others, and next to that Day indeed; Abraham rejoiced to
see my day, Ioh. 8.56.
and saw it, and was glad.

Abraham ran toward Three, he worshipped but one Three he saw, and but one
he called his Lord. The high and holy Trinity is here well assimalated, but (I
think) little intented: may hence be intimated, but cannot be here presented.

The good Guests were modest, it was therefore Abraham was so earnest. Because
they were bashful, ought he to be obsequious: and therefore to bow in the
offer, lest they might blush in the acceptance. That they might not blush to
be beholden, he confesses himself favored: Genesis 18.3.
If I have found favor in thy sight, pass not away I pray thee from thy
Servant. It is many times a favor to take, as to do a kindness: Nor at all
times lies the favor in the office, but interpretation. The hospitable think
them favored, when they may but favor; and conceit they give not, but
receive. For indeed, he has the benefit himself, that does it to the
deserving. I will confess my God favors me, that he will but daine to
accept my duty.

It is not good to be proud in doing good. See what an hearty, not haughty
inuitation! he salutes reu^rently, and inuit^s with humility. My Lord, pass
not away, I pray thee, from thy servant. To have done it (as they use) in a
pride, or humor; had been enough to have made them not only refuse, but
distaste his kindness. But if I have found favor in thy sight, says he; as
if the whole were but their vouchsafement: and as if himself did no more but
his duty, Genesis 18 5.
he says; Therefore are ye come unto your servant. True pattern is he of
hospitality: with what expedition, reverence, cheerfulness, does he meet,
salute, inuit? And yet (Freeheart!) makes he cold complements, the least part
of good entertainment. How he takes himself highly favored in the
acceptance of his so humbly proffered service? We have no worth before God,
but go all by favor. This is to find favor in his sight, that our duties
are accepted before him. It is a great blessing of God, where Grace is
vouchsafed a daily guest, for there is a continual feast. Her entertainment
is every man's grace and favor, was never any man's disadvantage or dishonor. I
will therefore sweep mine house, dress my meat, draw my wine, spread my
table, deck my chamber; and accordingly seek and sue unto her: If I have
found favor in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant.

How feign, and fairly he would insinuate with them? Any ways to persuade
them to take his kindness. Genesis 18.4.5.
Let a little water, I pray you, be brought, and wash your feet, and rest your
selves under the tree: And I will bring a morsel of bread, that you may
comfort your hearts, afterward ye shall go your ways. Travelers (he knew)
were both hungry, and hasty: Some refreshment (he intimates unto them) is not
only requisite, but ready for them; he promises them, they shall not stay long
for a little; and since they came but to him by the way, he will not so stay
them, but that they may go their way. The Angels came purposely to fire
Sodom, yet all agree to feast with Abraham by the way. God is ready at once to
favor the good, and plague the bad: can together heap judgments upon the
ungodly, and show mercy unto his Saints. Mercy and judgment are in his right
hand, and in his left. Lord let my Souls be, not the Geates; but the Sheep
Seat, and Lot.

The man's modesty offers his Guests a pittance; a little water, a morsel of
bread: but his bounty performs it with abundance; Cakes and butter, and milk,
and the Calfe tender and good. He inuites them only to a modicum, that his
guests might not gather by him, they should be chargeable, but rather welcome
to him. A good man will say well, and do better. and is one that always
intends more good then he vtters. Humility instructs to think the worst of
what we are: and so modesty, to speak the least of what we have. Discretion
offers courtesies with the least, albeit she intends them with the most. But
(alas!) vice is virtues ape. Complement, the worlds Fashionmonger, is grown
into favor: Her guise is also to mince out her inuitations to a morsel, when
she places her Guests to a superfluity of messes. Were my seat at her table; I
know not whether I could rather commend her courtesy, or complain of her
curiosity: seeing I discern, not, whether it be after her own prodigality, or
for my welcome.

The rude and churlish refusal of a well proffered courtesy, argues plainly
either ignorance, or immodesty. Abraham requests his unexpected, and scarce yet
perceived great strangers (no less would he have done, had he found them, as
yet he thought them meaner) to be pleased to wash, rest, and cate with him; for
each purpose offering them Water, a Tree, and Bread: And all this not offered,
ere accepted; Genesis 28.5
So do as thou best said. How ready is Gods Spirit to embrace the good motions
of our hearts entertainment? He that stands at the door, and knockes ere we
are ready to open, will doubtless, (when we willingly set open our gates to
receive him) not refuse to enter. O be thou open thou everlasting door of my
heart, that the King of glory may come in?

Abraham himself was now but a stranger, and yet he entertaines strangers. He
that had not an house wherein to lay his own head, affords his Guests a Tree
to rest under. God loves a cheerful giver, though but according to what he
has. The Widows Mite he esteems a Talent: And measures what we do, often
times, by what we would, as by what we ought. God had respect first to Abel,
then to his offering: and here, first to the Person, and therefore to the
Place. Where God holds possession of the heart, he refules not to dwell under
the meanest roof. Poor Cottage was it, scarce beseeming a man! and yet
(behold) is thus thought worthy God. O God! whose Throne is Heaven, and the
Earth thy Footstool, what house shall I build for thee, that dwell not in
Temples made with hands? Dwell thou in me, with me, let all that I am, and
have, be the place of thine abode: possess thou together with my soul, this
her earthly Tabernacle, her house of clay, until her time of flitting be: then
let her dwelling be in thee, with thee, to eternity.

And why under a Tree? was that an emblem of a house not made with hands? Nay,
nay, the mystery is more then so; Man had saucily presumed to eat of Gods
Tree, and God now graciously vouchsafes to eat under man's Tree. He that now in
a shadow, sat eating man's meat under the shadow of a Tree, was after in
substance, lifted upon the substance of a Tree, and himself made meat for
man. Thou that did eat under the Tree of weak refreshment! Oh feed my soul
with the fruits of thy Tree, the tree of Life.

While he but expected them, his face was upon them: having now invited them,
he turns his back. He first made all haste toward them; but now (me
thinks) it is from them, that he hastes so fast. Because he is secure of
their acceptance, is he therefore negligent of their entertainment? Nay, but
the same man he was, when he ran to meet them from the Tent door: the same
man was he, when he made have into the Tent. Genesis 18.6.
With like alacrity he but takes leave to go before, to fit and furnish things
accordingly. Indeed in all offices, men are forward at first; but when it comes
to it, who so backward as they? I have known many offer kindly, and repent
their kindness: and seen how hot they have been to inuit, but cold to
entertaine^

No sooner are the strangers come to rest them under Abraham's roof, then lo!
whatseuerall offices of good hospitality are ready to attend them. Husband,
Wife, Servants, with heart and hand, all hasten to their sundry and convenient
employments. It is a well ordered Occonomie, where all do their duty. Abraham
runs to the fold, the Servant hastes to make ready the Galfe, and Sarah is
busied about her meal. Not he in the house, which is not working, or willing
to work. Each one does all he can to give content. Our preparation and
provision, when it is with the best, and at the most; is yet too slender to
give God a welcome. When Grace will harbor her within my breast, there is not
a member of my Body, not a power of my Soul, which shall not be the willingly
devoted Servant of her entertainment.

The first dish is but a preparatiue to the feast, water to wash their feet.
Hereby is he equally testifying his own humbleness, as intending their
refreshment. Humility is both the foundation and crown of Hospitality. Where
the heart stoopes not to wash the feet, scarce stretches the hand to feed the
stomach. Pride ever was Pittyes adversary: Who can at once commiserate, and
contemn? yet (such are the disguised evils of the days) how wonted is it with
men, to scorn, and relieve together? No Succor now a days, but with some
reproach. Therefore must a man be abased before them, because he was beholden
to them. To be beholden (I see) is not only to sell his liberty, but to lose
his esteem.

Proud Simon bad Christ to dinner, Luke 7.
but gave him no water to wash his Feet: Christ had rather be honored, then
fedd: She therefore that did the last, had the reward of both. God regards our
lowliness, he needs not our relief. My Savior is come from a far to
visit my Soul; the whole distance betwixt Heaven and Earth will not measure
the length of his journey. I will in one act show my self lowly; and intend
him glorious: I will wash his feet with my tears, rather then he shall shake
off their dust as a witness against me, as Him; Thou gave me no water to
wash my feet: Luke 7.44. Mat. 25.43
or as against them, I was a stranger, and ye took me not in.

One is washing, another kneading, another dressing, and each one with have;
yet not more haste then good speed. Well ordered Families, have well appointed
Offices; and they supplied by those both diligent, and successful. Sarah
makes her Cakes in the Tent, Abraham fetches a Calfe from the Fold: A Calfe,
not as it came first to hand, or as he could find in heart to bestow; Genesis
18.7.
but a Calfe tender and good. Our choice services are but mean offerings, to
welcome God withal. He is well worthy the best, that gives us all. What can
we think too good to give him, that can give him but his own? Caine bad God
to the barren fruit of his ground, and was rejected together with his cheer:
Abel invited him to the fat of his flock, and the Lord had a double respect,
to Abel, and to his Offering. I will chearefully give God the best that I have,
who graciously gives me the best that I can be.

By this, the Fatteling is killed, the Dinner prepared, all things are ready;
and lo! God is come unto the Feast. Behold here and wonder! The Lord is become
as one of us: Divine Majesty is come down from a Throne, to take up a feate at
an humane Table. God is content to be like Man, that Man may be like God. Ah my
good Lord? thou cladst thy self in the shameful and miserable rags of my
Humanity; to cloth me in the gracious, yea glorious robes of thy Divinity.
Thou did eat, drink, sleep, weep with me; that I might never hunger, nor
thirst more; but rest, and everlastingly rejoice in thee.

What? Does the Lord eat Bulls flesh, or drink the blood of Goats? Has he
need of the Ox from the stall, or the Sheep from the fold? Does he hunger,
that fills all things with his blessings; or if he be an hungry, will he
tell it to man? when all the Beasts of the fields, and Cattles upon a thousand
hills, are his to kill and eat! God eats, and eats with Abraham, and can as
easily dispense with the corporal nutriment he receives; as with such
substance, he now assumes. Their Bodies they now took, were brought to
nothing, and so was their Meat. Spirits never eat of necessity, sometimes of
dispensation. God now eats, not of hunger, and for his own refreshment: but
of good fellowship, and for the others satisfaction. Not that nature in
himself had thereunto an appetite; but because Grace in the other had so
cheerfully bestowed it. Yet ofttimes will God stoop to the act of our nature;
that we might reach to the works of his Grace. Lord! thou that did put on the
shape of my image, renew me (I pray thee) according to the likeness of thine
own; that as thou have once lived, moved, and been in me, so may I also in
thee, world without end.

Abraham is such a Servant to strangers, that he neglects to be Lord in his
own house. He that had others to wait upon him, will himself wait upon
others. And though he commit the care of his own provision to his Servants,
he will see that his Strangers be provided for himself. An ordinary Host
will sit still, and command his servants: the Patriarch himself will give
attendance to his guests. Both his cheer, and service is at their command; so
willing is he to undergo both the Charge and Office of their entertainment.
Whether it were Custom to all, or rather Courtesy to them, he turns
Seruitor the while, and waits upon the Table. He sits not with them, Genesis 18.8
he stands but by them; He stood himself by them under the Tree, and they did
eat. The Godly man refuses no office, whereby to give God attendance. He
thinks him then highest promoted, when he does him best service. Oh that I
were worthy to stand by my Table, while my Lord eats with me; or to kneel at
his Table, when I eat him.

A free heart, and yet but frugall cheer. Cakes, and a Calfe, Butter and
Milk, are at once the first and second course. He bids not spare their
stomachs, and breathe awhile from the first dish, to expect more sumptuous
fare in the next: at once they see their cheer, and have their welcome.
Abraham will feast in frugality, let Dives glut in superfluity. Saints
Feastings ought not to be so dainty, as wholesome. Let the world alone with
this vanity, rejecting sobriety, to wallow in excess. Abraham's cheer was,
though frugall, yet hospitable. Who would have thought, to have found such
entertainment under an Oak? How many are there, build great Babels for their
honor, and yet her stately pillar yields not the like relief to strangers, as
the least branch of this homely Tree? Both (me thinks) agree not; such curious
Harbors, so careless hospitality. In my pilgrimage, I would rather choose to
lodge under Abraham's Tree, then shroud within the hard and bare stones of the
goodliest Palaces; which bear an aspect of so fair promises, and are fraught
with the furniture of so small performance.

The Guests are now sufficed; their Host also shall be satisfied. The Men have
thought, and are agreed, how to requite his courtesy. No man ever entertained
God with loss. Who ever gave him a dry morsel, which he requited not with an
honey-combe? Who gives him a cup of cold water, which he rewards not with the
water of life?

Abraham alone has attended on the table, but (the Guests would see, and
thank their Hostess) he must call in Sarah, that she together with him, may
gather up the shot. And where is Sarah? not gadding abroad as a Gossip, but
within doors, like a good Huswife well busied in her Tent. While the Woman is
calling, or coming, mean while the Men have thought; What more then wonted
kindness is it, they have received at their hands, themselves but strangers
to them? His whole Family, Ciuilly, how ordered? Religiously, how instructed?
And who shall do thus when Abraham is laid in his dust? Having thus pondered,
thus also have they promised: To hold up his fathers House, and Hospitality;
Sarah thy Wife, Genesis 18.10.
(say they) shall have a Son. Abraham for the kindness of Hospitality,
receives the blessing of Posterity. It Is pity indeed, but good Hospitallers
should have after them to uphold their Houses. And it proves true for the most
part; no Families so fruitful, as the cheerful. The houses of the Hospitable
are commonly continued in the same Name, and Kin: while the Niggards stock,
and style ends usually in himself.

Sarah (they say) shall have a Son. The saying is on the one side heard, and
laughed at, and yet believed: on the other it is said, and confirmed, and
accordingly effected. They are sufficed to see to, and these well rewarded. And
having thus made a clear board, up they rise, for why, part they must. Though
they have all seen, and blessed him by the way; yet they are some of them for
another place and purpose. And now (that he might do them all the offices of
Hospitality) he who had earnestly invited them, cheerfully treated them,
dismisses them courteously; and seeing they will needs depart, himself will
go with them, Genesis 18 16.
to bring them on the way. O God! what good Graces of thine have I seen here
(even with admiration) in this one Saint? Faith, and Hope, and Charity; all
lodged in the breast of Abraham. This in thee, that for a Son, the other
toward thy Saints. Because Abraham did once the office of entertaining Angels
upon Earth, he therefore has the honor of receiving Saints now in Heaven.
Had he not been found to have received the Angels under his Tree, he had not
been said to have received Lazarus into his bosom. Luk 16.22.
Thou God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob! Have pity (I pray thee) upon the Soul
of thy servant, a Lazarus poor and naked: Send her now relief from, vouchsafe
her ever resti^, Abraham's bosom.

The Monodie OR, Soliloquie.
Whilst on a day,
a true free-hearted Saint,
Set ^ope his door
and sits there to espy,
What strangers with
his house he might acquaint;
Forthwith behold
what guests approach him nigh.
My Soul! this Lesson
would be understood,
Who waits, never wants
fit season to do good.
He forthwith hyes
to meet, salute, inuit;
With equal speed,
courtesy, cheerfulness;
If so he have
found favor in their fight,
They will accept
so willing readiness
My Soul! if thou
would treat so worthy guest,
With have and heart
go bid him to thy Feast.
He met with men,
they are Angels, he salutes;
It Is God, whom he
inuites to be his guest:
Pre-eminence
alone he attributes
To him, in case
of his so high request.
My Soul could wish
this lesson oftener read;
Who takes the Members,
of treceiues the Head.
Poor Cottage had he
scarce beseeming Man,
Yet made meet harbor
for these Powers divine:
Thither forewends he
with all speed he can;
Bids kill, and dress,
for why his Guests must diue:
My soul observes
one choice in heavenly Grace,
If she the Person
likes, she likes the Place.
No sooner are
they come within his roof,
Ere one brings water
for to wash their feate:
The tendrest of
a beast that cleaues the hoof
A Second cooks,
a Third what else is meet.
My Soul! it is
the praise of Hospitality;
That entertainment
does not pass frugality.
Yet it is good cheer
the homely house affords,
And greater then
whereof his guests had need:
(Fair Palaces
have had worse furnished boords)
Yet so sufficed
they give him worthy meed.
My Soul full willingly
would entertain
So great a guest,
that is thus received with gain.
Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Sarah and Hagar.
SO so one as Abraham came into the land of Canaan, Gen 12.7.
GOD then made him this promise, unto thy seed will I give this land: yet saw
he no seed of his, after he had now been long in the Land. Genesis 12.4.
Seauentie years old, and odd was Abraham, before he came thither; Genesis 11.30.
and before that, Sarah said to be Genesis 16.3.
barren: Ten years after he came there, might they both agree to use their
own means, yet miss of Gods end: He must stay nigh twice ten Genesis 21.5.
after that, ere he set an eye on the promised feed. God does not many good
things on the sudden; that so he may exercise the patient abiding of the
Saints. Now of a long time received he nothing of the Promise, but words only:
No thing was yet done, according to what was said: And the longer, the more
unlikely, seeing to such an act every day seemed more unapt then other. God
will have his many times to believe him beyond their Reason, to expect him
beyond their Times, and to trust him beyond their Means. Gods promises are not
always so soon, as sure, nor so palpable to us, as possible to himself. He
slowes his promises on purpose, not that he loves to prolong the content, but
examine the patience of his Servants. He the rather deferres yet to do it,
that so they may see, what they want themselves; where to have what they want;
how to prize what they have. Possess I my soul in patience, long looked for
will come at last: My Savior was long promised, before he came; and has
promised long to come again. Oh let me have Faith in his first, and Hope in
his second Coming!

God not only did withhold Pharaoh, and Abimelech from Sarah, but of a long
time, withheld Sarah from Abraham himself: for so she says, The Lord has
restrained me. Genesis 16.2
She said not so to her Husband, as did another after her; Genesis 30.1
Give me children, or else I dye; but The Lord (says she) has restrained me
from bearing of Children: confessing the cause ingenuously, not asking so
inconsiderately, as if her Husbands had been the sault. The other grew
importunate at the power of the Instrument, but she rests satisfied with the
Lord of Natures will: and since it is his pleasure, is content to dispense with
her own desire. It is good to ascribe to God, as author of his own work;
and not to impute to Man, that is not in his power. God is the Master of
nature, and man but the instrument to work withal. Concerning whatsoever
seeds, it is not in him that sows, planteth, waters, but in God that gives
increase. How fondly do they impute that each to other, which God has granted
to neither? murmuring at their mutual impediments, not considering the
primarie cause. They think it sufficient that God has coupled them, but
think not who has withheld them. It could not but glad me, to be multiplied
amongst others, nor shall it but content me, to be stinted to my self. I would
not willingly undergo that yoke, to want that fruit. ('It Is but comfortless,
not to enjoy the reward of his labor.) Yet were it so, would I not so irke it;
considering in such a case, whose leave, and strength it is, that must both
bid, and help us to work our own. It was thought a great reproach of old, to
be coupled, and not increased: I think it not so now, but rather a less cost,
and care. There was then a want, to inherit, and uphold: but Men are now so
many, as that they burden and consume a World.

Sarahs faith in the Promise was not so sound as Abraham's; he still trusted to
the power of the Author, she now looks to the likelinesse of the means. Say
she was not doubtful of the Promise, yet is she distrustful of her self; The
Lord (she says) has restrained me. She complains the Lord has shut up her
womb; He believes, that nevertheless God can make his own way. He respects
Gods omnipotence, while she deplores her own impediments. Abraham's Faith was
more then Sarahs, yet neither was now enough. They have heard the Promise once,
and again, and both have believed it, but labor both of the like Disease. He
is not persuaded whether the promised Seed must be Native, or Adoptiue;
whether out of his House, or from his Loins, and so makes proffer of his
Servant unto God; Genesis 15.3.16.2.
One borne in mine house, is mine beyre; And she no less doubtful in the
like, offers her Handmayd to her Husband; I pray thee go in unto my Maid.
She has long expected the promise in her self, yet now she doubts whether it
may be accomplished in another. Abraham's (she thought) the Promised seed
should be; but what knows she, that it shall be Sarahs? Shall her
Barrenness debar him not only of all Offspring, but of the Promise also?
Rather then Abraham's House shall fall down utterly in her, she will presently
be built up in another. So they be but borne to Abraham, Sarah will make them
hers; since she cannot, another shall; The Lord has restrained me; I pray
thee, go in unto my Maid. This had been too much for to suffer, or consent
to, and yet she is the first that both counsels and entreats unto it. Me
thinks, considering her case, she should then (as others now use) rather have
suspected such a thing, then her self suggested it; and so he with small
entreaty, have attempted it. But (so is it with faithful, and happy
yoke-fellowes) neither is the one incontinent, nor the other jealous.

A Woman's reason direct; The Lord has restrained me, and therefore go in I
pray thee. For why? Restraint argues not vnpossibility; were she yet
restrained, yet was she not quite denied: Nor, had she been utterly
debarred, was that other therefore to be so employed. Her reason was weak, it
follows not, because God had withheld her, he therefore did exclude her; Her
Means bad; the promised Seed was not to be multiplied by adultery, or (if
not so) by Polygamy. Only her End was good, to build up her self in Children,
and them also in the promise. Neither is it sincere, nor safe, to employ bad
means, though to a good end. It was (no doubt) their sin, to invent and add
this their own way, and evil; though (very like) to a good intent. It had
been better to have quite wanted issue, or else to have yet expected it.
Rather should they have consulted with God about the use of the means, then
thus unadvisedly have gone together amongst themselves. The best of men may
mean well, and yet may err in the means: and the war^est aim well, and yet
wander in the way. I should think it a matter of bad consequence in manners,
to draw their practice to example: such their weakness is no warrant of mine:
shall I do evil, that good may come thereof? God forbid. It is but
accidental, that good can come thereof, but that is absolutely evil that I
do. That I do evil, is only in me, but it is from another, that good can
come thereof.

The woman (without doubt) was somewhat diffident of the Promise, more
impatient of the Time, but most preposterous in the Means. Nevertheless (see
a Woman's wit and will!) is she instant, if not impatient to have the Man
hearken to her aduisement: And what is it to importune, if not so to entreat
him? Go in, Genesis 16.2.
I pray thee, unto my Maid. Sarah here to Abraham, me thinks, somewhat
resembles Eve to Adam: She allures her Husband to taste one fruit forbidden
altogether: and she also to another, at leastwise vnallowed. So often and easily
are Wives wont to draw on Husbands to inconvenience: A Woman was made for man's
Help, but she proves his snare. The strongest and wisest have been
vanquished, and deceived by a Woman; So I may but shun a Woman's allurements,
I will not scorn even a Woman's advise.

The Mystery is more obseruable, then the History here inuitable. The Maid was
given to be fruitful before the Mistress, the Bondwoman before the
Freewoman, Hagar before Sarah; so was the Law given before the Gospel. Gal.
4.24.
These are the two Testaments; the Old namely, and the new: That went before in
Time, and Order, but was not before neither in Nature, nor Honor. Though Hagar
is first admitted according to the flesh, yet Sarah is only aimed in the
Promise. Though the Law was first propounded, yet the Gosspell was intended.
Blessed be God, Gal. 4.32.
We are not children of the Bondwoman, but of the Free. I am no flaue, but a
Son: and I thank my God for it, that I am borne to Liberty, not Bondage;
that I am in the Gospel, not under the Law; that I am not strictly bound to
Do, and Live; but rather plainly taught to believe, and be saved.

We are told together of the Maids Name, and Nation: Hagar, Genesis 16.1.
the Egyptian. Egypt (belike) was first thrall to Israel; Hagar is Sarahs
Hand-mayd, though Israel afterward became bond to Egypt. Divine wisdom often
times suffers his childrens prerogatives to be obscured, and their privileges
so debarred, that themselves happily become servants to such, as were chiefly
destinate to their Service: and are there forced to obey, where they ought
rather to command. While the Israel of the Church includes me, and the Egypt
of the world incloses it, I will count him but a slave under me, that is not a
fellowseruant with me. And if ever it so fall out, that he does violently
stoop upon me, to exact what he should render, and usurp where he should
observe. While my neck must bow to his yoke, and my back couch under his
burden, my heart (maugre all oppression) shall groan after the Liberty of the
Sons of God.

Sarah and Hagar are cohabitants: The Bondwoman and Free are conjoined, the
rather that they may be distinguished: They come together, that they may be put
asunder, and yet consist not one without another. It so fares with the Church
of God, as with the Body of man, as with the House of Abraham: all have life,
strength, growth, in a proportional compact of remitted contraries. One stands
in the composure of Hot and Cold, another in the relation of Bond and Free;
another in the mixture of Good, and Bad. Fish, and Soil, in one Net; Wheat
and Tares in one Field; Corn and Chafe in one Barn: so are Sarah and Hagar
in one House of Abraham; such are Grace and Nature, in one Church of God, in
one Soul of man. Though I be Wheat, yet must I not be weeded out, but reaped
up, from among the Tares. Till the time of my Harvest, let me be with them, so
I be not of them. Grace and Nature, I must not think but that both will be
remaining with me, till such time as I be separate from both.

The Mistress is not so ready to offer, but the Maid as forward to be given,
and the Master as willing to receive. It was not for satisfaction of lust, but
procreation of children, they all so agree together: And therefore, Abraham
takes Hagar, not as an Harlot, but as another Wife. Another Wife? He meant no
more Wives then one, especially at once, when he said, They twain shall be one
flesh. Mat. 19.5.
This was not according to Gods Institution; nor was it yet against any one of
his Commandments. The Law (which expressly forbade Adultery, Polygamie, and the
like) was not yet written. Abraham then did not so much transgress, he only
did forestall the Law. No doubt it was a fault, though tolerated, and that not
for lust, but procreation. Use in those times had brought such a perfection to
Polygamie, that it now was scarce counted an infirmity; nay, a dignity to be
pluraily vxorious. Those sins which corrupted custom has drawn out beyond
the reach of conscience, in most hearts (and est soones the best) find none,
or weak resistance. Then sins a man often and easily, when he does not see he
sins. I see, Man is worse, then he is aware. And not more ignorant of his
being, then being evil. All sins are neither reached by a blinded
understanding, nor rendered by a dulled conscience. Till I be able to know my
self, and sins, further and better; it shall be my exclamation, Alas! Psalm.
19.1^
who knows how often he offends? my Acclamation, Oh cleanse me from my secret
faults!

Abraham and Hagar are gone together. And now the aged Sire that had layne so
long barren in the bosom of a loyal wife, proves suddenly fruitful in a
less lawful bed. God keeps the one still barren, for a further blessing,
makes the other sooner fruitful, to a greater shame. If Sarah had done this to
prove him, she might soon perceive, his was not the impediment. Sarah makes
the motion, Abraham goes in, and so Hagar conceiues; and conceiues (be it said
of the best of that brood, in respect to the Promise) 3. Monsters at once: one
in her womb, and two in her heart: there Ismael, here ingratitude, together
with contempt: this to her Master, these against her Mistress: And the last
two (as brats both of an unlucky, and untimely birth) both borne, so soon as
the first is conceived: Genesis 16.4.
When she saw that she had conceived, her Mistress was despised in her eyes.
Sarah is her Mistress, yet Hagar dares disdain her: Sarah dispossessed her
self of that bosom, she placed her in; yet notwithstanding Hagar is
unthankful. The Handmayd in condition, thinks her self now Mistress in
Conception. Whether she vpbraids the others Barrenness, or boasts her own
Fruitfulness, arrogates a reverence to her self, or denies her obedience to
the other; one way or other, her Mistress is despised in her eyes. A servile
lightness cannot apply it self to prosperity, neither can inferior
dispositions use their Fortunes as they ought, How readily such minds are rapt
above themselves? scarce lifted up, ere puffed up: let them but grow to be
better, and how soon they forget their Betters. It is ever a badge of a base
mind, to wax insolent (albeit through inward, much less outward Gifts)
against either Superiors, or Benefactours. I could here pity poor Sarahs
case, but that (I see) she is beaten with no other then her own rod. It is
that Minion, whom her own hand would needs set up, in whose eyes she is so
despised. Evil counsel (I have heard) is worst to the counselor: And
selfe-doe, selfe-haue (may I be Judge) is as far from deserved pity, as
just complaint.

So vile impudency (thinks Sarah) can neither alone breed in, nor burst from a
servile breast She maruels an underling should be capable of so high contempt.
And hereupon jealous of some further cause or countenance; she accuses her
Husband together of the crime, whereof her Handmayd was conscious alone. As if
none had done it but he, she lays it all on him: My wrong be upon thee, Genesis
16.5.
I have given my Maid into thy bosom, I am despised in her eyes, the Lord be
judge between thee and me. So often are rash Passions mistaken in their
accusations: Such also is a Woman's anger, and impatience. I should here almost
grow angry at a Woman, and so thus would I censure her words. In all that was
uttered, was a Woman's impatience, imprudence, immodesty, and (in some part)
impiety. Impatience, in being so rashly provoked against an Husband;
Imprudence, in falsely imputing the fault; Immodesty, in vpbraiding him with
her benefits; Impiety, in willing God to witness an untruth.

Say the Man had been no wiser then the Woman, here had been enough, if not
to separate, yet set them all at odds. This causes private contentions, when
all are foolish together: And this keeps unity in a Family, when one or other
see their times, and turns to forbear, or bear. The Good Man heedes not so
much the bitterness of his Wives words, as yields to the weakness of her
Sex. And so, while the weaker vessel thus vents her soming rage and
rashness, he loath to add one sparkle to her fire, in a soft answer only,
turns her over to take punishment, Genesis 16.6.
where she received offense. Behold, thy Maid is in thine hand, do to her as
it pleases thee. Hagar is another Wife to Abraham, reuerthelesse is she Sarahs
Maid. Sarah before had given Hagar into Abraham's bosom, as Abraham's Wife:
Abraham now again delivers Hagar into Sarahs hand, as Sarahs Maid; Behold thy
Maid. Neither would Abraham (like a chaste Husband) go in unto Hagar, till
Sarah had given her to his bosom: nor durst Sarah (like a dutiful wife) do
ought against Hagar, till Abraham had restored her to her hands; Thy Maid is
in thine hand, do to her as it pleases thee. It is leave enough to let a
Woman have her will. Even weak hands will not now want violence to stretch to
a severity, in the vindication of a private wrong. She now (whether through
violence, or authority) dealt roughly with her. Neither is Hagars fault
precisely expressed, nor her punishment. One way or other she had despised her
Mistress; and her Mistress (one way or other) dealt but roughly with her.
Hagar had despised Sarah, not acknowledging (perhaps) that she was now her
Mistress: and Sarah dealt roughly with Hagar, making her know (it is likely)
she was yet her Maid. She dealt so roughly indeed, that for fear of her
hands, therefore fled she from her face. If nature will dare to insult over
grace; my Freewomen shall likewise learn to deal so roughly with this Bond
dame; that she may at leastwise rule her, if not be rid of her.

Ere now (no doubt) both Hagar had offended her Mistress, and Sarah chastised
her Maid; yet for all that, fled she not before. A little liberty makes a
servile condition, but the rather impatient of subjection. She had now borne a
Servants punishment, but that she was brought to a Mistresses conceit. Rather
will she break the reins, then bow under the yoke: And (as is wont with
Servants) turn Fugitive, rather then be made submissiue. Yet neither has she
long, nor far wandered in obstinacy, ere that (as she is summoned) she
returns in humility. Adversity is no less then advertisement to all: But the
rod of correction especially, is the slaves rule of instruction. Slavish people
are taught best, when they smart most for their learning. I had rather my
servile Affections should smart to learn under my soul in this world, then my
soul should learn to smart for them in the world to come.

Now Hagars time grows near, in which necessity would enforce her to lay
down her load at his feet, by whose help she had so readily taken it up. The
Bondwoman has conceived iniquity, and she brings forth shame. Now begins she
to groan for him, for whom she might both sigh and blush afterward. Lo now
a Man-child so like his Mother; that (save his shaping) had nothing of his
Father. The Freewoman is yet barren, when (behold) a Brat is engendered unto
bondage. The wicked bring forth sin to a numerous generation, but the Godly
are dead to such a womb. Let me rather be accursed in this Barrenness, then
be blessed in such a Fruitfulness.

But now at length, rejoice thou barren that bear not. Smother no longer thy
secret laughter of Diffidence, break forth into an open laughter of
Admiration. It has been said, Sarah shall have a Son: Genesis 18.10.
and not said, but done; all is come to pass as was promised; Sarah has now
done all the offices of a Mother; Genesis 21.
Conceived, and Borne, and given Suck. The womb that was dead, has
conceived; the womb that was closed, has borne; the Breasts that were dried,
have given suck. Therefore gave she suck, to make it m^nifest, it was she
indeed that both Conceived, and Bare. The Handmaid is the first Mother in
event, and according to the flesh: but the Mistress is the first and only
Mother in aim, and according to the promise. Hers was the former, but this the
better brood; hers the more hasty, but this the more happy seed. The world
commonly bears, while the Church is barren. Fruits of the flesh are more
easily abundant, then those of the spirit. At length notwithstanding, as this
mother of the faithful, so the mother of us all, becomes though slowly, yet
happily fruitful. And at each birth of every Babe, there meets to make merry;
the love of a Father, the care of a Mother, the joy of Brethren.

When Hagar had but Conceived, Sarah was despised in her eyes; but though Sarah
has Borne, yet is Hagar no whit viler in her esteem. The wicked are proud of
Gods least gifts, to think better of themselves: the Godly are humble in the
best, to think worse of none. I will neither envy another, because of his
gifts, nor disdain him because of mine own.

Sarah and Hagar are under one roof, and both bring forth: So are Grace and
Nature in one body, and both bear fruit. The one will not be idle, the other
not well busied. The Spirit and Flesh will have in us their several Times and
Works. Their daily strife assures me, that neither is the best I do, perfectly
good; nor the worst, totally evil.

The bond Brat of Hagar, proud of his many years prerogative, waxes daily not
more old, then evil. Like bird, like brood; the Son treads in his Mothers
steps: his Mother despised her Mistress, and he derides his Brother. The
wicked easily scorn and contemn those gifts in the Godly, which themselves
were never capable of. He that was borne after the Flesh mocked (says Moses)
Persecuted (says the Apostle) him that was borne after the Spirit. Genesis 21.9.
Gal. 4.29.
Why might he not at once do him both scorn and harm? He mocked, he
persecuted, nor was he more offensive in violence, then derision. With what
difficulties are the godly companions to the wicked, as being their infected,
or afflicted mocking-stockes? If I must be a brother to such Dragons, might
their stings rather smite me, then their poisons annoy me.

As Isaacs Father had weaned him from his Mothers breasts, so would his Mother
from his Brothers company. She fears his companion will either corrupt, or
wrong him; for why already she has seen the Son of Hagar mocking. How
mocking? and was that so much? He now discovered some evil against his brother
in sport, which he might do him in earnest afterward: Or might so play with
him, as a Cat with a Mouse; which dallies a little, but deuoures at length: Or
might vpbraid him with his Mothers old age, and long barrenness, might so
deride him, as that he (forsooth) should be the promised feed; might boast
himself the first borne, and therefore his Fathers heir. While Ismael is thus
laughing Isaac to scorn, with no less derision to the Promise, then
indignation to his person: Sarah (as Mothers care is tender, and frequent) is
readily sensible of her Sons abuse. Such is the divine Providence, who has
ever had a watchful eye ^uer ^her childrens wrongs: She sees, ere we suffer,
and hears ere we complain. Be I persecuted and oppressed, it suffices me (to
ease my Passions, and arm my Patience withal) I know, neither are covered,
his Iniquity, nor my Injury; neither the Hurt is done me, is hidden, nor the
wrong he does.

If Ismael begin so soon to mock Isaac, Sarah fears he will even supplant
him at length. Abraham and she, both are well stricken in years; if they
should dye during his minority, what then would he do unto him? Wherefore, to
prevent the worst, rather then he shall divide the inheritance with his
Brother, she seeks and sues to divide the Brethren: Gen 21.10
Cast out this Bondwoman and her Son. for the Son of this Bondwoman shall
not be heir with my Son Isaac. She but saw him mocking, and she cries, cast
him out: Not only sees the abuse, but calls for justice; Cast out this
Bondwoman and her Son. So also Gods Providence not only beholds iniquity,
to obscure, but judge it. What now becomes of Ismaels spite and wrong? The
wrath of the wicked, is but as the crackling of thorns under the pot, suddenly
kindled, wretchedly vehement, soon extinct. While the flourishing and
fruitless Fig Tree, is bold, and boasting to ouertop the chosen Cedar of
Libanus, by him but deemed so vile a shrub: Lo, the axe is already laid to the
Tree, to hew it down root and branch: Cast out this Bond. woman and her Son.
And does the Son sin alone, and must the Mother smart together with him?
Justice sometimes descends from the Parents to the fourth generation of
Children, but ascends never from Children, to so much as the first degree of
Parents, unless as convict delinquents as touching the same offense. The Son
is commonly liable to his Fathers debts, the Father never to his Sons, but by
condition. It is likely that Hagar (who did not stick to despise her
Mistress) was also accessory to this contempt of her Son; either in
counselling him to it, or not correcting him for it: and so not unworthy to
receive like doom; Cast out this Bondwoman and her Son. Consent and
Counsel, in all actions, add swift wings to commission. In evil, which is
more blameable, the Act, or the Encouragement? If I be counselor to another
sin, my Fee must needs lie in another punishment.

Ambition never rises, but to fall: Nor did Covetousness ever gain without
loss. Had not Ismael so scornefully boasted of his prerogative with Isaac, he
had (perhaps) still held the repute of a Son in his Fathers house: but this
strife has occasioned to search into his Pedigree, and (on the surer side) he
is found recorded no Son, but a Servant, Ioh. 8.35.
which abides not in the house for ever; and therefore cast out the Bondwoman
and her Son. Had he rested himself content with his own Lot, and not laid
false claim to his Brothers inheritance; this statute had not been enacted to
cut off all possibility of his future title. The Son of this Bondwoman shall
not be heir with my Son, even with Isaac. Thus have I heard of some, who in
the strife for new superiority, have lost their old repute. How many might have
inioyed what they had in quiet? only by laying false claim to others right,
have thereby come to lose their own. Let others alone with what is theirs,
mine own will I make enough to me. What profit have I, to lose, in ventring to
win? What credit, in seeking to rise, to fall?

Thus have Sarah and Hagar, Isaac and Ismael, dwelt together under one roof;
yet at length Hagar is cast out from Sarah, neither must Ismael be heir with
Isaac: Even so Grace, and Nature, the Spirit, and the Flesh, may reside in one
body; Good and Bad, in one Church: But corruption in the end proves a
castaway, neither can flesh and blood inherit the kingdom of God. The Tares
shall not possess the Barn with the Wheat, nor the Goats the Right Hand with
the Sheep. Divine wisdom indeed suffers a mixture of good and bad in his
Church, that these may be here as far from Security, as they hereafter from
Excuse: But in the end, separates them one from another; to the intent either
might know, that till then, they were neither truly happy, nor miserable
outright. So I be a vessel of purified Gold, or Silver, why should I repine
that baser vessels, as of Wood and Earth, are laid up in this same great House
together with me? since we differ here in the whole substance, and shall
hereafter in end and use: the one shall be for honor, for dishonor the other.
Being but one of the least of the chosen Grains, or of the little Flock: The
Tares (I know) may annoy me in the Field, they cannot in the Barn; the Goats
may vex me in the Flock, they shall not in the Fold. Till I my self be
dissolved, I shall never be but divided against my self. Ere my wrestlings and
warrings leave me, I must first leave my self, and them. I will therefore
patiently wait for at once, the separation of Grace and Nature, of the Flesh
and the Spirit, of Good and Bad; and the dissolution of Body and Soul.

The Monodie OR, Soliloquie.
A Sovereign Creature
by nature sociate,
Has Wife, Son, Servant;
each is to fulfill
The ancient triple
Oeconomicall state:
One's Free, one's Bond;
one's good, another's ill.
My soul how scantly
find we a society;
Without (of state
and manners) contrariety.
The Matron's barren,
(but it is not her crime,)
She therefore to
her Lord, her Maid bequeathes;
The Servant proud,
she is suffered so to climb;
Hateful despite
against her Mistress breathes.
My saul! if Nature
once get higher place;
Anon she bids
defyance unto Grace.
Yet were the cause
hereof once understood,
Why pride so puffes up
this so servile Dame?
It Is cause she first
conceived: unhappy brood!
That being borne,
is borne to Mothers shame.
My soul auerres,
(might it be in her will)
She Would rather barren
be, then bring forth ill.
The Matron cries
against her ingratitude,
That she her self
is in those eyes disdained:
Whom she had raised
from viler servitude;
As the first means
of such her favors gained.
My soul complains
of often and ill indignities:
Returned her
in lieu of best benignities.
But now committed
to her Mistress hands,
To deal with her
as seems good in her eyes;
Yet (though for lorne
she at her mercy stands)
She Will break, ^re bow;
ere that she falls, she flies.
My soul! if vile
affection^ dominere,
To bow, or break
them, show thy self severe.
She Is not fled far,
ere that again returned
Home to her Mistress;
before whom she falls
On bended knee,
as one that deeply mourned;
And humbly to her
she for pardoncals.
My soul! if thou wilt
inform thy vile Affection;
There Is no instruction,
like unto Correction.
The Bond-dame soon
grows big, and first brings forth
A luckelesse Impe,
to bondage generate:
At length the Matron
(of far greater worth)
Brings forth a Son,
free borne from seruils state.
My soul! though Nature
breed an evil brood;
Yet Grace brings nothing
forth, save what is good.
This Bond-dames Brat
daily more ill, then old,
Mocks with contempt
the Matrons hopeful Son:
Which she (good Mother)
no way can behold,
That unrevenged
such abuse is done.
My soul! when men
mock, wrong, spite, rage and kill;
There Is one above
both notes, and quits their ill.
At length it is
by counsel wise decreed,
For such abuse
what is fittest to be done:
Both shall receive
a well deserved meed,
Both are cast out,
the Bond-dame, and her Son.
My soul, dread sentence
is already past,
From Godly men
the wicked forth to cast.
Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Isaacs marriage with Rebekah.
THe power of Faith brought Abraham a Son in his old age, which the help of
Nature could not in his full strength afford him. So often God stirred up by the
virtue of the one, stretches forth his hand to work beyond the others bounds.
Long was it that Abraham expected, and well nigh twice so long has he now
inioyed a Son. Gods promises are not so suspensiue in the expectation, as
durable in the fruition. But alas! what is this present, and inioyed unity, to
that his promised and expected plurality? He aims at blessedness, not in a
Son only, but a Seed. The promise was, he should not only propagate, but
multiply himself: here are the Root, and Stock; but where are the Branches,
to stretch so far and wide? Nor is he to furnish a World, but found a Church
withal. Now therefore would he that God (by his means) should have more then
One to worship him. But his Wife was now dead, and had borne him but One. The
promised multiplication must needs then be already derived from the Father;
and now consist wholly in the Son, All Abraham's hopes are in Isaac: yet had
Isaac no more then his Father before him, toward the Promise namely, but a
Son. Abraham had but a Son, but Abraham's Sons Son had the Seed. God
goes on with his by Times and Degrees; he first begins to ratify his Promises,
and then proceeds to amplify them afterward. But (for what Abraham knows)
Isaac himself is likely, not to prolong, but enlarge the Promise. For he
cannot think (though his own experience might have so suggested) that it
shall so be with Isaac and his Wife (are they set eye on their Increase) as
with Abraham and Sarah; Genesis 18.11.
Stricken in age, and past the manner of women. Much less can he suppose that
the dry bones of Isaac shall be raised up from their Dust, to receive skin
and breath; and so replenish the hopes of a promised Israel: How should he
think they could so nighly come from the dust, Genesis 13.16.
that were for number to be as the dust of the earth? Least of all, can he once
surmize, that though God can, yet will he raise up even out of Genesis 15.5.
stones, Children unto Abraham, and them especially (as * he said) after the
number of the glimmering hosts of Heaven. For why, God (as he knows well)
works least by miracles, most by means. Nor do the Godly so expect the one,
where the other is used and allowed. And therefore, even now (that in a
faithful seed, Nature may have her course) while vigor cheares up his days,
strength knits his joints, marrow fills his bones; Isaac must have a Wife. Adam
was created to generate: Isaac is borne in old age, to beget in youth. What
though the Father inioyed the Miracle? yet the Son must use the means. God
works not for us only, but with us. We must not always impose all upon God;
in the ordinary events, and acts of Time and Nature, he will have us help our
selves. In the issue of these things, it is usually his blessing upon our
endeavor. This is an honor, to labor together with our God. I will reckon
him but a babe, that must have every morsel put into his mouth, and leave him
to starve and dye, that looks for Ravens to feed him. I take it as no small
honor, to be the Instrument where God is the Efficient: while I think, both
are co-operatiue, my Motion, and his Guidance.

Next after the Promise; it therefore moved Abraham to seek out a Match for
his Son, because he was now grown both Old and Rich, as appears plain;
Abraham was old, Genesis 24.1.2.3.4.
and the Lord had blessed him in all things; therefore said Abraham, etc. Old
he was, and therefore would gladly bestow his Son before his Death: He was
rich, and so had enough to bestow upon him. Time and wealth, are two good
things to make, and maintain Marriage. They come together with conuenience,
that are hereby fitted, and furnished each for other. Abraham was extreme old
when he took a Wife for his Son: and so was his Son then old enough for a
Wife. Forty years old was Isaac, Genesis 25.20.
when he took Rebekah to wife. Maturity is one maine thing that belongs to
marriage: and is required as well on the Parents behalf, as the parties
themselves. Neither ought they be too hasty to give in marriage, nor the other
to receive. This forwardness of Parents is their fondness and fault, they
search now have their children, ere thus they give them: They have but now
begotten, and borne them, and now they are ready to betroth them. The Parents
upon occasions are ready to contract, when the Children have not only not the
Affection, but scarce the Reason to consent. And as their Godfathers took upon
them to promise for their Faith to God; so will their Fathers for their Troth
to each other. To make it according to men's Laws, they now give their Hands;
their Hearts (which make it after Gods Institution) are yet to give; and
perhaps not given at al, or not so freely and fully given as they ought. I
dispute not whether such are lawful, they seldom prove joyful marriages. How
ever men admit of the Act, the Event shows ofttimes how God approues them; Had
my Parents been so hasty, as to give what was theirs, before they gave me
leave to give mine own; and so bound me rather at their pleasure, then
bestowed me to mine own content; I now must not but have yielded, though I
could not but have lamented; and lamented I know not whether more, their
Misdeed, or mine own Mishap.

Forty year old was Isaac, ere he went about a Wife. It were well we could
but stay till half his Age, that live not to half his Life. Oh the monstrous
preposterousnesse! they will be Parents and Children at once; The Sexes will be
coupled, ere you can well distinguish the Sex. Children in strength, children
in understanding, thus go they together; and so there come out Fools and
Wretches. Thus bring they forth, scarce well formed; thus bring they up, scarce
informed well. Every Age of man is not meet for marriage. There is a time in
Man's years (as in the year) when marriage yet comes not in, and when marriage
now goes out. Neither too soon, nor too late, is the best time for men to
marry in. While I am but young, I will marry not yet, and were I so old, I would
marry not at all. I would not wed too young, while yet I know not how to
maintain, and instruct a Family, nor yet too old, lest now I live not so to
do.

What a world of men did God make up in Adams loins? He gave him such an Help
to vent them, that Time neither through age, nor injury, could ever extirpate
their propagation. What multiplications of all men, for a worlds replenishment?
What of Good men, for a Churches conservation? Even Heathens have desired
Fruitfulness, to pay this debt to Nature, and their Countries; and so have
Christians, to give God, and his Church their due. It is natures instinct, to
generate her like; her ambition, to iiue in her image, and set up her name in
her succeeding offspring: So is it Graces act, and aim, to renew according to
her own likeness, and so endure in all generations. It was Abraham's hope,
that his Seed should be as the Stars of Heaven for number: Genesis 15.5.
but it was his joy, Genesis 12.3.
that therein should all the Families of the Earth be blessed. Godly Parents
desire, and delight to be fruitful, not so much to increase, as to Happiness.
The good Mother had rather her womb should be barren in the world, then to the
Church. The wise Father thinks he has begotten, if not to Gods glory, then
to his own shame. It were better to have no being, then to be accursed. How
much rather had I, not to have been borne, then to curse the womb, that bare
me not to blessedness.

The use is ancient, and honorable in matter of marriage, to do it by a
Deputy. So Abraham sent his Servant to take a Wife unto his Son. Genesis 24.4.
Abraham sent him to take, not to have her; and so was she given him to
conduct, not to enjoy. Isaac sees by his Servants eyes, speaks by his Servants
tongue, takes by his Servants hand. There is a way to convey, as to cast our
affections upon another. The Ear may woe in absence, though the eye but in
presence only: And it is that (they say) a wise man woes by. Abraham married
his Son by the hand of a Servant: And our God by the mouth of his Ministers,
marryes us also to his Son. O my sweet Savior! be it by thine appointed
means, that thou marry my soul to thee in love. I will ask of the Watchmen,
where I may find him whom my soul loves? The messengers of the
Bride-chamber, they shall bring me to my Beloved.

It is thought (and not unlike) the Servant here meant, is the same was
mentioned Genesis 24.2.
before. For, who should rule all he had, Genesis 15.2.
but the Steward of his Household? and why might not his eldest Servant be this
Eliezer of Damascus? And if it were no other man, then was he the better
servant. For why (had he considered himself) Isaac was the only man that had
put him out of all. Abraham was ready to choose and take him, or his, for his
heir, while Isaac was yet unborn; One borne in mine house is mine heir: but
now they are agreed upon, none must be heir with Isaac* Again, there were
some hopes to be had, if so Isaac dyed either issulesse, or unmarried. But the
pious man, and faithful, rather executes the will of God toward another, then
aims at his own gain and advancement. And hereupon sticks not to take an
oath by his Masters Thigh, to be true unto his loins. Good men do rather for
Gods glory, then their own ends: and respect not whether they be benefitted,
so God be honored. I will so intend mine own good, as not another harm; and
not respect that my mind is crossed, so Gods will be accomplished: yea, that I
might be but the executioner of Gods will against my self!

What a swearing about a Wife? Genesis 24.3. and 16.4.
Swear not to take a Wife? and swear to take a wife? A man must be wary in
Wiueing; must bind himself (even as by oath) to what, and what not. He ought
so to resolve, and not otherwise: such only ought he choose, and refuse other
such. Those must he be tied to decline, but those embrace. Marriage without
strict aduisement, is but an ill adventure. He has her for Better or Worse,
that has a Wife; he that is but about her, ought so to resolve upon the
better, as not to hazard the worse. Let him tie himself to take a Wife, not
profane, but religious; not lewd, but virtuous; prudent, not silly; modest, not
light, and so keep him to his conditions, and he shall not repent him of his
choice. All things else, we try them, before we buy them; and is there no
proof in the purchase of a Wife? Is there an election in every thing, and in
this only but an adventure? A man will not hire a Servant for a year, but
upon commendation and good liking; and yet will hazard upon a Wife at any
terms, though for the whole term of life. He runs on to experience,
rather then examine a Wife, which indeed is not known, ^re had, which
disobeyes not, till she be bound, and begins not to dislike, till now she be
inioyed. There Is no true content for a man to take a Wife by other then the
aforesaid conditions: Be she rich or poor, witty or silly, merry or sad,
beauteous or deformed; in all these are their several troubles and distasts. A
rich Wife will be imperious, and a poor cannot but be burdensome: one he must
endeavor to observe, the other must he labor to maintain. A witty Wife will
be opposite, and so the silly one obstinate: neither will the one be fully
answered, nor the other truly informed. A sad Wife will be comfortless, a
merry Wife may be scandalous; neither shall he know how to cheer the one, or
how to check the other. A foul Wife is irksome, a fair Wife is suspicious;
be she beauteous, others will love her; be she deformed, how can he love her
himself? He may fear to keep the one, the other will irke him to enjoy. But
a good Wife is to be found for all this, of him that binds, or bends himself
to seek out none but good. To avoid the worst, is the way to light upon the
best. I must be content with such a Wife as God has allotted me, but will
seek for such an one, as he has allowed withal.

A Rose grows not from a Nettle: or (as that holy Proverb) Do men gather
Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Mat. 7.16.
It is hard (we say) but a bad Bird should lay a bad egg: Nor (as he again)
can a corrupt Tree bring forth good fruit. verse 18.
Abraham cannot expect that a womb uncircumcised and accursed, can raise up
fit seed to his Son Isaac, both blessed, and within the Covenant. This
charge is therefore with mutual obligement delivered, and confirmed; Genesis 24.3.
Not to take a Wife to Isaac, of the daughters of the Canaanites. According to
this example, he gives a good precept; 2 Cor. 6.14.
Be not unequally yoked with Infidels. Which way draw they, and to what end,
that are unequally yoked? If they marry not in the Lord, alas how their Prayers
are hindered! Married persons are one flesh, so ought they to be one spirit
also. As Affection, so should Religion join them both together: that
distinguished in sex, they might be the same in mind; and Grace might
chiefly liken, whom Nature only had made unlike. One Faith is likewise
required to Godward, as one Troth betwixt themselves How unseemly is it to
see Man and Wife, like an Deuteronomy. 22.9 10.11.
Ox and an Ass under one yoke? How vnsute able, to have a wedding garment
especially, patcht up with party colors? How has God joined them together one
toward another, that never joined themselves together toward God? Oh the
misery of such a division, in such an union! Amongst these sinister
Conjunctions, an Israelite, and a Canaanite, a Nazarite and a Philistin, a Jew
and a Gentile, a Christian and an Infidel, a Man and a Beast; I do not easily
discern which has most cause to complain first of an unequal yoke. I my
self will loath alike to be there coupled; as where Nature, as a man, so where
Grace, as a Christian, has distinguished.

It is Abraham's only care to provide a Match for his Son, and the care
seconded with execution, the provision terminated with success. If the choice
of Parents be herein happily regarded, with what impiety is their consent
hereto refused? Good and lawful Marriage was never without a Giving in
Marriage, nor this latter without a Parents hand. God gave Children to their
Parents, and therefore are they theirs to give. Both must here indeed leave
Father and Mother, yet not without their leave. It was Parents consent begat
their Children, and it also should bestow them. Whose consent gave us a Being,
their Counsel may further our being well. Herein to regard our Parents is
commendable; nor is the other to be excused. Years may exempt us somewhat from
their awing, but not altogether from their advise. Isaac was now old enough to
have sought out a Wife for himself, yet not only asks he his Fathers
consent, but stands to his Fathers choice. Would I licenciously run headlong
without advice or guidance, to put a neck under that yoke, which I cannot lay
off, but with life? or rashly knit a knot, which Death only can undo? If I
rashly bind my self to shame and beggary without their counsel; I may justly
complain too late of both without their comfort: and rightly be debarred of
their Countenance, whose Counsel I disregarded.

The Father (doubtless) might have married his Son to a Wife nearer home,
then his own Country, and (very like) of greater value then his own kindred.
But this is it, the son of Abraham shall inherit his Fathers blessing, but
the daughters of the Canaanites, (his neighbors) are liable to their Fathers
curse: Now what community betwixt Blessing and Cursing, betwixt Good and Evil,
Sin and Grace. Life and Death? These he saw to be palpable Idolaters, and
profane, but them he knew to be morally honest, yea disposed to piety. He
therefore reiects them, he might have obtained with more case and honor; to
seek out Her, whom he finds though with more difficulty, yet greater virtue.
Godly Parents asks not chiefly, how Great? how Rich? but how Good? how
Religious? The old way was to marry by the Ears, but now by the eyes or
Fingers: there is no hearing of her virtues, either he must see her Face, or
feel her Gold. How many cast themselves away upon Wealth? and are married to
Money, more then Virtue: Nay, it is the Wealth the man is married to, not the
Wife. The man is rather hired to a Mistress, then married to a Wife: and so as
if she had no worth in her, it is the Wives worth comes with her, His, or Hers
are valued, and not themselves: And thus neither Give they, nor take to
Marriage; but hereto rather are they Bought and Sold. Nay there is more
Conditioning betwixt parties marrying, then between the one party or other, in
buying or selling. In stead of the old manner of Contracting, we have a new
kind of Couenanting. They are bound strictly under hand and seal, that ought
chiefly to be bound in heart. Dowries, Ioyntures Feofments, all are expressly
conditioned: Love, virtue, piety, scarce are meant, or mentioned. Oh! with what
distraction (me thinks) is a soul staiued, beggarly ugly; embraced in a
Carcass though pampered, wealthy, beautiful? Besides, wedlocks bond of peace,
is not of the Hands, but the Hearts. And, where Wealth is even forcible to
join the one, and Virtue not regarded to unite the other; there Death is
commonly (within a while) thought a ready and sweet liberty, to so lasting and
miserable chains. He, who in the choice of a (...) self, ouer-lookes what
she is, to look over only what she has: I could wish him Midasses ears and
a Wife of Clouts, that having there droyled like an Ass he may here sit down
(like ^ Fool) to play with a Puppet I would not (in such a place) credit mine
eye, above mine care: Neither would be led so much, because I have seen her
rich, as heard her well reported. I had rather be happy somewhat in her virtue,
then honored so much by her value. Goodness ever expects a Blessing* when
Greatness may fear a Casualty.

Isaac commits his Good liking to his Fathers choice; so Abraham his choice to
his Servants diligence and discretion^ and the servant also his best industry
to Angels guidance, and Gods protection. Marriage is honorable among all. Heb.
13.4.
This has God instituted, Angels directed, Men embraced. This has the Father
here chosen, to this has the son consented; about this is the servant
bus^ed. Who (I wonder) save beasts want it? save worse, neglect it? save
Heretics forbid it? save devils cont^mne it?

Great Potentates seek and sue not for Wives, but have them rather offered and
brought to hand. And is it therefore that Isaac must not leave the land of
Canaan, to go and get a Wife? Nay, nay, this is not for royalty, so much as
safety. Travel may irke him, perils endanger him, or (which is worst) foreign
manners corrupt him. Abraham came from his kindred and country, to have a
Son in the Land of Promise: and therefore especially must not his Son now
leave the Land of Promise to return to his Country or Kindred. Isaac must not
leave, or lose the promised inheritance, for the inioyment of a Wife: And for
this cause (above all) the charge is given once and again. Genesis 24.6.8.
Beware thou bring not my Son thither. A Christian man must not forsake the
Covenant of God, for a Wife: but rather (as he both Luke 14.26.
requires, and Mat. 19.29.
rewards) forsake even a Wife for his sake. I will (God willing) therefore
neither break my Covenant with him, no^ strain my conscience before him.

The wise Servant will not go without his errand: nor will he rashly swear to
a thing, though not impossible, yet not within his power: He will not so easily
tie himself to do a thing, not easy to be done. And therefore, ere he be
adjured to any thing, he will be informed of all, and to the utmost resolved.
Thou shall swear (said the Master) to go, and take a Wife to my Son, Genesis
24.5.
etc. Yea but (says the Servant) What if the Woman will not come? or if come,
not come with me? o^ (...) come with me, not come with me to this land? In this
case indeed it is to be doubted in a Woman, whether first she will yield to the
M^^ion, or if that acc^^t of the Means; or (...), b^ take her to the place.
Many have ^^cke and stoo^ upon it, though (may be) not to live with their
Husbands, yet where their Husbands (...). Either the air is bad, or Country
barren; pleasures none, or friends not near. I^ such a place must he buy and
build and have and hold, or else no living with his Wife. A good (...) and
near it with her Husbands (...) and wheresoever he is (...) tents her to be
with (...) whom my soul^ (...) now thy S^ouse from her ^^^^try and kindred, and
(...) to thy Fathers home. Whereso ever thou art, there let me be also. W^^ I
in the bottom of the (...), earth, (...) with my Beloved, I could not but be
happy. Be thou where thou can be, it is happiness enough to be with thee.

Now commits the Seruan^ his Journey and business, no^ to blind Fortune, but
divine Providence; and so he begins with patience, continues with prayer, and
with prosperity atchieues. He that was made a means under God to the marriage,
would even herein bring God to his means. Genesis 24.14.
Grant that the Maid to whom I say, etc. may be she that thou have ordained,
etc. We may not without our ill, do so, yet may we not think the man did ill
in so doing: For why, neither tied he, nor tempted God, in that he did it not
of rashness or curiosity, but from a faith in the Promise, and through an
instinct of the Holy Ghost. And therefore lo accordingly. He has not now set
a foot within the intended place, his iourneyes period, and businesses
dispatch; the word is scarce out of his mouth, or heart yet settled from his
wish, when now, (as he would) there came out Rebekah, a Damsel, fair to
look upon, a Virgin, not having known man, with her Pitcher on her shoulder,
etc. As who should say, lo! by Gods providence a Wife for Isaac, in the flower
of her youth, delicate and beauteous, chaste and pure, lowly and meek: not
disdaining cheerfully to bestow her self upon the meanest, if honest
employments. The man stands amazed to think, the thing indeed should fall so
soon and even with his desire. At length, the same spirit that instructed him
so to pray, has also assured him that it is thus performed. Our God teaches us
to pray, and accordingly fulfils our peti^ions. Instruct me (my God) what to
ask, and so vouchsafe me whereof I stand in need.

God has now brought her to the servant, whom the servant must bring to his
Master. And (i^ the immediate process of accidents) acquaintance is soon
taken by him; Tokens rec^iued by her, and himself entertained by her Parents.
Yet, as a trusty servant, careful to fulfill his Masters business, ere fill
his own belly: I will not eat (he says) until I have told mine ervand.
Genesis 24.33
And first (as an experienced woer) to make more easy passage to his purpose,
and take away, all doubtings and demurrings; He largely and orderly declares,
how that his Master is blessed of God, honored by Men, rich in substance; and
tha^ his only Son is sole heir to all that he has. Enough to have won
the fairest Lady (...) a Land; how much rather then but Bethuels Daughter? The
haughtiest heart, and nicest, that ever looked out of fleshly windows, would
easily stoop, and yield to so fair allurements. He cannot want a Wife, that
is thus fully, thus solely happy; having neither Fellow, to ro^be him of his
Honor nor Brother to divide the (...) ^itance with him. Besides all this,
(such is his Masters readiness, and goodwill to them ward) himself is sent
thither, the adjured motioner of the Match. Nevertheless, will he not wrest
their Daughter from out their hands, or steal her away from before their face.
For why? Isaac is ever well worthy Rebekah. Hardly will a man purloyne, vn^esse
he that cannot deserve a Wife. Only his necessity must demand her, but their I
berry it is t^ bestow her: It is his uttering, not their ratifying of his
message that let* him free from his Masters oath. While his Tale is drawn
toward an end, her Parents, they ponder how it began, and at length conclude
as one; That even as Abraham's great Honors, excessive Wealth, Isaacs
marvelous Birth, and his own pious diligence: so this their Daughters
marriage; Genesis 24.50
This thing (say they) proceeds from the Lord. Wedlockes institution is Gods,
so is the execution. He who at first (for that purpose) made one flesh two
Bodies; does now-make two bodies one flesh* That act which was alone in
Creation, does still concur to Procreation: that as he made man without him,
so may he propagate man with him. The same hand that has prepared this yoke
for us does also bind it upon us. I will therefore (in such a state) neither
bless, nor blame my Fortune, in whatsoever may here befall; while I look
beyond the acts contingency, to the Authors Decree. God gives, I take, for
Better, for Worse: The first is increase to my joys, the other is exercise to
my patience: and so be she better or worse, I am hereby still the better.
Better or worse, there would I thus rejoice, Pro. 19.14.
A prudent Wife is from the Lord. here thus resolve, this is my Cross, and I
will bear it.

It is not for men to dispute with Gods purposes, or resist his proceedings. He
that shuts, and no man opens; binds, and no man loses; as touching
this knot also, knitteth and no man can untie. Mat. 19 6.
Whom God has joined together, let no man (no not Parents) put asunder. Laban
and Bethuel can say neither good nor bad, because the thing proceeds from the
Lord. In this respect, their best cannot further, nor worst forbid the Match.
Nevertheless, though it be by Gods appointment thus to have her; yet is it in
their consent to give her, nor may they give her without her own consent. They
had given theirs already; Genesis 24.51.
Rebekah is before thee: it rests yet to get the Mai^s Good Will; verse 57.
We will ask her consent. It had not been her modesty, to make her own
choice; yet was it in her liberty, to gi^e her own consent. Parents may
neither violently enforce children, nor children headily outrunne Parents, to
tie a kno^, which neither want nor wo^, save death only is sufficient to
undo. In the one were it cruelty, and impiety in the other. Where ^h^y are
rigide, or these refractory; They are not to be commended, and these are to be
condemned. My Parents shall have honor in this prerogative, that I love, where
they like. ye^ (I hope) without infri^gement of my lau^able privilege, tha^ I
like at least where I love. How gladly would my behavior challenge a freedom
from impiety to them ward, if with but some disturbance to my self?

Rebekah having willingly condescended, (it was her religious modesty, not her
light easiness, she was so soon entreated) is with her fathers blessing
departed tow^rds an Husband. Pious couples must here leave Parents, not their
benedictions. Rebekah comes not unblessed to Isaac. He that is denied this
requisite good, may better forbear that recessary evil. There is none so
accursed as he that has a wife unblessed. O^ the misery of that folly! Fire and
water shall suffer more easy conjunction, then they who are thus yok't without
a blessing. Let me rather be bl^st in solitude, then accursed in such society.

The servant prayed by the way as he went forth; and Isaac himself prays by
the way as they come home. Isaac went (...) to meditate, Genesis 24.63.
or pray, in the field, at euen-tide. When a man is toward a Wife, now is it
time and need to pray. To pray, that God would unite them each to other, in
faithfulness and affection; and in faith and devotion both to himself. How
ought he beseech God to bless and guide him, that he may do that d^creetly,
and according to christianity; for which, being once done, there is no remedy?
In fit time and place, the young man betakes him to his meditations. At even
tide, when the day had well nigh run out her course, when the affairs of his
calling were for that day finished, when he could now praise, or bewail the
day past, for good or evil: He went out into the Field* finding his spirit
more free and expa^iate, then could coarctate it self within the covert or
closure of a narrow Tent; all abroad beholding God powerful, and provident, in
all things and places, under no less then heaven: He went to meditate, what
good he had that day done, what evil eschewed, what danger escaped, what grace
received: or (as not unlike) what a promise God had made, what a Wife his
Father had provided, what a journey his Servant had undergone; when he
departed, when he would return. While his thoughts have thus ouerseene them,
his eyes are now upon them. And that the act may prove (as all ought among
Lovers) reciprocal; Isaac not only sees Rebekah, but by Rebekah is Isaac also
seen. Rebekah is the first is seen, at the departure to Rebekah; Isaac is the
first is seen at the return to Isaac God so ans^eres his servants diligence
with the readiest success. She is no sooner informed, who it is that comes to
meet them (for why, expecting Isaac in every passenger, she had been here
inquisitiue) but straight, Humility dismounts her, in reverence to her head,
and modesty couers her, in chastity to her Husband. Genesis 24.64.65.
When she saw Isaac, she lighted off the Camel, and took a veil, and
covered her self. ^ebekah lights off the Camel; It is not for the Body to be
above the Head: Rebekah covered her self; the Moon is expelled at the
approaching of the Sun. Rebekah lights off the Camel, this is against those
Wives that will ride, when their Husbands must go a foot: Rebekah couers her
self to her Husband; this is against those that uncover themselves to others.
Oh my soul! the Bridegro^me, whose Spouse thou art, is now before thee: light
off from the Camel of uncleanness, from the crooked Camel of thine own
eui^l ways: cover thee with the veil of shamefastness, as (for thine own
unworthiness) blushing he should behold thee. Yea; cover thee with the robes
of his righteousness, so shall thou be the fairest amongst women, and as the
Kings Daughter, all glorious within: the King shall take pleasure exceedingly
in thy beauty, and kiss thee everlastingly with the kisses of his lips.

After some cheerful greetings, with a relation of their toil, piety,
success, entertainment, and the issue of all according to what he sees:
Isaac brings Rebekah to her Bridechamber, therefore prepared in his deceased
Mothers Tent. The first Wife was not, ere the man was furnished. God brought
not Eve to Adam, ere he gave him a Garden to live in: Nor Isaac takes Rebekah
to him, ere he have a Tent to put her head in. The policy is commodious, and
with approuement, ere a man enter into the world, to learn how to manage her
affairs: Whereinto a rash and raw entrance equally imports, the life of a
Nouice, and a Beggars death. It is better not to obtain, then not to
maintain: Forwardness to have, is folly and misery, without ability to
uphold. As Friends, so Famil^es, are casier in the purchase, then the
preservation. Him will I reckon as an Infidel, whole laudable care extends not
to his own provision: him worse, where it is wanting to his own, and those of
his household.

Thus is the Troth plight, the knot knit betwixt Isaac and Rebekah. Both are
Married, ^n^e Loved, He Comforted. Marriage without Love, Genesis 24.67.
is vnquie^nesse^ Love without Comfort, is Barrenness; but all thus annexed,
make Happiness. I would wish mine enemy no heavier bondage, then under the
seven Withes of Sampson and Dalilah: my Neighbor as my self, no easier
freedom, then within this threefold Cord of Isaac and R^bekah; Marriage. L^ue,
and Comfort. I will so expect the first, as (by Gods blessing) to communicate
the second, to participate the last.

The Monodie OR, Soliloquie.
IT is not good
for man to be alone;
Both World and Church,
should so want propagation:
He Is either God,
or Beast, that thus is one,
And not a man,
whose end, and ayme's a Nation.
My soul takes him
for brute and savage elfe,
That being borne,
is borne but for himself.
A Father old,
once blessed in a Son,
Would not alone
ingrosse such happy state:
But still consults
what is fittest to be done,
To make both Sons,
and Bliss continuate.
My Soul! though Envy
would alone be blessed,
Yet would not Love
be so, without therest.
As fittest help
unto such blissful life
He strait resolves
upon mature decree,
Unto his only
Son, to take a Wife;
That in more Sons
he may more happy be.
My soul! if aiming
at each state of bliss,
Thou fail in means;
the end well may thou miss.
The Father takes't
as due, to make the choice;
The Son in duty,
yields obeisance to it:
Th^ones verdit stands
not, save with the others voice;
Mutual consent
is requisite to do it.
My soul had rather
bide her own diuulsion,
Then such free act
should suffer hard compulsion.
The neighboring Daughters
(noble, rich, and fair)
Are not with inward
Graces qualified:
And so not found
fit matches for his Heir,
'Cause these they want,
themselves are here denied.
My soul! such Parents
are but rare to find,
That value less
the Body to the Mind.
But wearied steps
are spent to seek fit Spouse,
By trusty servant,
who his way to bless,
Solicites often
with prayers and with vows
The Power divine,
which answers with success.
My Soul! with ease
thou Nature may embrace;
Thy travel must
combine 'twixt thee and Grace.
Now while he has
scarce breathed from his prayer,
As heart could wish
to have with speed obtained
A Damsel young,
chaste, virtuous, and fair,
At once is seen,
and known, and wooed, and gained.
My soul never knew
the man, ere could complain,
He did begin in God
and end in vain.
Ere long (blessed Groom)
he meets with chosen Bride;
Joyful espou^als
knit both hearts and hands:
Love is with love
replied on either side,
Both comfort have
in such their blissful bands.
My soul (as longing
Spouse) fame would be wed,
Unto t^^ well.
beloved Christ, her Head.
PRACTIQVE THEORIES: OR, Votiue Speculations UPON John Baptists Nativity, or
Birth. Decollation, or Beheading.


By JOHN GAVLE.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper, for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear, 1630.

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON John Baptists Nativity, or
Birth.
THe same Angel foretold, the same Scripture records, the same Church
celebrates the Birth of Christ, and the Baptist. Captain and Soldier, Lord
and Friend, Master and Servant, Savior and Forerunner, God will that one
Herald shall in like manner fore-summon and proclaim them both. God honors
his Saints, as himself: reserving his Propertyes, he communicates his
Privileges; and vouchsafes them likewise, what to him pertaines alone. How the
shadow is suffered to resemble the substance? The Forerunner has likewise his
Forerunner. He that bare witness, witness was also borne of him: He that was
borne for the good of the Church, the Church has thought good to commemorate
his Birth. We may liken the Saints with their Savior, so we lessen not the
Savior by his Saints. John Baptist was sanctified in his mothers womb; Christ
was so, and more; not sanctified there, but even sinlesse altogether. The
Matrons womb was hallowed, but the Virgins undefiled: her Babe was endowed,
but hers conce^ued by the Holy Ghost. John Baptist was borne of a woman old,
and barren; and Christ of a woman free and untouched. He borne beyond natures
order, but He without natures Act. John was borne of a barren womb, where
nature was desperate: but Christ of a Virgins womb, where Nature was amazed.
It is not usual for many more to be borne, as was the Baptist: but not
possible for any other to be borne as Christ was. Many rejoiced at the Birth of
the Baptist, but Christ's Birth was the glad tidings of great joy unto all. They
rejoiced at John's birth, that then were, but Christ's was the joy of all both
before, and after. John's name was foretold, and much of his life, and many of
his parts: but Christ's Name, and Person, and office, and all were foretold The
Angel that forespa^e of John, commenced him: but adored Christ, of whom he
forespake. It is man's honor, that Christ, in many things, may be compared: but
that he should not in every thing be preferred, were Gods dishonor. We are but
a drop of that goodness, whereof he is the sea: but a sparkle of that Glory,
whereof he is the fire. We may be holy, as he is holy, but not as holy; we may
be perfect, so as he is perfect, but not so perfect. It is not for the Sons
of men to parallel, but resemble the Son of God. I would wish but to be the
shadow, to this substance; the drop, to this sea; the sparkle to this fire. Oh
let my soul but have the likeness, whereof my Savior is the perfection.

The Saints Funerals, the Church counts their Natalitials: calls their
Death-dayes, their birth-dayes: and not once mentioning the day, they were
borne in a World, commemorates the day, they were borne for Heaven, Other
Saints, S. Peter, S. Stephen, etc. We commemorate their death: we celebrate
the birth only of this Saint, S. John the Baptist. Beside the Baptist, no
Saint was borne into the Church of Christ; therefore the Church celebrates the
birth of no Saint, beside the Baptist. All else were borne of flesh and blood,
before they were borne of Water, and of the Spirit: but he borne of the Spirit,
before he was borne of flesh and blood. He was made a member of the Church in
his mothers womb: the Church then could not choose but take notice of his
birth. Our births are soul, and to be forgotten: hallowed was his Birth, and
to be remembered, We are borne in sin, he was sanctified from the womb. We
many of us both load, and shame our Mothers: his, he both gladded, and graced
together. We no sooner come out of our Mothers womb, but weep; he leapes
while he is yet in his mothers womb. We weep, as Prophets, foresigning some
sorrow to our selves. he leapt, as a Prophet, fore telling great joy to all.
Ah! I am unclean from the womb, wherein this Saint was sanctified. I will so
bewail, that I was once borne: as also to rejoice, that I am borne again.
Mine is the shame of my first, let Gods be the glory of my second birth. I
confess my self sinful from the womb, yet nevertheless believe me
sanctified: I believe him sanctified from the womb, yet sinful nevertheless.
If you say him without sin in the womb, how had he it in the world? if
neither here nor there, what need had he of Christ? what had Christ more then
he?

Besides that John's birth was hallowed, it was miraculous withal. His Parents
both were unlikely; both He and She were old and She beside was Barren. Luke
1.7.
One would think procreation there impossible; whereof the one was not yet
capable; and whereunto they were both now made unable. It is strange, that the
Time to such a purpose, should now be past, and the fitness for it, as yet not
come. The Sex^s both were aged, and their senses dulled; their blood cold,
bones dry, joints feeble, and v^ines empty; and all unlikely, whatso^uer might
belong to a natural act, or order conjugal. Yet for all this, was not a
child denied them, but delayed only. God had shut up her womb, not from a
Son, but for a Time. He would give the Issue, but would take his own
opportunity. When God sees good, he will make the old Man, a young Father; and
the barren Wife, will he make a fruitful Mother. God knows what is good for
every one, and when. It were presumption in us, to appoint him his Time. He
slowes his Gifts on purpose: and would have them the rather valued and
required, for that they are deferred. I will stay the Lords leisure and
pleasure: My God take his own time to do me good. And because though he delay
me a little, he denies me not; I will yet hope for, what I have not yet. Our
God therefore puts us off, not that he will not grant our requests, but would
reward our patience withal.

Many, and godly Women have been long barren, and yet they bare at last.
Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel, Hannah, and Elizabeth; their less hopeful wombes,
have (in the end) brought forth the more hopeful seed. All were barren a
while, to be the more happily fruitful: God restraining the work of Nature the
longer, that the gift of Grace might the rather appear. When God will do his
Saints and Servants an extraordinary favor, or blessing; he will let them see,
he does it by more then ordinary means. This was not a kind of cursed
Barrenness, but mysterious. These Births so hard, and marvelous, what did
they but prefigure, and foretell a Birth, more rare and miraculous? Fruitful
Sterilitie, did but prefigure a fruitful Virginity. That as we believe the
pregnancy of these old Matrons; so should we, of that young Virgin: Especially,
since there were two impediments to procreation, Old Age, and Barrenness; here
but one, only vntouchednesse. He that would make those wombes to conceive,
which after the manner of women, were shut up; why not that, which was not
opened after the manner of women? As John to Christ, so John's mother prepared
the way to Christ's. The Angel that told Mary she should conceive a Child,
though she had not known man; told her withal, her Kinswoman (that seemed to
be past that knowledge) had conceived. Luke 1.36.
Thy Cousin Elizabeth (who was called Barren) has also conceived a Son in
her old age. He tells her of one Old, and Barren both, that she might not
distrust her self, though pure and unknown. Hereupon, she doubts not, but
that he that had newly made a dead womb; can now also make a womb not
quickened, to conceive. The Son of an old Matron, did well foregoe the Son
of a young Virgin. Who but he, that was wonderfully borne; should fore-runne
him, whose birth was wonderful? Nature, that bare me once, is old and barren:
God grant me to be borne again of Grace, that is flourishing, and undefiled.

It was not the Baptists least praise and prerogative, that he was borne of
godly Parents. The Scripture tells well of them; Both were just before God, Luke
1.6.
and walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, without
reproof. We must understand this of Piety, as well as Nobility; The glory of
their Children, Pro. 17.6.
are their Fathers. It is hopeful in Nature, which is in Grace infallible; A
good Tr^e brings forth good fruit. In the order of Panegyrickes they use to
praise men for their Parents. 2 Timothy 1.^.
Paul commended Timothy, for his Mothers, and Grand-mothers faith. Happy was
the Baptist in his Parents virtues, but happier in his own. The worth of our
Ancestors is made ours, when we imitate their worth: otherwise, that his
Parents were worthy, is not only no honor, but a degenerate sons disgrace.
Men are more commendable for the worth that proceeds from them, then for the
worth that is derived to them: It is small glory to a bad man, that he had good
friends: Nor is the good man to be accused, because his Ancestors were bad. It
is no honor to have good Parents, and not to imitate their goodness: so, to
be borne of bad Parents, and not to partake of their badnesse, is no disgrace.
Nay, rather are they to be commended, that coming from bad, turn good: and
they to be condemned rather, for that borne of good, they become bad. In both
cases this is laudable alone; If a bad man's Parents be good, to learn to do
nothing unworthy his Parents: if a good man's Parents be bad, to labor to do
nothing unbeseeming himself. I am taught, neither to trust to my Parents
merits, nor to distrust, because of their defaults. Neither will I presume,
because I have Abraham to my Father; nor were my Father an Ammonite, and my
Mother an Hittite, would I therefore despair.

Grace in the Baptists birth, supplied the force of nature. John was the Son
of his Parents prayers, rather then their imbracings: a Son of his Fathers
begging, rather then begetting. Thy prayer is heard, Luke 1.13.
and thy Wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a Son. The prayer was now heard,
which he now prayed not. Zachary was (at this time) the peoples intercessour,
to plead the common cause; he therefore spoke not only in his own behalf.
He prayed now, for no Son of his own, but the peoples sin. We must not
think, that neglecting the public necessities, he would now betake him to his
private requests: or that he mixed his domesticke cares, with his priestly
office; or that he minded that in the Temple, which was fitter to be thought
on within private walls. He prays for the good of the people, and one is
promised him for the peoples good. He prays for all, and is answered touching
himself, Thy prayer is heard etc. Luke 1.14.
yet so, as it concerns others also; many shall rejoice at hi^ Birth. It is
prayer that preuaile^ with God. Nothing so powerful in every thing, as prayer.
Prayer has remitted the sin, prevented the judgment, obtaine^ a reward: It
has reared up Waters, and cast down Walls, shut the Heavens, opened the
Earth, brought down rain, kept in fire, shut up mouths, and set open doors;
it has overcome the enemy, comforted the afflicted, provided for the poor; it
has raised the dea^, repelled devils, healed Diseases, begotten Children: who
can reckon all, that rests in the power of prayer? There is nothing, which God
cannot do in himself; nothing, which he will not do for prayer. Authority
cannot command, nor strength enforce, nor worth deserve any thing at Gods hand:
God will not be commanded, nor forced, nor hired, but entreated. Iam. 5.16.
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, avails much with God.
When, and wherein I would prevail with God; I will only, and earnestly pray
unto him.

The Mother of the Lord, and Mother of the Prophet meet together: The Mother
congratulates the coming of the Mother, and so does the Prophet of the Lord.
Elizabeth to Mary, and John to Jesus: Jesus came to sa^ctifie John in the
womb; and John salutes Jesus there. Unheard of congratulation! they so salute
each o her, as neither is heard. The Saint and Savior inuisibly meet together,
and unspeakably embrace each other, with a mediation only of two tender
walls: She now tells to her, what he now did to him; As soon as the voice of
thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the Babe leaped in my womb for joy. What
a joyful exultation was here in the womb? even such as now was not in the
world beside. Elizabeth was first acquainted with Mary's coming, but John with
Christ's: She first heard the voice, but he first knew the Word: She first
answered, in the way of courtesy, but he first rejoiced, in regard of the
Mystery. O mystery of Angels, in an Infants motion! the Morning Star thus
springing from below, how it betokens the Dayspring from on high? Ioh. 5.35.
The burning and shining light (shining and burning in an early knowledge and
ze^le) before it come to the Candlestieke, it first illuminates the Bushel.
He that now leaped in his Mothers womb, told her, who was in her womb, whose
salutation she now heard; Mary's salutation made John leap; but John's leaping
made Elizabeth prophecy of Christ. It was through the fruit of her own womb,
she said unto the other; Luke 1.42.
Blessed is the fruit of thy womb. In that he is so hasty, not one^y to
fore-runne his Lord, but even himself in a manner, makes the Mother of the
forerunner to know and acknowledge the Mother of the Lord. This consideration
is admirable, how that he now is aware of Christ's coming, that yet is ignorant
of his own: that he understands of his Lord, while yet he is not sensible of
himself: and that while he yet sees not what is present, he tells what is to
come. Behold, therefore and wonder! the spirit of divine Grace is upon him,
when the spirit of a natural life is scarce yet within him; yea, he leape^
already in the spirit, while he is not fully in the flesh. So as he^ begins to
live to God, ere he live to himself; yea, begins to live to God, in the act of
grace, ^r^ God in the order of nature, begin to live to him. Totally divine is
he, ere he yet be compleately humane: Does the part of a Prophet, while yet he
has no^ the members of a man; and begins to leap, when now he ca^ neither go
nor creep. John Baptist lived to God, before he was: My God grant me to live
to him, now that I am; and live with him, when I shall be n^ more.

Elizabeth was maruellously quickened, and in a moment: Yet is she orderly, and
but ordinarily delivered. For her fu^^ time came, that she should be
delivered, Luke 1 57.
and she brought forth a Son. It is wont with God to keep Order, even in
Wonder; or to begin miraculously, and conclude with means. So comes he at first
like himself, but stoops to us at the last; shows himself only, in the
beginning; but uses us also, in the end. Elizabeth conceived beyond nature, but
she must not bring forth, without order. God made her conceive, though the fit
time was past, but would not have her bring forth, till the full time came. He
would have her partaker of the miracle, but others should be but witnesses of
the means. God deals wonderfully with his Saints, when the world perceiues no
other, but ordinary. He vouchsafes his Saints special Graces, but lets the
World conceive of no other, but common Gifts. So God (in his gracious
vouchsafements) do wonderfully to me; I care not though the world conceive, or
consider but wontedly of me.

Now they have him, they agree not how to call him. The kin, they take upon
them, to name the Child; and give him no other name, but (as they used) the
name of the kin. He is Fathers Son, and they give him Fathers name: They
called him Zacharias. Luke 1.59.
But he must not be long known by that name. What talk they now of the name
of his Kindred? the name of a Prophet is already given unto him. His Godfather
is God the Father, who christened him before by a Deputy: Thou shall call his
Name John. Luke 1.13.
This was a great vouchsafement of God to some of his Saints, that he has
given them their names: So is this to all, that he knows them by their Names,
that he calls them by their names; that their names are written in the book
of life. God cares by what names we be called. He gives us our names in our
Christendom; to make us mindful of his mercy, and our duty; so often as we
hear the sound or mention of our names.

Yet are they at controversy how to call him. They reason with his mother
about the matter; and the father is he, that must resolve them: who, because
he is tongue tied, tells them under hand; His name is John. Luke 1.63.
A name not fansied of himself, but imposed of God: a name which himself
inuents not, but repeates. That name is of importance, which is given of God.
John, beside the appellation, has this signification, the grace of God. There
were other of this name, beside the Baptist: but none, in whom the import of
this name was so fully and truly accomplished. The names they imposed of old,
were Sentences, or Prophecyes. None of them taught, or signed so much as the
name John. Next to the name Jesus, is the name John: I was God, that gave, them
both John, and Jesus; are as much a^ Grace and Salvation: John prepares the way
to Jesus; betokening, there is no way to salvation, but by Grace. John's name
was an honor to him, no^ was John a disgrace to his name. He both was, and was
called Gracious. We many (by our ba^ manners) slander and belie ou^ good Names.
We have fair appellations, and filthy conditions. Nay, have nothing to betoken
us Christians, but the name: usurping the style, whereof we want the truth; so
contrary are our lives to our callings, and titles of our persons, so unlike
the works of our Professions. What skilleth it to be called Clement, Vrbane,
Pius, and yet be cruel, uncivil, ^uill? to be called Christian, Prudence
Grace, Faith; and yet to be unchristian, unwise, ungracious, unbelieving? Lord!
let me not be a scandal to my Calling, nor a reproach to mine own name. But
make me mindful of my vow, and duty, so often as my name is mentioned: and as
ready to answer unto my faith, as I would unto my name.

John was a miracle himself, although himself did no miracle: He was not so
much the instrument, as matter of wonder: Though he did no miracl^, yet nothing
but miracles was done upon him. Wonderful was his Birth, and so his life
wonderful. Neither was he borne according to natures strength, and order, nor
does he live after natures manner, and means. He presently flits from a womb,
to a wilderness: changes one Desert for another. His birth and life, are both
alone: He is borne, but one, and so he will live but one. While he yet has no
fellowship with men, he shunne^ their society; and ere he yet com^ amongst
them, wholly auoid^ the company and concourse of men: And wherefore does he^
thus, but to teach men (by his example) if not to avoid, yet not to regard a
World: To bid Christians especially not so to toil on earth, since they are
borne for heaven: Or rather, he thus reserues himself for his coming; for
whom indeed he came. It is expressed of him; He was in the Deserts, Luke 1.80.
till the day of his showing unto Israel. Ioh. 1.23.
John began to show himself in that day, that he said; I am the voice, etc.
But was not fully shown himself, till the next day to that, Ioh. 1.29.
when he showed Him also: Behold the Lamb of God. The voice was silent, and
solitary now a while; for why, the Word was not yet to be proclaimed. John was
an Alien from the World; but though, was a Citizen of the Wilderness. Though
John resorted not to men's dwellings, yet men repaired to John's abiding. The
whole land of Judea was not wide enough for a Wilderness indeed. This indeed
was called so, but in comparison; Not because solitary altogether, and
dispeopled, but because less inhabited and frequented. In this kind of
Wilderness was John, as set apart for his Office, not to set up an Order. He
neither (that I can hear) praised the Desert, nor per^waded thereunto. He bad
men but do as they ought, and let him alone to do as he did.

Who calls John a Pilgrim, Monk, Hermit, Anachorete, etc. Will they make a
sedentary loyterer of Christ's Forerunner? This is to belie the Baptist, to
make him their Prince or Patron. The Orders of this kind, have Authors of
their own: They have Fathers (such as themselves have falsified, or feigned)
whereon to father the^ John minded to ply his appointed office; not to teach
men to live in an uncertain Calling. Would John in stitute or inioyne such a
life, as is neither i^ Church, nor Commonwealth? Even men are borne one for
another; and is there a kind of Christian, that is only for himself? Either
is he a God, or a Beast, that always is alone. Now of Beasts, (they say) none
so savage, as the solitary. God said it of all Solitude, It is not good for man
to be alone. Genesis 2.18
Not Good, because neither safe nor honest: Genesis 4.
Not safe, Caine slew Abel all alone in the Field. He the rather did the
wickedness, because there was no witness. Not honest; Genesis 19.
Lot that was chaste in Sodom, became incestuous in a Cave. No temptations, to
those of the Wilderness. Mat. 4.
The deui^ tempted Christ there. The Tempter is then secure, when he can but
take us by our selves. Even Solitude it self p^r^wa^es to evil: and we the
sooner ^oe it, when there is none to mark it. Fe^re and shame forbid a man in
presence; he gives way to his lusts only, when he is alone. He that travels
alone, soonest wanders, and is most in danger. Bad company is not good, yet is
a man many times his own worst companion: and is more innocent with any, then
with himself. A man is his own careless keeper, and therefore it is ill
trusting him with himself. He that shunnes others, let him first forsake
himself. A good conscience is peaceable and settled in a Tumul^; a bad one is
troubled, and brawles in Silence. And if a man be not at quiet within him; what
auayl^s it, that the Region is so round about him? H^e that does ill, though in
secret and ^olitarinesse, has witness enough within him: He that does well,
has few enough to observe him, though the eyes of a world were upon him. It is
a fault, to light a Candle, and put it under a Bushel: and to hide a virtue,
is a vice: Nor is it better, then to do bad; to withdraw themselves from doing
good. But they therefore renounce a world, to shun temptations: Temptations
are well avoided, but better overcome. They thus betake themselves wholly to
Devotion; That is no Devotion, which is beside Religion. They sequester
themselves to good meditations: Good meditations are not better thought, then
taught. Say what they can for such their Solitude; those that would be Saints
by themselves: I only believe The Communion of Saints. It skilleth not where I
dwell, so God dwell with me; not where I live, so I live to God. World, or
Wilderness. I care not, so my God be with me: City or Country, no matter
whether, so I serve God in either. I pass not to shroud me under a neighbor
Turfe, or a foreign Heap; For I know, that if my earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, I have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens.

Come to John's Habit, from his Habitation, and next his Dwelling, mark his
Clothing. He had his raymert of Camels hair, Man. 3.4.
and a leatherne girdle about his loins. We Preach to live, John lived to
Preach; His life was seen, when his doctrine was ^ot known. We Preach better
then we live, John lived accor^ingly as he Preach^. He preached Repentance,
Repent ye, Mat. 2.2.
for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand; and (as his Habit here betokens) his
practice was Repentance. The old Penitents used to sit in Sackcloath, and what
Sackcloath so hard as Hayrecloath? Christ marks him (if not commends him) for
the roughness of his raiment. Luke 7.25.
What went ye out to see? a man clothed in soft raiment? they which are
gorgeously apparelled, are in Kings Courts: He that dwells but in the Desert, is
clad only in Camels hair. Not Silk, not Linen, not Wool, but Hair; not
the wolly fleece, but bristly shreds and shearings of a Beast. Could they have
wouen a courser excrement of Beasts or Earth, he would (no doubt) have worn
it. This bodily habit, showed the virtue of his mind; that he that seemed
outwardly so sordid, was notwithstanding all glorious within. It seems
strange, so tender a Body, and harmless, could endure such hardness, as not
only not to cherish, but to afflict the Body. Why blessed Baptist? though thou
would not be so vain as to adorn thy carcass, yet this was enough, to
cover thy nakedness: is this then, that thou would humble, or subdue thy
flesh? Or would thou bring men to their first and frugall fashion? Or tell
them of a more excellent Adam, then ever was he, that at first, neither had,
nor wanted raiment? Or would a Prophet clad in the excrements of an unclean
Beast, betoken that a Savior was to be clad in the similitude of sinful
flesh? or strict girt, would thou condemn our loose living? Or waiting to
be clothed from above; did thou contemn the Wearings of a world? Or being
borne under the Law, would thou teach them men to live according to the Law?
or toward the liberty of the Gospel; would thou betake thee to a more
severity, then of the Law? Or would thou let men see their dissoluteness,
in thy strictness? Or would thou move men by thy living, more then
preaching? Or was such habit pertaining to thy profession? By many reasons we
may consider, and conjecture the cloathings of a man: and many times examine,
and censure the man by his clothing.

The man is aptly clad, that is clad accordingly: whose Habit chiefly is
agreeable to himself. How is it that one wears above his ability, another not
according to his Calling? One shows his vanity in his apparel, another
therein shelters his iniquity. There goes an Ass in a Lions skin, and here
comes a Wolf in Sheep clothing. One is regular in his habit, almost to a
Superstition, another is (even to a scandal) uncomfortable to his Profession.
Many a man's Habit bears more show of holiness, then his life brings forth
fruit: His conversation is no better, then before; the change is only of his
Name, and Coat. John Baptist clad himself agreeable to his office; how
unprofitable are we to our Professions? John Baptist went meanly clad, that
was both Great and Holy: why go we so gay, that are so Base, and Bad? John
Baptists garments were girt unto him: but Lord what looseness of our Apparel?
The Saint was not ungirt, unblessed; how fluttering go we wretches, and
unfortunate? He girt him accordingly, to fit him for his Travel and
Employments; Besides our sloth, we fashion us so fluidly, as shaming to apply
our Garments to our Shap^s. Far ^e it from me, so to adulterate Natures art,
by mine own inventions, as to make my self a Picture, whom God has made his
Creature. Howeuer I am made, is Gods work: thus, and thus to fashion my self,
is the devils art. Neither sordid let my garment be, nor sumptuous; neither
scanted, nor superfluous. Not such soft rayments, lest they prove nests of
lusts: not too hard, lest they wear me, and not I them. I would have them
clad only, not puff up, not perplexe my Body. Savior Christ, above all,
cloth me with thy Righteousness; that is a Garment, an Ornament, necessary
and comely, both to cloth and deck me. Having put on Christ Jesus, and tied
him close to me with the Girdle of verity; I am better clad, then was the
Baptist, in his coat of Camels hair, and a leatherne Girdle.

Both in his Dwelling, and Clothing, the Baptist had a Companion; but in his
Dye^, was himself alone Elias was also in the Wilderness, and had on a Coat
of hair, girt to him with a leatherne Girdle: Mat. 3.4.
John only lived on Locusts and wild honey. Locusts, and wild honey was his
appointed food; Wine and strong liquour, were drinks forbidden him. Because his
meat and drink was so mean, Christ reckons them as none: John came neither
eating nor drinking. Mat 11.18
It skilleth not to dispute the kind of his meat and drink, but note the
end; no matter to inquire, whether the Locusts were Roots, or Flies; the Wild
honey was a Pith or a Dew. (The last of each is likeliest.) But this is to be
observed, He contented himself with such Food, as the place afforded; with
such, as was soon prepared. He took what was near and ready; he stood not
so to fetch and dress his Food. Each Country of old, was sufficed with it
self; All now are sought, to satisfy the appetite of one. Every Country was
formerly noted for their proper Foo^ and Apparel. In a confusion are we now
fed, and clad. There is a curiosity to dress more Dishes, then ever God
appointed for Food. God at first appointed nothing for Food which is not so in
it self: we have invented our varieties, which indeed are no Food, but in the
Cooking. Men have an art of their own to teach, and supply nature, as both
ignorant and improuident for it self. Nature is sufficed with few things* no
ma^uell they crave so many, that eat all by Art. In his Appetite is man only
unmeasurable. Few eat to refresh, many to vomit, and lust. Bread and Water was
the first Fare: Food and Raiment is a Christians sufficiency. Locusts and wild
honey were delicate to content, and nourishing enough, to strengthen Christ's
Forerunner. We complain of course meats: Oh! they are hard, heavy, cold,
windy. Thus feed we after the Physicians rules, rather then Gods precepts: and
eat rather according to our Complexions, then our Professions. My Savior
says, Mat. 6.25.
The life is more then meat, and the body, then raiment. This I know, Life,
Body, Food, Raiment, my Soul is more then all. A man has nothing more to
value then his soul. He teaches me how to prize it, that so inualuably
compares it: What shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? Mat 16.26
My Food shall serve my Body, so as my Body may serve my Soul. Neither would I
have my Body to be my Souls Master, nor slave: Nor my soul to be my bodies
Pander, nor executioner.. So far forth would I suffer it, as to preserve me
in Health: and so far forth subdue it, as not to provoke me to lust.
Christianity requires us to a Soberness, not to a wretchedness of Life. The
honest Christians are not the severe, and scrupulous, but the modest and
ingenuous. But set aside this bodily food, which perishes together with the
body. Oh satisfy my soul with thee, thou Food of my soul! which indurest,
and strengthenest to eternal Life. I mortal wretch, and sinful, live not by
Bread only, but by thee, the Bread of Life. Our Fathers have eaten Manna, and
are dead: Oh! let me eat thee, and I shall live for ever.

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON John Baptists Decollation,
or Beheading.
THe people were both ways mistaken, in calling Christ John Baptist; and in
taking John Baptist to be Christ. They had not learnt yet to distinguish
betwixt the Angel, and the God; the star and the sun, the voice and the
Word, the Herald and the King, the Crier and the ludge, the Usher and the
Lord, the Friend and the Bridegroom, the Witness and the Truth, the Prophet
and the Savior, Christ Jesus that was to come, and John Baptist his
Forerunner. But this Lucifer (far unlike that other) not daring to usurp
divine honors (though men would blindely and rudely have thrust the^ upon him)
gives God the glory of what he is, and quite denies himself to be, what he is
not. Once, and again he says, Ioh. 1.10. Ioh. 3.28.
I am not the Christ. And so himself sets down one difference betwixt them:
He must increase, Ioh. 3.30.
but I must be diminished. And indeed thus are they distinguished more ways
then one. Christ did increase, for he began to be revealed what he was: John
did decrease, for he ceased to be called what he was not. Christ did increase,
for he was yet to accomplish the work of a Savior: John did decrease, for he
had already done the office of a Fore runner. Christ did increase, the Gospel
was to be Preached: John did decrease; the Law was to be abolished. Christ did
increase, for coming after John, he was preferred before him. John did
decrease, for coming before Christ, he was set after him. Christ did increase,
in whom dwelt all the fullness of the God head bodily; John that received the
Spirit, but by measure, did decrease. Christ, an inexhaustible fountain of
Grace, did increase; John the burning Lamp, did decrease. Christ did increase,
for he was hand and foot enlarged to a Cross: John did decrease for he was
cut shorter by the Head. The shadow was to yield, now that the substance came
in place. The voice was to be silent, now that the Word began to be understood:
and the glimmering of the star vanished, now that the luster of the sun
appeared. It is behoofefull for us Christians, that both Christ should increase
in us, and we decrease unto our selves: Christ, and his Grace must live in us,
and we dye to our selves, and sin. Lord increase thou my Faith in thee, and
let me decrease to my sin and self. Oh be thou more and more to me, and let
me be less unto my self. Live thou, and let me dye; proceed thou, and let me
be restrained; prosper thou, and let me decay; yea, yea, Lord! let me be
ashamed, and thou glorified; let me be despised, and thou magnified; let me be
humbled, and thou exalted; let me be nothing, and thou all in all.

We have all of us one thing or other, to bring us to our ends. Some Natures
frailty, some our own Intemperance; some others violence. For the first,
neither was the Baptist borne by natures strength, nor through weakness was
it that he dyed. And as touching the other two, he dyed not by his own, but
another evil. John both was borne, and dyed for Christ's cause: He was borne
foretelling Christ, whom he dyed confessing. Borne was he to bear witness of
the truth, and he dyed for witnessing the truth; Mark 6.18.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy Brothers Wife. Here came John Baptist
in the spirit of Elias; for as he to Ahab; Thou, 1 King. 18.18.
and thy Fathers house have troubled Israel: So he to Herod, It is not lawful
for thee to have thy Brothers Wife. The Prophets have not gone behind their
sace, to tell Kings their faults. John shames not to tell even Herod of his
shame. Nor speaks he faintly and generally; It is not lawful for a man to
have his Brothers wife: but stoutly taxes him in particular, It is not lawful
for thee to have her. It is not lawful for a man to have his Brothers Wife,
this were but to confute the Doctrine: It is not lawful for thee to have her;
this is to oppose the practice and example. Herod heretofore heard John gladly,
but now he hates to hear him: Hypocrites, while themselves are untouched, will
hear the word of truth, not only with a kind of patience, but delight. None
are more taken with the reproof of sin, then they, and yet then they, none
more irke to be reproved for their sins. How frequently are men, and
deservedly, and yet but unprofitably reproved? What good does it only to
inueigh against sins in general; when men have not the grace to apply it to
themselves? Men think themselves unmentioned, untouched. It concerns not them
to tell them never so of their faults, if you tell them not as theirs. We must
indeed hare the vice, not the man; yet may tax the man for his vice. It is no
offense to the person, sometimes to tax the person for his offense. No man can
truly say, he is slandered, when that is only reprehended in him, whereby God
is dishonored. Nor is it an offense, when one is publicly corrected, to the
intent that many may be amended. Nor yet is it against Charity, when one man's
shame and scandal is recompensed with the peace and wariness of a many.
Better an open reprehension, then imitation of evil. Neither is it other then
duty, so to do; Them that sin, rebuke before all, 1 Timothy 5.20.
that others also may fear. The best way of reproof, is neither to slander a
man's person, nor favor a man's sin; neither to betray, nor smother his evils:
neither to carpe and censure, nor sooth and flatter him in his faults and
offenses. Neither to be zealously cruel, nor pit^^ously unjust. Neither to be
so bitter against things but ridi^^lous, and so easy to things pernicious; as
to inueigh so against Errors, and but chide at Abominations: neither to
lance them that are sore, and but scratc^ the seared; neither to come to a
fool with words, nor with a club to a wise man: Neither to come too near, and
broadly point at the blushing and shamefast; nor to keep too far off, and
speak too much beside the impudent, and out-facing: neither to vpbraid that
openly, which is done but once, and against one; nor hushed it privily, which is
done against all, and openly. If one speak in the clouds, and but touch me a
far off, yet so as my self finds me conscious of his words; I will blush to
commit that my self again, which I perceive another is so loath now to
discover: Since his secrecy would excuse me for the first, I will so accuse my
self therefore, that my wariness may prevent the next. If I deserve to be
made a public example, better I be ashamed, then confounded for my faults. If
he be my friend that repre^ends me, it is because he loves me: nor is this to
hate me, though he be mine enemy that reprehends me. If I be ^ustly
reprehended, I thereby may learn to amend; if reprehended unjustly; I so may
learn to beware. As Remedies to wounds, so are reproves to sins. He that
reprooues me, I will not therefore count him for my foe, but make him my
Physician. Reprehension is but counsel, if we could so consider it. He that
tells me I am bad, he but bids me to be good.

If John could have kept hi^ tongue still within his head, John's Head had stood
longe^ upon his shoulders: To have held his peace, would have yet prolonged his
life and liberty. Nay, silence now had been as well rewarded, as secure. What
might he not have obtained at Herod's hand, only if he would but have held his
tongue? He that feared him, after he had imprisoned him, had he been silent,
how would he then have honored him? Silence (they say) is safe, but though,
silence may be unjust. There is an indiscreet, and a dissembling silence: One
is not to speak when he is thereto permitted, the other when he is thereto
required. Discommendable is an indiscreet silence, and a dissembling silence
damnable. Nor fear, nor favor can stop his mouth; he will speak to Gods
glory, though against his own Head. John cannot be so Pander-like to his own
lusts, as to seek to bring himself into favor, before the Truth. His tongue
is his Talent to employ, and to hold his tongue, were to hide his Talent: since
a man's tongue is given him, as welll to correct, as inform his brother. Though
the Hireling see the Wolf coming, and by a soothing kind of secrecy, as it
were flee from him, yet will he stand still and forbid him to his face: Though
never so many be dumb Dogs, he needs must bark: Let who so will sow pillowes
under others elbowes. John will be sure to have his Goades in their sides.
Herod heard John gladly, great like to flatter him in hearing, but this cannot
make John to forbear Herod in preaching. There are Hearers that therefore
countenance the Preacher with attention and applause, because they would not
have him reprove them for their sins: But though the vain Hearer never so
tell him, that he says well; nevertheless will the true Pre^cher tell him
when he does i^l. John will dissemble no man's sin, will flatter no man in
his faults; will rather incur the danger to himself, then not rebuke
another evil: Rather dye by a King, yet more offending, then not once tell a
King of his offense. The Prophet preferred Honesty before Safety, and therefore
rebuked the Kings dishonest dealing to the Death. The Saints are counseled, and
encouraged, not to fear to speak before them, Mat. 10.28.
that can kill the Body only, so they speak for him, that otherwise is able
to destroy both Body and Soul in hell. They therefore have chosen rather to be
improuident to themselves, then false to the truth. Fear, nor Danger could
make them not only not deny, but not conceal the truth, much less could
favor and preferment. Lord! let me neither be forced, nor allured against thy
Truth. Not to confess thee for fear, is to deny thee; and (for favor) not to
defend, is to resist the truth. Rather then to dissemble thee, and prosper, to
live, and not preach thy law; Oh teach me! oh strengthen me! oh vouchsafe me
to utter, and suffer; to speak, and dye together.

He that cried so in a Wilderness, is now silent in a Prison. It Is strange to
think, how he is stilled and straightened both for voice and place. He had
taken upon him a liberty to speak, it therefore was the liberty to walk was
taken from him. Herod the Tetrach being reproved by him, Luke 3.19.20.
for Herodias his brother Phill^pt Wife, and for all the evils which Herod had
done: added this yet above all, that he shut up John in prison. John belike
reproved many of Herod's faults, but this especially, his Incest: and Herod (it
is like) had done John many despights, but this principally, his imprisonment.
Many times, nothing gets a man more hatred and evil will, nothing brings a man
into more danger and displeasure, then to tell the Truth. He asks them, as
they thought him: Gal. 4.16.
Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? He is counted
an Adversary that would but dissuade: nor is there a more thankelesse office,
then to advise. But to hear of the Truth, is harsh and unsavory, to the false
and, guilty. The very worst, think not themselves so bad, as to be worthy
reprehension. It is common with every man to prefer himself to the truth:
nor can any man endure, the Truth should be defended against himself. Nay, be
a man never so bad, he interprets better of Predication, then Reprehension; and
had rather suffer himself to be deceived by a false praise, then amended by a
just reproof. Great ones especially, that seek to do evil by Authority, and
would have any thing lawful for them, whereunto their lusts carry them: To
tell them of their offenses, is to offend them, and not to wink at the wrong
they do, is to do them wrong. John boldly rebuked the Pharisees, told the
Publicanes, Soldiers, and People, their several Faults and Duties, and all
this was taken well, only Herod here cannot well away withal. When
reprehension meets with men both guilty and mighty; in stead of a due
consideration, it finds an irefull repulse, if not malicious revenge. And what
was intended for the Patients information, and amendment, proves only the
Authors damage and despite. A good heart grows rather angry at it self,
because it has sinned, then at another, because it is reprehended: so is it a
naughty and perverse disposition, to interpret Love for Hatred, and Kindness
for Wrong. John reproved Herod, to save him; Herod imprisoned John to destroy
him. This will I say o^ them both. John did good against evil, to reprove
him; Herod did evil for good, to imprison him: John had done evil for evil,
had he soothed him in his sin; Herod had done good for good, had he followed
his advice.

Martyrdom may be in case of moral Truth. It was no such point of Faith, in
confession whereof, John now laid down his life; yet no man will deny John
Baptist for a Martyr. To speak so against Incest, what was this (would some
say) to the profession of Christ? For so much as any thing is done with respect
to Christ, Christ takes it as done unto himself: and to suffer for any truth
of his, is to suffer for his Name. Whatsoever an Heathen man indures for
virtues sake, and though he would dye in a detestation of vice, yet is he no
Martyr. There is no Martyr without the Church: A Martyrs Death, follows not,
but a Christians life. Nor is it the extreamenesse of the pain, but
uprightness of the cause, that makes a Martyr. Nor is he martyred, because his
life is ended, but work absolved: Martyrdom being to be measured according
to the purpose, not event. Moral virtues occasion a Martyr only in refore^ce
to God and Christ; neither have the beautiful sins this Crown, but such as
are Hand-^aids unto Grace. All that can be done unto a Pagan, does not merit
him this name: The least that a Christian suffers, is Martyrdom. Yea, this is
Martyrdom, that he would but be a Martyr. Be it Loss, Shame, Grief, Want,
Pain, Death; this makes us Martyrs, that we suffer for Christ, and Christ in
us. I hate a Thief, not because he is executed, but executed for Theft; I
honor a Martyr, not because he suffers, but suffers for Christ.

Genesis 40.20.
Pharaoh, and Mat 1.6
Herod, are found to have feasted, and blessed their Birth-dayes: Theirs did
Job 3.3.
Job and Ier. 20.14
Icremie, both execrate and bewail. They were Heathens that first celebrated
their Natalitials: Their Funerals were first observed amongst the Saints. It is
for the wicked, to glory in such a Day, they are borne to a World, and Sin:
For the godly, to rejoice in that, they are borne to Grace, and Heaven. On
their Birth days, (of all others) the Infidels gave themselves to Plays, and
Pleasures: the Faithful on such days, would the rather betake them to their
Prayers and Deplorations. But thus are their first births celebrated, who were
never consecrated to a second birth. How Iouiall is Herod on his own Day? He
praises his Constellation, magnifies his conception, glories in his Fathers
loins, blesses his Mothers Womb; and says, let the day never see d^rkenesse,
in which he first saw light. Himself will cannonize the day, wherein a Man, a
King was brought into the World: and so must others observe his Life, and
Reign. They must eat and drink, in remembrance of his birth, that was borne
to no better, but to eat and drink. The man might have made better use on his
Birthday. He should on this day, have deplored the evil of his days; as
their Breuity, Misery, Sin; should have now given God the glory, the Author
and Vpholder of his Being: Should have likewise thought, that so days succeed,
and end, that his life decreases, as his years increase; and that by a few
Birth-dayes, he must come to the day of Death. But not so well as this, nay
worse then that before. Even on that day, the use of life was given him; he
depriues another of the benefit of life. Herod's birthday is John's death-day.
When the Wicked live, the Godly dye; when they increase, these are diminished;
When they prosper so, and flourish, these needs must perish, and decay. Herod's
birthday, is John's death-day. The wicked can at once be vain and cruel; at
once glory in their own Folly, and others Affliction. Herod's birthday, is
John's death-day. I would that day were had in remembrance, though not for
Herod's birth, but for John's death.

John Baptist danced himself before his birth, but it is another that dances
toward his death. Not he, Mat. 1^.6.
but the daughter of Herodias danced. (It were but uncouth to imagine, that the
lightness of an Harlots heels, should strike so heavy at a Prophets Head.)
Wantonness is handmaid to Excess. Always, after a satiety of meat; there
follows a leuitie of action, if not a provocation to lust. They that sit them
down to eat and drink, are fit for nothing, Exodus 32.6
but to rise up and play. So they, They sat them down to eat and drink, and
rose up to play. To play, that is, to verse 19.
dance. Who but lightheeles, makes apt sport for lightheads? Heredias Daughter
that should have been modest, as a Virgin; exceeds even an Harlots impudence.
I had almost called her the pride of Harlots, but let her be said the shame of
Virgins. Negligent of her own shame-fastnesse, and treacherous to others also;
she begins, I cannot well say whether a more Wanton, or bloody Dance. Besides
that she was taught, and dressed to such a pranke, and part; consider what an
Harlots behavior belongs hereunto. A wagging Head, wanton Face, rolling Eye,
the Hands shuffling, Body turning, Feet tripping; with such a number of wrested
Gestures, which make the body seem deformed in the Motions, as if the members
of the body were deformed. Our Feet are given us to go forward, we but abuse
them to totter and turn withal. They say in this kind of skipping, the
Devil most commonly leads the Dance: This is certain, to swagge and swing
so, up and down, to and fro, and run all in a round; this is to tread
according to the Devils pace and measure. We many skip lewdly (like Goats)
before the Calfe: Where are those comely motions of men before the Arc? Woe,
and alas! how we measure our paths to the Devils play? Lord! thou have long
piped to us, and yet we have not danced.

Nothing so unseemly, which will not arride the naughty. Herod, that should
now have been ashamed at the presence of his Daughter, is now delighted with
the folly of his Niece. Her face was enough to convict the unlawfulness of
that marriage, which John did but confute in words: And yet she is made a
means against him, for uttering but that Truth, whereof her self was the
only proof. Herodias had better kept her Daughter within doors, she does but
diuulge her shame, in seeking by her means to suppress it. So Herod himself
might well have blushed at her being; but he is notwithstanding delighted with
her Dancing. Mat. 14.6.
The Daughter of Herodias danced, and pleased Herod. That she so pleased by
dancing, was worse then that she danced. The gratulation of evil is worse then
the commission. The well taking here, was worse then the doing ill. Had she n^^
pleased the King in dancing, she had not danced against the Prophets Head.
Evils are most pernicious then, when approved. Neither is this folly approved
only, but rewarded. Nay, as though he thought nothing enough to reward her
withal, he bids her ask any thing. Mark. 6.22.
Ask of me whatsoever thou will, and I will give it thee. How mightily men are
taken with Tricks and Toys? And for their Feats and Follyes, men soonest and
highest praised and preferred? He for running, riding; he for singing,
fidling,; or (as she here) for dancing; few for Preaching. How cunningly he not
only iumpes, but instructs her to petition? To make her the bolder to ask to
some purpose, he tells her before hand how far he will grant; and beside, to
make it the surer, binds it with an oath: He swear unto her, verse 23.
whatsoever thou shall ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my
Kingdom. Bountifully promised, and as well deserved* a Reward but beseeming
the labor, and but an equal recompense for so high demerit. He was a whole
King indeed, that valued half a Kingdom but at a skip: such another leap
might have turned him out of all, so little he counts of Sovereignty to
Pleasure. Was not he as unworthy to possess the whole Kingdom, as she to
deserve the half? Men in their humors, are prodigal of their promises:
Nothing is too dear to recompense the Panders of their pride and lust. Ah that
vanity is so prized and approved! We fools pass away our Gold, for Straw; and
our Pearls for a Barley corn. How do we dis-esteeme of the birthright of
the Sons of God, for the Pottage of earthly pleasure; and give, sell, lose
our whole in the Kingdom of heaven, for but the dancing delights of a world?
With the wise Merchant, having purchased that precious pearl; I will not
promise it for money or friends: no, not to gain a world, will I part withal.

It was ill in Herod, to take pleasure in Folly; worse, that he promised to
reward it; but that he bound himself hereunto by Oath, was worst of all. This
is of evils, the greatest, to engage himself to evil. An oath is not usual,
but in case of weight and need. To swear lightly, is as ill as to forswear.
One would have thought, a Princes Word had been as good as his Oath: and, that
a King had said it, was as if he had sworn it. To swear, bewrayes but
falsehood and infirmity: Truth and Authority stand not upon an oath. It is not
the Oath that is credited, but the Truth; and were not men false, they had no
need to swear. Hence are all those execrating attestations, because men are
either jealous, or suspected I will not believe the man for his Oath, but his
Oath rather for the man. If he be a good man, he will speak the truth, though
without an Oath; a bad man will both swear and lie. An honest man (I take it)
is bound as well buy his promise, as by his Oath; what necessity then of an
Oath to a Promise? He that says he will do me a Favor, be he honest, I will
take his word, he shall not need to give me his Oath.

Herodias had required John Baptists death ere now, and ^as denied: Now that
her Daughter may have any thing that ^he will ask, what shall she ask (by her
consent) but it? She made her dance for that purpose, and bade her ask that
recompense: Wherein her fuite prevailed not, she thus brought it about by a
wile. The weaker Sex seek by all means to wreake their malice and despite.
It is the manner of the malicious, to require others hurt, before their own
good: who rather then benefited, sue to be revenged. While it is generally
expected she now should ask Honor; behold, and abhor, she demands Blood.
Give me here John Baptists head in a Platter. Mat. 14.8.
Monster of her Degree, Age, Sex! All her demerit was but some Iew^ mirth; and
a most horrid murder is her demand. To ask slaughter, for dancing; oh vain
office! oh foul reward! John Baptists Head? and his Head in a Platter? Out
shameless Girl! to crave a Prophets death and shame. But, no marvel that a
Strumpet indures not a Prophet: What other should be Lusts petition, but
Chastities destruction? How cruel are pleasures? and what brutish impieties
arise from rioting, and lust? It Is the condition of an Harlot to be cruel:
what cares she to destroy another body, that prostitutes her own? The fool
that follows her, she keeps in the stocks, Pro. 7.23.
till a dart strike through his Liver: the wise man that rebukes her, she puts
in prison, till an hatchet chops off his Head. Dalilah will cut off (...) Hair
of Sampson, rob him of his strength: Herodias will cut off the Head of the
Baptist, deptiue him of his Life. Better an Harlot cut off Head, or Members for
Christ's cause, then to take the members of Christ, and make them the members of
a Harlot. For them of this ^^rl; Lord! let me not fall into the deep Ditch:
And for them of this Sex, Prou. 23.27. Ecclus. 25.15.
Give me any malice save the malice of a Woman.

It is not safe to swear upon uncertainties: never was good end and event of
rash Oaths Of the evil hap of this vnadnisednesse, complain Iephthe^
Daughter, Jonathan, and John Baptist. It was an Oath, was John Baptists death.
(this is cruel that the death of a Prophet should be for the observation o^ a
Sacrament.) Herod's swearing lost him his life, and not the Baptists rebuking.
The cruelty of a Tyrant could spare him, whom the necessity of an Oath
destroyed. To what straits are men brought into by Oaths? Did he, as he swear,
it was cruel; if not, he was forsworn. He should of evils have chosen the
less: But he to commit murder, pleads perjury; chooses to offend rather in
slaughtering, then forswearing; and will be the more impious, under a pious
pretense. Monstrous unwilling is he, yet takes he all occasions to be
persuaded. Mark. 6.26.
The King was exceeding sorry, yet for his Oaths sake, and for their sakes that
sat with him, etc. This was all was said for him, but all this made against
him. He was sorry, just as the Crocodile sheds tears: He dissembled a
sadness in the face, when he was glad with all his heart, under a color of
religion, to have occasion of revenge; And would seem to be constrained to
suffer, what himself would willingly have dispatched. Or, were he so sorry, as
they say; that sorrow confesses but the Guilt, which preuents not the Fault. To
be sorry aforehand, and sin nevertheless; this is a bewraying, rather then
bewailing of our sin. Such was Herod's sorrow before hand, as was Judas
repentance afterward. Nevertheless for his Oath sake, etc. Perhaps he swear to
give her any thing, thereby to occasion her to ask this one thing; and then it
was for his Oaths sake indeed. Otherwise, an oath binds not to evil. There Is
no religion at all to impiety, nor is a Sacrament of force to sin. Of the
twain, better be false then cruel; better a bad Oath broken, then a good life
lost; better a Promise wisely frustrated, then wickedly performed. I marvel,
had she asked his own Head, would he have given it her? An Oath had been all
one to the Head of a Prophet, and Head of a King. And for their sakes that sat
with him, etc. Had none of them the wit, or goodness, to speak one word in
the Baptists behalf? How well might some of them have pleaded the innocence of
his cause, and iniustnesse of her request. They should have told him, that a
birthday was a day wherein to pardon and reward, rather then to punish or
execute: That cruelty was unbeseeming iollity, that nothing was more uncouth
and execrable, then was blood at a Banquet. Especially, how opportunely might
they have dissuaded him from it, now that they saw him sorry so to do it?
Howeuer he seemed, they all perceived whereat he aimed: nor durst they dissuade
that wickedness, since but for such a thing (they knew) that wickedness was
done. Their silence argues they allowed it, may be also they requested it,
since it is said, for their sakes. Herod had killed John ere this, but for
fear of men; and now it is for favor of men that he kills him. For their
sakes, what a madness is it, for a man to damme his own soul, for another
sake? He did it for their sakes, for whose sakes he should rather not have done
it. What need he have made them witnesses of his crime, that come but to be
partakers of his cheat? shames he they should be witnesses of his Leuity, that
performed not his Promise? how then should he of his Cruelty, that so performed
it? Herod had thought to have hid his Incest by Murder, to have excused his
Murder by Perjury, and thus he discouers all in the end. To heap one sin
upon another, is not the way to hide it. Sins are not covered by sinning, but
by repenting: nor cleares it a man, to smother, but confess his Sins. Alas
Lord, and God! how wonted are we to promise, and engage our selves to
inconvenience, and evil? How do we abuse thy Law, and Sacrament against it
self? Making it a Religion to do mischief: seeming as it were out of a
conscience we were constrained to do evil. What evil is done under a color?
what regard is had of men, more then Thee? Woe, woe, what sins are made even
cloakes for sins? Lord make me wary to engage, but fearful to dissemble mine
Oath: wary before men, but fearful before thee: wary to commit, but fearful
to smother my sin.

John Baptists death is decreed at a Banquet: how should Riot but consult
against Sobriety? It is meat and drink to the wicked, to do mischief: They
in the midst of their ^ollity, can nevertheless determine persecution. This is
amongst the wicked, pleasure and delight, even the godlies woe and smart: but
yet this is made the godlies happiness and comfort; namely, the wickeds force
and spite. Herod thought he had now determined John's punishment; alas, he but
did him the benefit. He but compels him, that of himself was willing; but
drives him that is ready to go; but kills him, that desires to dye. To behead
him in the prison, what was it else, but to free him from two Prisons at once;
from that of Herod's, and of his own body; as well from the Prison of flesh, as
stone? thus what was solely intended for a punishment, proves a double favor.
The malice of the wicked, makes for the godlies more advantage. Let the bad do
their worst, if I be good, my God will turn it to the best.

Were they not filled with Wine, they now might satiate themselves with Blood.
Behold here, and abhor it; After the Heads (no doubt) of many Beasts, Fowls,
Fishes; a man's Head comes in as the last course. He that came neither eating
nor drinking, goes as meat and drink. Mat. 14.11
His Head was brought in a Platter. Bloody guests, and barbarous, to partake,
but more barbarous and bloody Master of the Feast, to provide such cheer.
Where are brought in (though in covered dishes) a Scholars Head, a Mothers
Breasts, an Orphans Heart, a Laborers Hands, a Travelers Feet; and sauced all
with their several Sweat and Tears; there also is brought in (if not worse
then so) John Baptists Head in a Platter. I had rather starve, then feed on
man's flesh. And this is it I count to crush the bones, and suck the blood of
men, to rauine, and riot so, by fraud and oppression.

Herod and Herodias (alike both in name and sin) are glad to see, the Head is
smitten; for now they are sure, the Tongue is silent. Having killed the
Censurer, they think they have cleared the crime: and any thing shall now be
lawful for them, since now there is none to reprove them. How do they now
deride that face, which before they could not but blush to behold? Glad were
they to avoid him, yet now how they dare insult against him? They formerly were
afraid of his voice, yet now how they spurn his Head? What, John Baptist? so
great before God, and so vile before men? What, a Prophet? and more then a
Prophet? and delivered to an Harlot, and worse then an Harlot? Art thou he that
came in Spirit and Power of Elias? and go thou at Herodias lust and
pleasure? Art thou he that was called the Angel, and art thou made so vile a
slave? What, John? greater then whom was not borne of Women; art thou he, then
whom none dyed viler by a Woman? Ah Lord, and God! do thou sell thy People
for nothing, and deliuerest thou them without price? How is the death of thy
Saints precious in thy sight, when thou give the life of a Prophet, for but
an Harlots Dance? Lord! how are thy Saints led like sheep to the slaughter?
and for thy sake, how are they killed all the day long? Stand amazed flesh and
blood, be confounded to dispute a against him that is both Wise and Good. Lord,
Lord! that art gracious together and unsearchable: Thou suffer thy Saints
and servants to be humbled, that they may be exalted; to be despised, that they
may be honored; to be confounded, that they may be glorified; to mourn, that
they may rejoice; to suffer, that they may reign; and once to dye, that ^o
they may live for ever. Thou suffer them to suffer all, that we following
their example, may obtain their reward.

There was not such shadow of semblance betwixt the Baptists birth, and
Christ's; as there is manifest disparity in their deaths. Christ dyed to redeem
sinners, John dyed in condemning sin* John dyed in a close prison, Christ
dyed in an high Mount; He dyed obscurely, that dyed to himself; he dyed
openly, that dyed for all. John's master-bone was cloven, not a bone of Christ
was broken: His Neck was cloven, that laid hard loades upon our necks; not a
bone of him was broken, that bare the burden of us all. John dyed to decrease,
Christ dyed to increase. John bare a type of the Law, and was beheaded; that
there might no Head be acknowledged in the Gospel, but Christ, that was
exalted. Christ is the whole and sole Head of his Church. Would ye make the
Church a many-headed Monster; or would ye behead Christ (as Herod, the Baptist)
ye Monsters, that would raise up so many in his room? Dead members are ye all,
that know not, that acknowledge not; rotten are ye, and corrupted, that obey
not Christ your Head: painted Members are ye, that dissemble him; and ye but
hang by, ye are not on, that would cut him off. I bless my good God, I am a
Member ingraffed into that Body, whereof I acknowledge Christ Jesus to be the
only Head. Lord, give me grace to succor, and condole my Fellow Members, to
love, and observe my Head.

The Monodie OR, Soliloquie.
AS does the morning
star foregoe the Sun;
And next before
a Prince, does Herald hye:
A Prophet so
a Savior does forerunne;
And next before
the Word, the voice does cry.
My soul! by such
forerunner fit and good;
The Commer honored
was, and understood.
He that to all
men's health, and wonder, would
Make Virgin chaste,
and pure, bring forth a Son:
Would also Mother
make of Matron old,
That wonder might
with wonder be forerunne.
My soul! our God
sets forth his wondrous power
In young and olds
increase, both day and hour.
A man of blameless
life, his office plyes,
Offers not for
himself, but all and some:
Yet while he does
in Temple sacrifice,
He Is heard concerning
what he prayed at home.
My soul! it is not
in words still to dispute:
Do thou thy Duty,
God will hear thy suite.
One tells the Babes
both birth, and worth, and name,
How great to God ward,
and how glad to all:
What sanctity
in womb, on earth what fame,
With such as should
accordingly befall.
My soul! of others,
he must needs excel,
Whom God does so
approve, as to foretell.
Old Father cause
he credits not such voice,
Till coming of
the voice, he is taken dumb:
Two mothers meet,
in promise to rejoice
Th'ones Babe (an unborn
Prophet) springs in womb.
My soul! he now,
ere manned was, was sainted;
Be thou before
this earth, with heaven acquainted.
The Mother old
(at Time) brings forth young Son,
Friends meet, and feast,
and thus the Babe they style:
Not so, why so?
say She, and They, it is done
By Sires deciding,
as God said ere while,
My soul says happy,
happy is the same
Whom God or styles,
or writes, or knows by name.
His wondrous life
follows next wondrous Birth,
Food, Raiment, Harbor,
all to be admired;
So lives he, as
he would not live on earth.
As if (past men)
to Angels he aspired.
My Soul! so live
on earth, and heaven so love,
As being yet
below, bound for above.
So strict a Liver,
cannot but reprove
Others loose lives,
true zeal is bardly mute:
He tells what fits
not, and what does behooue;
And does before
their face, their faults refute.
My soul! he others
faults must freely blame,
And rather may,
himself free from the same.
A Tyrant snuffes
and frets, he is told his fault,
So bad men brook
not, to be reprehended:
He casts true Preacher
into filthy vault,
There to expect
a further ill intended.
My soul! such hire
thou have from froward heart,
He would destroy
thee, whom thou would convert.
A Day befits
to do some jolly deed;
One plays a part,
has promise of reward;
Having consulted,
asks such horrid meed,
The like whereof
is scantly seen, or heard.
My soul! thou can
not think, nor understand,
What enill things,
would evil men demand.
An Harlots Daughter,
asks a Prophets death,
The Enuyous
are all for others ill;
Whose mouth they could
not stop, they choke his breath,
And banqueting,
of blood they take their fill:
My Soul! when wicked
men so feast, and flourish,
Alas! then pine
the godly men, and perish.
PRACTIQVE THEORIES: OR, Votiue Speculations UPON Peter's Calling. Peter's
Confession. Peter's Denial. Peter's Repentance.


By JOHN GAVLE.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper, for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear, 1630.

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Peter's Calling.
THe Calling of the Apostles was both timely, and mature. Christ then chose
them, when he was both to instruct and employ them. He sought them early, and
opportunely, so to have and use them: as both fit matter, and Instruments of
his sacred Trade and Work. Therefore he called them, because he would send
them first were they instructed as Disciples, that so they might be furnished
for Apostles. Call me O Lord to thy service, and that right soon; take me to
thine own self, fit me for thine own use: make me to receive, and employ my
Talents, to learn, and teach thy Law; to hear, and do thy will.

A Captain, going to war, presses his Soldiers; a Master being to set up
School, gathers his Scholars together: so Christ beginning to preach, calls
his Apostles. Jesus began to Freach, Amend your lines, etc. (and forthwith it
follows) Jesus saw two Brethren, Mat. 4.17.18.
Simon which is called Peter, etc. Having but repeated the Text, the Auditors
next are reconciled. The Preacher is nothing without his Hearers. God gives his
Preachers gifts, for the Hearers sakes. Preachers are instituted of God, but
Hearers intended. Forasmuch as the word of God was ordained, not that it should
be preached only, but chiefly that it should be heard. Christ is not envious
of our illumination: The great Doctor of Israel, and Bishop of our souls,
would not that saving learning should live, and dye in himself. Could Christ
himself have continually been amongst us, he had needed no Disciples: but
because himself could not always teach, he therefore chose not to teach
alone. The Master of the School cannot be always present, Vshers therefore
are chosen under him: The Bishop must of necessity be elsewhere, his Vicars
therefore and Curats supply his place. Now that he began to Preach, he chose
his Disciples to help to Preach: chose to teach some himself, and charged
them to teach all Nations. Our Savior would not only communicate, but even
propagate the knowledge of his truth. No man is taught of God, for himself
alone; nor taught to know only, but to instruct. Peter is not called or
converted, Luke 22.
but to strengthen his Brethren. We have this grace and knowledge one for
another: The Prince for his People, the Father for his Children; the Master for
his Servants, the Preacher for his Hearers, as Christ also for his Apostles.

Christ said or did little without, or beside his Apostles; because he would
have them partakers and witnesses of all he said or did: And the rather
witnesses, because they were partakers. Well might they testify to others,
whereof themselves had such proof and experience. So John, That which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you: 1 Ioh. 1.3. Act. 4.20.
So Peter and John; We cannot but speak the things, which we have seen and
heard. Christ would not but call Peter to hear, and see the things of saving
Truth; that Peter might not but speak the things, he had both seen and heard.
The truth of God is not to be learned only, but related. We are Conduits of
our knowledge, not Cesternes. Then are we profitable Scholars, when we
understand to edify; when we learn, to teach. O thou wisdom of thy Father,
and Bishop of my soul! How dull a Scholar, and careless, have thou taken
under hand? I am but one of thy blind and sluggish Disciples: As one that
would shame his Master, how have I truanted in thy School? Beside mine
ignorance, I have no desire to know. Often and long have thou taught me, and I
have either forgotten, or not understood. Oh slow-heartednesse of ours! oh
untowardness! How incapable are we, whereof we are taught! how unmindful,
whereof we are admonished? All are Truants; few or no Proficients: Fools and
Scorners, that have refused, have hated to hear of Counsel and Instruction.
Master, thou art true, oh teach me thy truth! Teach me to learn Thee, and
unlearn my self. Spur me to thy Precepts, and bridle me in my lusts. But
slow am I by nature, and floathfull by thine own art, and industry; Lord work
me to thy Word and Will. Vouchsafe me (Lord) to hear, and tell of thy Truth.
I will teach others, what thou have taught me, since I am therefore taught to
teach.

Ioh. 1.
Once, and Luke 5.
Again, and the Mat. 4.
Third time was Peter called; else do the Evangelists differ in the Time,
Place, and Manner of his Calling. We are often, ere effectually called. We
seldom come to Christ at once: It is well, if again and again will thoroughly
convert us unto Christ. First Peter's Brother brought him unto Christ, then
Peter bad Christ go from him; after that, Christ bad Peter follow him. So come
we to Christ; first, the Ministers (our Brethren) bring us, then (considering
our unworthiness) we bid Christ go from us; lastly, (in his love and power)
Christ both bids us, and helps us to follow him. Thrice (I think) Peter was
called: certain I am, thrice he denied Mat. 26.
his Calling, and so he Ioh. 21.17.
confessed thrice.

The Apostles of the first election, were men but of mean Birth, and Parts.
Not Paul is first called, but Peter; not he that studied at the feet of
Gamaliel, but he that toyled in the bottom of the Sea. The first knowledge of
the Gospel was not gotten by study, but given by inspiration. Not a
Philosopher reaches to a Divine: but a very Fisherman, is made even a Fisher
of men. Christ the rather made choice of the rude and base, that the Gospel
might be known to be the power and wisdom of God not men: that the wit, and
eloquence of men, might not arrogate to it self, the promotion of faith and
piety: that the divine Truth might neither be thought, nor said, the wisdom
of the world. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
that the excellency of that power may be of God, and not of us. The weak
ones, and obscure, are made the lights of the world, and pillars of the Church.
Even the Ignorant, shall preach his Mysteries, and the Obscure shall publish
his Name. He chose but weak Instruments, to a mighty Work. The more was his
power, that could conquer without weapons, and his wisdom more, that could
persuade without words. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many Noble are called.
God that made all persons, creatures, regards no creature for his person. His
election is not more free, then frequent, of the foolish, to confute the wise;
of the weak, to confound the strong. Cephas, rough, and vn^ewne, is brought
from his Quarre, to a Rock, and there framed, and placed a polished corner of
the Temple. A silly Simon, is both elected, and endowed a preaching Peter. I
see well, the necessity of being a Creature, of the lowest, in the first Adam;
excludes not the possibility of being a Christian in the second, with the
highest. Then, having this prerogative, to be as fearfully and wonderfully
made, as the most: I will look for this privilege, to partake of the
likeness of that Image, with the best: Country, nor condition shall discourage
me, since my God regards not what Country, what condition.

All are unapt by nature, and unworthy a spiritual vocation. A dead man can as
easily raise up himself to life, as can the natural man incline himself to
grace. How far unfashionable to a vessel of honor, is this clay, if it want
the hand of the Potter? We stand still in an uncalled state, unless the grace
of God prevent us in our Callings. He said it, as of all Christians, so of his
own Disciples: Ye have not chosen me, Ioh. 15.16
but I have chosen you. Christ's intention was to Peter, ere Peter's attention
was to Christ. Both our Election and Vocation, are sudden to us ward, and
indeliberate; to God only are they determinate, and foreseen. Christ sees,
ere Peter perceiues, nor offers Peter, but Christ calls. It is no power and
merit of the called, but the will and mercy of him that calls. Such is the
dignity of an Apostleship, that it is obtained only by the grace of God.
Christ saw Peter, when Peter saw not Christ. He saw him, not only according to
the appearance of the face, but disposition of the heart: He saw him, what he
was, and should be, and chose him for what he should be, not for what he was:
He saw him, not as one that was, or would be, but that might be an Apostle. He
perceived there was apt matter to work upon, though the thing was now but in
gross: he well discerned this precious stone, though yet but in the rough.
Himself had the art to polish it, therefore despised he not a possible,
though incomposed good. Lord bow down thine eyes upon us in thy Christ; behold
us, clothed with his Righteousness, cleansed by his Blood: show us the light
of thy countenance, and let thy gratitious aspect allure us. See us now to
sanctify us, and bless us in thy sight for ever.

While Peter busily casts his Net into the Sea, Christ earnestly casts his eye
upon Peter: He waits and watches to take Fish, and he to take the Fisher. How
the Lord attends his intended Disciple? Heee finds him Casting a Net into the
Sea, for he was a Fisherman: Busied namely, not only in an honest labor, but
in his proper Calling. How should the Fisherman be found, but mending or
casting his Nets? So the Labourer, but holding his Plow; the Scholar, but
using his Pen, the Soldier, but handling his Spear? Peter is now employing
the One Talent of a civil Calling, when the Ten Talents of a spiritual
vocation are vouchsafed him: Christ not only chose men of mean Callings, but
took them at such times as they were exercised therein. It is not our ordinary
labor can hinder Gods special work. Inward endowments are not the further
from us, for our outward employments. Grace takes those at best leisure for her
entertainment, whom she finds occupied, though in a poor, and toylesome,
yet honest Calling. When we are idle, is an occasion for the Devil to tempt
us: but when we are employed, is a time for God to call us. Let sin, and the
Devil, always find me doing something, that so there may be nothing for them
to do: And let Grace, and my Savior, find my soul so busied in the best
things of this present, as not thereby indisposed to the least of a better Life.

Yet minds he to take Fish in his Net, and himself is now caught by a voice:
a voice that at once commands and enables; that persuades, and disposes
together: Mat. 4.19.
Follow me. He that now had the will to command, had also the power to
prevail. As afterward, Peter had not left the Land, to have followed Christ
upon the Sea; but that Christ bad him: So neither had he now left the Sea, to
have followed Christ upon the Land. Our following of Christ, lies not in our
Coming, but in his Commanding. Can. 1.3.
Draw me, we will run after thee. It is in him that draws, not in him
that runs. We follow Christ no longer, or further, then he leads us on by
the hand. Peter hears unlooked for, Follow me. God calls us when we think not
of: and is nigh unto us, when we are not aware. No more but Follow me. To
follow Christ, is to be called to him. To follow Christ, this is it, both
ordaines and perfects a Disciple. The Disciple is not above his Lord, nor goes
he before him; it is his all, to follow him. We have all of us Christ for an
example, in all things that concern us. He is gone before us, we but come
after him; not in the paths of his feet, as did his Disciples, but (as
Christians ought) in the works of his Truth. As a Son his Father, a Servant
his Master, a Soldier his Leader, a Scholar his Teacher: so instruct me
(Lord Jesus!) and strengthen me, that (in all love, and duty) I may follow thee.

There is a promise annexed to the command: Follow me, Mat. 4.19.
and I will make you Fishers of men. It is by his Benefits, Christ inuites us
to our duties. Our loving Lord, rather seeks to win us to his Service, then
constrain us. As Christ has caught Peter, so will he teach him to fish for
his fellows: of a Fisherman, he shall be a Fisher of men. Christ now calls him
from the same Trade, to the like; from the ordinary art, to the deep Mystery
of Fishing* The temporal was but an emblem, type, prophecy of a spiritual
Piscation. He shall be a Fisher, as before; only this, there shall not be the
same Nets and Fish. Whereas he caught a scaly Nation, being and moving in a
liquid element only; now shall he captiuate a smooth People, residing in all
under Heaven. He caught Fish by the labor of his hands, but shall catch men by
the labor of his mouth. He brought Fish to the earthly, but now shall, to the
heavenly Hie rusalem. Such Fish he took before, dyed; because taken out of
their own element: but now except such as are taken, none shall live; because
brought into their best state. The Preachers of the Word are not unfitly
compared to Fishers. They weaue the Word of God in method and order, and knit
holy Sentences, precepts. Counsels together, like Nets; to catch souls
withal. Their Hooks of the Spirit, and mystery, are bayted with the flesh of
Christ, and humanity. They take men from out their mudde, and Ponds, and Sands,
and Sea: Him from his carnal mudde, him from his golden sands, him from his
troubled pond, him from his raging sea. All from the deep sea and dangerous,
from the dead sea, from the swelling sea and merciless, from the stormy and
unstable Sea. Master, thou have made us Fishers of men: woe, woe, we have
fished all night, and caught nothing: Our draw-Nets gather more Soil then
fish; our vessels are empty, and much is cast away. Our Hooks hang
continually, and the fish but nibble at our Baits* The little fish find holes
to slip through, and the great ones break our Nets. The fishes are mute, the
fishes have no ears; the fishes hearts are turned within them; the broad part
is backward. Some cleave to their Rocks, some play upon their Sands, some
wallow in their mudde. We venture even our golden Hooks, and yet the vile fish
escape us. Lord! we can but (at thy command) cast our Nets into the Sea; it is
thou that must bring the fish into our Nets Our labor is only in the Cast,
thy power is wholly in the Draught. We labor at adventure, thy power is
infallible. We fish in the night, we angle under water; we know not what fish
we shall take, neither can we say directly how, or when the Fish are taken:
Thou only can determine all; that bring them to our Nets.

Christ has commanded Peter's Service and attendance: nor stands Peter now to
bargain and dispute with Christ. He is not so scrupulous, as curious in the
matter: that he has called him, is enough to persuade him: Neither asks he to
what work, nor for what end? The grace of the Holy Ghost neither will be
examined, nor controlled: nor does true Faith and Petty expostulate, but obey.
Peter (as now) had seen Christ do no miracle; had heard Christ speak of no
reward; he follows only upon his bare word. Alas then, that all his promises
cannot allure us after him. Call me (Lord Jesus!) and commend me to thee,
without all contradiction. I will observe, rather then inquire my Savior; nor
shall it be my Lightness, but my faith: I will follow my Savior for himself,
nor shall it be my duty only, but reward.

Where grace is together both motive and guide, neither is the reason there
expostulated, nor the act suspended. The good Disciple neither expects his
Fathers burial, Wives kiss, or Friends farewell: neither stays he to consult
at their mouths, nor once ask their consent. (We have good leave of our
selves, to serve God.) So soon as he heard say, Follow me, He and his Brother;
Mat. 4.20.
They straight way left their Nets, and followed him. We ought to deliberate,
and consider upon some moral actions: the divine Election, and vocation, asks
no deliberation of ours, abides no delay. There is no deferring our conversion
to Christ. Christ now calls, he that will hear his voice, even to day (while
it is called to day) let him take heed, that he horden not his heart. Christ
will not call him, that will not come when he calls. Delays but disable us to a
Christian calling. To day, we are unready, to morrow unwilling; to day
indisposed, to morrow irresolued; excusing to day, denying to morrow; to day
but neglecting, to morrow quite contemning: Thus are we every day less fit
then other, to be followers of Christ. He shall be my canonized Saint, who
readily bows at his Saviors beck, that comes when his Savior calls: I will
chaulke up that soul for a foolish Virgin, which will delay to follow, till
the door be shut. Let mine never fear her own exclusion, till she can hope
it shall be opened to her late and little regarded knocking. When Lord! when?
My heart is ready (O God) my heart is ready. Speape Lord, for thy servant
hears; Bid Lord, for thy servant comes; say but thou the word, and
forthwith I shall not but follow thee.

No man can serve two masters; Mat. 6.24.
ye cannot serve God and Mamnion. Peter followed not Christ, but first he
forsook his Nets. Not only such Nets, wherein he might have caught a brute
Creature; but all such Nets, as might have snared a reasonable soul. Worldly
Affluency, Affinity, and Affections whatsoever, he took to be but Nets: His
Substance, Parents, Wife, and Children; all these were Nets, and enough to
entrap him. But that more was meant by the leaving of his Nets, his Nets were
not worth the naming, nor his loss and leauings worth the reckoning. Had he
lest no more, but (as here) his Nets, he had little cause to boast so largely
of his leauings: Luke 18.28.
We have left all, and followed thee. All says he? Alas, what all? What if a
crazy Boat, a rotten Net, a rude Cottage, an obscure kindred? this is a poor
all, to speak of. None None had less to leave, then the Apostles of Christ;
yet none left more then they. For, had it been more, they would nevertheless
have left it all. They left all, that reserved nothing, they left all, that
desired nothing. It skilleth not what they left, but with what heart. They left
all they had in action, and in affection all that might be had. As much as they
that followed not, could covet: so much they forsook, that followed Christ.
Peter (of the little he left) left as much as Alexander could desire, although
he wished for a plurality of Worlds. In short, while he retained, coueted, and
inordinately loved nothing, he left all things. Nor had he loss in his
bargain; he got for his Ship, the Church; for his Net, the Word; for Fish men;
for his art of fishing, the gift of Preaching; and for his loss of all, a
gain of all in all. It is gain, to leave Goods and Substance; piety to
despise Father and Mother; Charity to hate Wife and Children, and the only
self-love, to deny himself for Christ. I will say in his words, and (I trust)
with his heart; Phil. 3.8.
I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, etc. Christ is to me in Misery, Comfort; in Weakness,
Strength; in Sickness, Health; in Want, Fullness; Defense, in Danger; Glory in
Shame, Gain in Loss, and Life in Death. I will learn to leave all (under
Heaven) for him, that left Heaven for me. Let my soul never want comfort,
till she feel the damage of so happy a change.

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Peter's Confession.
COncerning Christ, men of all sorts, must say somewhat. Some speak of him
neither well, nor truly, some truly, but not well; some well, but not truly,
some both well and truly: Behold a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, Mat. 11.19.
a friend to Publicans and sinners: His own Country men truly, Mat. 13.55.
but not well, Is not this the Carpenters Son? is not his Mother called Mary?
etc. The common people well, Mat. 16.24.
but not truly, Some say John Baptist, and some Elias, and others leremias, or
one of the Prophets: Peter and the Disciples both well and truly, Thou art the
Christ, Mat. 16.16.
the Son of the living God. Men go not so far, as to guess at, it is for
Disciples only to confess the Truth. A many speak largely of Christ, they
are but few that tell truly of him. The vulgar sentence is as false, as
frequent, and not more various, then untrue. What is it, that men say of
Christ? Why, so many men, so many minds, so many mouths, Some say John
Baptist, some Elias, etc. Some say this, some say that, none say truth. Truth
stands not upon opinions, certainety is not grounded upon wavering, verity
admits not of variety, Grace deriues not her efficacy from a Quantity: Faith
consults not at the most mouths, for her profession. The truth is one, sole,
and simple in it self. Wherefore, they could not say truly of him, and
severally. Amongst diversities, there cannot but be errors of opinions. He
could not be all they said, nor was he any: neither John Baptist, nor Elias,
nor Ieremias, nor one of the Prophets. Multitudes (I see) may err as well in
Doctrine, as Manners. Always, the more they are, the more evil and untruth.
Their Learning shall neither instruct me, nor their Life direct mes who take
these, as either proof, or sign of a Church. Neither will I take all they
say, for Gospel, nor all they do, for good.

But men said more then so; Mat. 12.23. Luke 17.16 Ioh. 7.41.
they called him moreover, The Son of David: And a great Prophet: Nay, even
The Christ. They said so indeed, but it was but now and then, as they were
occasioned: not constantly, and confidently, as they were persuaded. All, and
the best they said of him, was but from some sudden opinion, but no sound
Faith. All they said of Christ, it was but a various vulgars error at the
best. The good they spoke, it was not much to be commended; yet might their
error the rather be excused. For, though they did not (as the Disciples)
confess him; yet did they not (as the Pharisees) blaspheme him: They said not
but honestly of him, though they said amiss. This is not all, to speak good
of Christ, but well; nor to speak highly of him, but accordingly neither is it
enough to utter no evil against him, but confess his truth. (...)
Then (...) Christian, and to be commended, not only when I say of my Savior,
the best that can be coniectured ^ but when I say of him accordingly as he is
revealed.

Christ was not ignorant, Whom, and how the World esteemed him: Nor (say he
were so) was he curious to inquire it. He asks indeed of the vulgar opinion;
Mat. 16.13
Whom do (...) say that I the Sa^ne of man am? but therein minds only his
Disciples donfession. Or, he would first refute the falsehood of others weening,
and then confirm the truth of their Belief. What cares be to inquire after
the report, but to acquaint them rather with the truth? verse 15.
This first question (...) but to make way for the next; But whom do ye say
that I am in Passes h^^ what others report him? he only so asks, the rather
to take occasion, so to examine his. Disciples, whether they thought no other
of him, then did others? Nor is it to question only but reward their (...)
Cares he when then report hi^^ he (...) so to make his Disciples (...) (...)
what they say; (...) say ^^ that I am (...) last question was enough to consute
the former answer (...) proves he was not (...) the other (...) that he
(...) whether they (...) can yet say other of him. Yea, further seeks he to
(...) the peoples opinion, by a Disciples Resolution. (...) and (...) to be
found, (...) of the earth, but (...) ^^some of the Church, Though perhaps men
may say no (...) of Christ you Disciples indeed must speak the (...) It is no
resting upon the (...). This is Christ (say they) and that is Christ, here is
Christ, and there is Christ. The Aposties only, they have seen mo^^, an dean
say (...) with one heard and voice of (...) were conceiving and confessing at
once; both the Nature, Person, and office of their Savior. Thou art the
Christ, Mat. 16.16.
the Son of the living God. These are recorded to be Peter^ words only, but
are acknowledged to be all the Disciples says. Peter is here the Apostles
mouth, or his Fellows spokesman; he preue to their tongues, yet are all their
hearts at once in his mouth: so as you cannot say which was first, his
utterance, or their assent. All were asked as well as he, he only answers for
them all. It is easily observed, that upon all occasions, Peter was more
forward to speak, then his fellows. As namely when he said; Ioh. 21.21
Lord, what shall this man do? And again, Though all men shall be offended
because of thee, yet will I never be offended. Yea, and again, Be it far
from thee, Lord, Mat. 26.33 Mat. 16.22
this shall not be unto thee Each instance euinces, that Peter would still he
talking of (...) then pertained to him of more then was possible (...) and that
he said (...) he was (...) though now for (...) much commended (...) not too
conitcture it his (...) rather his faculty (...), it is his praise; he was
(...) to (...), then (...) they (...) rily had, understanding (...) as well as
he: only thiis he wa^^ more (...) too (...) rest. Christ, (...) not his
Disciples all alikes, They had all of them, their sever all gifts; (...)
faculties, in which they did excell^ One might be more (...) ^ ^ ^ ^ lubl^
inexpressiable, We see amongstour (...) (...) judge, (...) ter^ he moke fully
span^ more freely declares, he wants no Words, and he no Thoughts. O Father,
from whom is every good and perfect gift; perfect thy several Graces in thy
Saints, that we may one with another conceive and declare thy Truth, and Name:
unite thy several Graces in thy Saints, that we may all as one, believe with
the heart unto Righteousness, and confess with the mouth unto salvation.

Hark the only and Apostolical confession. Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God. A little confession of a large faith, or a strong faith in few
words. His Name is expressed, his Nature is understood, his Person, and Office
are acknowledged; Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. Thou, even
thou (as thou say) the Son of man; thou Son of a Virgin, and true Man
made of a Woman: Thou art Christ, anointed namely, a King, a Priest, a
Prophet. Thou art the Christ, that was long promised and expected; that is now
exhibited and enjoyed. He says moreover, The Son of God, and not (as men
said superstitiously, and himself in asking the first question, seemed to add
superfluously) the Son of man only: The Son of God by nature, not
adoption: Not a Son amongst others, but the only Son: and Son not of a
dead Idol, but of the living God. The people said of him, Ioh. 7.41.
This is the Christ: and they that were in the Ship (other men, and Mariners,
rather then Apostles) said likewise to him, Mat. 14.33
Then art the Son of God: and yet as though they said nothing concerning him,
or somewhat unbeseeming him, they are not only not commended for their sayings,
but their sayings not regarded. No matter with what words, but what minds God
and Christ are called and confessed. The same words, have not always the same
knowledge and intention: Therefore deserve they not the same praise and
approuement. The people spoke of Christ, but understood not of the Christ they
spoke: So the men that were in the ship, called Christ the Son of God, rather
out of wonder and astonishment, then out of knowledge and true says. But Peter
is all faith, in few words: He calls him the Christ in Office and calling; the
Son of God in person and propriety, and in nature and power, the Son of the
living God. Oh Jesus, and Savior! so belieues thy servant, and confesses: Thou
art the Christ, anointed above thy fellows, and without any fellows, the
Son of the living God.

When Nathaniel had heard Christ speak no word, had (...) him (...) no (...)
could shy^ Th^^ (...), Ioh. 1.49.
(...). (...) these had Reter long and often, both heard and (...); and he says
more over. The So^^s of the livings God. And Christ (...) Nathaniel before his
(...). Ioh. 1.47. Mat. 16.17
(...) and (...), in whom is (...) guile; and Peter for his saying, Blessed art
thou (...) Bar (...). The true profession of Christ is not without the (...)
and (...) and if i^ gain praise and raward from God, then i^ it a true
profession Peter was blessed for the confession of Christ, ^ea blessed in the
reuelation^ of that confession Blessed (...) thou Simon; (...) For flesh and
blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father, etc. A Christian is happy,
not only in the operation, but infusion of divine Grace. The confession of
Christ proceeds (...) from an humane opinion, but from the divine revelation.
Faith reaches above reason: Flesh and blou a has not revealed it unto thee.
Nature is not capable to conceive, much less able to instruct in the Doctrine
and Mysteries of divine Grace. Happy are we when the truth of God is revealed
to us, happy in the truth, happy in the Revelation. Peter's faith was not worthy
to be so blessed; but for his sake, by whom it was revealed. Blessed art thou
Simon Bar Iona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in heaven. Faith is no whit commendable for it self, or
subject, but for the Object, or Author thereof. God for his own sake, commends
and crowns his Graces in his Saints. Peter now confessed the person of Christ,
because it was revealed; but he soon after dissuaded the Passion of Christ,
because it was not revealed. We know, believe, testify no more of God and
Christ, then is revealed us. Gods Revelations are not always with every Saint:
nor has every Saint all revelations: nor have any revelations but Saints. The
Scribes and Pharisees could not learn this in their law, Thou art the Christ,
etc. which a silly Fisherman confessed, because it was reuea^ed. We are not to
be proud, but thankful, in the height or measure of revelations: Since the
knowledge of divine Mysteries are not gotten by our own labor and me^^; but
if God have revealed any thing, to any man so it was, for so it seemed good in
his fight. It pleases the Father, to reveal the Son, and the Son to
reveal the Father; other wise know we neither Father nor Son. Oh Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and revealed them unto Babes; that so these things may be known to come, not
from humane Wisdom, but divine Grace: Inspire thou mine heart by thy holy
spirit, that I may know thy Truth, believe thy Word, do thy Will, declare thy
Name.

He that confesses Christ, him also will Christ confess. Peter says, thou art
Christ; Christ says, thou art Peter. Peter means, Christ the eternally
anointed; Christ means. Peter the everlastingly established. Peter calls
Christ the Son of God; Christ calls Peter the son of Jonas: But for the
confession of Christ's Father, Peter's Father was not worthy the mention: Because
he confessed his Father; whom flesh and blood revealed not; he therefore
testifies of his Father, though but of flesh and blood. Signifying withal,
that he is not more truly his Son, whom he mentions, then himself is his,
whom he confesses. Peter being urged, confesses Christ; Christ vnaskt,
acknowledges Peter. We cannot do any thing for Christ, which Christ will not
more readily and largely do again for us; in every thing so answerable is our
Savior to vs^ yea he so exceedes us. If we know him, he will take notice of
us; if we worship him, he will honor us; if we love him, he will embrace us;
if we pray unto him, he will entreat for us; if we praise him, he will commend
us; if we witness of him, he likewise will testify of us. Mat. 10.32.
Whosoever shall confess me before men; him will I confess also before my
Farher which is in heaven. I believe what my Savior has said for his part:
God grant me, for my power, to observe the saying.

When Peter but came to Christ, Ioh 1.42.
Christ then said, Thou art Simon, the Son of Jonas: but now that he
confesses him, Mat. 16.18.19.
he says besides, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church,
etc. and I will give unto thee, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.
Before, he but told him of his name and pedigree; but now withal of his office
and authority. The sounder confession of our faith, has always the ampler
approouement, and reward. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. We observe
amongst us, from these words in their original, a twofold point of Rhetorique;
a Metaphor, a Paronomasie: the one, in that there is an allusion in the words;
the other, in that there is an assimilation in the matter. There be, that would
have the word intend the same party, whereto it alludes; we say the word but
assimilates another thing, which it also intends. In holy Writ, we hold it
safer to be led by the apt sense, then bare found of words. Upon this Rock.
How many have wilfully dashed themselves to pieces against his Rocke^ making the
Rock of sa^nation, (...) rock of offense, and a common stone to stumble at,
of the (...) corner stone. Upon this Rock. What? upon the man? upon the man's
faith rather, and confession. Upon his Confession ^ay, not upon his personal
faith, but the universal truth. Upon this Rock will I build my Church: what,
upon the other? nay rather upon himself. To say that Christ should build his
Church upon Peter, is to liken him to the Fool, that built his house upon the
sands: so vain a thing is man. Will they lay another foundation, besides that
which is laid already? Confession ^e upon their Babell! It is verified both of
Him, and Them; The Stone which the builders (nay the Dawbers) refused, Mat.
21.42
the (...) (maugre their ignorance, avarice, pride, and malice) (...) (and
confessed by all true Christians) the head stone in the corner. I abhor that
Church, and Chair, as groundless; which will mistake the Rock, to build upon
the sands. Let neither Faith nor Hope of mine be so built, till I can believe
three Fables at once; That the Earth is vnderprept by a Giant; the Heavens are
supported by Atla^; or that the Church of Christ is founded upon Peter. Oh thou
that art the only Rock, and sole foundation of my Faith! build thou, not Thee
upon (...), but me upon Thee; so shall I stand firmly, and for ever.

Immediately upon Peter's Confession, the Keys are granted him. (By Faith we
are saved: without Faith and Confession, there is no opening, no entering into
the Kingdom of heaven.) I will give unto thee the Keys. What keys? Keys
which some boast of, some abuse: Keys which are mostly neither well used, nor
understood: Keys, whose power and authority is lost in the ignorance or abuse:
for they have them, that use them; they that abuse them, have them not. Keyes^
not of power only, but dis^^^^tion; as well to search and discern, as either
to bind or loose. Keys, whose efficacy it not in the Instrument, not in the
Agent but from the Author: Keys which neither bind nor loose, because of the
Administration; but according to the desert. Retentiue and Remissiue Keys,
they call them* Keys of Science, to resolve the scrupulous and perplexed
spirit^ of conscience, to absolve the broken and contrite heart. What says my
soul to the power of those Keys? I confess it fit and just, that the L^per
and unclean should be cast out of the Host, or Camp; that a rotten member
ought to be dissected from the body: and a scab'd sheep excluded the Fold:
That he that refuses to hear the Church, should be counted as an Heathen man,
and a Publicane; and the obstinate sinner to be worthily delivered up to Satan;
that he may learn not to blaspheme. I at once admire their use, reverend
their Minister, adore their Author. I faithfully believe, and love to embrace
the Liberty; I fear to incur, and doubt not to obey the censure: the
denunciation is the sore trembling of my joints the Pronunciation is thevery
rejoicing of my heart: For I look to a surther efficacy, then their outward
ministry. Only I cannot but lament that their light use, and familiar, has
brought them into contempt, and wish that the contempt were not so familiar.

The words are here (according to the occasion) pronounced but to one of
Christ's Disciples; To they will I give the Keys: But the power is (...) here
(according to the intention) exhibited to them all; Mat. 18 18
Whatsoever (...) bind on earth, shall be bound in he^^^n; and whatsoeue^
(...) earth, shall be loosed in heaven. What is commended to one, is meant to
all. And not to them alone, or then only, was this privilege and jurisdiction
g^^^ted; but for ever to their like the true and faithful Ministers of the
Word. Say ye then Peter carried the Keys alone: and so shall his Successor?
Nay, but his Fellows in profession, were also partakers of this power: and so
are all their followers. The faith was theirs also: and therefore the Promise
theirs. Say (as ye^ would have) Peter's hand had borne them only; yet (...) we
not so senseless, to take the Porter for Lord of the house. A Doore-keeper was
ever accounted the meanest officer in Gods House. So he intimates it; that
notwithstanding in comparison preferres it: Psalm. 84.10
I had rather be a Doore-keeper in the house of my God, etc. Will ye make Peter
(after your manner) the Prince, Head, Chief, First Apostle? If Peter would so
himself, he should so prove himself to be but the last and least: Mat. 20.27
Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Would Peter
usurp himself, what he so dissuaded others? when he forbad them to be as
Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3.
but rather ensamples to the flock. We take Peter for a Prelate indeed, not a
Prince; it is a Key (we see) he bears not a Scepter. The Keys (we know) are
not (...) sway, but employ; and to bind and loose, are parts of Office, more
then Author (...). We count Peter the first, so as the Scripture records him;
The first is Simon, Mat. 10.2.
called Peter. The first namely in the Catalogue of Apostles; not primely in
place and pr^h^minence: the first in: number, not degree counted, rather than
accounted first: The first i^ order amongst his equals, not best in dignity
amongst inferiors. Peter's Successors (if any such) have made green boast
(...) contention, about Christ's, promise here to Peter. They take: (...) them
solely to succeed him in the virtue of that promise Christ then made to him:
that never offered to imitate him, in the piety of that confession, he then
made of Christ. They would follow him in place ye^ in faith how they fail of
him? They (...) at his Keys has let f^ll his Words ( Peter's power they will
have theirs; (...) will he his profession. Yet is it but a shadow, they so
^asely and greedily catch at all this while. For why, Peter (...) ^ailes both
in the right (...) of superiority and succession because Peter's power and
office, was neither proper, nor hereditary: Neither could be personally
challenged, nor derived. And why now should the substance envy the shadow? Let
them bear the picture; we have the power of the Keys.

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Peter's Denial.
NOt Peter's faith, can forbid his sin: For all he had formerly so confessed
Christ; yet does he now deny him. He stood erewhile stiff and straight, like a
stable pillar: now reeles he to and fro, like a rolling stone. What
intercourses are there of grace and sin in men? what contrary struglings, and
preuailings, between the flesh and the spirit? In the very best, there is a
vicissitude of good and bad. Man is not more frail and fading in the course of
nature, then grace: in either state, never stands he at one stay. I am a
Creature, am a Christian; and both changeable: I will expect Immortality, ere
Immutability.

Peter even of late (since which time has not added an inch to his stature)
made a promise, both peremptory, and beyond his performance; how ready he would
be to dye for his Master: When lo! his hair is not altered, ere his heart is
changed; he is now readier to deny him, then dye for him. But yesterday was
he bold in presumption, and to day is fearful in denial. Alas! it is all in
one day, that he so boasts, and fails. What a folly of men is it, to make such
mountain-promises to their God: and to boast of more then they are able, before
him that knows their abilities? It is a wilfulness, to ouer-binde our selves
to obedience; a rashness, to promise above our power; and a weakness, to
hazard beyond our strength. We are not able to do our Duties, much less to
pay our vows: To what end is more promised; when we fail even in what is
required? A wise Debtor will not engage his word to any man, deeper then his
hand: will say no more, then he well may do; promise no more, then he is able
to pay. I dare not indebt my self to God in an hasty promise; but with
condition of ability to perform. Lord strengthen me, to perform always, what
I ought; and promise only, what I may.

When Christ told his Disciples, Mat. 26.31.
All ye shall be offended because of me; Peter (that is still so prompt to
reply) should have now also become his Fellows spokesman, and thus prayed
together for the rest; Lord strengthen us, that we be not any of us offended:
Or (since he will be particular) thus conditioned for himself; I hope by thy
grace and help, never to be offended. But arrogantly somewhat, and
uncharitably, he would accuse all others, to quit himself; and in a grant of
their weakness, boasts his own strength: Mat. 26.33
Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended. Did the man but remember himself, he began ere now to be offended
hereat. Master, Mat 16.22.
pity thy self, this shall not be unto thee: Nevertheless dares he now
presume upon himself; I will not be offended. When a man is unmindful of his
weakness, that is it makes him presume upon his strength. But for all that,
Peter need not have so disparaged his Fellows; though he needs would so vaunt
himself. It is a weakness of ours, to boast our strength before others;
especially, to boast it to others weakness. Touching holy performances, I
dare promise my self neither able nor secure; much less prefer my self. I
say none more apt to swerve, then I: for I know mine own weakness; but am
ignorant of another strength. Here am I warned, how I boast mine own will and
strength; I will (as I am warranted) glory only in mine infirmities.

It is neither good, nor safe, for a man (in matters that pertain to God) to
presume upon himself. When he is securest of himself, he is most in hazard:
while he thinks he stands the fastest, is he most apt to fall; yea, while he
now says, he stands, and shall never be moved; he is now troubled, and falls
away. Because a man presumes he stands, therefore God suffers him to fall.
Because Peter spoke of his strength before all others; Christ (of all others)
tells him of his weakness: and permits him to fall the worst; that of his own
standing presumed most. Because Peter was so ready to answer for himself, when
Christ spoke in general; Christ therefore tells Peter in particular: Mat. 26.34.
This night, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Who dares
presume to do, or stand; since Peter fails and falls? Lord! to presume upon
our selves, is the way to make thee leave us to our selves: and to say we will
stand, is to bid thee let us alone to fall: And this is to begin to deny thee;
not to deny our selves. Notwithstanding some endeavor thou have committed to
us; thou will have the whole work of well-doing imputed to thy self. Thou
bidst us labor a little in it, that we should not be idle; but without thee,
our labor is in vain; why should we then be proud? Our Will is nothing to thy
Work: and all our readiness, is (without thee) no better then backwardness.
We stand by faith, not of our selves; we rise, not of our selves, but by
grace. While I stand, it is thou Lord, that vpholdest me; when I am fallen, it
is thou Lord, that must help me up. It is by thee (O thou my Savior!) that I
do confess thee: and again, by thee, if I do not deny thee.

But even now, Christ told his Disciples indefinitely, that one of them should
betray him; and Peter also amongst the rest, grows fearful of himself; Mat.
16.22
Master is it I? Now that he tells him expressly, even He shall deny him, yet
will he contradict him; verse 35.
Though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee. We are often times
more scrupulous and doubting, when most innocent and unlikely, and then most
apt and obnoxious, when most arrogant and secure. Christ had cleared Peter from
being the Traitor, and Peter will justify himself from being the Denyer. He
spoke this (no doubt) out of a devotion; but he should have considered his own
condition To lay down his life for Christ, is not of humane will and
weakness; but of divine power and dis^^^sing. Neither considers he now his
own frailty, how subject he is to such a thing; nor Christ's truth, that he
having said it, it cannot but come to pass. Even now he denies the truth, in
that he will not be persuaded, he shall deny him. No falsehood more manifest,
then to gainesay the truth. But since he will not believe his words, the event
shall prove it. Since he will by no means yield, to be wary; to his overthrow
he is suffered to gainesay. He that so contradicts his Savior, shall anon
gainsay himself. Rather shall Peter prove a Denyer, then Christ be found a
Liar. Both the Prophet, Zach. 13.7 Mat. 26.31.34.
and Christ foretold of Peter's offense and denial. The Prediction was a
caveat, rather then a cause of his offense: serving rather to admonish him of
it, then enforce him to it. Was the sin therefore foretold, to impose a
necessity vp^^ the Agent, or an ineuitability upon the act? God forbid. Peter
did not therefore fall, because Christ forespake: but Christ therefore
forewarned, because Peter would fall. Evil cannot take event without Gods
knowledge, though against Gods Will. His prescience neither lays constraint
upon our work; nor takes away liberty from our will. When we wilfully do the
worst, he knows it, permits it, yea concurres with it; to direct the action,
to correct the prauity: in all which, he is no less good, then we are evil.
Let dissolute and reprobate spirits accuse God, as enuyous; because foreknowing
their iniquities, he could, but would not prevent them: or as impotent; because
he would, but could not: or as both; because he neither would, nor could: I
will wonder at his Wisdom, in his Mercy, in his Justice; and not dare to
censure, where I cannot understand.

Now is it, as he foretold; The shepherd is no sooner smitten; then lo, the
sheep are scattered. Yea the foreman of the flock is left behind. Even
Peter followed a far off. Mat. 26.38
That he followed, was his love that led him: it was his fear forbad him that
he followed a far off: Through Piety, he follows, and through Frailty, but
a far off. That he follows, is Graces good motion; that he follows a far
off, is Natures preuarication: The Disciples devotion is to follow his Lord;
only it is the man's infirmity makes him follow but a far off. He never comes
near Christ, that follows betwixt Desire and Fear, Faith and Unbelief, Hope
and Despair. Peter follows, with desire to see what would happen to his
Master; but a far off, for fear what might befall himself. We would so
far profess Christ, and Religion; as thereby not to prejudice our selves. We
love Christ a little, and so we follow him in word, and show; but we love our
selves better, and therefore in deed and truth, we follow but a far off.
That he followed, was more then the other Disciples, for they fled; but to
follow him a far off, was little better, then (as they did) to forsake him.
It is to be feared, that man will quite forsake Christ in the end; that
contents himself only to follow him a far off. Peter followed a far off.
Had he kept close to his Saviors person, great like he had not denied his
profession. The nighnesse of our God, expels temptations. The very distance now
disposes to a Denial. To swerve from Grace, is that inclines a man to sin.
Even Peter follows Christ but a far off. What Saint comes near his Savior?
Lord, he that goes fastest, and furthest, follows thee but a far off. We
are weak Lord, and cannot go with thee; we are lame, and lazy, and shall
never overtake thee. We are Snailes in the ways of thy Commandments. So slow
we follow thee, and slenderly; as as if we either did fear, or did not care to
set one foot before another. Every difficulty is as a Lion in the way, to
deter us from our duty: and but the thought of an inconvenience, serves to
slacken our pace. We are sluggish in the performance of Religion; O Lord make
haste to help us: we are slow toward the attainement of salvation; O God make
speed to save us. Lord, be not thou far from us; that cannot follow thee, but
a far off.

Traveling betwixt Desire and Fear; Peter's slow pace at length brings him to
the very place where his Master was. It was not his haste, that ouertooke him;
but Christ's stay, to expect him there. Not all our speed can approach our
Savior, unless he tarry to expect us. Neither is it enough, that he stands
to look for us, except he return to setch us. Stays my Savior till I come
to him? Alas, when shall I be able to overtake him? Nay, nay; come thou to me,
my Savior, and bring me to thee. I will wait my Lords leisure and pleasure;
it is not for thee, to expect my Power, and Time.

Peter was (as the weather was) somewhat cold in body; for his slow pace could
not get him heat with walking: But Peter was stark frozen in mind; for his
following a far off, had let the sun of righteousness (both for warmth and
light) to set upon him. Beside the body; there is a coldness that contracts,
depresses, slowes, benummes the soul: there is a chattering, next to the
gnashing of teeth. Peter was now not more cold in sense, then devotion: and yet
while he starues inwardly, Luke 22.55
he sits him down by the fire to get him outward heat: and lets his heart
cool, the while he warmes his hands: Such is our blindness, we are careful
of the body, above the soul: and commonly prefer corporal refreshment, unto
spiritual redress. Evil fire and unprofitable! whose smoke offends, more
then heat refreshes; that scorches so vehemently without, and luffers so
benummedly to freeze within. How unlike is Peter to a Rock; a Rock stiff,
and stable? Never was he more near a stone, then now; now when as cold as a
stone. How cold is our earth, when the Sun of heaven once sets upon us? Cold
are we in Compassion, cold in Devotion: and think we have attained to a good
degree of warmth in either; when we are now neither hot nor cold. If thou
(Lord) take away our sewell, our fire is quenched; if thou withdraw thy light,
our Candle is put out. Thou art our Sun to inlighten us; thou art our fire,
to inflame us. A frozen heart, a frozen conscience; who may abide that Frost?
My heart (as 1 Samuel 25.37.
Nabals) is cold as a stone, and almost dead within me; Oh quicken me by thy
free spirit: Come Lord Jesus, and confer with me about thy Truth and Life; and
my heart (as did thy Luke 24.32.
Disciples) the while shall burn within me.

It seems Peter's heart was cold as ice within him; since but the chill blast
of a weak woman's breath, could make him so to shake and shudder. She was weak
in her sex, her Age, her Office; a Woman, a Damsel, a Doore-keeper; and she
not threats, but taxes him (as one that would rather pity, Mat. 26.69
then bewray him;) Thou also wast with Jesus: And yet, not pondering what is
asked; he would be ignorant what to answer; I know not what thou say.
verse 70.
He shrinkes, and flinshes now that a Woman but asked him; what would he have
done had the high Priest accused him? A Doore-keeper is now enough to pervert
an Apostle. Even weak motions, are strong prouocations to sin; where grace
is either denied, or obscured. Small things cast us down, if God hold not up:
We couch under any burden, if he strengthen us not: we yield to the least
temptation, if he but leave us to our selves. Yea, that lewd Damsel of our
own flesh, how soon and often she prouokes us to deny our God, in our works,
and lusts! It is strange to think, how he durst of late, draw a sword against
a multitude; and now dare not answer a word to a Woman. He was not so rash
then, as now cowardly; to fight beside his profession, even upon unequal
terms; and not to answer according to his Office, though he might easily,
and with advantage. Women are tempting creatures: are a seducing Sex. Adam the
first, Sampson the strong, Solomon the wise, Peter the Apostle, were every one
tempted by a woman. It is not the first or second challenge, can make Peter
confess: rather, so often as he is urged to confess, he denies. Thrice is he
tempted and taxed, and thrice he denies Christ, thrice a Christian: and
doubtless, had his prouocations been more, his faults had not been sewer
then his prouocations. So often he denied, as Christ foretold; Thou shall deny
me thrice. Nay had not Christ (so saying) terminated, as foretold the sin;
he had (no doubt) been oftener tempted, and as often had offended. God in his
Saints, both straightens the nature, and stints the number of their sins. See
what an heap and weight of sin in the process of Negation! How is this one
sin paid home with use, in a triple iteration? Mark him, and he first
dissembles the matter; then denies the party; after forsweares the truth: now
he denies openly, then with an oath; lastly, with cursing and swearing. So
rashly and headily he rushes out of one sin into another of the same; and
falls from another sin, into a worse. The same sin, etc The same sin,
recommitted, and unrepented; has besides aggrauation in it self,
augmentation, by disposing to another sin. There be that would excuse this
fact, and fault of Peter; and make them no denyals, but doubtful answers at
the most. Alas, alas, the corruption of Doctrine, as well as manners! How
wickedly they pervert good Authors, to make them Authors of their excuse.
Mat. 26.72
I know not the man; for why (say they, that for some ends of their own, would
mend the matter if they could) he well knew him to be a God. I am not; Luke
22.58
the man might well say, I am not; for it is for God to say, I am. I am not of
them; He now denied not Christ, but rather denied himself: refused not to be
of the fellowship of Saints, but company of men. I know not what thou say;
Mat. 26.70. Luke 22.57
that is, the sacrilege and blasphemy that thou speak. I know him not; for
I cannot comprehend him: or I know him not, to tell it unto thee. Thus would
they feign make him aequiuocate: like as themselves are wont to do, and teach.
But it is not deceitful aequiuocation, but sincere confession beseemes a
Disciple of Christ. A doubtful answer had been here all one with a denial.
But Christ said not he should cunningly dissemble, but flatly deny him. So to
extenuate, were to aggrauate his sin: in adding a falsehood, when a fear was
the worst in his offense. In as much as he denied not through contempt of
Christ, but for fear of himself: not because he so much hated his Master,
but because he now loved himself too much. Therefore he denied him, not
because he would deny him; but because he would not dye for him. I dare not
say, all was but a slip of his tongue at the most, and no error of his mind:
nor will I urge how foul and desperate was his fall. Neither is the Disciple
to be reproached, nor excused for his fault. It is not for us to sooth, or tax
him; whose own Tears both convict, and clear him of his sin. I will not
accuse him, but rather bewail him, and his like. Lord! what have I seen? a
Rock; or a Reed shaken with the wind? Ah Peter, Peter! how unlike art thou
to thy self? A Pillar, and blown down by a Woman's breath? Thrice bowing thy
top to a fearful and shameful denial: and in so short a space, as the Cock
could crow thrice? Woe, woe! once set on sinning; how soon and often we sin?
Ah frail Humanity! whose strength is then most and best, when it may but reach
to infirmity. Is this the Disciple that would dye for his Lord? who thus denies
the Life, for fear of Death. I have heard of his promise, I see not his
perfo^mance. O God! how do we mock thee? when our heart will boast above the
power of our hand. The spirits of our strength vanish like smoke; when we
leave thee, or thy grace us. If our foot be once backsliding, every small
blast, is a sore tempest, to drive us further from thy presence. Alas, how do
we then by insensible degrees, settle unto our vilest dregs; without an
efficacy beyond our art, never to be refined?

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Peter's Repentance.
THe Disciples denial of his Master; serves to make the Saints confess their
Savior. Peter denied indeed, but repented. To repent of the falsehood, euinces
the Truth: And to be sorry that he so denied him; is now to confess him.
Always, to recant a denial, is a kind of Confession. Peter denied, and
repented: We are to follow his Repentance; and but consider his denial. That
he repented his denial; teaches us, that have denied, to repent. His sin
was his own, ours should be his Repentance: contrarily, we take his sin to
us; and leave his Repentance to himself: We sin together with him; and he
repents alone. Many sin with Peter, how few are we that repent with Peter?
we sin as he did; but he repented, as we do not. Many will fall with the
lust man; how few are we, that so rise up again? Woe, and alas! that we
thereby excuse our falling; whereby we should only take encouragement to
rise. Ah my soul! Thou that have followed Peter sinning, follow him repenting:
Thou have him an example for repentance, not sin; and art to imitate him in
his rising, not in his fall. The fallings and failings of thy Saints, Lord let
them be a caution to me, rather then excuse.

Who would think Peter's former Confession was now within him; when his
fearful Abnegation proceeded from him? But so it was, his faith was yet in
his heart, even when that falsehood came out of his mouth. Peter's faith was (as
is the Saints) indeleble. Sin may obscure, but not abrogate the grace of
Saints. Satan now winnowed Peter as Wheat, but not to Chafe: So he sifts the
Saints, but not to Branne. Often are Gods Goodnesses abated in us, never extinct;
falsified often, never frustrated; often raked up, never rooted out. Gods grace
(like himself) is both immutable, and immovable; it never flits, nor fails.
The Grace my God gives me; shall (...) ^^^^don the sin I have in me. The
sin I have in me* shall (...) the Grace my God (...) me. Gods, graces are
(...) more then my sins. my sin^^^ indeed deserve to, damme, but Gods grace
to (...) me.

Once, and again, and the third time, Peter, sinned an nevertheless repented
of his sin* It is not the number of sins can forbid the power of
Repentance, Sins at the most, are but the faults of men; the (...) Repentance
is the gift of God. The sins of men are innumerable; and so is the graces of
God immeasurable. Gods mercy is always more, then our desert. Pride,
Covetousness, Whoredom, Murder, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Denial; even these are
to be forgiven. Repentance can digest evil of all kinds, can (...) all manner
of sins* And these once, and again committed; may be once, and again
repented. Repentance is enough to answer to the repetition of sins. Much
shall be forgiven him, that repents much. Our Lord will forgive us our ten
thousand Talents, as our utmost farthing: only beware we this, that we
therefore run not further into his debt. Alas Lord! long, and often, have we
sinned; but short, and rare has been our repentance. We that in words
profess thee; again, and again, have denied thee in our works. We have
sinned, and not repented; repented, and sinned again: yet sinned, with
presumption to repent; rather then repented, with resolution to sin no more:
and so iterated our evils, that many a time and often, we have repented us of
our repentance, rather then our sin. Yea, Lord, so far, and frequently,
have we denied thy goodness, and truth; that we could not but despair of of
mercy; and (...) (...) that (...) and worse to deny (...).

The ^o ye of the Mai^^^^ uoked Peter to sin: and the voice of the Cock now
occasions him to repent. As Sa^^^ tempts to sin, by light (...)ments: so God
inuites to grace, by ordinary means. Peter denies once, and the Gods crows:
God makes (...) of brute (...) to instinct reasouable souls. Twice he denies;
and the Cock crowe^ and yet he neither conceiue^ the one, nor (...) the other.
Im(...) at one cin(...) of their own insight, and (...) admonishment The Cock
crows (...) third (...), and now he (...) what himself did, and (...) said.
He that steeper in s^^^, and will not hear the first and second voice of the
Watchman; let him not dare to neglect the last, lest he so sleep an
everlasting sleep, never to be awaked. It is for every Cock, to awake the
Sleeper, to admonish the Labourer, to guide the Traveler; but for Peter's Cock
alone to warn the Sinner. Lord Jesus! thou art the Cock that shall crow
before the dawning of the last day; thou art the Cock, at whose crowing the
roaring Lion trembles. Now crow Lord (as a Cock croweth) early, and late; by
thy Preachers, and power; to awake us from our sleep of sin: and once gather
us safe, and happy; as a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings.

It was the Cocks crowing; made Peter remember his fault but was Christ's
turning toward him, and looking upon him, moved him to repent. Conversion is a
work, not of humane labor; but divine power. The voice of the Minister may
inform the understanding hereunto; but the grace of God alone must move the
affection Neither distance of place, obscurity of the conueying mean, nor
interposition of objects, could let Christ from looking (...) Peter.
Notwithstanding these, the Lord turned back, Luke 22.61
and looked upon Peter. Where God hardens to perdition, where he mollifieth
to repentance; there his eye of justice, here of mercy, is all penetrable.
Christ now looked upon Peter, not with the eye of rebuke, but grace; not with
the eye of a Master, that were offended; but of a Savior, that would be
reconciled. Happy sinner, whom his Savior so daynes to behold. He denied once,
and wept not; because the Lord looked not upon him. the Lord looked not yet upon
him; and therefore he wept not the next: the third time he denied, the Lord
looked upon him; and hereupon considering his sin, he went out and wept.
Unless the Lord so look upon us, we can neither consider, nor lament the
evil that is in us. Christ speaks not to Peter, but only looks upon him:
for he would admonish, not bewray him; would secretly check him, not openly
reproach him. And so, Peter calls Christ's words to mind, from his looks: His
looks have the force of words; which show him his weakness, tell him of his
presumption, blame him for his fall, warn him to recovery. Now begins Peter to
reckon his fault and falsehood, from the truth: He calls to mind, that Christ
was a true Prophet, and himself but a vain boaster: How He told him true,
that said he should deny him; He answered fondly, and (...) dye for him (...)
now (...) here (...) those, (...) shall (...) (...) for that were enough (...)
made him despair: (...) also, Luke 22.32
I have prayed for (...) thy faith (...); and the (...) he repents. It is the
(...) of God, (...) pentance. Mercy (...) repentance, and leader (...): The
only moti^^s, and (...) of all good duties, are the mercies of God. The
favorable face of his Savior, moves Peter the rather to repent. What favor
has a sinner ^ound in a Saviors eye? what gladsome light of a cheerful
countenance has there shone unto him (...) Peter has (...) and ^^umbered in
the v^le of (...) in the (...) of dea^^. But the Cock has crowed, the night
is past, the day is spring from an high, the Sun of righteousness is risen
upon him; wherefore ashamed of his sloth and sin; he forthwith rises up,
goes out, and weeps. His heart and eyes, that were contracted and frozen so
before; now thaw, and are dissolved at the cheerful aspect and operation of
the Sun. The guilty slave, he fears, because he sees his Master frown; the
Son offending, sorrows, though he perceive his Father smile: He roares,
because he knows his Master is just, and will smite; but he grieves, because
his Father is so gracious, that he has not smitten: Gods judgments may work
horror, and desperacy in the one; but even his loving kindness and mercy,
effects an holy sorrow, indignation, and revenge in the other. My God offended,
is not only Great, but Good; why should I be so seruilely desperate, seeing I
may be awfully penitent?

True repentance has always annexed a leaving and loathing of the sinful,
Mat. 26.75.
and their sin. Peter went out, and wept bitterly. Had he not gone in
amongst them, perhaps he had not sinned; and he must come out from them, if
he will repent for sin. Denied he his Master on the Mount, or in the Temple?
no; but in the High Priests Hall. When he was with the other Disciples, he
confessed his Savior; while he was amongst lewd Companions, he denied his
Master. Nothing corrupts so, as ill company. The Devil is sooner resisted, a
man's own lusts subdued, then are bad accomplices denied. Resist the Devil, and
he flees; deny but lusts, and they are undone; only, these naughty Copemates
are more violent, for resistance; more importunate, upon deny all. Their
familiarity has prevailed, to allure a man even unwillingly to evil; and
drawn him to do it, rather upon their occasions, then out of his own
inclination. A man is hardly innocent among Euilldoers. There is little hope to
amend amongst such, as not only daily practice evil, but persuade it. Good
motions have no process, but are soon extinct, among evil prouocations. A
man cannot be at once more sinful, and truly sorrowful for sin. He did
well therefore, that he went out, and wept. Get thee out of Sodom, O my
soul! escape (I say) for thy life, and liberty; be not thou united to such
their assembly: touch not their Pitch, lest thou be defiled; handle not their
Fire, for it will burn: It is not their mudde and puddle will cleanse thee;
thou can not be safe, in the midst of danger; thou can not repent amongst
Temptations. Therefore O thou my soul! go out to (...) most border^, and
where (...) may no more set one foot before another; there sit down, and
weep; when thou remembrest thy loss, or lack of Sion.

Peter was bold, in presuming, was weak, in failing wherein he presumed, but
was quick, in bewayling wherein he failed. At once, he went out, and wept: No
sooner, went out from sinning, but wept bitterly for sin. True repentance is
both speedy, and early. Not he that slip^ on the sudden; but he that so long
couches, is the (...) heart (after a (...) hastily, and redoubles his force. It
is worse to lie still, then to fall into evil: and he is the rather to be
blamed, that he hastens not his Recovery; then that he (...) not his fall.
Peter was suddenly drawn to sin; and (...) soon he repented. One, and the
(...) night, saw him denying, and weeping; saw him fallen, and risen again;
saw him sick unto death, and restored to saving health. Repentance is
measured, not according to the time, but truth thereof. Remission attends, not
the length, but manner of repentance. In the moment we have repented, our God
will be reconciled. It is his goodness, not easiness, so soon to forgive us.
For he delights not, yet more to expect; but is willing, even now to accept
our contrition. We men suddenly pull down, and but slowly build up again:
Our God is slow to destroy, but is ready to restore. He is long provoked, ere
he punish; but no sooner entreated, then he remits, then he rewards. Psalm.
103.8.9.
The Lord is full of compassion, and mercy, slow to anger, and of great
kindness: He will not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever. Psalm.
30.5.
He (...) ^ Weeping (...) because of our sins; (...) comes in the morning,
through our Repentance.

What order and process of his Repentance* He went out, and wept. Modesty and
Discretion, Pity and Compunction; commonly all restrain to weep and wayle in
presence* but of all, in private is fittest for a Peuitent, to acknowledge and
deplore. ^e they because of our misery, or Sin; God then most regards them,
when there is no other witness of our Tears. H^^ing but (...) his ^^oke upon
those inticers, who now to have seen his face (bewraying a G^^^^an indeed)
would have wrought him both further violence, and derision: He now feales his
spirit more free; and his tears more fluent: Now says he nothing, but
weeps. Nothing but weeps: For he would only bewail, not excuse his sin;
would purge him of his filthiness by tears, rather then in words, plead for
his offense. Words cannot always express the force of tears; tears have
often the force of words. Tears are silent prayers: they make confession, show
contrition, got absolution. Sin is a fire, is a flame; which not the showring
clouds, but the distilling eyes can quench: Sin is a stain, a blot; which
not all the water in the sea, but our tears, can wash away. Tears are the
only Lauer, and Purgatory of a sinful soul. Good God! Tears had never
been, but for sin; and sin had ever been, but for Tears: Sin occasions
tears; tears dissolve sin: But for sin, we had not been borne in
tears; but for tears, we had dyed in sin. True Disciple, and now again
turned to himself! his Eyes, how they gush, to weep? his Heart, how it
groans, to weep bitterly? He weeps, and weeps bitterly; for it is not the
rigation of his eyes, that is enough, but compunction of his heart. Sins
heinous in the commission, are heavy in the repentance. A little water, washes
not a foul spot. For the servant, to forswear his Master; for the Apostle, to
deny the truth; was no small offense. Wherefore his eyes (like two distilling
Fountains) gush out even rivers of waters; and all is little enough, to wash
him thoroughly from his wickedness, to cleanse him from his sin. Since there
is such help; then what need is there, yea what lack of tears? Ah! this is
cause enough of weeping, that we cannot weep. Woe to us, that we sin daily
with hard hearts, and dry eyes; and provoke our GOD to plague us; not so much
for sinning, as not sorrowing for sin. Alas, alas! tears of compassion,
tears of compunction; nothing sooner dry, then tears. So weep we for our
sin, as if we meant to sin, and weep again. So slowly come our tears,
and slenderly, that our sins rather prevail to defile our tears, then our
tears avail, to wash away our sins. Ah my Soul, my Soul! considerest thou
Peter's sin, and Tears? Alas, alas! thy Sins (I know) have been more; but
fewer (I fear) thy tears. It will both warn, and encourage thee; to think
how Peter has sinned, and repented: Peter has sinned, how then dare thou
presume? Peter has repented, why then should thou despair? Peter (...)ned;
and Repented; and (...) happy: eschew thou the first neglect not the next; and
(...) sear to fail in the last.

The Monodie OR, Soliloquie.
TO be man's Savior,
Gods eternal Son
Leaves Heavens attendance,
the Angellicke train.
Whilst he considers
on earth may be won
A serving troop,
he counts his loss his gain.
My soul, praise him
who left high heauent transcendence;
Himself abasing
low, to earths attendance.
He being Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings;
Could vassals make,
of greatest Potentates:
Yet makes he choice
of vile, and foolish things,
The first are called,
are men of mean estates.
My Soul's a Sister
but of low degree;
If such may serve
this Lord; then well may She:
One's here first called,
neither for wit, nor wealth;
For he is both simple,
and a Fisherman:
Yet when he hears
the voice of saving health;
Leaves all, and follows
with all speed he can:
My soul will all
but him, for him reject;
Who emptied
himself, for his elect.
The Lord inquiring
of his own repute;
Since others miss,
demands his servants d^^me:
This Servant (whilst
the rest are flow or mute)
With ready answer,
gives him true esteems.
My soul! think not,
his fellows were so weak;
That he spoke first,
because they could not speak:
Forthwith the Master
does the Servant bless,
For's good opinion;
to him gives the Keys;
To shut, to open,
unto more, and less;
To whose just censure
heaven and earth obeyet.
My soul says, he
was not alone here blessed,
Nor had the power
before, above the rest.
The Seruant-being
highly thus rewarded;
For's Masters sake,
he vows to spend his breath:
But when he should
his Master most have guarded,
Then shrinkes for fear
of danger, and of death.
My Soul takes it*
a lesson of humility,
Not to presume,
(...) ability.
Traitors assault
his Lords, him smite, and scoff^;
As Lion Lamb
to den, so him they hale:
For fear of such,
he follows a far off,
His promise he
forgets, his heart ^i^e fail^^
My soul! the strength
is Gods, in us is shown;
But weakness, we
have nothing of our own.
Ere long (it so
falls out) (...)
In Sex, Age, Office,
impotent and weak;
Yet (as against Champion
stout) his courage quaiks;
She vrges him,
the truth he dares not speak^*
My soul observes,
weak motives spur apace
To sin; in breast
where fear is void of grace.
Thrice in a frail
taxation, him she tryes;
Thy voice (Quoth she)
bewrayes that thou art one:
Through fear as frail,
thrice he again denies;
Cursing, and swearing,
says he; I am none.
My Soul! when sinne's
on foot, each provocation,
Besides increase
of sin, is aggrauation.
While thrice he is tempted,
and while thrice he sins;
Thrice claps the watchful Bird,
wakes him from sleep;
His Master to
him beckes; and he begins
To call his fault
to mind, goes out to weep.
My soul (...)
^.
He fell himself
^
PRACTIQVE THEORIES: OR, Votiue Speculations Upon Saul's Cruelty. Paul's
Conversion.


By JOHN GAVLE.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper, for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear, 1630.

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Saul's Cruelty.
SAtan, ere he fell, thought none; since his fall, would none better then
himself. His venom boiled, and brast out upon us; because we stood, and fell
not; we fell and rose again; since himself sanke utterly, and past recovery.
Whether of Devils, or Men; Malice, and Sin, are equally aged, and semblably
evil. Both have the same Name and Guise, as if there were no sin, but
malice; Malice is as much as sin in general: and as if malice were a sin
by it self, there is a malice, which is a particular sin. Briefly, they
borrow and repay each other in a mutual loan; Malice is not but sinful, nor
sin but malicious. All evil is envious. The Good which a bad man will not
imitate, he cannot but envy. Always, either do our own vices irke us; or
else the virtues of another: And, who grieves not, because himself is evil;
he commonly repines, because another is good. I wonder not at such envy
enraged, when I consider the enmity foretold. I will put enmity betwixt thee,
Genesis 3.15.
and the Woman; and betwixt thy seed and her seed. God himself has provoked
and proclaimed open hostility, and everlasting enmity, betwixt Satan and the
Saints. The quarrel pertained not to our Fore-father alone, but his
successions: It was no more theirs, betwixt whom it first began, then ours, to
whom it is still derived. God indeed loves, and likes love and unity in his
creatures: but preferres a just war, before an unjust peace betwixt them:
Betwixt whom, peace and familiarity has been dangerous and evil; there war
and hostility, is both good and profitable. Better a pious warfare, then a
vicious covenant. My God was my friend in making me and the Devil foes; I were
his foe then, should I seek or grant, to be reconciled against my God. If God
be with me, who can be against me? I but scatter, if I gather not with him.
So God love me, let the Devil envy me. Oh let me have peace and amity with
God, in Christ; war and enmity with the Devil and sin!

It was sin that separated betwixt God and man, that put enmity betwixt the
Devil and man: but it can combine, and make friends, betwixt man and man. How
soon are we sworn Brethren in iniquity? The most froward and thwarting
spirits, will easily agree to be evil. If it be to drink iniquity, like
water; Lord, how we draw all at the same Well! if it be to draw sin with
cartropes, and iniquity with cords of vanity; how we toil together, and
sweat, and blow under one yoke! There is no peace to the wicked, within
themselves; yet have they a kind of covenant one with another. How the
Serpents claspe and climb together; Even Iayes and Crows take pleasure to be
birds of a feather: even the Wolves will flock, and Apes hug. The wicked
have their mutual and malicious imbracements: And (which is the worst
confederacy) their agreement is not so much amongst themselves; as against the
godly. The wicked conspire not so much in being, as in doing evil: Evil men
arride not only in this, that they are so themselves; as that they would do
so to others. Beware the flock; when the Foxes consult, or Wolves come
together. It is always against the true-man, that the thieves shake hands.
Judas consulted with the Priests against Christ: So consents Saul to the
people, against a Christian. Not only the people stone Steven, Act. 8.1.
but Saul was also consenting to his death. The only agreement with evil men,
is to consent unto their evil. And this is evermore the first entrance into
evil; to consent unto it. Sin creeps on by consent: It is bold indeed to
insinuate with us; but so, as it asks our admission. Sin intrudes not, but
with our leave; nor are we guilty of any temptation, but so as we yield unto
it. No man is evil against his will; nor do we (at any time) sin against
our own consent. Our own evil, is not ours, if we consent not to it: and to
consent unto i^, makes another evil, our own. Oh my God! am I not wicked
unless I will? Alas Lord! none but thou, can dispose my will to any thing, but
wickedness. I cannot shun, Lord strengthen me to resist Temptations: Sin
would daily intrude into my soul; my God give me grace, not to admit of sin.

To behold evil, and not forbid it; is to consent unto it. For he confesses,
Act. 22.20.
I stood by, and consented to his death. But Bystanders, may be accessory to
the same fault and offense. Nor yet yields the man (as he says) but helps to
do mischief. For, not to forbid sin, is to further it. Either was his
degree above the office of an Executioner, or his age was under it: yet, if he
may, not be a Partner in evil, will he be a Witness: yea, and a Witness of
the witnesses. Act. 7.58.
The Witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, named Saul. No
Age is innocent: there is an evil peculiar to every Age. The Child vain, the
Youth riotous, the Man every way injurious, and the Old Man always covetous.
According to which common course of Age, and Evil; who would not have thought,
the Young man should have been rejoicing in his youth? When he is now envying
the truth. In stead of being vain in pleasures, he is violent in persecution.
H^ is ^ monster of sin^ (...) more ill, then old. A very prodigy of iniquity
is it, when our sins do forestall our years. Is there not force enough in a
young man^ hand, to cast a stone at a Martyr? there is malice enough in his
heart, to hold their clothes, that cast them. What gain soever they get
hereby, he will look they they have no loss. He is willing to stand still,
and keep their clothes, that they might the rather busy themselves to cast
with more frequency, and greater violence: To have an hand in all their
cruelties, so held he all their clothes Had all hands there stoned Steven, but
Saul's; yet his heart stoned him with them all. Saul so stones Steven in all
their hands, as if his own hands only were not enough to stone him: and does
him far more violence, by stirring up others; then if himself had stoned
him. Pilats hands were somewhat cleaner from the blood of Christ, then Saul's of
Steven: He but yielded to what he urged. Nay, I guess Saul not much freer
from Steuens; then Iezabel from Naboths stoning. Justice has well learned to
measure, and repay, action with intention accordingly. Whether hands shall I
judge the cleaner? These are actually imbrued, Those keep a loofe off, yet
either by command, counsel, consent, or concealment, are polluted. I take
consent (in another evil especially) to be worse, then the commission. For
as much as to commit evil, is but to execute it; to consent unto it, is to
approve it.

For thee Steven, thou man of passions and patience; a Deacon thou wast, the
least in order; yet art thou of Disciples, the first in Passion; a Master in
Martyrdom, though not a Disciple in Degree. Have thou lost thy blood for him,
that shed his own for thee? it was recompensed, ere rendered: Expires the
Witness under a shower of stones? so did the Savior within a hedge of
thorns. Not a stone cast at thee (dear Saint) falls to the ground: The
coursest flint in thy Cross, is a precious gemme in thy Crown. Prayedst thou
so for thine enemies? lo, they return into thine own bosom. Yea, and (O the
effectual fervent prayer of a faithful man!) hence is it that Saul now thy
foe, becomes afterward Paul thy fellow Servant. That he that was once a
Persecutor, and against thee on earth, is now a partner with thee in heaven.
His stones but sent thee from earth to heaven; thy prayers brought him to an
heaven upon earth. Great pity had it been the Church should have wanted his
Person, or thy Prayers. Another would have now neglected his friends; yet
prayest thou for thine enemies. There is no charity to that of Christians; who
are taught to love their enemies; to bless them that curse them; to do good
to them that hate them; to pray for them that persecute them: And of all
Christians, no charity to that of Martyrs; which have so willingly and
chearefully, both done, and suffered, as they have been taught. Thou breathest
mild words for them; while they break hard stones against thee. Why prayest
thou so for Persecutors? but as irkeing their impieties more then thine own
sufferings? grieuing rather for their sins, wounding their own souls, then
their stones, thy body. Rest now (patient soul) in the Lord, from all thy
labors; Thy momentany bitterness, is eternally seasoned and sweetened unto
thee. As thy Name imports, so thy soul inioyeth Martyrdomes most blessed
Crown. That I were but worthy to suffer any thing, for the Name of the Lord
Jesus! It shall be my prayer, howeuer (according to divine wisdom) be the
event: Lord, let me dye the death of the righteous; and with their meed may my
last end be repayed.

The blood of Abel cried for vengeance upon Caine: So had the blood of Steven
opened as wide a mouth against Saul; but that the blood of Christ spoke better
things for Saul, then the blood of Steven. Yea, and (far unlike to Abels) the
very Martyrs blood cried not so fast for justice against them; as did his mouth
for mercy upon them; Lord, Act. 7.60.
lay not this sin to their charge. If Steven (amonst the rest) had not here
prayed for Saul, the Church (says one) might have wanted a Paul. Rather then
the Church shall want us; Lord, let us not want the prayers of the Church.
Hear me (my God) for my Brother; hear my Brother, for me; hear us one for
another; hear us all for Christ.

Saul was so well fleshed in the gore of Christ's Protomartyr; that by this
time, he is become a mighty hunter before the Lord. The flesh of St^uen yet
sticks in this Wolfes teeth: Nor is it the d^uouring, and sharing the life of
one silly Lamb, can satiate the bloody appetite of this one greedy Wolf: Nay,
that he got a snatch at one sheep, makes him bolder even to seize upon the
whole Flock. His hands are scarce either dry, or cold, from the dye of
lukewarm blood; and yet it seems (oh sinful insatiacy!) the blood of Steven
does but water his mouth, to a full carouse in the blood of Saints. Why Saul,
was it not enough for thee to yield to destroy a Saint; but do thou also
seek to dissolve a communion of Saints? Could neither the consideration of the
miracles he did, nor the words he spoke, nor yet the prayers he made, admonish
thee, how thou did further meddle with his Fellows? Alas, alas! no
consideration can once forbid an unconverted heart from sinning; or make it
forbear again to sin. Sin, if at the first time; it may but creep on to
consent, the next time (such is the unhappy growth of this ill weed) it makes
bold to run on to commission; and after that, even to iteration. He who
erewhiles would scarce seem to lay hands on a single Saint, now sticks not to
make havoc of an whole Church. Saul was but potentially agreeing to the death
of Steven, but in the havoc of the Church is personally employed. Of a
Spectatour formerly, he is now become an Actour: and is so much the worse, as
he acts his part the better. But too just a Judge, in a too too unjust cause:
with an indifferent eye looks he on all Estates, Sexes, Ages; Noble, or
ignoble, male or female, young or old; without respect to any, so handles he
them all. Like a bold Wolf and daring, he thrusts into the very Fold. He is
entering into every house: Act. 8.3.
like a Wolf that is earnest and impartial of his prey: Without either fear,
or pity; he haled men and women, and put them into prison. Not only men
spitefully dragged, but women shamefully haled. Oh fury worse then womanish! to
do violence to a Woman: To persecute a Woman, oh deed much unworthy a man! how
well might she say to this; as said he to that other Saul: whom do thou
pursue? 1 Samuel 24.15.
after a dead Dog? and after a Fly? A fruitless and ridiculous pursuit:
What gain is it, to pursue a dead Dog? what glory, to pursue a Fly? what
credit to oppose such as are not wont, not able to resist? A great conquest,
and manly deed; to bind and hale a woman. Unmatched, nay mismatched malice; to
wreake it so upon the weaker sex. This sex is commonly exempted from either
Tyranny, Spoil, or Persecution. The two arch-Tyrants of all Ages, Phara^h and
Herod, that so cruelly tyrannized over the innocent Age; yet spared they
always the weaker Sex. Exodus 2.16
If it be a Son (said Pharaoh) then ye shall hill him; but if it be a
Daughter, Mat. 2.16.
then let her live. So Herod (in like manner) slew no more, but the male
children. And those grand Persecutors of the world, that crucified the Son of
God, and put him to open shame their madness and malice, was all against the
man; neither so much as heeded they, or once forbad they the following, Luk
23.27
or weeping of the Women. But Saul here, not remembering himself to be a Man,
or that his Mother was a Woman; haled Men and Women, and put them in prison.
Sore is the persecution, that afflicts also the female ^inde: Then is havoc
made of the whole Church indeed; when both Men and Women suffer together for
the Truth; when they forbear not so much, as may bear for the Church. Blessed
God! what vessels of grace are there, of these weaker vessels? Such have been
not only Saints, but Martyrs. He that testified, O Woman, Mat. 15.28 Ioh.
20.15.
great is thy faith: he demanded, Woman why weepest thou? The Crown of
Martyrdom is set up for either S^xe: Even Women have worn this Crown; not
only have they believed in, but suffered for the Name of the Lord Jesus. I
know of whom I speak; Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce; and their
^age, for it was cruel: in their anger they slew a man; nay, in their
madness, consumed they many a Woman. They had pity on no sort, no sex: Our
men and women, were fuel alike unto their fire. Besides that our weak and
silly women, have been enough to answer their Examiners, to convict their
Accusers, to confute their Opposers, and to satisfy their Hearers: Our chaste
Virgins, have embraced their flames; our faithful Wives have kissed their
stakes; our fruitful Mothers, have borne in their Fires; our devout Widows
have accepted their Faggots; And our godly Matrons, yielded their bodies to
their Ashes, rather then their Dust. Blessed be the Lord our strength, and
light; that has helped the weak things of the world, to confound the strong;
and taught the foolish, to confute the wise.

In this so sore a storm, the Windows are battered, the Walls shaken, the
Battlements heaued; nevertheless, the Corner stones remain, the Pillars
stand, the Foundations are sure. Weak Brethren (because of Saul's persecution)
are dispersed, the Layicks scattered abroad; but for all this blast, Act. 8.1.
the Disciples stand still even in Jerusalem. The Disciples were either of more
favor, or notice; then Saul's Envy could yet suppress. But how bootlesse is
it, to press the Branches; while the Palms Stem keep so firm a root? and
vain, to exhaust the channels, while the fountains run so free? Saul has
heau'd the Battlements with a Blast; with a Tempest, he seeks to shake the
Pillars. He imprisons the Brethren; but breathes out threatenings, and
slaughters against the Disciples. God shapes our Burdens to our backs;
measures our loades, to our strength; lays upon us so much, and no more, then
he enables us to bear. No Christian is tempted, or afflicted above the least;
though every one according to the utmost of what he is able to endure. Gods
Hand here, neither comes short, nor goes beyond us; but is even with us. Our
God comes not always short of us, as though he did but dally with us; nor at
any time, steps he beyond us, as if he would depresse us; but goes even with
us, because he means so to prove and examine us. He often times lays so much
load upon us, as that we reele, and stumble: yet not so much, but that we rise
again, and stand. Our heavenly Father, neither will he rack his Children, nor
would he have them too remiss. My God vouchsafes me strength withal, when
he imposes the Burden: So when the Burden comes, ere I couch altogether, I
will oppose the strength.

No tyranny is enough, to those that are bent to persecute the Church of God.
Words cannot satisfy them; nor will Blood suffice them. Persecutors of the
Truth, are of all Tyrants, most unmerciful. To entreat them, is but to
exasperate them; and though they have punished, yet are they not appeased. Saul
had already made havoc of the Church; and Saul is yet breathing out
threatenings and slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord. Act. 9.1.
Breathing threatenings, breathing slaughters; so cruel was he both in word and
deed. Like an untamed Horse, still foaming and flinging; not the bridle of
reason can curb him: Like a mad Dog, running up and down, and lilling
forth his tongue, ready to bite whoeuer comes by him: Or like an hungry Wolf,
puffing and blowing with hunting after his prey. Much what like a Madman, so
transported with fury, that he talks not beside Blasphemy, and Tyranny; that
he blows not, but all threats and death. Threatening and slaughter at once
(like Lightning and Thunder) proceed out of his mouth. His very Breath savors
of threatening and slaughter: These are as familiar to sin, as that is
frequent to Nature. Threatenings and Slaughters, he both fetches them as deep,
and vtters them as often, as he does his breath. You would think, that rather
then in the defect of them, he would cease to be evil, in the deprivation of
this other, would he cease to be.

Saul is now no better, then as he first began. He had before consented to the
Death of Steven, made havoc of the Church, haled Men and Women, and
imprisoned them, and scattered the Brethren all abroad; And he yet breathes out
threatenings and slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord. Once is enough to
do well: there is a Yet pertaining to any evil act. yet, and yet; and never
enough of sinning. Who yet knew the sinner, that lived, which would not live,
to sin Yet, or Yet live to sin? Oh the odious, and horrible insaciacy of
sin, and hell! How justly are they everlastingly damned; that would always
be wicked? Often have I resolved to sin no more; God grant me never to reserve
this Yet within my self. Prevent me (O Lord) in all my doings, that I yet
continue not in sinning; that I prolong not yet, to repent for sin.

Sin is ambitious: The height of her pride, is to creep into the favor and
furtherance of men in high Callings: and then grows she impudent, being backed
with Authority. Saul with a private hand will sweep Jerusalem of Saints; but
with the consent, and encouragement of Authority; he will take the pains to
make Damascus also no better then her eldest Sister; and so (in fine) neither
better then Sodom. Act. 9.1.2.
Saul went unto the High Priest, and desired of him Letters to Damascus, etc.
Who is worse then he; that thinks not himself enough, to do evil? He (of
all) is wholly bent upon evil; that not only seeks, but begs to do
mischief: that cannot be contented to do it, where he is; but would be
elsewhere, to do it. The High Priest need not hire, or persuade Saul, to such
a purpose; he both offers, and entreats hereto. Authoriry needs neither
inquire, nor entreat, to do naughtily. Bad Officers, are never without bad
Executioners: may they be but licenced, they look not to be commanded. So
easily are we employed in evil: and always become the willing instruments of
bad works. The Letters are not sooner requested, then obtained. They soon
condescend to, what themselves so desired: and cannot now (at least) but
applaud him for his forwardness; that otherwise, would (by all means) have
both allured, and hired him hereto. The High Priest sticks not to grant; Saul
is not unwilling to carry; the Letters blush not to relate; and the Jewish
Synagogues (had these come to their hands) had not failed, to have effected.
But the Libels are happily intercepted by the way: neither were they delivered;
nor understood what they were. Better the Church should be ignorant, then
should have been sensible of their contents. This one thing I wonder at, that
he that was the Carryer of such Letters, should be the Author of such
Epistles. Who would hope, or think, that he that now carried such Letters,
touching the destruction of Christians bodies; should after that write such
Epistles, teaching the salvation of their souls; that he should afterward
indite Letters full of truth, and piety; that now conveyed Letters full of
Blasphemy and Wrong. Thine is thy Power and Goodness, O God! Thou art able not
only to work Good, out of Evil; but of Evil, to make it Good. Thou can
turn us to thee, and change us from our selves. Of an evil Instrument, and
unworthy; Lord make me a means, and Minister of thy Truth and Praise.

Not the length of many miles could couple Damascus to Jerusalem: Five days
journey (at the fewest) would but measure the distance betwixt the Towns.
Nevertheless, if Authority will but send the errand, here is one will dispatch
the journey: So the high Priest will but lend his hand; Saul cares not to spare
his feet. Height nor Depth, Length nor Breadth, are impediments to sinful
ways. Nothing is enough to hinder a man from wicked works: Fire and Water,
cannot here forbid us. We compass Sea and Land, to weary our selves in the
ways of wickedness; and so we gain sin, we complain neither of loss,
nor labor. Sin (though many so think it not) is both a labor and a load.
There is not the like toil, and hazard, to win Heaven; as to earne Hell:
Some take more pains to damn, then some to save their souls. Christ's yoke is
light, and yet we take it not; Sins load is heavy, and for all that, we feel
it not. Not only our Savior so enlightens us, that his yoke is but easy; but
also Satan so seduces us, that his burden seems but light. The way of sin
(we know) is a broad way; but ah (say we) that it is no longer. It is hard to
weary us in our own, and sinful ways. Would God, the fearful perils in the
end, were thoroughly discerned; as the false profits and pleasures in the way,
are obscurely glanced at: the sinner might sit still, and save the labor; with
less toil, larger gain; and reap more by doing nothing, then doing worse.

Saul is now on his journey; the best journey that ever he took; the worst
that ever he undertook. It was wickedly purposed, happily disposed; ill
attempted, well achieved. Now is he near to Damascus, near to Evil
purposed; but (oh the Wisdom and Goodness of Divine Providence!) nearer to
Grace offered. The Wolf is made a Sheep even then, when gaping, he is at
point to enter into the Fold. The Physician of his soul (praised be the power
of his grace) heales him in the midst of his madness; and restores him in the
very extremity of his Disease. No height of sin can forbid the force of
grace. Always, the more the weight of sin, the greater the work of
salvation. True Conversion, is never too late: though late conversion, proves
scarcely true. Better end with Saul, then with Judas: but better begin as
Judas, then as Saul. For grace rooting, well enough, when soon enough: for
grace budding, soon enough, when well enough. Early ought to be the Ground,
and effectual the working of Regeneration. Quantity may place the habit;
Quality must perfect the act of grace. In thy Grace and Truth (O God) let thy
Saints both timely be established; and wholly employed.

They say, man purposes, but God disposes. We may intend this, or that; but
God directs it: He lets us alone, to will; but himself goes along to guide
us. The event is otherwise, then Saul either intended, or deserved. What a
wondrous prevention of that evil, wherein he now even promised himself
success? While he mused on nothing, but cruelty to others; see, Mercy
vouchsafed to himself. Lo, what an happy shipwreck in the Haven. Saul was no
sooner got within the sight of Damascus, but (behold, and bless you) Suddenly
there shined round about him (dazzling his former intended sight) a light from
heaven. Act: 9.3.
What? is God come down (as to Sodom) to see whether iniquity be yet full?
Far be it from him; to seek, and save what was lost, is he come. God minds
now (such is his mercy) to destroy no Sodom; but convert a Saul. When sin is
waxen to her height; let the sinner expect either a gracious Conversion, or a
just Confusion: and a confusion the rather, because not a Conversion. For,
whose Conversion God expects the longer; them not converted, he therefore
plagues the sorer. God often times abides the extremity of evil; expects
ungodliness to the utmost: and then (the more to magnify him in his Mercy, or
Justice) either takes he vengeance; or else has Compassion. There is a time,
when GOD has mercy, on whom he will; and whom he will, he hardens: when he
rewards his own above their worth; and repayeth the other according to their
desert. When sin has done her worst with Gods elected ones; then grace can
turn them to the best. It is in me, to do all evil; to do any good, is in
thee Lord alone. Thou can alter me from mine own corruptions, thou can
work me to thy Will. Turn thee (O Lord) to me, and I shall be turned to
thee; convert thou me, and I shall be converted. Who but the Shepherd, can
find out, can fetch home, the lost and straggling Sheep? Come Sheepeheard of
my soul, come quickly: Suffer me not to stray and wander too long, too sarre,
in the mountains of a wretched, and a wicked world. Oh let thy Grace and
Favor find me! Oh bring me safely, happily, to thy Fold.

Practique Theories: OR, Votiue Speculations, UPON Paul's Conversion.
WHat was once said of the one Saul, in derision; may now not amiss be said
of this other, even with admiration: Is Saul also amongst the Prophets? 1 Samuel
19.24.
It is no such wonder, that the one seeking Asses, should obtain a Kingdom:
as that this other following death, should find life. The Tare, is made
Wheat: the child of wrath, a vessel of Election: the prodigy of Nature, a
Miracle of Grace. Even a Wolf, is transformed to a Sheep: O strange
Metamorphosis! beside, above, beyond all heathen Dreams. I will always praise
the power of that Alchymist, that can refine such pure gold, and precious, from
so rough and base a metal: Will admire his skill, that can sift out such fair
Wheat, from so coorse a Branne: will adore his art, that can draw so comely,
and saintly a portraiture; from so ugly, so obscure a ground.

Though Saul go against God, to Damascus, yet he meets with God in the way.
God is able to convert him, that does never so oppose him: In an hostile
breast, can he frame to him a friendly heart: And make him so much the more to
witness; by how much he did despise the truth. Mercy is Gods, and Sin but
man's; that can do more good, then this other deserve evil: Sin cannot
destroy, whom Grace intends to save. Election is of grace, not merits: At no
time does Favor respect Desert. The man runs on hastily, and is as suddenly
met withal. While an hellish darkness was yet within him; Suddenly there
shone round about him, a light from heaven. Act. 9.3:
It is time for thee (Lord) to lay to thine hands; as a good and cunning
Potter, to reform the clay, which Satan has misshapen. Lord, when thine
elected ones run on so swiftly to iniquity and sin; return thou them
speedily to thy Grace and Mercy. Thou art as prone to mercy, as Satan is busily
malicious. Satan would quickly overthrow me; do thou (Lord) everlastingly
establish me: Lord, perfect me with speed; whom Satan would so soon dispatch.
Satan delays not to tempt me; O Lord make haste to help me. Though he never
so thirsts, and seeks the damnation; yet work and fulfill thou the Salvation
of my soul.

Conversion is a work of wonder: A man is ordinarily borne; but is
maruellously regenerate, or borne again. Each Saints illumination is
miraculous; Saul's here a miracle: Suddenly there shined round about him, a
light from heaven. Not the light of the Sun, but of the Sun of
righteousness now shone upon him. A greater and fairer light shone within him
also, then shone about him; it was but as a shadow, and did but prepare to that
light that shone within him. The outward light did somewhat foregoe the inward;
yet so, as the inward also shone upon the sudden. In a moment, is Grace
infused, and Conversion inchoate: though in time, this other is consummate, and
the first diffused. The light of Gods grace is sudden to all his Saints. We
cannot say, when he will make his face to shine upon us; such his times and
seasons, are in his own knowledge and power. Nor shone the sigh so soon, as
full: Alight shone round about him. Illumination ought to be total; that the
man of God may be perfect. Conversion is none, if not complete. Half is for an
Harlot; have thou (O Lord) thine whole Babe. For all the powers of my Soul;
Lord inlighten mine Understanding. Will, Affections: For all the parts of my
Body; Lord wash, not my Feet only, but mine Hands, and my Head. Lord! thou art
all light: All thy works, are the works of light. When thou did create us,
thou made light: thou bring light, when thou do convert us. Send out thy
Light and thy Truth; to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, and guide their feet into the way of peace.

How powerful, and speedy, are the Works of the Spirit? But the outward
glimmerings of his bright rays, but glance upon us; and straightway they dazzle
and deiect us. No sooner saw Saul a light shining from Heaven; Act. 9.4.
but forth with he fell to the earth. That the Holy Ghost but shines upon us,
is enough both to humble, and instruct us. Great is the efficacy of saving
Grace; that does no sooner approach, but convert; scarce touch, ere change us.
It can at once make a King, of a Shepherd; a Prophet, of an Heardsman; an
Evangelist of a Publicane; a Disciple of a Fisherman; and a Doctor of the
Gentiles, of a Persecutour of the Church. See! now lies Saul groueling, kissing
the footstool; as not daring, not worthy to behold the Throne. Happy Fall was
it, that gave such advantage to his Rise: For, he rose up the best that could
be; that fell bad enough. Grace and corruption are now in one soul; as are Hot
and Cold in one body: through their strife so violent, and irreconcilable; the
poor patient falls down flat, he knows not whether more ravished, or amazed.
When Grace comes and renues; I know not whether I can more rejoice at Gods
Goodness, or grieve at mine own Wickedness, and unworthiness.

Behold at once the several degrees of conversion, mutually respecting both
the Agent and Patient. God strikes, Saul falls; God calls, Saul answers; GOD
commands, and Saul obeyes. Blessed stroke! that heales in wounding: sweet
speech, that incourages, even reprehending: and facile Iniunction, that
enables, in commanding. Happy deiection, that raises in the fall; modest
answer, intimating acknowledgement; true obedience, wanting no willingness.
How ascends Conversion in her steps; but from Contrition, to Confession, and so
to satisfaction? His contrition and humiliation is, he falls to the earth: for
his Confession, both is it annuated by his silence, and convicted by his
speech: And so his Obedience, as the best satisfaction, answering so readily,
and so chearefully bestowed. My Thoughts of Sorrow, my words of
Acknowledgement, my Deeds of Obedience; these all must avouch me, seated in the
state of Grace.

The hand of earth, that durst so lift up it self against Heaven, is now by
the hand of Heaven, cast down unto the earth. Nay, God but calls, and Saul
falls. He starts at his calling, what would he have done at his rebuking? How
could he have withstood him punishing, that is not able to abide him
converting? God thus smites him, to heal him: that otherwise would have
smitten God, to have wounded himself. I accept his strokes, for favors: nor
fear I evil from him; with whom (I know) it is easier (which is impossible)
to do nothing, then not good.

Having first stricken down, he seconds his blows with words: God is one
that will do nothing wherein his Word shall not justify his Deed. I will not
dispute with God, nor examine him: Far be it from my clay to say Why, or
Wherefore unto the Potter. What befalls me from him, I know is just; though I
conceive not my desert: Because my offense may be smothered, his justice in no
wise detected.

After the Lightning, hark the Thunder: Saul, Saul, why persecutest tho^ me?
Act. 94.
How is it, that he smites Saul himself; and first says, Why persecutest thou
me? If God smite, it is no more but Justice: but if man persecute, it is no
less then Malice. Injury received (though again revenged) not violence
offered (though double requited) has most cause to cry first, Why persecutest
thou me? As though he had little reason, and no provocation to do as he did;
he asks him, Why persecutest thou me? For what demerit of mine? for what and
of thine own? It Is causeless, and bootlesse both, that thou art so against
me. Causeless, for it is not, but for my good deeds thou do it: Bootlesse,
for thou but kickest against the prick: Causeless, for what have I done
against thee? Bootlesse, for what can thou do against me? what have I done
against thee? Nay, what other have I done to any, then healed the diseased,
restored the blind, fed the hungry, cast out Devils, raised the dead? What
can thou do against me? Whom do thou Saul pursue? such an one (think
thou) as did that other Saul and evil? a dead Dog? or a ^lye? namely one
both base and wretched? Nay, but thou kickst against the prick; which can
enter into the soul of him that spurns it. I am not now, as once, subject
either to Spite or Force. I have changed Earth, for Heaven; a Cross for a
Kingdom; a Grave, for a Throne; Weakness, for Power; Ignominy, for Glory;
and Mortality, for Eternity. Me thou oughtst not, me thou can not persecute:
only in as much as thou do it against one of these little ones; thou do it
unto me. As the honor of the Head, redounds to the members: so the sorrows of
the members, reach unto the Head. The Head is not senseless, albeit in Heaven;
when the members suffer, although upon earth. God is not only sensible of his
Saints; Luke 10.16.
He that despises you, despises me: but even tender over them; Z^ch. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. Christ asked not such a
question of his Crucifiers, why crucify ye me? Neither of him that scourged
him, why scourgest thou me? Not so much as why do thou so? said he to him,
that bound, blinded buffeted him; that nailed, bored, gored him. Christ is more
sensible of his Members, then of himself: and complains of their Wrong and
Oppression, before his own. My Savior has not only made his Benefits, and
Glory, mine: but my woe, and wrongs, his own. God forbid now, I should take
the sword of vengeance into mine own hands: I will leave both the Claim and
Execution hereof, to him; that rightly says, vengeance is mine, Romans 12.19.
and I will repay it. I will learn to bear my wrongs with patience; seeing he
has (in a manner) quit me, in taking them so unto himself.

Saul was learned in the law; but was yet but ignorant of the Gospel. He could
speak of Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but could not believe
in Jesus, the Savior of the world. May be, had God appeared after that manner,
and to those purposes of old; namely, as a mighty and auenging God, he also
would have answered, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: But to hear now of
such a God, as is suffering, and to feel him so forgining; he asks, Who art
thou Lord? The words are of one doubting, and yet disposed to believe. To say
who art thou, all this argues ignorance; to say Lord, is a sign of some faith.
He shows him here docible, rather then inquisitiue: Nor indeed asks he, as
he would examine; but to be instructed. We must not be curious to inquire
only; but desirous to learn the truth. I will inquire my God so, as to
believe him: and so believe him, as beyond inquiry.

To strive against the stream, is difficult; is dangerous to kick against the
prick. A wise man will there deride the vanity, and here eschew the damage.
Will he smite an adamant, till the blow rebound in his own face? He will not
shoot at the Moon, lest the arrow light on his own pate. Neither the Power,
nor Grace of God, is to be resisted. He that spurns at a Stone or prick,
hurts not them, but himself. What gets he that will knock his head against
the wall? What becomes of the proudest Waves, when they beat against the
Rocks? It is not for a Potters vessel, to iustle with an fron Rod. There is no
profit of a vain and imperfect labor, but much hurt in an unequal and vain
contention. Hark Saul, what he says; It is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks. Lie still then and stir not, lest thou but beat the air: spurn
not at the pricks, lest the iron enter into thy soul. Thou art fallen, to
rise; why should thou rise, to fall? Humble thy self under that hand, that
has therefore cast thee down, to lift thee up: Lie still but a little: And
now, where thou fellest down a Persecutor, there rise up a Preacher where a
Wolf, there a Lamb; where an Enemy, there a Soul^ier; where a Tyrant, there a
Saint; where a Saul, there a Paul. Our good God humbles us not, but to exalt
us: nor but to amend us, does he correct us. Though he smite me, yet he will
heal me: though he cast me down, yet will he lift me up. So often as I fall
before him, I thereby rise the better: He grant me of his mercy, that I fall
not from him, and so make my self the worse.

How soon is Saul altered from himself? He is now not another, but as it
were a contrary creature: Not a Wolf, as before, but now a ^ambe. The Wolf
that hunted, and howled so for his prey; now gently co^ches, like a Sheep, and
hears the voice of the Shepherd. He resisted before, but now submits: was
before not so violent to oppose, as now willing to obe^: Now not willing only
to eschew evil, Act. 9.6.
but do good: Lord, what will thou have me to doe^ He is rightly converted
unto God, that seeks to observe, and as^es, to do his Will. You shall sooner
take the fire without an operative heat; then a true con^^^t without a working
grace. I will take him only to be marked in the forehead, as sealed up in the
renewed number; which speedily, willingly seeks after his heavenly Fathers
will, to do it: offering and applying his works to such words; Lord, what
will thou have me to do? Lord inform me of what thou would, and conform
me to it. Let thy Will be the rule of both my Actions and Petitions; that I
may neither ask nor do but according to thy will.

The house of Paul's whole man is swept from the dust, and dung of corruption;
yet is it req^isite to strew it with the flowers of sanctification: His heart
is (as a rased Table) well wiped from a raging sin; yet must it be (as a
marble Monument) engraven with a lively portraiture of saving grace. Now he
that has laid the foundation of Grace in himself, by himself; will by
others, build up the Battlements in others. In Conversion, let my soul
magnify the Cause, admire the Order, bless the Means, enjoy the Effect.

The Master Worke-man has shaped out this Garment of Holiness, but puts it to
his Servant to finish it: What an high hand has begun, a subordinate hand
must now make up. By Christ is grace infused; but by his Ministers dilated. An
Angel does appear to Cornelius, but Peter must further inform him: So Christ
will convert Paul, but A^amas must yet instruct him. A man must teach him; to
let him understand, he also must teach men: That though his was but a private
Teacher, yet must he be an universal Doctor. Besides himself, God will teach
and instruct his Saints one by another. He that has ordained the office of
the Ministry, has established that office with efficacy; has adorned that
efficacy with his own use. God will do little by miracles, where he bath
allowed means. The miracle was, he saw the light, he heard the voice: now
must he also use the means. Arise, Act. 9.6.
go into the City, and it shall be told thee, what thou must do. Shall my
prying spirit expect their Apparitions (you know who they are) or their
Revelations, for my Conversion? It shall suffice my soul, if from the
Fountain, I may by the Conduits, receive the water of Life. Nor shall she
attribute less praise to that power, for the wonderful conueying of supreme
Graces, by subordinate means.

Now has Saul good leave to go to Damascus: He is better aided, and
authorized then by the High Priest: Christ himself both incourages, and
command^ him thither; Arise, go into the City. What to do there? Not as he
has intended, but as he shall be instructed; it shall be told thee, what thou
must do: Go on then Paul on GODS name: and accept his instruction, whose
destruction thou intendest. But how can he walk that is blind? The excelling
object has certainly confounded the sense. He has seen so much of Heaven,
he now sees nothing upon Earth: or he now sees nothing, that is done upon
Earth; that he may the rather attend to what is spoken from Heaven: or else
the light is so within him; that (in comparison) all is but dark about him.
Act 22.1^.
According as he confessed, I could not see, for the glory of that light. The
Sun of Nature is but darkness to the Sense, and Body; where the Sun of
righteousness is light to the Soul and Mind. Saul ar^se from the ground,
Act. 9.8.
and opened ^i^eyes, but saw no man. He did not lose, but change his sight.
Happy privation, to a better habit: Welcome blindness, that disposed to such
a sight: Thrice blessed caecation of one man, that was the illumination of the
whole World. Such his blindness, was to better his Sight. Outward sight was
taken from a Persecutot; inward light is vouchsafed to a Preacher. I will never
complain to be like Patient, for such a Recovery.

As Paul said afterward; so now Saul found: Ephesians. 4.8.
He led captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto men. He that thought to have
taken Christians captive, is himself taken captive by Christ. He that would
have brought Saints bound from Damas^^^, to Ier^salem; is him self led blind
from Ier^salem to Damascus. Who must lead Saul to Damasc^^, but those very
hands, that should have helped him to hale. Sain^^ to Jerusalem? Who must
restore Saul in this City; but such an one, as Saul would have imprisoned in
the other? Not the Sheep falls into the Wolfes hands, to destruction; but the
Wolf comes to the Sheep hands for succor. The Fool prepares a Rod for his
own back. Haman sets up Gallows for Mordeoai, and himself is hanged
thereon. It is wise and just with God, to chain a man in his own Fetters, to
entrap him in his own Snare. Many a man has been taken in his own Net. Mine
Enemy diggeth a Pit for me, and his own foot may fall therein. He that would
me evil, may also want my aid: Wisdom will teach me to prevent the one; to
deny the other, charity will not suffer me.

Leave Paul a while in the depth of his contemplations, to busy his now
seques^red thoughts in a three days Theorye: in Blindness, with Fasting, to
prayers: Seeing nothing but Heaven; feeding on nothing but faith; saying
nothing but with Supplications. Now considers he his God, and self: Now fasts
he from sin, and prays for Grace: now blesses he what happened, and abhorres
what he intended: Now both bewayles he his life past, and reioyces in his
present estate: yea now he learnes, and studies in three days; what all his
life long, he must teach and preach. And now, while a Wolf is turning to a
Sheep; behold, a Sheep is coming to a Wolf. A Wolf, the Sheep thought,
and feared him; and yet comes, for the Shepherd not only enjoined, but
secured him. Ananias, a particular Doctor, and obs^ure, comes to create Paul,
a general Doctor, and famous among all Nations. Iethro could counsel Moses,
a man learned in all the learning of the Egyptians: and Ananias is able to
teach Saul, so brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. It is wonted with God to
make the foolish things of the world, both to refute and instruct the wise.
After his Conversion, comes his Calling: his spiritual Office, is next after
his holy State. Imposition of hands is given both with good warrant, and upon
examination: the blind receives both his former, and a better sight: the
fasting is also filled with the Holy Ghost: and by the Sacrament of an holy
initiation, the Father is honored, the Brother received, the Mother comforted.
The Church was sad, and disperced through Saul's Persecution; but they meet, and
make merry, at Paul's Conversion. Besides the joy of Saints on Earth; there is
joy in the presence of the Angels of God, Luke 15.10
for one sinner that conuerteth: O Lord, let thine holy Host rejoice for me
now; and let me rejoice with them for ever.

Paul receives the Grace, not of a Christian only; but also of an Apostle: Not
only whereby himself is converted; but to convert others also. First is he
converted; and in his Conversion, called; and in his Calling, endowed with
Gifts; and through his Gifts, is he preaching; and Preaching the Sum and
scope of all Texts; Act. 9.20.
That Christ was the Son of GOD. Saul, that persecuted Jesus; is now Paul,
preaching Christ: Now is he as constant, to publish; as he once was impudent
to suppress the Name of the LORD Jesus: And as ready to suffer for it with
Patience; as he was with violence, to offer against it. The Church did
hitherto labor under none more, then him: but henceforward he labors in it,
more then all. Whatsoever he did to Christians; as a Christian, he is now
content to suffer. Of once a Tyrant, destroying them that called on this Name
in Jerusalem; Act. 9.21.
how feign is he to become a Martyr afterward? Act. 21.13.
I am ready noe to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the Name
of the LORD Jesus. The Wolf was not so eager, as the Lamb is meek: once, not
so greedy, to devour; as now a ready prey. In the same heart renewed,
corrupted Nature was never so furious, as divine Grace is zealous. Her love of
the Truth, has laid down more lives, and with more alacrity; then the others
spi^e has taken away, even with greatest cruelty. Such is the condition of
either state of Life; a man must be doing, or suffering evil. Of the twain, I
had rather expect my Passions Coronation, then fear my Actions Condemnation.

Me thinks I should yet contemplate, 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 Cor. 15.9.
the chief of Sinners (as he calls himself) and the least Apostle: Both how
Saul, and the chief of Sinners; how Paul, and the least Apostle: Yea,
therefore the least Apostle, because the chief of Sinners. Moreover, Act. 9.15.
and the Chosen vessel: How a vessel, and dishonouring him, that intended him
for honor: how a Chosen vessel, wherein was prepared, Food for the hungry,
and Physic for the sick. As also his Rapture Rapture into the third Heaven;
2 Cor. 12.2.
where he heard and saw amongst Angels, more then he could utter unto men. I
will only abridge my slender Thoughts (oh that the utmost of my Imitation, may
but reach to the least of my Meditation) to consider his Diligence, his
Patience; that seasoning and atchieuing all his actions; this his Passions
Fruit and Guide. First, while I muse upon his Constancy, Sobriety, Vigilance;
his Fidelity, Sincerity, Charity to GOD, Himself, and his Brethren: his
Preachings, Praises, Prayers; his Writings, Meetings, Greetings; his contempt
of the World, his prize of Heaven; his handy Labor, and his bodily Travel: I
cannot but adore the Giver, while I must admire the Graces; I must praise the
Author in every work, whilst so I ponder each effect. Again, while I
address my Thoughts (I know not whether with more commiseration, or
amazedness) to think on, what, how, why he suffered; to muse on his often,
not ordinary Hunger, Cold, Nakedness; his Stripes, Rebukes, Perils; by Sea and
Land; Men and Beasts; Jews and Gentiles, Tyrants, and Traitors, Friends and
Foes: I know not whether I can rather praise his actions zeal; or his passions
aequanimity. No doubt, the desire of Gods glory by him, stirred feruency in the
one: and the aim of his own glory with God, settled Constancy in the other.
The words of his own mouth shall modestly and certainly witness the Travel,
and Reward of both: 2 Timothy 4.7.8.
I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the LORD
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to
them also that love his appearing: I have fought a good Fight: Saul fought but
ill, Paul has fought well. Grace puts down Nature, in the like action: A
Sheep fights better then a Wolf. Paul fought a good fight against the
Adversaries of Truth, and Honesty: against all such as either in Words
gainesayed the Truth; or shamed Goodness, or Honesty in their deeds. He could
not but fight, he had so many Adversaries; his Adversaries were so evil, his
fight must needs be good. I bane finished my Course: Paul always so ran, as
to obtain; he strove not only, but wanne the prize; his Course was as long,
as the World was wide, and yet he fulfilled his Course. Saul ran madly to
Damascus; but Paul happily finished his course. Not the Beginnings of a
Christian are regarded, but always the End. Judas began well, but ended ill:
Saul began ill, but ended well. I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith: A good Christian will keep the Faith, till he finish his course: will
as soon lose Being, as leave Religion: and at once forsake both World and
Church. Henceforward there is laid up for me a Crown, etc. Paul has labored
already, and now looks for his Penny: Notwithstanding expects he not his
hire, as Merit; but Reward: herein alone is the Labourer unworthy his Hire. The
Cross has an end, the Crown has none: Nor is that for the time, so grievous
to endure; as this is always glorious to enjoy. We serve not GOD for Nothing;
Religion is not without her Reward; Our duty to Godward, has her due; and our
labor in the LORD her hire, And not to me only, but to them also that love
his appearing. The Crown is laid up secretly, and safely, for so many as
timely, and truly labor for it. GODS Gifts are neither private, nor
proportionate: Neither bestows he all Glory upon one; nor one glory upon all.
Not all manner of glory do I believe to be granted to one; nor one measure of
glory to all. Another may have more of Heaven then I; but I shall have no
lack: Neither shall I envy him, that has more; nor he pity me that has
less: I shall not repine at his abundance, but rejoice in mine own
sufficiency: Mine shall not be less to me; because his is more then mine; for
the least is Fullness; and the most is no superfluity of Joy. I will only, and
evermore laud the Divine Goodness; which out of the inexhaustible treasure of
his Bounty, gives to all abundantly to possess.

The Monodie OR, Soliloquie.
VIew here my Soul,
upon one stage of Life,
As in a Mask,
Dame Nature, Lady Grace:
Both play their parts
with unappeased strife;
While either seeks
each other to displace,
My soul does judge
it Tragicke-comedie
She sympathizing
in the Psuchomachie.
First comes up Nature,
foul, deformed Hagge;
Withered, crook't, lame,
bleer-ey'd, and stinking breathed;
All cloakt are with
corruptions filt by Ragge;
Foot-bound with cords
of floath, head snake, bewreath'd.
My soul's aghast,
to view so vile a Creature;
As once well formed,
now deformed Nature.
Malicious Witch,
and Grace-enuying Elfe;
She thunders Threats,
sticks not to slay and kill:
Because she would
none better then her self;
She ever thinks,
none's Good, that is not as Ill.
My Soul she wonders
not, to see the strife;
When she but marks
what longs to Christian life.
The mis-shap't Monster
sieging Graces Towers,
In the first battle,
heau^s her Battlements:
The Pillars stand
at which her envy lowres;
She Will do her spite,
to shake her Fundaments.
My Soul, this lesson
learn, and prone at length;
Our trials ever
adaquate our strength.
In this fell onset
finds she force to fail,
Not answ'ring to
her fury; for supply,
She goes, seeks, gains,
afresh'gins to assail,
And also vaunts
backed with Authority.
My Soul! then sin
is in her height and vigor,
When she may rage
with privilege, as rigor.
Insatiate Harlet,
more thou Gulf or Grant;
Often surfetted,
yet never satisfied:
The more she has,
the more still would she have,
She craves, even full;
and would not be denied.
My Soul never knew
the sinner did begin
To live, that ever
would not live, to sin.
The Monster mounted
on the top of pride,
Thinks haughty Thoughts,
tush, now is all her own.
Now, Grace divine
minds not in words to chide,
But buckles with
the Champion, casts him down.
My Soul! he
happily, and fairly sell;
Who by his Fall
was taught to rise so well.
The splendent luster
of the glorious Queen,
Did so at once
illuminate the place,
The foul ill favored
Hagge durst not be seen,
But vanished
as shamed to show her face.
My Soul well notes,
though Nature keep the hold
In straggling sheep,
yet grace can bring't to Fold.
The Champion
are while that ra^^^ apace,
Lies grou^lings now,
ready to kiss the ground:
He dares not rise,
but rather learnes a Race
As never Foot
but sanctified, has found.
My Soul! this lesson
is not enough learned,
How way, from way,
strait, broad, may be discerned.
With modest check
she does his boldness blame,
That he presumes
against her to lift a sword:
Hereat he lies
confounded much with shame,
Yields all with silence,
scarce dares speak a word.
My Soul! when Grace
complains, or does accuse
Men euilly, and
often, her grace abuse.
Seeing his heart
so broken with compunction,
She heales the wounds
the which her hands had made.
Withal imposes
this so soft iniunction;
To take upon him
now, her warlike trade.
My soul! when thou
o^s^'st off vile Natures arms,
Thou straight must strike
up graces loud alarmes.
She sends him to
a Captain, to be trained,
And well instructed
in her feats of war:
By whose direction
such art he gained,
Where he had joy,
he now has mortal jar.
My Soul new being
a renewed Creature,
Will speak defyance,
to corrupted nature.
This man of God,
of war, of courage stout,
Bears, and forbeares,
besto^es both, and receives,
His travel, zeal,
each Fury, and each Flout:
His active passive life,
with life he (...).
My Soul cannot
more pr^ise his acts sublimity,
Then she can laud
his Passion aquaminity.
And now he blows
the trumpet of rono^^e,
I Have fought, kept, f^^ish't,
good fight, the faith, my course:
My self expects
for me reso^^^^ Crown,
Nor shall another
for mine fare the worse.
My soul fight then
good fight, and vndiminish't
Hold fast thy faith
until thy course be finished.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 51. line 1. for inuitable, read imitable, p: 85. l. 27. for search, r.
scarce, p. 116. l. 13. for expelled, r. appalled, p. 169. l 4. for weakness,
r. Natures weakness, p. 189. l. 3. for iumpes, r. inuites, p. 233 l. 12 for
Petty, r. Piety, ibid. l. 10. for commend, r. command, p. 235. l. 23. for
speape r. speak, p. 239. l. 8. before the word Behold, r. The Jews in
general, neither well nor truly, p. 260. l. 23. for basely, r. busily, p.
282. l. 14. dele The same sin, etc. p. 302 l. 11. for re^^raine, r. refrain,
p. 342. l. 11. r. sit still, p. 354. l. 25. r. a^auch me.


