The Steel Glass.

A Satyr co^piled by George Gascoigne Esquire.

Together with The Complainte of Phylomene. An Elegy devised by the same
Author.

Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.

Printed for Richard Smith.

TAM MARTI QVAM MERCVRIO


To the right honorable his singular good Lord the Lord Gray of Wilton, Knight
of the most honorable order of the Garter, George Gascoigne Esquire wishes
long life with increase of honor, according to his great worthiness.
RIght honorable, noble, and my singular good Lord: if mine ability were any
way correspondent too the just desires of my heart, I should yet think all the
same unable to deserve the least part of your goodness: in that you have
always deygned with cheerful look to regard me, with affabylitie to hear
me, with exceeding curtesy to use me, with grave advice to direct me, with
apparent love to care for me, and with assured assistance to protect me. All
which when I do remember, yet it stirs in me an exceeding zeal to deserve
it: and that zeal begets bashefull dread too perform it. The dread is
ended in dolours, and yet those dolours receive the very same affection, which
first moved in me the desire to honor and esteem you. For whiles I bewail
mine own unworthiness, and therewithal do set before mine eyes the lost time
of my youth misspent, I seem to see a far of (for my comfort) the high and
triumphant virtue called Magnanimity, accompanied with industrious diligence.
The first does encourage my faynted heart, and the second does begin
(already) to employ my understanding, for (ahlas my good Lord) were not the
cordial of these two precious Spiceries, the corrosyue of care would quickly
confound me.

I have misgouerned my youth, I confess it: what shall I do then? shall I
yield to mysery as a just plague appointed for my portion? Magnanimity says
no, and Industrye seems to be of the very same opinion.

I am derided, suspected, accused, and condemned: yea more than that, I am
rygorously rejected when I proffer amends for my harm. Should I therefore
despair? shall I yield unto iellosie? or drown my days in idleness,
because their beginning was bathed in wantonness? Surely (my Lord) the
Magnanimity of a noble mind will not suffer me, and the delightfulness of
dilygence does utterly forbydde me.

Shall I grudge to be reproved for that which I have done in deed, when the
sting of Emulation spared not to touch the worthy Scipio with most untrue
surmyses? Yea Themistocles when he had delivered al Greece from the huge host
of Xerxes, was yet by his unkind citizens of Athens expulsed from his own,
and constrained to seek favor in the sight of his late professed enemy, But
the Magnanimity of their minds was such, as neither could aduersytie overcome
them, nor yet the injurious dealing of other men could kindle in their breasts
any least spark of desire, to seek any vnhonorable revenge.

I have loytred (my lord) I confess, I have lien streaking me (like a lubber)
when the sun did shine, and now I strive al in vain to load the carte when
it raineth. I regarded not my comelynes in the Maymoone of my youth, and yet
now I stand prinking me in the glass, when the crows foot is grown under
mine eye. But what?

Aristotle spent his youth very ryotously, and Plato (by your leave) in twenty
of his youthful years, was no less addicted to delight in amorous verse, than
he was after in his age painful to write good precepts of moral Philosophy.
What should I speak of Cato, who was o^de before he learned lattine letters,
and yet became one of the greatest Orators of his time? These examples are
sufficient to prove that by industry and diligence any perfection may be
attained, and by true Magnanimity all adversity are easy to be endured. And
to that end (my very good lord) I do here presume thus rudely to rehearse
them. For as I can be content to confess the lightness wherewith I have been
(in times past) worthy to be burdened, so would I be glad, if now when I am
otherwise bent, my better endeavors might be accepted. But (alas my lord) I am
not only enforced still to carry on my shoulders the cross of my carelessness,
but there withal I am also put to the plonge, too provide (^uen now) weapons
wherewith I may defend all heavy frowns, deep suspects, and dangerous
detractions. And I find my self so feeble, and so unable to endure that
combat, as (were not the cordialles before rehearsed) I should either cast
down^ (...) armoure and hide myself like a recrea^t, or else (of a malicious
stubbornness) should busy my brains with some Stratagem for to execute an
envious revenge upon mine adversaries.

But neither will Magnanimity suffer me to become dishonest, nor yet can
Industry see me sink in idleness.

For I have learned in sacred scriptures to heap coals upon the head of mine
enemy, by honest dealing: and our savior himself has encoraged me, saying
that I shall lack neither works nor service, although it were noone days
before I came into the Market place.

These things I say (my singular good lord) do renew in my troubled mind the
same affection which first moved me to honor you, nothing doubting but (...)
your favorable eyes will vouchsafe to behold me as I am, and never be so
curious as to enquire what I have been.

And in full hope thereof, I have presumed to present your honor with this
Satyr written without rhyme, but I trust not without reason. And what soever
it be, I do humbly dedicate it unto your honorable name, beseeching the same
too accept it with as gracious regard, as you have in times past been
accustomed too behold my travails. And (my good Lord) though the skorneful
do mock me for a time, yet in the end I hope to give them al a rybbe of roste
for their pains. And when the virtuous shall perceive indeed how I am
occupied, then shall detraction be no less ashamed to have falsely accused me,
than light credence shall have cause to repent his rash conceypt: and Gravity
the judge shall not be abashed to cancel the sentence unjustly pronounced in my
condemnation. In mean while I remain amongst my books here at my poor house
in VValkamstowe, where I pray daily for speedy advancement, and continual
prosperity of your good Lordship. Written the fiftenth of April, 1576.

By your honors most bownden and well assured George Gascoigne.

N. R. in commendation of the Author, and his works.
IN rowsing verse, of Mauors bloody reign,
The famous Greek, and Maro did excel.
Grave Senec did, surmounte for Tragike vain,
Quick Epigrams, Catullus wrote as well,
Archilochus, did for lambickes pass,
For commicke verse, still Plautus peerless was.
In Elegies, and wanton love writ lays,
Sance peer were Naso, and Tibullus deemde:
In Satyrs sharp (as men of mickle praise)
Lucilius, and Horace were esteemde.
Thus diverse men, with diverse veins did write,
But Gascoigne does, in every vain indite.
And what perfourmaunce he thereof does make,
I list not vaunte, his works for me shall say:
In praising him Timantes trade I take,
Who (when he should, the woeful cheer displaie,
Duke Agamemnon had when he did wail,
His daughters death with tears of small avail:
Notskild to countershape his morneful grace,
That men might deem, what art could not supply)
Deuisde with painted veil, to shrowde his face.
Like sort my pen shall Gascoignes praise discrie,
Which wanting grace, his graces to rehearse,
Does shrowde and cloud them thus in silent verse.
Walter Rawely of the middle Temple, in commendation of the Steel Glass.
SVVete^ were the sauce, would please each kind of taste,
The life likewise, were pure that never swerued,
For spyteful tongs, in cankred stomachs plaste,
Deem worst of things, which best (percase) deserved:
But what for that? this medcine may suffyse,
To scorn the rest, and seek to please the wise.
Though sundry minds, in sundry sort do deem,
Yet worthiest wights, yield praise for every pain,
But envious brains, do naught (or light) esteem,
Such stately steps, as they cannot attain.
For who so reapes, renown above the rest,
With heaps of hate, shall surely be oppressed.
Wherefore to write, my censure of this book,
This Glass of Steel, impartially does show,
Abuses all, to such as in it look,
From prince to poor, from high estate to low,
As for the verse, who list like trade to try,
I fear me much, shall hardly reach so high.
Nicholas Bowyer in comme^dation of this work.
FRom lays of Love, to Satyrs sad and sage,
Our Poet turns, the travail of his time,
And as he pleased, the vain of youthful age,
With pleasant pen, employde in loving ryme:
So now he seeks, the grauest to delight,
With works of worth, much better than they show.
This Glass of Steel, (if it be marked aright)
Discries the faults, as well of high as low.
And Philomelaes fourefolde just complaynte,
In sugared sound, does shrowde a solemn sense,
Against those whom lust, or murder does attaynte.
Lo this we see, is Gascoignes good pretense,
To please al sorts, with his praiseworthy skill.
Then yield him thanks in sign of like good will.
The Author to the Reader.
TO vaunt, were vain and flattrie were a fault.
But truth to tell, there is a fort of fame,
The which I seek, by science to assault,
And so to leave, remembrance of my name.
The walls whereof are wondrous hard to clyme:
And much to high, for ladders made of ryme.
Then since I see, that rimes can seldom reach,
Unto the top, of such a stately Tower,
By reasons force, I mean to make some breach,
Which yet may help, my feeble fainting power,
That so at last, my Muse might enter in,
And reason rule, that rhyme could never win.
Such battring tire, this pamphlet here bewraies,
In rymelesse verse, which thundreth mighty threats,
And where it finds, that vice the wall decays,
Even there (amain) with sharp rebukes it beats.
The work (think I) deserves an honest name,
If not? I fail, to win this forte of fame.
Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
Gentle Reader I pray you before you read to correct these faults ensuing.
Leaf Line. Fault. Correction. A. 2. First page. 18. receive reviued Eadem
32. fainted fainting A. 2 Second page 25. even now new B. 2 First page 6. this
deceit their deceit Eodem. 2 page 18. second seemly second stemly Eadem.
21. wood. woed B. 3. Second page. 17 from fraud through fraud B. 4 Second.
Margin of them of the theme C. 4 First page. 5. king knight F. 1 First page.
9. greediness greedy guyles I. 1 Second page. 2. byrded bryded K. 3 First
page 19. astonyed astoynde Eadem. 20 advance aduante P. 3 First page. 6. phy
false and Fie fierce and Q. 3 Second page. 10 then vae vobis vae vobis then

THE STEEL GLASS.
THe Nightingale, (whose happy noble heart,
No dole can daunt, nor fearful force affright,
Whose chereful voice, does comfort saddest wights,
When she her self, has little cause to sing,
Whom lovers love, because she plains their greues,
She wraies their woes, and yet relieues their pain,
Whom worthy minds, always esteemed much,
And grauest years, have not disdainde her notes:
(Only that king proud Tereus by his name
With murdring knife, did carue her pleasant tongue,
To cover so, his own foul filthy fault)
This worthy bird, has taught my weary Muze,
To sing a song, in spite of their despite,
Which work my woe, withouten cause or crime,
And make my back, a ladder for their feet,
By slaundrous steps, and stayres of tickle talk,
To clyme the throne, wherein my self should sit.
O Phylomene, then help me now to chaunt:
And if dead beasts, or living birds have ghosts,
Which can conceive the cause of careful moan,
When wrong triumphs, and right is ouertrodde,
Then help me now, O byrd of gentle blood,
In barrayne verse, to tell a fruitful tale,
A tale (I mean) which may content the minds
Of learned men, and grave Philosophers.
And you my Lord, (whose hap has heretofore
Been, lovingly to read my reckles rimes,
And yet have deignde, with favor to forget
The faults of youth, which past my hasty pen:
And therwithall, have graciously vouchsafte,
To yield the rest, much more than they deservde)
Vouchsafe (lo now) to read and to peruse,
This rimles verse, which flows fro troubled mind.
Since that the line, of that false caytife king,
(Which ravished fair Phylomene for lust,
And then cut out, her trusty long for hate)
They live, they live, (alas the worse my luck)
Whose greedy lust, unbridled from their breast,
Has raunged long about the world so wide,
To find a pray for their wide open mouths,
And me they found, (O woeful tale to tell)
Whose harmless heart, perceivde not this deceit.
But that my Lord, may plainly understand,
The mysteries, of all that I do mean,
I am not he whom slanderous tongues have told,
(False tongues in deed, and crafty subtle brains)
To be the man, which meant a common spoil
Of loving dames, whose ears would hear my words
Or trust the tales devised by my pen.
I n'am a man, as some do think I am,
(Laugh not good Lord) I am in deed a dame,
Or at the least, a right Hermaphrodite:
And who desires, at large to know my name,
My birth, my line, and every circumstance,
Lo read it here, Plain dealyng was my Sire,
And he begat me by Simplycitie,
My sistr and I, into this world were sent, ^.

My Systers name, was pleasant Poesys,
And I my self had Satyra to name,
Whose hap was such, that in the prime of youth,
A lusty ladde, a stately man to see,
Brought up in place, where pleasures did abound,
(I dare not say, in court for both mine ears)
Began to woo my sister, not for wealth,
But for her face was lovely to behold,
And therewithal, her speech was pleasant still. Where may be commonly found
a meeter vvoer for pleasant poetry, than vain Delight? Such men do many ^ymes
attend upon vain delight.

This Nobles name, was called vain Delight,
And in his train, he had a comely crewe
Of guylefull wights: False semblant was the first,
The second man was, Flearing flattery,
(Brethren by like, or very near of kin)
Then followed them, Detraction and Deceit.
Sym Swash did bear a buckler for the first,
False witness was the second seemly page,
And thus well armd, and in good equipage,
This Galant came, unto my fathers court,
And wood my sister, for she elder was,
And fayrer eke, but out of doubt (at least)
Her pleasant speech surpassed mine so much,
That vain Delight, to her adrest his suit.
Short tale to make, she gave a free consent,
And forth she goes, to be his wedded make,
Entyst percase, with gloss of gorgeous show,
(Or else perhaps, persuaded by his peers,)
That constant love had herbord in his breast,
Such errors grow where such false Prophets preach.
How so it were, my Sister likte him well,
And forth she goes, in Court with him to dwell,
Where when she had some years ysoiorned,
And saw the world, and marked each man's mind,
A deep Desire her loving heart enflamde,
To see me sit by her in seemly wise,
That company might comfort her sometimes,
And sound advice might ease her weary thoughts:
And forth with speed, (even at her first request)
Does vain Delight, his hasty course direct,
To seek me out his sails are fully bent,
And wind was good, to bring me to the bower,
Whereas she lay, that mourned days and nights
To see her self, so matchte and so deceivde,
And when the wretch, (I cannot term him bet)
Had me on seas full far from friendly help,
A spark of lust, did kindle in his breast,
And bad him hark, to songs of Satyra.
I selly soul (which thought no body harm)
Began clear my throat, and straue to sing my best,
Which pleased him so, and so enflamde his heart, Satirical Poetry is sometimes
ravished by vain Delight.

That he forgot my sister Poesys,
And ravished me, to please his wanton mind.
Not so content, when this foul fact was done,
(Yfraught with fear, least that I should disclose
His incest: and, his doting dark desire)
He causde straight ways, the foremost of his crew
With his compeare, to try me with their tongues: False semblant and
flattery. can seldom beguile satirical Poetry.

And when their guiles, could not prevail to win
My simple mind, from tracke of trusty truth,
Nor yet deceyt could bleare mine eyes from fraud,
Came Slander then, accusing me, and said,
That I entist Delyght, to love and lust.
Thus was I caught, poor wretch that thought none il.
And furthermore, to cloak their own offense,
They clapped me fast, in cage of Myserie, The revvard of busy meddling is Misery.

And there I dwelt, full many a doleful day,
Until this thief, this traitor vain Delight,
Cut out my tongue, with Raysor of Restraynte,
Least I should wraye, this bloody deed of his.
And thus (my Lord) I live a weary life, note now and compare this allegory to
the story of Progne and Philomele

Not as I seemd, a man sometimes of might,
But woma^like, whose tears must venge her harms.
And yet, even as the mighty gods did daine
For Philomele, that though her tongue were cut
Yet should she sing a pleasant note sometimes:
So have they deignd, by their divine decrees,
That with the stumps of my reproved tongue,
I may sometimes, Reprouers deeds reprove,
And sing a verse, to make them see themselves.
Then thus I sing, this selly song by night,
Like Phylomene, since that the shining Sun
Is now eclypst, which wont to lend me light.
And thus I sing, in corner closely cowcht
Like Philomene, since that the stately cowrts,
Are now no place, for such poor byrds as I.
And thus I sing, with prick against my breast,
Like Philomene, since that the privy worm,
Which makes me see my reckles youth misspent,
May well suffice, to keep me waking still.
And thus I sing, when pleasant spring begins,
Like Philomene, since every ianglyng byrd,
Which squeaketh loud, shall never triumph so,
As though my muze were mute and durst not sing.
And thus I sing, with harmless true intent,
Like Philomene, when as percase (mean while)
The Cuckowe suckes mine eggs by foul deceit,
And lickes the sweet, which might have fed me first.
And thus I mean, in mournful wise to sing,
A rare conceit, (God grant it like my Lord)
A trusty tune, from ancient clyffes conveyed,
A plain song note, which cannot warble well.
For whiles I mark this weak and wretched world, Here the substance of them
begins

Wherein I see, how every kind of man
Can flatter still, and yet deceiues himself.
I seem to muse, from whence such error springs,
Such gross co^ceits, such mistes of dark mistake,
Such Surcuydry, such weening over well,
And yet in deed, such dealings too too badde.
And as I stretch my weary wits, to weighe
The cause thereof, and whence it should proceed,
My battred brains, (which now be shrewdly brusde,
With ca^non shot, of much misgouernme^t)
Can spy no cause, but only one conceit,
Which makes me think, the world goes still awry.
I see and sigh, (because it makes me sad)
That peuishe pride, does all the world possess,
And every wight, will have a looking glass
To see himself, yet so he sees him not:
Yea shall I say? a glass of common glass,
Which glistreth bright, and shows a seemly show,
Is not enough, the days are past and gone,
That Berral glass, with foyles of lovely brown,
Might serve to show, a seemly fauord face.
That age is dead, and vanished long ago,
Which thought that steel, both trusty was and true,
And needed not, a foil of contraries,
But shewde al things, even as they were in deed.
In stead whereof, our curious years can find
The crystal glass, which glimseth brave and bright,
And shows the thing, much better than it is,
Beguylde with foyles, of sundry subtle sights,
So that they seem, and covet not to be.
This is the cause (believe me now my Lord)
That Realms do rewe, from high prosperity,
That kings decline, from princely government,
That Lords do lack, their ancestors good will,
That knights consume, their patrimony still,
That gentlemen, do make the merchant rise,
That plowmen beg, and craftesmen cannot thrive,
That clergy quayles, and has small reverence,
That laymen live, by moving mischief still,
That courtiers thrive, at latter Lammas day,
That officers, can scarce enrich their heirs,
That Soldiers sterue, or prech at Tiborne cross,
That lawyers buy, and purchase deadly hate,
That merchants clyme, and fall again as fast,
That roysters brag, above their betters rome,
That sicophants, are counted jolly guests,
That Lais leads a Ladies life alofte,
And Lucrece lurkes, with sobre bashful grace.
This is the cause (or else my Muze mistakes)
That things are thought, which never yet were wrought,
And castles buylt, above in lofty skies,
Which never yet, had good foundation.
And that the same may seem no feined dream,
But words of worth, and worthy to be wayed,
I have presumde, my Lord for to present
With this poor glass, which is of trusty Steel,
And came to me, by will and testament
Of one that was, a Glassemaker in deed.
Lucylius, this worthy man was namde,
Who at his death, bequeathd the crystal glass, A famous old satyri^cal Poet.

To such as love, to seem but not to be,
And unto those, that love to see themselves,
How foul or fair, soever that they are,
He began bequeath, a glass of trusty Steel,
Wherein they may be bold always to look,
Because it shows, all things in their degree.
And since myself (now pride of youth is past)
Do love to be, and let al seeming pass,
Since I desire, to see my self in deed,
Not what I would, but what I am or should,
Therefore I like this trusty glass of Steel.
Wherein I see, a frolike favor frounst The aucthor himself.

With foul abuse, of lawless lust in youth:
Wherein I see, a Sampsons grim regard
Disgraced yet with Alexanders bearde: Alexander magnus had but a small beard.

Wherein I see, a corpse of comely shape
(And such as might beseem the court full well)
Is cast at heel, by courting al to soon:
Wherein I see, a quick capacitye, He which vvil rebuke other men's faults,
shall dovvel not to for get his own imperfectio^s.

Berayde with blots of light Inconstancy:
An age suspect, because of youths misdeedes.
A poets brain, possessed with lays of love:
A Caesar's mind, and yet a Codrus might,
A Soldiers heart, suppressed with fearful doomes:
A Philosopher, foolishly fordone.
And to be plain, I see my self so plain,
And yet so much unlike that most I seemde,
As were it not, that Reason rules me,
I should in rage, this face of mine deface,
And cast this corpse, down headlong in despair,
Because it is, so far unlike it self.
And therwithal, to comfort me again,
I see a world, of worthy government,
A commonwealth, with policy so ruled, Common wealth.

As neither laws are sold, nor justice bought,
Nor riches sought, unless it be by right.
No cruelty, nor tyranny can reign,
No right revenge, does raise rebellion,
No spoils are taken, although the sword prevail,
No riot spends, the coin of commonwealth,
No rulers hoard, the countries treasure up,
No man grows rich, by subtilty nor slight:
All people dread, the magistrates decree,
And al men fear, the scourge of mighty Jove.
Lo this (my lord) may well deserve the name,
Of such a land, as milk and honey flows.
And this I see, within my glass of Steel,
Set forth even so, by Solon (worthy wight)
Who taught king Croesus, what it is to seem,
And what to be, by proof of happy end.
The like Lycurgus, Lacedemon king,
Did set to show, by view of this my glass,
And left the same, a mirour to behold,
To every prince, of his posterity.
But now (aye me) the glasing crystal glass
Does make us think, that realms and towns are rych
Where favor sways, the sentence of the law,
Where al is fish, that comes to the net, Common voe.

Where mighty power, does over rule the right,
Where injuries, do foster secret grudge,
Where bloody sword, maks every booty prize,
Where banqueting, is compted comely cost,
Where officers grow rich by princes pens,
Where purchase co^mes, by couyn and deceit,
And no man dreads, but he that cannot shift,
Nor none serve God, but only tongtide men.
Again I see, within my glass of Steel,
But four estates, to serve each country Soil,
The King, the Knight, the Pesant, and the Priest.
The King should care for all the subjects still,
The King should fight, for to defend the same,
The Peasant he, should labor for their ease,
And Priests should pray, for the^ and for themselves.
But out alas, such mists do bleare our eyes,
And crystal gloss, does glister so therewith,
That Kings conceive, their care is wondrous great Kings.

When as they beat, their busy restles brains,
To maintain pomp, and high triumphant sights,
To feed their fill, of dainty delicates,
To glad their hearts, with sight of pleasant sports,
To fill their ears, with sound of instruments,
To break with bit, the hot coragious horse,
To deck their haules, with sumpteous cloth of gold,
To cloth themselves, with silks of strange devise,
To search the rocks, for pearls and precious stones,
To delue the ground, for mines of glistering gold:
And never care, to maynteine peace and rest,
To yield relief, where needy lack appears,
To stop one ear, until the poor man speak,
To seem to sleep, when Justice still does wake,
To guard their lands, from sudden sword and fire,
To fear the cries of giltles suckling babes,
Whose ghosts may call, for vengeance on their blood,
And stir the wrath, of mighty thundering Jove.
I speak not this, by any english king,
Nor by our Queen, whose high for sight prouids,
That dyre debate, is fled to foraine Realms,
Whiles we enjoy the golden fleece of peace.
But there to turn my tale, from whence it came,
In olden days, good kings and worthy dukes,
(Who saw themselves, in glass of trusty Steel)
Contented were, with pompes of little price,
And set their thoughts, on regal government.
An order was, when Rome did flourish most, Veleri max. lib. a. Cap. 3.

That no man might triumph in stately wise,
But such as had, with blows of bloody blade
Five thousand foes in foughten field foredone.
Now he that likes, to look in Crystal glass,
May see proud pomps, in high triumphant wise,
Where never blow, was dealt with enemy.
When Sergius, devised first the mean
To pen up fish, within the swelling flood,
And so content his mouth with dainty fare,
Then followed fast, excess on Princes bordes,
And every dish, was chargde with new conceits,
To please the taste, of discontented minds.
But had he seen, the streine of strange devise,
Which Epicures, do now adays invent,
To yield good smacke, unto their dainty tongues:
Could he conceive, how princes paunch is fillde
With secret cause, of sickness (often) unseen,
Whiles lust desires, much more than nature craves,
Then would he say, that all the Roman cost
Was common trash, compard to sundry Sauce
Which princes use, to pamper Appetite.
O Crystal Glass, thou set things to show,
Which are (God knows) of little worth in deed.

The Faulcon fly, the grehounde run his course,
The bayted Bull, and Bear at stately stake,
These Enterluds, these new Italian sportes,
And every gawde, that glads the mind of man:
But few regard, their needy neighbors lack,
And few behold, by contemplation,
The joys of heaven, ne yet the pains of hell.
Few look to law, but al men gaze on lust.

Does raise our minds, (as rapt) al up on high,
But sweeter soundes, of concord, peace, and love,
Are out of tune, and jar in every stop.

To bridle him, and make him meet to serve,
Deserves (no doubt) great commendation.
But such as have, their stables fuly fraught,
With pampred Iades, ought therwithal to wey,
What great excess, upon them may be spent,
How many pore, (which need nor brake nor bit)
Might therewith al, in godly wise be fed, Deuteronomy. ^^.

And kings ought not, so many horse to have.

But vain excess, bewrayes a princes faults.

Our suits of Silk, our comely guarded capes,
Our knit silk stocks, and spanish lether shoes,
(Yea velvet serves, ofttimes to trample in)
Our plumes, our spangs, and al our queint array,
Are prickingspurres, provoking filthy pride,
And snares (unseen) which lead a man to hell.

And scorn the costs, which we do hold so dear?
How? how but well? and wear the precious pearl
Of peerlesse truth, amongst them published,
(Which we enjoy, and never wey the worth.)
They would not then, the same (like us) despise,
Which (though they lack) they live in better wise
Than we, which hold, the worthles pearl so dear.
But glittring gold, which many years lay hid,
Til gredy minds, began search the very guts
Of earth and clay, to find out sundry moulds
(As read and white, which are by melting made
Bright gold and silver, metals of mischief)
Has now enflamde, the noblest Princes hearts
With foulest fire, of filthy Avarice,
And seldom seen, that kings can be content
To keep their bounds, which their forefathers left:
What causes this, but greedy gold to get?
Even gold, which is, the very cause of wars,
The neast of strife, and nourice of debate,
The bar of heaven, and open way to hell.
But is this strange? when Lords when Knights and Squires
(Which ought defend, the state of common wealth)
Are not afraid to covet like a King?
O blind desire: oh high aspiring hearts.
The country Squire, does covet to be Knight, Knights.

The Knight a Lord, the Lord an Earl or a Duke,
The Duke a King, the King would Monarke be,
And none content, with that which is his own.
Yet none of these, can see in Crystal glass
(Which glistereth bright, and bleares their gasing eyes)
How every life, bears with him his disease.
But in my glass, which is of trusty steel,
I can perceive, how kingdoms breed but care,
How Lordship lives, with lots of less delight,
(Though cappe and knee, do seem a reverence,
And courtlike life, is thought an other heaven)
Than common people find in every coast.
The Gentleman, which might in country keep
Aplenteous boor de, and feed the fatherless,
With pig and goose, with mutton, beef and veale,
(Yea now and then, a capon and a chicke)
VVil break up house, and dwell in market towns,
Aloytring life, and like an Epicure.
But who (mean while) defends the common wealth?
Who rules the flock, when sheperds so are fled?
Who stays the staff, which should uphold the state?
Forsooth good Sir, the Lawyer leapeth in,
Nay rather leapes, both over hedge and ditch,
And rules the roast, but few men rule by right.
O Knights, O Squires, O Gentle bloods yborne,
You were not borne, alonely for your selves:
Your country claymes, some part of al your pains.
There should you live, and therein should you toil,
To hold up right, and banish cruel wrong,
To help the pore, to bridle back the rich,
To punish vice, and virtue to advance,
To see God servde, and Beelzebub suppressed.
You should not trust, lieftenaunts in your rome,
And let them sway, the scepter of your charge,
VVhiles you (mean while) know scarcely what is don,
Nor yet can yield, account if you were callde.
The stately lord, which woonted was to keep
A court at home, is now come up to court,
And leaves the country for a common prey,
To pilling, polling, brybing, and deceit:
(Al which his presence might have pacified,
Or else have made offenders smell the smoke.)
And now the youth which might have served him,
In comely wise, with country clothes yclad,
And yet thereby bin able to prefer
Unto the prince, and there to seek advance:
Is feign to sell, his lands for courtly cloutes,
Or else sits still, and lives like a loute,
(Yet of these two, the last fault is the less:)
And so those imps which might in time have sprung
Alofte (good lord) and servde to shield the state,
Are either nipt, with such untimely frosts,
Or else grow crookt, because they be not proynd.
These be the Knights, which should defend the la^d,
And these be they, which leave the land at large.
Yet here percase, it will be thought I roue
And run astray, besides the kings high way,
Since by the Knights, of whom my text does tell
(And such as show, most perfect in my glass)
Is meant no more, but worthy Soldiers
Whose skilin arms, and long experience
Should still uphold the pillars of the world.
Yes out of doubt, this noble name of Knight,
May comprehend, both Duke, Earl, lord, Knight, Squire,
Yea gentlemen, and every gentle borne.
But if you will, constrain me for to speak
What soldiers are, or what they ought to be
(And I my self, of that profession)
I see a crew, which glister in my glass,
The brauest band, that ever yet was seen: Soldiers

Behold behold, where Pompey co^mes before,
Where Manlius, and Marius ensue,
Aemilius, and Curious I see,
Palamedes, and Fabius maximus,
And eke their mate, Epaminondas lo,
Protesilaus and Phocyan are not far,
Pericles stands, in rank amongst the rest,
Aristomenes, may not be forgot,
Unless the list, of good men be disgrast.
Behold (my lord) these soldiers can I spy
Within my glass, within my true Steel glass.
I see not one therein, which seeks to heap
A world of pence, by pinching of dead pays, Covetous Soldiers

And so beguiles, the prince in time of need,
When muster day, and foughten field are odd.
Since Pompey did, enrich the common heaps,
And Paulus he, (Aemilius surnamed)
Returnde to Rome, no richer than he went,
Although he had, so many lands subdued,
And brought such treasure, to the common chests,
That fourscore years, the state was (after) free
From grievous task, and imposition.
Yea since again, good Marcus Curious,
Thought sacrilege, himself for to advance,
And see his soldiers, pore or live in lack.
I see not one, within this glass of mine,
Whose feathers flaunt, and flicker in the wind, Soldiers more brave the^
valiant.

As though he were, all only to be marked,
When simple snakes, which go not half so gay,
Can leave him yet a furlong in the field:
And when the pride, of all his peacockes plumes,
Is daunted down, with dastard dreadfulnesse.
And yet in town, he ietted every street,
Proud Crassus bags, consumde by couetise,
Great Alexander, drounde in drunkenness,
Caesar and Pompey, spilt with privy grudge,
Brennus beguild, with lightness of belief,
Cleomenes, by riot not regarded,
Vespasian, disdayned for deceit,
Demetrius, light set by for his lust,
Whereby at last, he dyed in prison pent.
Hereto percase, some one man will allege,
That Princes pence, are pursed up so close,
And faires do fall so seldom in a year,
That when they come, provision must be made
To fend the frost, in hardest winter nights.
Indeed I find, within this glass of mine,
Justinian, that proud ungrateful prince, ^ngrateful (...).

Which made to beg, bold Belisarius
His trusty man, which had so stoutly fought
In his defense, with evry enemy.
And Scypio, condemns the Roman rule,
Which suffered him (that had so truly served)
To lead pore life, at his (Lynternum) ferme,
Which did deserve, such worthy recompense.
Yea herewithal, most Soldiers of our time,
Believe for truth, that proud Justinian
Did never die, without good store of heirs.
And Romans race, cannot be rooted out,
Such yssewe springs, of such unpleasant budds,
But shall I say? this lesson learn of me,
When drums are dumb, and sound not dub a dub, What every soldiour should be
in time of peace.

Then be thou eke, as mewet as a maid
(I preach this sermon but to soldiers)
And learn to live, within thy bravries bounds.
Let not the Mercer, pull thee by the sleeue
For suits of silk, when cloth may serve thy turn,
Let not thy scores, come rob thy needy purse,
Make not the catchpol, rich by thine arrest.
Art thou a Gentle? live with gentle friends,
Which will be glad, thy company to have,
If manhood may, with manners well agree.
You have forgot, my greatest glory got.
For yet (by me, nor mine occasion)
Was never seen, a mourning garment worn.
O noble words, well worthy golden writ.
Believe me (Lord) a soldier cannot have
Too great regard, whereon his knife should cut.
Ne yet the men, which wonder at their wounds,
And show their scarres to every commer by, Braggers and such as boast of
their vvounds.

Dare once be seen, within my glass of Steel,
For so the faults, of Thraso and his train,
(Whom Terence told, to be but bragging brutes)
Might sone appear, to every skilful eye.
Bold Manlius, could close and well convey
Full thirty wounds, (and three) upon his head,
Yet never made, nor bones nor bragges thereof.
What should I speak, of drunken Soldiers?
Or lechers lewd, which fight for filthy lust? Drunken and lecherous soldiers.

Of whom that one, can sit and bybbe his fill,
Consume his coin, (which might good courage yield,
To such as march, and move at his command)
And makes himself, a worthy mocking stock
Which might deserve, (by sobre life) great laud.
That other dotes, and drives forth his days
In vain delight, and foul concupiscence,
When works of weight, might occupy his hedde.
Yea therwithal; he puts his own fond head
Under the belt, of such as should him serve,
And so becoms, example of much evil,
Which should have servde, as lantern of good life:
And is controlde, whereas he should command.
Augustus Caesar, he which might have made
Both feasts and banquets bravely as the best,
Was yet content (in camp) with homely cates,
And seldom drank his wine vnwatered.
Aristomenes, dayned to defend
His dames of prize, whom he in wars had won,
And rather chose, to die in their defense,
Then filthy men, should foil their chastity.
This was a wight, well worthy fame and praise.
O Captayns come, and Soldiers come apace,
Be hold my glass, and you shall see therein,
As though the god of wars (even Mars himself)
Might well (by him) be lively counterfayte,
Though much more like, the coward Constantine.
I see none such, (my Lord) I see none such,
Since Phocion, which was in deed a Mars
And one which did, much more than he would vaunt,
Contented was to be but homely clad.
And Marius, (whose constant heart could bide
The very veins, of his forwearied legs
To be both cut, and carved from his corpse)
Could never yet, contented be to spend,
One idle groate, in clothing nor in cates.
I see not one, (my Lord) I see not one Soldiers who (for their own long
continuance in service) do seem to despise all other of latter (...), and
especially such as are learned.

Which stands so much, upon his painted sheath
(Because he has, perchance at Bolleyn been
And loytered, since then in idleness)
That he accounts, no Soldiour but himself,
Nor one that can, despise the learned brain,
Which joins reading with experience.
Since Palamedes, and Ulysses both,
Were much esteemed for their policies
Although they were not thought long trained men.
Epamynondas, eke was much esteemde
Whose Eloquence, was such in all respects,
As gave no place, unto his manly heart.
And Fabius, surnamed Maximus,
Could join such learning, with experience,
As made his name, more famous than the rest.
These bloody beasts, apeare not in my glass,
Which cannot rule, their sword in furious rage, Soldiers over cruel without
any regard.

Nor have respect, to age nor yet to kind:
But down goes al, where they get upper hand.
Whose greedy hearts so hungry are to spoil,
That few regard; the very wrath of God,
Which grieved is, at cries of giltlesse blood.
Pericles was, a famous man of war,
And victor eke, in nine great foughten fields,
VVherof he was the general in charge.
Yet at his death he rather did rejoice
In clemency, than bloody victory.
Be still (quoth he) you grave Athenians,
Who whispered, and told his valiant facts)
Art thou a serving man? then serve again,
And stint to steal as common soldiers do.
Art thou a craftsman? take thee to thine art,
And cast off sloth, which loytreth in the Camps.
Art thou a plowman pressed for a shift?
Then learn to clout, thine old cast cobled shoes,
And rather bide, at home with barley bread,
Than learn to spoil, as thou have seen some do.
Of truth (my friends, and my companions eke)
Who lust, by wars to gather lawful wealth,
And so to get, a right renoumed name,
Must cast aside, al common trades of war,
And learn to live, as though he knew it not.
Well, thus my Knight has held me al to long,
Because he bare, such compass in my glass.
High time were then, to turn my weary pen,
Unto the Peasant coming next in place.
And here to write, the sum of my conceit,
I do not mean, alonely husbandmen,
Which till the ground, which dig, delve, mow, and sow,
Which swinke and sweat, whiles we do sleep and snort
And search the guts of earth, for greedy gain,
But he that labors any kind of way. Peasa^^^

To gather gains, and to enrich himself,
By King, by Knight, by holy helping Priests,
And all the rest, that live in commonwealth,
(So that his gains, by greediness be got)
Him can I count, a Peasant in his place. Strange Peasan^^

Al officers, all advocates at law,
Al men of art, which get goods greedily,
Must be content, to take a Peasants rome.
A strange devise, and sure my Lord will laugh,
To see it so, desgested in degrees.
But he which can, in office drudge, and droy,
And crave of al, (although even now a days,
Most officers, command that should be cravde) Officers.

He that can share, from every pention paid
A Peeter penny weying half a pound,
He that can pluck, sir Bennet by the sleeue,
And find a fee, in his plurality,
He that can wink, at any foul abuse,
As long as gains, come trouling in therewith,
Shall such come see themselves in this my glass?
Or shall they gaze, as godly good men do?
Yea let them come: but shall I tell you one thing?
How ere their gowns, be gathred in the back,
With organe pipes, of old king Henry's clampe,
How ere their cappes, be folded with a flappe,
How ere their beards, be clipped by the chinne,
How ere they ride, or mounted are on mules,
I count them worse, tha^ harmeles homely hindes,
Which toil in deed, to serve our common use.
Strange tale to tell: all officers be blind,
And yet their one eye, sharp as Linceus sight,
That one eye winks, as though it were but blind,
That other pries and peekes in every place.
Come naked need? and chance to do amiss?
He shall be sure, to drink upon the whippe.
But privy gain, (that bribing busy wretch)
Can find the means, to creep and cowch so low,
As officers (...) never see him slide,
Nor hear the trampling of his stealing steps.
He comes (I think,) upon the blind side still.
These things (my Lord) my glass now sets to show,
Whereas long since, all officers were seen
To be men made, out of another moulde.
Epamynond, of whom I spoke before
(Which was long time, an officer in Thebes)
And toylde in peace, as well as fought in war,
Would never take, or bribe, or rich reward.
And thus he spoke, to such as sought his help:
If it be good, (quoth he) that you desire,
Then will I do, it for the virtues sake:
If it be badde, no bribe can me infecte. There are to fevv such officers.

If so it be, for this my common weal,
Then am I borne, and bound by duty both
To see it done, withouten further words.
But if it be, unprofitable thing,
And might empaire, offend, or yield anoy
Unto the state, which I pretend to stay,
Then all the gold (quoth he) that grows on earth
Shall never tempt, my free consent thereto.
How many now, will tread Zeleucus steps?
Or who can bide, Cambyses cruel dome?
Cruel? nay just, (yea soft and peace good sir)
For Justice sleeps, and Troth is iested out.
O that al kings, would (Alexander like)
Hold evermore, one finger straight stretched out,
To thrust in eyes, of all their master thieves. ^alse ^udges.

But Brutus died, without posterity,
And Marcus Crassus had none issue male,
Cicero slipped, unseen out of this world,
With many mo, which pleaded roman pleas,
And were content, to use their eloquence, (...).

In maintenance, of matters that were good.
Demosthenes, in Athens used his art,
(Not for to heap, himself great hourds of gold,
But) still to stay, the town from deep deceit
Of Philips wyles, which had besieged it.
Where shall we read, that any of these four
Did ever plead, as careless of the trial?
Or who can say, they builded sumpteously?
Or wroong the weak, out of his own by wyles?
They were (I trow) of noble houses borne,
And yet content, to use their best deuoire,
In furdering, each honest harmless cause.
They did not rowte (like rude vnringed swine,)
To root nobility from heritage.
They stood content, with gain of glorious fame,
(Because they had, respect to equity)
To lead a life, like true Philosophers.
Of all the bristle bearded Advocates
That ever lovde their fees above the cause,
I cannot see, (scarce one) that is so bold
To show his face, and feigned Phisnomie
In this my glass: but if he do (my Lord)
He shows himself, to be by very kind
A man which means, at every time and tide,
To do small right, but sure to take no wrong.
And master Merchant, he whose travail ought Merc^^^

Commodiously, to do his country good,
And by his toil, the same for to enriche,
Can find the mean, to make Monopolyes
Of every ware, that is accounted strange.
And feeds the vain, of courtiers vain desires
Until the court, have courtiers cast at heel,
Quia non habent vestes Nuptiales.
O painted fools, whose harebrainde heads must have
More clothes attones, than might become a king:
For whom the rocks, in forain Realms must spin,
For whom they card, for whom they weaue their webbes
For whom no wool, appears fine enough,
(I speak not this by english courtiers
Since english wool, was ever thought most worth)
For whom al seas, are tossed to and fro,
For whom these purples come from Persia,
The crimosine, and lively red from Inde:
For whom soft silks, do sail from Sericane,
And all queint costs, do come from fardest coasts:
Whiles in mean while, that worthy Emperor, August. 9.

Which ruled the world, and had all wealth at will,
Could be content, to tire his weary wife,
His daughters and, his niepces euerychone,
To spin and work the clothes that he should wear,
And never card, for silks or sumpteous cost,
For cloth of gold, or tinsel figurie,
For Baudkin, broydrie, cutworks, nor conceits.
He set the ships, of merchantmen on work,
With bringing home, oil, grain, and savrie salt
And such like wares, as served common use.
Yea for my life, those merchants were not wont
To lend their wares, at reasonable rate,
(To gain no more, but Cento por cento,)
To teach young men, the trade to sell brown paper,
Yea Morris bells, and byllets too sometimes,
To make their coin, a net to catch young frye.
To bind such babes, in father Derbies bands,
To stay their steps, by statute Staples staff,
To rule young roysters, with Recognisance,
To read Arithmeticke once every day,
In VVoodstreat, Bredstreat, and in Pultery
(Where such schoolmaisters keep their counting house
To feed on bones, when flesh and fell is on,
And yet be combred with a concubine.
Not one of these, will read the holy write
Which does forbid, all greedy usury,
And yet receive, a shilling for a pound.
Not one of these, will preach of patience,
And yet be found, as angry as a waspe,
Not one of these, can be content to sit
In Tauerns, Innes, or Alehouses all day,
But spends his time, devoutly at his book.
Not one of these, will rail at rulers wrongs,
And yet be blotted, with extortion.
Not one of these, will paint out worldly pride,
And he himself, as gallaunt as he dare.
Not one of these, rebukes avarice,
And yet procures, proud pluralities.
Not one of these, reproves vanity
(Whiles he himself, with hawk upon his fist
And hounds at heel,) does quite forget his text.
Not one of these, corrects contentions,
For trifling things: and yet will sue for tithes.
Not one of these (not one of these my Lord)
Will be ashamde, to do even as he teaches.
My priests have learnt, to pray unto the Lord,
And yet they trust not in their lyplabour.
My priests can fast, and use al abstinence,
From vice and sin, and yet refuse no meats.
My priests can give, in charitable wise,
And love also, to do good alms deeds,
Although they trust, not in their own deserts.
My priests can place, all penance in the heart,
Without regard, of outward ceremonies.
That Physic, thrive not over fast by murder:
That Numbering men, in all their euens and odds
Do not forget, that only Unity
Unmeasurable, infinite, and one.
That Geometry, measure not so long,
Til all their measures out of measure be:
That Music with, his heavenly harmony,
Do not allure, a heavenly mind from heaven,
Nor set men's thoughts, in worldly melody,
Til heavenly Hierarchies be quite forgot:
That Rhetoric, learn not to ouerreache:
That Poetry, presume not for to preach,
And bite men's faults, with Satyrs corosiues,
Yet pamper up her own with pultesses:
Or that she dote not upon Erato,
Which should inuoke the good Caliope:
That Astrology, look not over high,
And light (mean while) in every pudled pit:
That Grammar grudge not at our english tongue,
Because it stands by Monosyllaba,
And cannot be declind as others are.
Pray thus (my priests for universities.
And if I have forgotten any Art,
Which has been taught, or exercised there,
Pray you to god, the good be not abusde,
With glorious show, of ouerloding skill.
Now these be past, (my priests) yet shall you pray
For common people, each in his degree,
That God vouchsafe to grant them al his grace. For the Co^inaltie

Where should I now begin to bid my beads?
Or who shall first be put in common place?
My wits be weary, and my eyes are dymme,
I cannot see who best deserves the room,
Stand forth good Peerce, thou plowma^ by thyname,
Yet so the Sayler says I do him wrong:
That one contends, his pains are without pear,
That other says, that none be like to his,
In deed they labor both exceedingly.
But since I see no shipman that can live
Without the plough, and yet I many see
(Which live by land) that never saw the seas:
Therefore I say, stand forth Peerce plowman first,
Thou winst the room, by very worthiness.
Behold him (priests) and though he stink of sweat (...)(...)

Disdain him not: for shall I tell you what?
Such clime to heaven, before the shaven crowns.
But how? forsooth, with true humilytie.
Not that they hoord, their grain when it is cheap,
Nor that they kill, the calfe to have the milk,
Nor that they set, debate between their lords,
By earing up the balks, that part their bounds:
Nor for because, they can both crowche and creep
(The guilefulst men, that ever God yet made)
When as they mean, most mischief and deceit,
Nor that they can, cry out on landelordes loud,
And say they rack, their rents an ace to high,
When they themselves, do sell their landlords la^be
For greater price, then ewe was wont be worth.
I see you Peerce, my glass was lately scowrde.
But for they feed, with fruits of their great pains,
Both King and Knight, and priests in cloister pent:
Therefore I say that sooner some of them
Shall scale the walls which lead us up to heaven,
Than cornfed beasts, whose belly is their God,
Although they preach, of more perfection.
And yet (my priests) pray you to God for Peerce,
As Peerce can pinch, it out for him and you.
And if you have a Paternoster spare
Then shall you pray, for Sailors (God them send
More mind of him, when as they come to land,
For toward shipwreck, many men can pray)
That they once learn, to speak without a lie,
And mean good faith, without blaspheming oaths:
That they forget, to steal from every freight,
And for to forge, false cockets, free to pass,
That ma^ners make, them give their betters place,
And use good words, though deeds be nothing gay.
But here me thinks, my priests begin to frown,
And say, that thus they shall be ouerchargde,
To pray for all, which seem to do amiss:
And one I hear, more saucie than the rest,
Which asks me, when shall our prayers end?
I tell thee (priest) when shoomakers make shoes,
That are well sowed, with never a stitch amiss,
And use no craft, in vttring of the same:
When Taylours steal, no stuff from gentlemen,
When Tanners are, with Corriers well agreede,
And both so dress their hydes, that we go dry:
when Cutlers leave, to sell old rustie blades,
And hide no crackes, with soder nor deceit:
when tinkers make, no more holes tha^ they found,
when thatchers think, their wages worth their work,
when colliers put, no dust into their sacks,
when maltemen make, us drink no firmentie,
when Dauie Diker diggs, and dallies not,
when smithes shoo horses, as they would he shod,
when millers, toll not with a golden thumb,
when bakers make, not barme bear price of wheat,
when brewers put, no bagage in their beer,
when butchers blow, not over al their flesh,
when horsecorsers, beguile no friends with Iades,
when weauers weight, is found in huswiues web.
(But why dwell I, so long among these lowts?)
When mercers make, more bones to swear and lie,
When vintners mix, no water with their wine,
When printers pass, none errors in their books,
When hatters use, to bye none old cast robes,
When goldsmithes get, no gains by sodred crowns,
When vpholsters, sell feathers without dust,
When pewterers, infect no Tin with lead,
When drapers draw, no gains by giving day,
When perchmentiers, put in no ferret Silk,
When Surgeons heal, al wounds without delay.
(Tush these are toys, but yet my glass shows al.)
When purveyours, provide not for themselves,
When Takers, take no brybes, nor use no brags,
When customers, conceal no covine used,
When Seachers see, al corners in a ship,
(And spy no pens by any sight they see)
When shriues do serve, al process as they ought,
When baylifes strain, none other thing but strays,
When auditors, their counters cannot change,
When proud surueyours, take no parting pens,
When Silver sticks not on the Tellers fingers,
And when receivers, pay as they receive,
When al these folk, have quite forgotten fraud.
(Again (my priests) a little by your leave)
When Sicophants, can find no place in court,
But are espied, for Echoes, as they are,
When roysters ruffle not above their rule,
Nor color craft, by swearing precious coals:
When Fencers fees, are like to apes rewards,
A piece of bread, and therwithal a bobbe
When Lays lives, not like a ladies pear,
Nor uses art, in dying of her hear.
When al these things, are ordered as they ought,
And see themselves, within my glass of steel,
Even then (my priests) may you make holyday,
And pray no more but ordinary prayers.
And yet therein, I pray you (my good priests)
Pray still for me, and for my Glass of steel
That it (nor I) do any mind offend,
Because we show, all colors in their kind.
And pray for me, that (since my hap is such
To see men so) I may perceive myself.
O worthy words, to end my worthless verse,
Pray for me Priests, I pray you pray for me.
FINIS. Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
EPILOGVS.
ALas (my lord) my have was al to hot,
I shut my glass, before you gasde your fill,
And at a glimse, my seely self have spied,
A stranger trowpe, than any yet were seen:
Behold (my lord) what monsters muster here,
With Angels face, and harmefull helish hearts,
With smyling looks, and deep deceitful thoughts,
With tender skins, and stony cruel minds,
With stealing steps, yet forward feet to fraud.
Behold, behold, they never stand content,
With God, with kind, with any help of Art,
But curle their locks, with bodkins and with braids,
But dye their hear, with sundry subtle sleights,
But paint and slicke, til fairest face be foul,
But bumbast, bolster, frisle, and perfume:
They mar with musk, the balm which nature made,
And dig for death, in dellicatest dishes.
The younger sort, come pyping on apace,
In whistles made offine enticing wood,
Til they have caught, the birds for whom they birded.
The elder sort, go stately stalking on,
And on their backs, they bear both land and fee,
Castles and Towers, revenewes and receipts,
Lordships, and manours, fines, yea fermes and al.
What should these be? (speak you my lovely lord)
They be not men: for why? they have no beards.
They be no boys, which wear such side long gowns.
They be no Gods, for all their gallant gloss.
They be no devils, (I trow) which seem so saintish.
What be they? women? masking in men's weeds?
With dutchkin dublets, and with Ierkins iaggde?
With Spanish spangs, and ruffes fet out of France,
With high copt hattes, and feathers flaunt a flaunt?
They be so sure even VVo to Men in deed.
Nay then (my lord) let shut the glass apace,
High time it were, for my pore Muse to wink,
Since all the hands, al paper, pen, and ink,
Which ever yet, this wretched world possessed,
Cannot describe, this Sex in colors dew,
No no (my Lord) we gased have enough,
(And I too much, God pardon me therefore)
Better look of, than look an ace to far:
And better mumme, than meddle overmuch.
But if my Glass, do like my lovely lord,
We will epsy, some sunny Summers day,
To look again, and see some semely sights.
Mean while, my Muse, right humbly does beseech,
That my good lord, accept this ventrous verse,
Until my brains, may better stuff devise.
FINIS: Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
The complaynt of Phylomene. An Elegye compyled by George Gascoigne Esquire.

Tam Marti, quam Mercurio. IMPRINTED AT London by Henry Binneman, for Richard
Smith.

Anno Domini 1576.

To the right honorable, my singular good Lord, the L. Gray of Wilton, Knight
of the most noble order of the Garter.
Right noble, when I had determined with myself to write the Satire before
recited (called the Steel Glass) and had in mine Exordium (by allegory)
compared my case to that of fair Phylomene, abused by the bloody king her
brother by law: I called to mind that twelve or thirtene years past, I had
begone an Elegye or sorrowefull song, called the Complainte of Phylomene, the
which I began too devise riding by the high way between Chelmisford and London,
and being overtaken with a sudden dash of Rain, I changed my copy, and stroke
over into the Deprofundis which is placed amongst my other Poesies, leuing the
complaint of Phylomene unfinished: and so it has continued ever since until
this present month of April. 1575. when I begone my Steel Glass. And
because I have in mine Exordium to the Steel Glass, begone with the
Nightingales notes: therefore I have not thought amiss now to finish and piece
up the said Complaint of Philomene, observing nevertheless the same
determinate invention which I had propounded and begone (as is said) twelve
years now past. The which I presume with the rest to present unto your honor,
nothing doubting but the same will accept my good entente therein. And I further
beseech that your lordship will voutsafe in reading there of, to guess (by change
of style) where the renewing of the verse may be most apparently thought to
begin. I will no further trouble your honor with these rude lines, but beseech of
the almighty long to preserve you to his pleasure. From my pore house in
VValkamstowe the sixtenth of April 1575.

Your L. bounden and most assured George Gascoigne.

PHILOMENE.
IN sweet April, the messe^ger to May
When hoonie drops, do melt in golden showers,
When every bird, records her lovers lay,
And western winds, do foster forth our flowers,
Late in an even, I walked out alone,
To hear the descant of the Nightingale,
And as I stood, I heard her make great moan,
Waymenting much, and thus she told her tale.
These thriftles birds (quoth she) which spend the day,
In nedlesse notes, and chaunt withouten skill,
Are costly kept, and finely fed always
With dainty food, whereof they feed theirfil.
But I which spend, the dark and dreadful night,
In watch and ward, when those birds take their rest,
Forpine my self, that Lovers might delight,
To hear the notes, which break out of my breast.
I lead a life, to please the Lovers mind,
(And though god wot, my food be light of charge,
Yet seely soul, that can no favor find)
I beg my bread, and seek for seeds at large.
The Throstle she, which makes the wood to ring
With shryching loud, that loath some is to hear,
Is costly kept, in cage: (O wondrous thing)
The Mauis eke, whose notes are nothing clear,
Now in good sooth (quoth she) sometimes I weep
To see Tom Tyttimouse, so much set by.
The Finche, which sings never a note but peep,
Is fed as well, nay better far than I.
The Lennet and the Lark, they sing alofte,
And coumpted are, as Lords in high degree.
The Brandlet says, for singing sweet and soft,
(In her conceit) there is none such as she.
Canara byrds, come in to bear the bell,
And Goldfinches, do hope to get the gole:
The tatling Awbe does please some fancy well,
And some like best, the bird as Black as cole.
And yet could I, if so it were my mind,
For harmony, set al these babes to schole,
And sing such notes, as might in every kind
Disgrace them quight, and make their courage cool.
But should I so? no no so will I not.
Let brutish beasts, hear such brute birds as those.
(For like to like, the prouer be says I wot)
And should I then, my cunning skill disclose?
For such unkind, as let the cukowe fly,
To suck mine eggs, whiles I sit in the thick?
And rather praise, the chattring of a pie,
Than her that sings, with breast against a prick?
Nay let them go, to mark the cuckowes talk,
The iangling Iay, for that becomes them well.
And in the silent night then let them walk,
To hear the Owl, how she does shryche and yel.
And from henceforth, I will no more constrain
My pleasant voice, to sound, at their request.
But shroud my self, in dark some night and rain,
And learn to cowche, full close upon my neast.
Yet if I chance, at any time (percase)
To sing a note, or twain for my disporte,
It shall be done, in some such secret place,
That few or none, may there unto resort.
These flatterers, (in love) which falsehood mean,
Not once aproch, to hear my pleasant song.
But such as true, and sted fast lovers been,
Let them come near, for else they do me wrong.
And as I guess, not many miles from hence,
There stands a squire, with pangs of sorrow pressed,
For whom I dare, auowe (in his defense)
He is as true, (in Love) as is the best.
Him will I cheer, with chaunting all this night:
And with that word, she began to clear her throat.
But such a lively song (now by this light)
Yet never heard I such another note.
It was (thought me) so pleasant and so plain,
Orphaeus harp, was never half so sweet,
Tereu, Tereu, and thus she began to plain,
Most piteously, which made my heart to grieve,
Her second note, was fie, fie, fie, fie, fie,
And that she did, in pleasant wise repeat,
With sweet reports, of heavenly harmony,
But yet it seemd, her gripes of grief were great.
For when she had, so soong and taken breath,
Then should you hear, her heavy heart so throbbe,
As though it had been, overcome with death,
And yet always, in every sigh and sobbe,
She showed great skill, for tunes of vnisone,
Her Iug, Iug, Iug, (in grief) had such a grace.
Then stinted she, as if her song were done.
And ere that past, not full a furlong space,
She began again, in melody to melt,
And many a note, she warbled wondrous well.
Yet can I not (although my heart should swelt)
Remember al, which her sweet tongue did tell.
But one strange note, I noted with the rest
And that said thus: Nemesis, Nemesis,
The which me thought, came boldly fro her breast,
As though she blamde, (thereby) some thing amiss.
Short tale to make, her singing sounded so,
And pleased mine ears, with such variety,
That (quite forgetting all the weary woe,
Which I my self felt in my fantasy)
I stood astonyed, and yet therewith content,
Wishing in heart that (since I might advance,
Of al her speech to know the plain intent,
Which grace hirselfe, or else the Gods did grant)
I might therewith, one further favor crave,
To understand, what her sweet notes might mean.
And in that thought, (my whole desire to have)
I fell on sleep, as I on staff did lean.
And in my slomber, had I such a sight,
As yet to think thereon does glad my mind.
Me thought I saw a derling of delight,
A stately Nymph, a dame of heavenly kind.
Whose glittring gite, so glimsed in mine eyes,
As (yet) I not, what proper hew it bare,
Ne therewithal, my wits can weldeuise,
To whom I might her lovely looks compare.
But truth to tell, (for all her smyling cheer)
She cast sometimes, a grievous frowning glance,
As who would say: by this it may appear,
That Just revenge, is Pressed for every chance,
In her right hand, (which to and fro did shake)
She bare a skourge, with many a knottie string,
And in her left, a snaffle Bit or brake,
Bebost with gold, and many a gingling ring:
She came apace, and stately did she stay,
And whiles I seemd, amazed very much,
The courteous dame, these words to me did say:
Sir Squire (quoth she) since thy desire is such,
To understand, the notes of Phylomene,
(For so she hight, whom thou calst Nightingale)
And what the sound, of every note might mean,
Give ear a while, and hearken to my tale.
The Gods are good, they hear the hearty prayers,
Of such as crave without a crafty will,
With favor eke, they further such affairs,
As tend to good, and mean to do none il.
And since thy words, were grounded on desire,
Whereby much good, and little harm can grow,
They granted have, the thing thou did require,
And lovingly, have sent me here by low,
To paraphrase, the piteous pleasant notes,
Which Phylomene, does darkely spend in spring,
For he that well, Dan Nasoes verses notes,
Shall find my words to be no fained thing.
Give ear (sir Squire quoth she) and I will, tell
Both what she was, and how her fortunes fell.
The fable of Philomela.
IN Athens reignde sometimes,
A king of worthy fame,
Who kept in court a stately train,
Pandyon was his name.
And had the Gods him given,
No holly bread of hap,
(I mean such fruts as make me^ think
They lie in fortunes lap)
Then had his golden gifts,
Lain dead with him in toombe,
Ne but himself had none endurde,
The danger of his doom.
But smyling luck, bewitched,
This peerless Prince to think,
That poison cannot be conueyde
In draughts of pleasant drink.
And kind became so kind,
That he two daughters had,
Of beauty such and so well given,
As made their father glad.
See: see: how highest harms,
Do lurk in ripest Joys,
How covertly does sorrow shrowde,
In trymmest worldely toys.
These jewels of his joy,
Became his cause of care,
And beauty was the guileful bayte,
Which caught their lives in Snare.
For Tereus Lord of Thrace,
Because he came of kings,
(So: weddings made for worldli wealth
Do seem triumphant things)
Was thought a worthy match,
Pandyons heir to wedde:
Whose eldest daughter chosen was,
To serve this king in bed.
That virgin Progne hight,
And she by whom I mean,
To tell this woeful Tragedy,
Was called Phylomene.
The wedding rytes performde,
The feasting done and past,
To Thrace with his new wedded spouse
He turns at the last.
Where many days in mirth,
And iolytie they spent,
Both satisfied with deep delight,
And cloyde with all content.
At last the dame desirde
Her sister for to see,
Such coals of kindly love did seem
Within her breast to be.
She prays her Lord, of grace,
He graunts to her request,
And hoist up sail, to seek the coaste,
Where Phylomene does rest.
He past the foming seas,
And finds the pleasant port,
Of Athens town, which guided him
To King Pandyons court.
There: (lovingly receivde,
And) welcomde by the king,
He shewde the cause, which thither then
Did his ambassade bring.
His father him embrast,
His sister kissed his cheek,
(...) all the court his coming was
Reioyst of every Greek.
Oh see the sweet deceit,
Which blinds worldly wits.
How common peoples love by lumpes,
And fancy comes by fits.
The foe in friendly wise,
Is many times embraste,
And he which means most faith and troth
By grudging is disgrast.
Fair Phylomene came forth
In comely garments cladde,
As one whom news of sisters health
Had moved to be glad,
Or woman's will (perhaps)
Enflamde her haughty heart,
To get more grace by cru^mes of cost,
And princke it out her part.
Whom he no sooner saw
(I mean this Thracian prince)
But straight therewith his fancies fume
All reason did convince.
And as the blazing bronde,
Might kindle rotten reeds:
Even so her look a secret flame,
Within his bosom breeds.
He thinks alley sure long
Til he (with her) were gone,
And her he makes to move the mirth,
Which after made her moan.
Love made him eloquent
And if he cravde too much,
He then excusde him self, and said
That Prognes words were such.
His tears confirmed all
Tears: like to sisters tears,
As who should say by these few drops
Thy sisters grief appears.
So finely could he saine,
That wickedness seemde wit,
And by the lawde of his pretense,
His lewdness was acquit.
Yea Phylomene set forth
The force of his request,
And cravde (with sighs) her fathers leave
To be hirsisters guest.
And hoong about his neck
And collingly him kissed,
And for her wealth did seek the woe
VVherof she little wist.
Mean while stood Tereus,
Beholding their affectes,
And made those pricks (for his desire)
A spur in all respects.
And wished himself her sire,
When she her sire embrast,
For neither kith nor kin could then
Have made his meaning chaste.
The Grecian king had not
The power for to denay,
His own dear child, and son in law
The thing that both did pray.
And down his daughter falls,
To thank him on her knee,
Supposing that for good success,
Which hardest hap must be.
But (least my tale seem long,)
Their shipping is preparde:
And to the shore this aged Greek,
Full princely did them guard.
There (melting into moan)
He used this parting speech:
Daughter (quoth he) you have desire
Your sisters court to seech.
Your sister seems like wise,
Your company to crave,
That crave you both, and Tereus here
The self same thing would have.
Ne could I more withstand
So many deep desires,
But this (quoth he) remember al)
Your father you requires,
And thee (my son of Thrace,)
I constantly conjure,
By faith, by kin, by men, by gods,
And all that seems sure,
That father like, thou fend
My daughter dear from scathe,
And (since I count al leisure long)
Return her to me rathe.
And thou my Phylomene,
(Quoth he) come soon again,
Thy sisters absence puts thy sire,
To too much privy pain,
Herewith he kissed her cheek,
And sent a second kiss
For Prognes part: and (bathde with tears)
His daughter does he bliss.
And took the Thracyans hand,
For token of his truth,
Who rather laughed his tears to scorn,
Than wept with him for ruth.
The sails are fully spredde,
And winds did serve at will,
And forth this traitor king conueies
His pray in prison still.
Ne could the Barbrous blood,
Conceal his filthy fire,
Hey: Victory (quoth he) my ship
Is fraught with my desire.
Wherewith he fixed his eyes,
Upon her fearful face.
And still beheld her gestures all,
And all her gleames of grace.
Ne could he look a side,
But like the cruel catte
Which gloating casts many a gla^c
Upon the selly ratte.
Why hold I long discourse?
They now are come on land,
And forth of ship the fearful wenche
He leads by the hand
Unto a selly shrowde,
A sheepecote closely builte
Amid the woodds, where many a la^b
Their guiltless blood had spilte,
There (like a lamb,) she stood,
And askte with trimbling voice,
Where Progne was, whose only sight
Might make her to rejoice.
Wherewith this caytife king
His lust in lewdness lapt,
And with his filthy fraud full fast
This simple maid entrapt.
And forth he floong the raines,
Vnbridling blind desire,
And meant of her chaste mind to make
A fuel for his fire.
And al alone (alone)
With force he her suppressed,
And made her yield the wicked weed
Whose flower he liked best.
What could the virgin do?
She could not run away,
Whose forward feet, his harmfull hands
With furious force did stay.
Ahlas what should she fight?
Few women win by fight:
Her weapons were but weak (god knows)
And he was much of might.
It booted not to cry,
Since help was none at hand,
And still before her fearful face,
Her cruel foe did stand.
And yet she (weping) cride,
Upon her sisters name,
Her fathers, and her brothers (oh)
Whose fact did foil her fame.
And on the Gods she calde,
For help in her distress,
But al in vain: he wrought his will,
Whose lust was not the less.
The filthy fact once done,
He gave her leave to greet.
And there she sat much like a bird,
New scapte from falcons feet,
Whose blood embrues her self,
And sitts in sorry plight,
Ne dare she proine her plumes again,
But fears a second flight.
At last when heart came home,
Discheveld as she sat,
With hands vphelde, she tried her tongue,
To wreake her woeful fate.
O Barbrous Greek (quoth she)
By Barbrous deeds disgrast,
Could no kind coal, nor pitties spark,
Within thy breast be plaste?
Could not my fathers hests,
Nor my most ruthful tears,
My maydenhoode, nor thine own yoke,
Affright thy mind with fears?
Could not my sisters love
Once quench thy filthy lust?
Thou foilst us al, and eke thy self,
We grieved, and thou unjust.
By thee I have defilde
My dearest sisters bed
By thee I count the life but lost,
Which too too long I led.
By thee (thou Bigamus)
Our fathers grief must grow,
Who daughters twain, (and two too much)
Upon thee did bestow.
But since my fault, thy fact,
My fathers just offense,
My sisters wrong, with my reproach,
I cannot so dispense.
If any Gods be good
If right in heaven do reign,
If right or wrong may make revenge,
Thou shall be paid again.
And (wicked) do thy wurst,
Thou can no more but kill:
And oh that death (before this gilte)
Had overcome my will.
Then might my soul beneath,
Have triumphed yet and said,
That though I died discontent,
I livde and did a maid.
Herewith her swelling sobbes,
Did tie her tongue from talk,
Whiles yet the Thracia^ tyrant (there)
To hear these words did walk.
And skornefully he cast
At her a frowning glaunce,
Which made the maid tostriue for spech,
And stertling from her trance,
I will revenge (quoth she)
For here I shake off shame,
And will (my self) bewray this fact
Thereby to foil thy fame.
A midde the thickest throngs
(If I have leave to go)
I will pronounce this bloody deed,
And blotte thine honor so.
If I in deserts dwell,
The woods, my words shall hear,
The holts, the hills, the craggie rocks,
Shall witness with me bear.
I will so fill the air
With noise of this thine act,
That gods and men in heaven and earth
Shall note thy naughty fact.
These words amazde the king.
Conscience with choler straue.
But rage so rackte his restles thought,
That now he began to rave.
And from his sheath a knife
Full despratly he draws,
VVherwith he cut the guiltless tongue
Out of her tender jaws.
The tongue that rubde his gall,
The tongue that told but truth,
The tongue that movde him to be mad,
And should have moved ruth.
And from his hand with spite
This trusty tongue he cast,
Whose root, and it (to wreake this wrong
Did wagge yet wondrous fast.
So stirs the serpents tail
When it is cut in twain,
And so it seems that weakest wills,
(By words) would ease their pain.
I blush to tell this tale,
But sure best books say this:
That yet the butcher did not blush
Her bloody mouth to kiss.
And often her bulk embrast,
And ofter quenched the fire,
Which kindled had the furnace first,
Within his soul desire.
Not herewithal content,
To Progne home he came,
Who asked him straight of Philomene:
He (fayning grief for game,)
Brust out in bitter tears,
And said the dame was dead,
And falsely told, what weary life
Her father (for her) led.
The Thracian Queen cast off
Her gold, and gorgeous weed,
And dressed in dole, bewailde her death
Whom she thought dead in deed.
A sepulcher she builds
(But for a living corse,)
And praide the gods on sisters soul
To take a just remorse:
And offered sacrifice,
To all the powers above.
Ah traitorous Thracian Tereus,
This was true force of love.
The heavens had whirld about
Twelve years in order due
And twelve times every flower and plant,
Their liueries did renew,
VVhiles Philomene full close
In shepcote still was clapped,
Enforst to bide by stony walls
Which fast (in hold) her hapt.
And as those walls forbadde
Her feet by flight to escape,
So was her tongue (by knife) restrainde,
For to reveal this rape
No remedy remaynde,
But only woman's wit,
Which suddenly in queintest chance
Can best it self acquit.
And Misery (amongst)
Ten thousand mischieues more,
Learnes policy in practices,
As proof makes men to know.
With curious needle work,
A garment began she make,
Wherein she wrote what bale she bode,
And al for bewties sake.
This garment began she give
To trusty Servants hand,
Who straight co^^^id it to the queen
Of Thracian Tirants land.
When Progne red the writ,
(A wondrous tale to tell)
She kept it close: though malice made
Her venging heart to swell.
And did defer the deed,
Til time and place might serve,
But in her mind a sharp revenge,
She fully did reserve.
O silence seldom seen,
That women counsel keep,
The cause was this, she wakt her wits
And lullde her tongue on sleep.
I speak against my sex,
So have I done before,
But truth is truth, and must be told
Though danger keep the door.
The third years rytes renewed,
Which Bacchus to belong,
And in that night the queen prepares
Revenge for all her wrong.
She (girt in Bacchus gite)
With sword her self does arm,
With wreathes of vines about her brows
And many a needles charm.
And forth in fury flings,
Her handmaides following fast,
Until with hasty steps she found
The shepecote at the last,
There howling out aloude,
As Bacchus priests do cry,
She brake the doors, and found the place
Where Philomene did lie.
And took her out by force,
And dressed her Bacchus like,
And hid her face with boughs and leaves
(For being known by like.)
And brought her to her house,
But when the wretch it knew,
That now again she was so near
To Tereus untrue.
She trembled est for dread,
And looked like ashes pale.
But Progne (now in privy place)
Set silence al to sale,
And took the garments off,
Discovering first her face,
And sister like did lovingly
Fair Phylomene embrace.
There she (by shame abasht)
Held down her weeping eyes,
As who should say: Thy right (by me)
Is refte in wrongful wise.
And down on ground she falls,
Which ground she kissed her fill,
As witness that the filthy fact
Was done against her will.
And cast her hands to heaven,
In steed of tongue to tell,
What violence the lecher used,
And how he did her quell.
Wherewith the Queen brake off
Her piteous pearcing plainte,
And swear with sword (no tears) to venge
The craft of this constrainte.
Or if (quoth she) there be
Some other mean more sure,
More stearne, more stout, than naked sword
Some mischief to procure,
I swear by all the Gods,
I shall the same embrace,
To wreake this wrong with bloody hand
Upon the king of Thrace.
Ne will I spare to spend
My life in sisters cause,
In sisters? ah what said I wretch?
My wrong shall lend me laws.
I will the palace burn,
With all the princes pelf,
And in the midst of flaming fire,
VVil cast the king him self.
I will scrat out those eyes,
That taught him first to lust,
Or tear his tongue from traitors throat,
Oh that revenge were just.
Or let me carue with knife,
The wicked Instrument,
Wherewith he, thee, and me abusde
(I am to mischief bent.)
Or sleeping let me seek
To send the soul to hell,
Whose barbarous bones for filthy force,
Did seem to bear the bell.
These words and more in rage
Pronounced by this dame,
Her little son came leaping in
Which Itis had to name.
Whose presence, could not please
For (vewing well his face,)
Ah wretch (quoth she) how like he grows
Unto his fathers grace.
And therwithal resolvde
A rare revenge in deed
Whereon to think (withoute^ words)
My woeful heart does bleed.
But when the lad lokt up;
And cheerfully did smile,
And hung about his mothers neck
With easy weight there while,
And kissed (as children use)
His angry mothers cheek,
Her mind was movde to much remorce
And mad became full meek.
Ne could she tears refrain,
But wept against her will,
Such tender rewth of innocence,
Her cruel mood did kill.
At last (so fury wrought)
Within her breast she felt,
That too much pity made her mind
Too womanlike to melt,
And saw her sister sit,
With heavy heart and cheer,
And now on her, and then on him,
Full lowringly did leare,
Into these words she brust
(Quoth she) why flatters he?
And why again (with tongue cut out)
So sadly sits she?
He, mother, mother calls,
She sister cannot say,
That one in earnest does lament,
That other whines in play.
Pandions line (quoth she)
Remember still your race,
And never mark the subtle shows
Of any Soul in Thrace.
You should degenerate,
I fright revenge you slake,
More right revenge can never be,
Than this revenge to make.
Al ill that may be thought,
Al mischief under skies,
Were piety compard to that
Which Tereus did devise.
She holds no longer hand,
But (Tygrelike) she took
The little boy full boistrously
Who now for terror quooke
And (craving mothers help,)
She (mother) took a blade,
And in her sons small tender heart
An open wound she made.
The cruel deed dispatched,
Between the sisters twain
They tore in pieces quarterly
The corpse which they had slain.
Some part, they hoong on hooks,
The rest they laid to fire,
And on the table caused it,
Be set before the sire.
And counterfaite a cause
(As Grecians order then)
That at such feasts (but only one)
They might abide no men.
He knowing not their craft,
Sat down alone to eat,
And hungerly his own warm blood
Devoured there for meat.
His oversight was such,
That he for It is sent,
Whose murdered members in his mawe,
He privily had pent.
No longer Progne then,
Her joy of grief could hide,
The thing thou seekst (o wretch
Within thee does abide. (quoth she)
VVherwith (he waxing wroth)
And searching for his son)
Came forth at length, fair Philomene
By whom the grief begone,
And (clokt in Bacchus copes,
VVherwith she then was cladde,)
In fathers bosom cast the head
Of It is selly ladde:
Nor ever in her life
Had more desire to speak,
Tha^ now: whereby her madding mood
Might al her malice wreake.
The Thracian prince stert up,
Whose heart did boil in breast,
To feel the food and see the sauce,
Which he could not digest.
And armed (as he was)
He followed both the Greeks,
On whom (by smarte of sword, and
A sharp revenge he sekes. flame)
But when the heavenly benche,
These bloody deeds did see,
And found that blood still couits blood
And so none end could be.
They then by their forsight
Thought meet to stinte the strife,
And so restraind the murdring king,
From sister and from wife.
So that by their decree,
The youngest daughter fled
Into the thicks, where covertly,
A cloister life she led.
And yet to ease her woe,
She worthily can sing,
And as thou hearst, ca^ please the ears
Of many men in spring.
The eldest dame and wife
A Swallowe was assignde,
And builds in smoky chimney tops
And flies against the wind.
The king him self condemnde,
A Lapwing for to be,
Who for his young ones cries alwais,
Yet never can them see.
The lad a Pheasaunt cock
For his degree has gaind,
Whose blouddie plumes declare the blood
VVherwith his face was staind.
But there to turn my tale, An expotion of al such notes as the nightingale
do^ commonly. use to sing

The which I came to tell,
The youngest dame to forests fled,
And there is dampnde to dwell.
And Nightingale now namde
Which (Philomela hight)
Delights for (fear of force again)
To sing always by night.
But when the sun to west,
Does bend his weerie course,
Then Phylomene records the rewth,
Which craves just remorse.
1 And for her foremost note,
Tereu Tereu, does sing,
Complaining still upon the name
Of that false Thracian king.
Much like the child at schole
With byrchen rodds sore beaten,
If when he go to bed at night
His master chance to threaten,
In every dream he starts,
And (o good master) cries,
Even so this bird upon that name,
Her foremost note replies.
Or as the red breast byrds,
Whom pretty Merlynes hold
Full fast in foot, by winters night
To fend themselves from cold:
Though afterward the hawk,
For pity let them escape,
Yet all that day, they feed in fear,
And doubt a second rape.
And in the nexter night,
Full many times do cry,
Remembering yet the ruthful plight
Wherein they late did lie.
Even so this selly bird,
Though now transformde in kind,
Yet evermore her pangs forepast,
She bears still in mind.
And in her foremost note,
She notes that cruel name,
By whom she lost her pleasant speech
And foiled was in fame.
2 Her second note is fie,
In Greek and latin phy,
In english fie, and every tongue
That ever yet read I.
Which word declares disdain,
Or loathsome leying by
Of any thing we taste, hear, touch,
Smell, or behold with eye.
In taste, phy shows some sour,
In hearing, some discord,
In touch, some foul or filthy toye,
In smell, some sent abhorde.
In sight, some loathsome look,
And every kind of way,
This by word phy betokneth bad,
And things to cast away.
So that it semes her well,
Phy, phy, phy, phy, to sing,
Since phy befytteth him so well
In every kind of thing.
Phy filthy lecher lewd,
Phy false unto thy wife,
Phy coward phy, (on womankinde)
To use thy cruel knife.
Phy for thou were unkind,
Phy false, and foul forsworn,
Phy mo^ster made of murdring mould
Whose like was never borne.
Phy agony of age,
Phy overthrow of youth,
Phy mirror of mischeuousnesse,
Phy, tipe of al untruth.
Phy fayning forced tears,
Phy forging fine excuse,
Phy perjury, fie blasphemy,
Phy bed of al abuse.
These phyes, and many more,
Pore Philomene may mean,
And in her self she finds percase,
Some phy that was unclean.
For though his foul offense,
May not defended be,
Her sister yet, and she transgrest,
Though not so deep as he.
His doom came by deserte,
Their deeds grew by disdain,
But men must leave revenge to Gods,
What wrong soever reign.
Then Progne phy for thee,
Which kildst thine only child,
Phy on the cruel crabbed heart
Which was not movde with mild.
Phy phy, thou close conveydst
A secret il unseen.
Where (good to keep in councelclose)
Had putrifide thy spleen.
Phy on thy sisters fact,
And phy her self does sing,
Whose lack of tongue nere touched her so
As when it could not sting.
Phy on us both says she,
The father only faulted,
And we (the father free therewhile)
The selly son assalted.
3 The next note to her phy
Is Iug, Iug, Iug, I guess,
That might I leave to latynists
By learning to express.
Some commentaries make
About it much ado:
If it should only Iugum mean
Or Jugulator too.
Some think that Iugum is
The Iug, she iugleth so,
But Iugulator is the word
That doubleth al her woe.
For when she thinks there on,
She bears them both in mind,
Him, breaker of his bond in bed,
Her, killer of her kind.
As fast as furies force
Her thoughts on him to think,
So fast her conscience choks her up,
And woe to wrong does link.
At last (by grief constrainde)
It boldly breaks out,
And makes the hollow woods to ring
With Echo round about.
4 Her next most note (to note)
I need no help at al,
For I my self the party am
On whom she then does call.
She calls on Nemesis
And Nemesis am I,
The Goddess of al just revenge,
Who let no blame go by.
This bridle bost with gold,
I bear in my left hand,
To hold men back in rashest rage,
Until the cause be scand.
And such as like that bitte
And bear it willingly,
May escape this scourge in my right hand
Although they trod awry.
But if they hold on head,
And scorn to bear my yoke,
Often times they buy the rostful dear,
It smells of the smoke.
This is the cause (sir Squire
Quoth she) that Phylomene
Does call so much upon my name,
She to my laws does lean:
She feels a just revenge.
Of that which she has done,
Constrainde to use the day for night,
And makes the moon her sun.
Ne can she now complain,
(Although she lost her tongue)
For since that time, ne yet before,
No bird so swetely soong.
That gift we Gods her gave,
To countervaile her woe,
I sat on bench in heaven my self
When it was granted so.
And though her foe be fled,
But whither knows not she,
And like her self transformed eke
A selly bird to be:
On him this sharp revenge
The Gods and I did take,
He neither can behold his brats,
Nor is belovde of make.
As soon as coals of kind
Have warmed him to do
The selly shift of duties dole
Which him belongs to:
His hen straight way him hates,
And flies far him fro,
And close conueis her eggs from him,
As from her mortal foe.
As soon as she has hatched,
Her little young ones run,
For fear their dame should serve the^ efte,
As Progne had begone.
And round about the fields
The furious father flies,
To seek his son, and filles the air
With loud lamenting cries.
This loathsome life he leads,
By our almighty dome,
And thus sings she, where company
But very seldom come.
Now lest my faithful tale
For fable should be taken,
And thereupon my courtesy,
By thee might be forsaken:
Remember al my words,
And bear them well in mind,
And make thereof a metaphore,
So shall thou quickly find,
Both profit and pastime,
In all that I thee tell:
I know thy skill will serve thereto,
And so (quoth she) farewell.
Wherewith (me thought) she flong so fast away, The author continevveth his
discourse and concludes

That scarce I could, her seemly shadow see.
At last: my staff (which was mine only stay)
Did slip, and I, must needs awaked be,
Against my will did I (God knows) awake,
For willingly I could my self content,
Seven days to sleep for Philomelas sake,
So that my sleep in such sweet thoughts were spent.
But you my Lord which read this ragged verse,
Forgive the faults of my so sleepy muse,
Let me the heast of Nemesis rehearse,
For sure I see, much sense thereof ensues.
I seem to see (my Lord) that lechers lust,
Procures the plague, and vengaunce of the highest,
I may not say, but God is good and just,
Although he scourge the furdest for the nighest:
The fathers fault lights sometime on the son,
Yea four discents it bears the burden still,
Whereby it falls (when vain delight is done)
That dole steps in and wields the world at will.
O whoredom, whoredom, hope for no good hap,
The best is bad that lights on lechery
And (al well weyed) he sits in Fortunes lap,
Which feels no sharper scourge than beggary.
You princes peers you comely courting knights,
Which use al art to mar the maidens minds,
Which win al dames with bait of fond delights,
Which beauty force, to loose what bounty binds:
Think on the scourge that Nemesis does bear,
Remember this, that God (although he wink)
Does see al sins that ever secret were.
(Vae vobis) then which still in sin do sink.
Gods mercy lends you brydles for desire,
Hold back betime for fear you catch a foil,
The flesh may spur to everlasting fire,
But sure, that horse which tyreth like a roile,
And lothes the grief of his forgalded sides,
Is better, much than is the harbrainde colte
Which headlong runs and for no bridle bydes,
But huntes for sin in every hill and holte.
He which is single, let him spare to spil
The flower of force, which makes a famous man:
Lest when he comes to matrimonies will,
His fynest grain be burnt, and full of branne.
He that is yokte and has a wedded wife,
Be well content with that which may suffyse,
And (were no God) yet fear of worldly strife
Might make him loathe the bed where Lays lies:
For though Pandyons daughter Progne she,
Were so transformde into a fethered foul,
Yet seems she not withouten heirs to be,
Who (wrongde like her) full angrely can scoule,
And bear in breast a right revenging mode,
Til time and place, may serve to work their will.
Ye a surely some, the best of all the brood
(If they had might) with furious force would kill.
But force them not, whose force is not to force.
And way their words as blasts of blustering wind,
Which comes full calm, when storms are past by course:
Yet God above that ca^ both lose and bind,
VVil not so soon appeased be therefore,
He makes the male, of female to be hated,
He makes the sire go sighing wondrous sore,
Because the son of such is seldom rated.
I mean the sons of such rash sinning sires,
Are seldom seen to run a ruly race.
But plagude (be like) by fathers foul desires
Dogadde a broad, and lack the guide of grace.
Then (Lapwinglike) the father flies about,
And howles and cries to see his children stray,
Where he him self (and no man better) might
Have taught his bratts to take a better way.
Thus men (my Lord) be Metamorphosed,
From seemly shape, to byrds, and ougly beasts:
Yea brauest dames, (if they amiss once tredde)
Find bitter sauce, for all their pleasant feasts.
They must in fine condemned be to dwell
In thickes unseen, in mewes for minyons made,
Until at last, (if they can bryde it well)
They may chop chalk, and take some better trade.
Bear with me (Lord) my lusting days are done,
Fair Phylomene for bad me fair and flat
To like such love, as is with lust begone.
The lawful love is best, and I like that.
Then if you see, that (Lapwinglike) I chance,
To leap again, beyond my lawful reach,
(I take hard task) or but to give a glaunce,
At bewties blase: for such a wilful breach,
Of promise made, my Lord shall do no wrong,
To say (George) think on Phylomelaes song.
FINIS. Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
ANd thus my very good L. may se how cobbler like I have clouted a new patch to
an old sole, beginning this co^plainte of Philomene, in April, 1562.
continuing it a little further in April. 1575 and now, thus finished this
third day of April. 1576. A. which mine April showers are humbly sent unto
your good Lordship, for that I hope very shortly to see the May flowers of your
favor, which I desire, more than I can deserve. And yet rest Your Lordships
bownden and assured.


