THE Foot out of the Snare: WITH A DETECTION OF SUNDRY LATE practices and
Impostures of the Priests and Jesuits in England. Whereunto is added a
Catalogue of such books as in this Authors knowledge have been vented within
two years last past in London, by the Priests and their Agents.

By JOHN GEE, Master of Arts, of Exon-Colledge in OXFORD.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold at his
shop at the great South door of Paul's, 1624.

TO THE MOST REVErend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, and to the rest of the Reverend Lords Spiritual, and the right
honorable the Lords Temporal, as also to the most Worthy and Religious Knights
and Burgesses of the house of Commons, all now assembled in this happy
Parliament; I. G. an unworthy Minister of the Church, presumes to dedicate
this evidence of his repentance, and declaration of his best endeavors for the
Church of England.
IT is the safety of a Ship, to have good Pilots; the strength of a Palace, to
have sure Pillars; the security of the body, to have clear eyes; and
safeguard of sheep, to have vigilant Shepherds: So it is the safety of a
Country, and safeguard of a Kingdom, to have many wise and watchful
Counselors. We never had greater reason to bless GOD, then in contemplation
of the present time, in the perfect vision of so many principal Planets now
met together in happy Conjunction: such a King, such a Prince, such Honorable
Senators, such Assistants. Pro.
The ear that hears you, blesses you: and the eye that sees you, gives
witness to you. The blessing of Her that was ready to perish, is come upon
you. Under your shadow we are much refreshed. The God of blessing dispose of
your Counsel. We wait for you, as for the rain: and our mouths are opened
wide, as for the latter rain. Ita quisque vt audit, mouetur.

I need not, neither were it less then boldness and presumption in me (Right
honorable) to suggest unto you, of what weight and consequence those affairs
are, which his Majesty has been graciously pleased to refer to your joint
consideration and advice: neither need I repeat, how deeply you are all
interessed herein: you reverend Bishops, by your sacred profession; you the
Noble Baronage of this Realm, by your military honor, always pressed and ready
for the defense of Religion and of this Kingdom, against open Inuaders, or
secret underminers; and you the Representative Body of the Commons, in regard
of the liberty of the Subject; but most of all, the free course of the Gospel
without impeachment: by whom is not only represented, but also actuated; the
desire and zeal of the body of this kingdom, being a people true-harted, and
fervent toward God in the purity of his worship; toward our Sovereign, in
the steadfastness of obedience; and toward the Laws, in wishes and hopes that
they shall stream forth motu naturali, in their own course, without diuersion
or obstruction.

But you being at this time employed about so weighty affairs, how may I, the
meanest of the sons of my Mother, presume to interrupt you? Are there not the
Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen of the same? Do the Lords battles want
supply? whence should it be expected but from them? But I may say, with
Epictetus: Your hand ever holds an equal balance, and your Sun shines alike
on the poor and rich. It may be, one Scout may upon occasion hear and know
what an whole Army has no present notice of.

True it is, (and why should I now be ashamed to manifest it to such an
Assembly?) An evil and scandalous report is gone forth of me, in regard I was
the man that was present at the Jesuit Drury his Sermon at the Blackfriars. I
was the same day in the fore-noone at the Sermon at Pauls-Crosse: and lighting
upon some Popish company at dinner, they were much magnifying the said Drury,
who was to preach to them in the afternoon. The ample report which they
afforded him, preferring him far beyond any of the Preachers of our Church, and
depressing and vilifying the Sermons at Pauls-Crosse, in regard of him, whetted
my desire to hear his said Sermon: to which I was conducted by one Medcalfe a
Priest. This being heard of by my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, he
sent for me within few days after; and being before him, found me inclining
to their side. I laid open my self unto him and confessed I had some scruples
in Religion. Whereupon it pleased his Grace to afford me his holy counsel and
monition: which had that good effect, that albeit my foot was stepped into the
Babylonian pit, yet I often meditated of his Fatherly admonitions. Some other
speeches I received from his Domestique Chaplains, D. Goad and D. Featly: for
which I shall be bound ever to pray for them: their words left aculeos et
stimulos; Vade et ne pecca amplius, etc. piercing me the more, being recorded
in a public narration: which, my checking conscience did justly take for an
indictment to convict me, and a Trumpet to reduce me. Like the Prodigal, I now
return home with a Peccaui in my heart, mouth and pen, to God and our blessed
Mother the Church of England: to both I say, Peccaui contra coelum et te.

The reason why I presumed to present these lines to your view, and offer them
to your hands, seems to me just, because sincere; and excusable, because in
some sort necessary, in that the vastness of my fault requires, forasmuch as
from my acquaintance on the left side, I can expect little less then
indignation and machinations against me by them; whom, partly by my
relinquishment of them, but much more by disclosing some of their proceedings,
I am like to provoke in a high degree: it behooves me therefore to choose such
Refuge, as may protect me against their malice. I have touched (in a manner)
nothing else but the behavior of the Priests; whereto, I might have added
somewhat of my own knowledge, concerning the insinuations and encroachments
used by those of that stamp, who profess physic: Who, whatsoever they do
unto the bodies, infuse into the minds of many the Kings Subjects, bitter
distempers; whereby those patients tongues distaste the wholesome food of our
Church, and their hearts are stricken with antipathy against our present State.
But these things I thought fitter for your Wisdoms to cure, then for my
weakness to declare; my intent in this Treatise, having been to act the part
of unmasking the veiled fraud of the Jesuits and Priests: wherein if you
sometimes dislike the style, condemn not me for a botcher: for, their Stories I
alter not a stitch, but give you the^ lapt up in their own clouts.

If the form and phrase I use in other places be distasteful, as either too
sharp, or too light and Ironicall for one of my profession; let my matter be
my Advocate, that draws me thereunto; trusting, that I may be excused, if I
sometime light my candle at the Torch of Elias, when he sindged and smoaked out
Baals Priests from the nest of the Sanctuary. I jest but at their jesting, that
have made a jest of God, and of his blessed Saints in heaven, by casting upon
their most pure and glorious faces, the cloud, nay, the dirt and dung of ugly,
unsavory, ridiculous Fables: whereat the sounder Christians are scandalized,
wherewith the weaker are deluded and captiuated in superstition, and the very
Jews and Heathen are driven further off from listening unto the true and sacred
Mysteries of Christian Religion. For surely, no small mischief or danger is it
unto Truth, to have her precious garment eeked out with patches of falsehood,
and, upon pretense of imbellishment, to be dawbed over with the
copper-embrodery of cogging Impostures.

In regard of my own particular; hereby I hope, I shall regaine that good
opinion which I have lost, and no longer be censured by my friends and others,
as at all wavering, inclining and warping toward their side: yet withal, you
have the Character of mine heart, toward the public good of our Church and
Commonwealth. I say no more, but God give you understanding in all things. Ride
on with your honors; and, because of the Word of Truth, be courageous and
stout Nehemiahs. Such a man as I, flee? Nehem. 6.11. The deaw of Gods grace be
upon you and your children. And thus, with my incessant prayers for you, I rest,

The most humble servant of you all, to be commanded in the Lord, JOHN GEE.

THE FOOT OVT OF THE SNARE.
SAint Augustine reports, Aug. Ciuit. de Dei. l. 1.
that even in the Primitive Church, and in those better times, the Devil was
become both Leo aperte saeuiens, and Draco occulte insidians: by open and
outrageous cruelty, he showed himself a Lion; and, by his secret poisoning of
Religion, a Dragon. Yet his malicious power was curbed, and himself bound in
chains for a thousand years: so that, notwithstanding all his subtilty, Truth,
like a Palm Tree, flourished; and Christ's Cross, like Aarons Rod, did
blossom, and bring forth much fruit. But now the old Serpent is let loose, and
of late years has acted both the Lion and the Dragon without restraint; both
by policy and puisance, studying to extinguish the light of the Truth. Neither
have his attempts been effectlesse: for, what by Magogs sword in the East, and
Gogs usurped Keys in the West, he has driven Truth, like a Dove, into the
holes of the rocks, and banished Faith in many places from among men.

In Reformed Churches (especially in our Church of England) Gods Mercy has
supported his Truth, even amidst the slacknes and carelesnes of the Professors
themselves: whilst yet some, like Dinah the daughter of Jacob, Genesis 34.2
have lost their Virginity, I mean, primam et puram fidem, their first faith,
by going abroad, and have returned home impure. Some, like Salomons outlandish
women, 1 Kings 11.4
have brought-in outlandish Religion. Many at home, in stead of the voice of
the Faithful, Come, let us go up into the House of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1
say among themselves, Let us go up to Bethel, and trangresse to Gilgal, and
multiply transgressions. So that our Country, which ought to be even and
uniform, is now made like a piece of Arras, full of strange forms and
colors. But what is the reason? Besides the drowzinesse of many Lukewarm
Gospellers, there is a vigilant Tribe (I mean, the Emissaries of Rome, and
Factors for the Papacy), who are like unto Dan, and are as an Adder in the
path, which bites the horse, and makes the Rider to fall backward. Genesis 49
They make them, whom they can get to work upon by their persuasions, to become
retrograde, with the Church of Ephesus, to leave their first love, Apoc. 2
and become Apostates in matters of orthodox Christianity. Easily can they
steal away the hearts of the weaker sort: 2 Samuel 15.6
and secretly do they creep into houses, leading captive simple women laden
with sins, and led away with diverse lusts. 2 Timothy 3.6


Strange indeed it is to consider, how That Wolf-bred and Wolf-breeding Romulus
does daily send-ouer his ravening brood of Jesuits and Priests, to make hauock
and spoil, and to conclude a bloody Catastrophe to a direful Tragedy. Astant
and instant, vt Hannibal ad portas: nay, like Brennus and his Gauls, Plut.
vid. de Bren.
they have not only surprised our Suburbs, but almost taken our Capitol.

Virgil.
Galli per dumos aderant, arcemque tenebant,
Defensi tenebris and dono noct is opacae:
The Gauls came stealing-in by night through the Thickets: so these Bats, in
the twilight of our security, creep upon us, defensi tenebris. They find,
perhaps, among us a still night of negligence and drowzinesse: but they
bring-on a greater night, by the thick cloud and fogge of superstitions and
forgeries; wherein they enwrap themselves, and would ensnare us; who if they
should go on to the height of their hopes, what may we expect, but vt notent
and designent oculis ad caedem vnumquemque nostrum, etc? Cic. orat. 2. con.
Catelin.
Did they not long since, like the sons of Belial, not only cast off the
yoke of obedience, with a Nolumus hunc regnare, Luke 19.14. but even clothe
themselves in the robes of rebellion, with a Venite and occidamus, Luke 20.14?
Gunpowder Treason.
Witness one intention of theirs, which must never be forgotten. And therefore,
not without just cause, have they been of late put in mind of a second
reflecting Tragedy; which met so right with them, that well were it, if they
could apply it to themselves, according to the sense of our Sauiour's words
(which have been by diverse of my friends rung in mine ears, and I trust I
shall still ponder of and remember them), Vade, and ne pecca amplius, ne
deterius contingat tibi: Sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.
And sure, for my own particular, I make such application, and will ever
consider, that I had a fair warning Ictus Piscator sapit.
to come out from among them; non tam pede, quam pectore; non tam gradibus,
quam affectibus; not so much in motion, as in affection; leaving them to their
superstitious devotions, and never more partaking with them in any their
abominations.

But, omne beneficium petit officium: as in morality every benefit is
obligatory, and binds to some thankful duty; so more especially in Divinity,
the wonderful works of God, extended to all in general, or to any one man in
particular, in regard of special protection, do bind to a duty of
Thanksgiving.

Though I have long run upon the score, and hitherto yielded to Ingratitude,
that crafty Sinon, to keep the door of my lips, so that I have neither
discharged my conscience toward God or man, yet will I at last, with the alone
Lepe^, return to give praise. And surely, of those that escaped the danger of
the Blackfriars (an Accident for which I have been much noted, and often
pointed at), none has greater cause to offer the calves of his lips, a
grateful Sacrifice unto the Almighty, then my self. For, as my escape was not
the easiest; so my offense, the greatest: whereof, one moves me to
compunction; the other, to gratulation. Being in the midst of the Room that
fell, and though that omnes circumstantes, all (in a manner) that stood about
me, perished in that calamity, and I inuolued in the downfall, and falling,
being covered with the heaps of rubbish and dead carcases; yet it pleased God
to hasten my Escape, beyond my own expectation and humane understanding.
Surely, when I record this common downfall, which wounded others unto death,
and me but unto affright, I cannot but strike my breast, and look up into
heaven, or rather with the Publican, down to the earth, and say, What was
there, or is there in me, miserable man, that the hand of God should strike so
many on my right hand and left, and yet ouerpasse me? Surely I was no Lot, to
escape out of burning Sodom; no Noah, to be preserved in a general Deluge. If
the load of sin pressed them down that fell (alas! far be it from me to
have uncharitable conceit of their persons), that weight should have sunk me
then deeper than any of them, not only to the ground, but under ground, to
hell it self. But our good God is Master of his own work, and free Lord of his
own mercies. He bestows them where there can be no plea of merit. He
spared to crop me in the strength of my yout h, in the midst of my wandering
vanities, in the act of my bold curiosity. He has prolonged my days, that my
heart may be enlarged in thankfulness to his glorious Name; that my feet might
be enlarged, to walk the way of his Commandments; Psalm. 119.
that my eyes and understanding might be opened, to take a full view of humane
frauds, adulterating his truth, and so to abhor them. Does not he that has
plucked my feet out of the snare, and delivered me from this sudden death
(against which our Church has taught me to pray), deserve now to be praised,
toto voto, tota vita, toto pectore, toto homine; in all my life, with all my
soul, and with all my self? Yes sure, I will ever take the Cup of salvation,
and call upon his Name. I will not cease to pay my vows unto him, in despite
of our spiritual Adversary, or any his Advocates. I penned and published this
writing as a monument of my th^nkfnlnesse.
It becomes well the just to be thankful. For others that escaped, I wish
they would not so presumptuously tempt God, as some of them, whom I have heard
repine, because they had not a share in this slaughter. And what is the reason
forsooth? Because ever since that accident befell, at all the places about the
City of London, where Priests are harbored, which are not few (there being at
this present, to my knowledge, more then two hundred of them, within the City
and Suburbs), after every Mass of theirs, the Priest or Clarke starteth up
presently upon the Benediction, and calls aloud unto the people, to say three
Paternosters, and three Aue-maries for the souls of those that died at
Blackfriars. So that they think it cannot otherwise choose, but that their
souls must be by this time in heaven. And sure so think I, or else they will
never come thither. For (...), a modo, forthwith, blessed are the dead that dye
in the Lord: they rest from their labors, etc. Revel.
Bona mors iusti, propter requiem; melior, propter nouitatem; optima, propter
securitatem, says Saint Bernard. Bern. Epist. 103.
Death is to be desired, in regard of the rest, repose, and tranquillity,
wherewith it is immediately accompanied: but in the Priests erected Purgatory,
durante commoratione, Suarez to. 3. in 3. p. disp. ^4.
there is nothing but torture and torment to be expected.

I cannot, but, by the way, tell you of one that very narrowly escaped the
danger of Blackfriars, and accompanied me that night to my Lodging: his name
was Parker, one that had been long a Trader and Factor for the Papacy beyond
the seas. He told me by the way, that nothing grieved him more, then that he
had not been one of those that dyed by the aforesaid mischance. What should
make him so prodigal of his life, I know not: but sure, not long after, the
Powers divine cut the thread of his days: for, the week following, he being
the man that must carry the news over the seas to Doway, and going then to
take Priestly Orders there being need of a supply, F. Drury, F. Redyate, and
one F. Moore, being so unexpectedly, as they term it, martyred; The Proverb
is, He that was borne to be drowned, etc.
at London Bridge, at his very first setting forward, M. Parker was drowned,
with a kinswoman of his, bound for Brissels, there to take on her the habit of
a Nun. I will not comment upon these disasters, knowing, that God reserues to
himself three things; The revenge of Injuries, The glory of deeds, The
Judgment of secrets. Quae Deus occulta esse voluit, non sunt scrutanda: quae
autem manifesta fecit, non sunt negligenda; ne etenim in illis illicite
curiosi, et in his damnabiliter inueniamur ingrati. Prosp. de prouid.


I will judge of my own cause, and conclude, that the Mercy of God was of
larger extent to me, then any other. None had provoked him, or tempted him
more: and therefore, where sin abounded, there the mercy of God has abounded
much more. He is, multus ad ignoscendum, according to the Vulgar Latin, and
Because of sinners, he shall be called merciful. But why should I have entered
into the house of Rimmon, or have partaken with the abomination of the children
of Ammon? Why should I, that knew my own Fathers Courts, have gone into the
house of a stranger? Curiosity, in these kinds, cannot excuse. Calvin. instit.
Be not deceived, God will not be mocked. Eusebius.
It is dangerous with Ecebolius to be trodden under foot as unsavory salt. How
great was his glory! how infinite his beauty above his fellows, who could say
unto his Father; Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them is
lost, but the child of perdition. John 17.12.
Holy Father, keep them in thy name even them whom thou have given me, that
they may be one, as I am!

And let me here admonish all such as are facile to yield unto Popish
persuasion, and are ready to take up the old saying of the Chaldees, Mel. can.
in loc. com.
Homo quidam ex Iudaeis venit, Sacerdos, neutiquam decipiet nos: Such a Priest
will not deceive us. Sure, none sooner, though they wind as close as Iuy about
a tree, and so insinuate, as they suck no small advantage. They persuade, that
their houses are the houses of Cloe; their households, the households of
Onesiphorus. 2. Tim. 4.19.
But trust you no such undermining Jesuits: believe you not any of those
oyly-mouthed Absolons, though they speak plausible things, to steal away your
hearts from Gods Truth, and the Kings Obedience; crying as loud, The Church of
Rome, as ever the Jews did, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, The Temple of the
Lord. Ier. 7.14.
Let them not, with their golden Calves reared at Dan and Bethel, keep you
from going to serve God at Jerusalem. 1. King. 12.28.
Let them not bring you out of love with your David, your Governor, and true
Father, or with our Orthodox and Reverend Church of England, your Mother. Let
them not entrench you with their false and lying Fables; the most of which you
cannot be so absurd and dull, but to conceive and confess, that they are
forgeries, and mere fopperies. Weigh but some of them in the balance of your
understanding, which in this poor work of mine, out of their modern Authors,
I have truly collected, q^oted, and recited; and you will find, that,
according to the old plain verse, Qui leuiter credit, deceptus saeperecedit.


All that they study, is but Imposture and Legerdemaine. They will perchance
tell you of their strict Orders; that they are religious men, of the society of
Jesus, Benedictans, Franciscans, Augustines, Bernardines, Antonians, Ioannites,
Carthusians, Praemonstratentians, Cistertians, and the like; that they have
distinct habits and customs, differing one from another; that they profess
perpetual chastity, obedience, and wilful poverty, and live for the most part
a solitary life, and thence called Monks. Oh believe them not: they have Esaus
hands, though Jacobs voice: Genesis 25.22.
notwithstanding all their fair pretexts and shows, they are but as tinkling
cymbals, and green bay-trees, whereunto David compares the wicked. Psalm. 37.
The Pope dispenses with any thing here, while they be in our Kingdom. Their
penury is turned into plenty: their Chastity becomes charity, for the relieuing
collapsed Ladies wants: their Friars coat is a Gold-laced Suit, to hide their
iuggling knavery, and keep them unknown, when they are drunk in good
company; which is not seldom with them, as my self have seen in sufficient
ouerflowing measure, having been their companion ad hilaritatem; but I
protest, never ad ebrietatem. But thinking, a fair outside at the Altar shall
mend all, to tempt you to their Idolatry, they will show you their Bishops and
Priests offering up the Sacrifice of the Mass, attired in holy Vestures,
commanded (as they say) by a sacred Synod, which for their perfection are
borrowed out of the Law of Moses.

I am not so singularly conceited and fantastic, as to think, that it is not
expedient for a Minister of the Christian Church, by his decent habit to be
distinguished from the people, and adorned with some sacred significant Robe,
in the function and action of presenting public prayers unto God, or executing
the sacred Mysteries instituted by our Savior, to endure ad consummationem
mundi. But to invent and multiply indecent and theatricall habits, burdensome
in number, superfluous in signification, and superstitious in opinion of
sanctity, this may be the proper dower of Mother Rome, rather then the beauty
of the Kings Daughter, who is all glo^ious within. What a Wardrope of
habiliments and idle complements, does the superstitious Massing Priest bear
about him! the Amice, the long Albe, the Girdle, the Stole, the Maniple, the
Castula, the Napkin or Sudary, common to inferior Priests; besides the
Sandals, the purple Coat with wide sleeves, the Gloves, the Ring, the Pall or
Cope, the Crozier Staff, a Chair standing near the Altar: the last sort of
which, are more proper to the Bishops. The Pope (by the donation of the Emperor
Constantine the Great) wears, in the Celebration of the Mass, all the Robes
used by the Emperors of Rome; as, the Scarlet Coat, the short purple Cloak,
the Scepter, and the Triple Diadem, and wi^h these he is arrayed in the
Vestry. Sure I am, that our Savior and his Apostles, when they preached and
baptized, had other kind of accoutrements.

They boast much of their propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, which the
Doctors of their Church hold fit to be said in no other Language then in
Latin; yea, Rabanus auerreth, Raban. lib. 2. de cler. instit. cap. 9.
that it is no less then Sacrilege, to think of changing it into another
Tongue, which the people can understand. Now their common answer for the
peoples not understanding their public prayers, has been, That the Priest,
who pronounces them, does understand them: but many of their Priests cannot
themselves interpret those very prayers which they power forth for the people.
The Masse-Book, as it is Latin to the Vulgar, so it is Greek to the Priest: and
how Prayers, understood neither by the one nor the other, should be other then
a dead Sacrifice, I cannot understand, even by their own Tenants. Saint Paul,
1. Cor. 14.16. speaking of one, quisupplet locum Idiotae, surely intended, that
in the Church there should be at least one who should be of an higher form
then Idiota; but, for ought I ^ee, some of their Priests must be content in
their Mass, to act two parts in one; both of the Guide, and of the Idiote. For
I am sure, some of them whom I have met withal in this Kingdom, when I have
spoken Latin to them, they have not been able to distinguish whether it were
Irish or Welsh. One of their wooden Doctors I will name, called Courtney, whom
I met withal in Lancashire: he was very busy talking, that none could be
saved without hearing Mass; and that Christ and his Apostles went up and down
saying Mass, in all Villages and Countries. And I asked him, how he proved
that? He could name no Scripture or Author, but told me, He had read it in a
Book, and, perceiving me smile, said, It was in The Revelation of Saint John.
Hearing his Answer to this, I asked him another Question, which was, What might
be meant by the words so often used together in the Mass, Kirie Eleison,
Christ Eleison, Kirie Eleison. He told me, The word Kirie signified The Host;
and Eleison, Christ. No marvel now, that they maintain Ignorance to be the
Mother of Devotion, the old Proverb being still true, that They have golden
Chalices, but wooden Priests. Talking another time in London with another
Brother of his, one Father Medcalf, who lies at a Tobacco-shop in Shoo-lane, I
asked him, why he could not pray without a Pictures He replied, How can you
understand what manner of man Christ is, but by seeing him? or any Saint, but
by their Picture? or how can you pray without a Picture, but your mind will be
carried some other way? Then thought I upon that sentence of Fulgentius, It a
facile possit Christum comprehendere, quem tota terra nequit apprehendere.
Fulgent.
So easy was it with him to comprehend Christ, whom the whole world cannot
apprehend. To go on with their absurdities: One F. Leech a Jesuit, who wrote
the book called Evangelical Counsels, told me being with him in Christmas
last, That if any but hear Mass, and after hearing, be sprinkled with holy
water, and kiss the Priests garment, he could not commit that day any mortal
sin, si maxim velit, though he would never so fain. Which indeed, though
very gross and absurd, is no less than some of their Writers avouch. Barst in
lib. inst. The Propitiator, page 74. vid. Fitz-Sim. in fin. citat. in diverse.
loc.


O how do they lead along poor silly souls into the gulf of destruction, by
telling them, such and such sins are but venial; drunkenness, lying,
swearing, and (upon occasion) forswearing, but venial sins! whereas no sins
are lesser than the point of those thorns that pierced the head of Christ: pro
quibus abluendis, sanguis Christi effusus; for the washing away of which,
Christ shed drops of blood in the garden, and opened the spouts of blood on the
Cross. Our sins, in Scripture, are compared unto sands; which are very
small, con^idering them severally, and yet the greatest ship is swallowed up
of them quickly. Lactantius.
Every sin, in its own nature, has the sting of a Viper, and does wound us
mortally: yea, the least sin, legally considered, is damnable; though
euangelically, the greatest of all is pardonable. Augustine.
Inexcusabilis est omnis peccator, vel reatu originis, says S. Augustine.
Bernard.
And, Parents ante-fecerunt damnatum, quam natum, says Bernard. And so I
conclude with Elias Cretensis his words: Expeccati fumo, ortae sunt lachrymae.
Cretens. in Naz. orat. 4.


Lying, in some cases, the Papists hold not only to be no sin, but to be
lawful: and a man may forswear himself before Authority sometimes, nay, ought
to do so, under pain of damnation. Witness their Notes Anno^. in 23. c. Act.
Apost.
upon the Rhemists Testament, and diverse their Books. According to the Rule of
the Parthians, they will keep faith with none, nisi quantum expedit, but as it
serves their turn. As for Oaths, to the most of them, they are no other than
Collars for Munkies; which, upon dispensation of Superiors, they slip off
their necks at their pleasure; especially if they be such State-Papists as have
been inspired with Iesuitical Equivocations and mental Euasions: whom a
Reverend Father of our Church D. King, Bishop of London.
does blazon out by their true Epithets, and Ensigns of their Family, stiling
them (...), the falsest cozeners of the world; (...), with whom no bond of
nature, consanguinity, allegiance, alliance, affiance, wedlock, Oath,
Sacrament, stands good, if they list to dissolve it. Dij terrae, talem terris
auertite pestem: Psalm. 82.6
O ye gods of the earth, purge this Region of the air, as much as in you
lies, of these pestilent exhalations. This I the rather observe out of his
Writing, because it seems to me, to be spoken not only morally, at large,
upon general experience of their dealing, but also (in a sort) prophetically,
as by a kind of fore-instinct; I mean, the monstrous Ly termed by them, The
Bishop of London his Legacy.
implying, that himself, though not in life, yet in death, should not be free
from this their audacious forgery.

Let me proceed to a further furuay of their doctrine and religion, and
acquaint you with what I find true by my own experience. Sure I am, that the
Papists, by diverse their Impostures, have more dishonored Christ, than ever he
was by any Sect or Profession whatsoever: for, have not their best Doctors,
Bellarmine, Valentia, Vasquez, with others, been the very Patrons of damnable
Idolatry, suam perditionem sentientes, Aug. Epist. 48 ad Vinc.
feeling themselves to perish, and yet would not be reclaimed? Bellarmine and
Valentia maintaining, that there is a proper worship due to Images; Bell.
tract. and cont. de Imag.
Vasquez, implying, that the Devil, in some cases, may be adored. Vasq. l. 3.
de adorat. disp. 1. c. 5.
And howsoever, of late years, they will a little refine their doctrine
concerning Imageworship, by Distinctions and Metaphysicall Notions, yet the
practice of the people among them (to my knowledge) is no less than
Idolomania; that practice, I say, not private, or forbidden by their Guides,
but fostered, increased, and kindled by those that pretend to be the Fathers
and Pastors of their souls. Read Dauies his Catechism, Dauies Catec. page
217.
and a Book of theirs, called, The Manual of Controversies; and see whether
they do not allow of falling down to Images, of kissing them, as they do the
Pax in the Mass.

What shall I say of their much mumbling of Masses, and jumbling of Beads? If
there be twenty Priests in a house, they must all say Mass before Noon, though
there be no body by, though they sacrifice to the walls. They must have beads,
to pray by number, or else their prayers want weight. They are commanded to say
sometimes in one day an hundred and fifty Pater-nosters, as many Aue-Maries,
forty Creeds; and, if they miss but one of the right number, all is vain and
effectlesse: nay, the Confessors hold it to be a mortal ^inne, if, among so
many Prayers appointed to be said for Penance, one only be omitted. Goddard,
in his Treatise of Confession, page 40.


As concerning their Processions, Praying to the Dead, Invocation of Saints,
Ad^ration of the consecrated Host, Administration of the Sacrament under one
kind, sprinkling of Holy Water, tinkling of a Bell at the Elevation, kissing
the ground where the Priest has stood, worshipping of Relics, repeating the
name Jesus nine times together, with nines upon nines, often crossing the
forehead and the breast, their necessary wetting of their fingers in the holy
Pot, before they go toward the Altar, their kneeling down to every Priest they
meet, their ambling thrice about a Cross, their Pilgrimages, Dirges, several
sorts of Letanies, in which the Saints only are inuocated, and other like
trash, which are the very Diana of the Romish Religion, what foundation have
they in holy Scripture? Are they built upon the Rock Christ? No; but upon the
sands of humane brains; being invented, and obtruded upon the people, to
advance the benefit and honor of their Clergy. So says one of their own
Writers: An non audis dicentes grata multitudini, flectentes, fingentes, ac
refingentes religionem ad nutum and c^piditates Dominorum and coetuum; quorum
gloriam, nisi suam, pluris faciunt, quam gloriam Dei? Ebber. in prae^. in com.
Philip. super Christ. ad Cor.
Do you not hear them, how they speak plausibly to the itching ears of the
multitude, inflecting, fashioning and refashioning their religion according to
the will and wantonness of them, whose glory, next unto their own, they
prefer before the glory of God?

But shall not their own Disciples one day ^peak unto them, according to that
of Saint Augustine, Quare nos decepistis? Quare tanta mala and falsa dixistis?
Et erubescunt humanae infirmitati, and non erubescunt inuictissimae veritati.
Aug. ser. 22. de verb. apost.
Why did you seduce us? Why did you tell us so many false things; more
regarding the weakness of men, than the inuinciblenesse of Truth? Yes sure:
Necesse est, cum dies Iudicij venerit, etc. says Saint Cyprian: Cyp. l. 1. ep.
3
to your charge, the loss of so many souls, for which Christ gave his life,
will one day be laid, and a strict account exacted. Many wauing Babes were
carried away with the blast of your deceits, beaten and broken against the rock
of error; many, I say, whom Saint Paul terms Paruulos fluctuantes,
unconstant yong-ones; not so much swelling with pride, as deceived and tossed
with the rage of your Imposture. But, my beloved Countrymen, let not fuch
vipers eat out your hearts: let not the ignis fatuus of their preposterous
zeal mis-lead you: but discover the hypocrites, and send them home to hell,
where they were hatched. For, they that dare thus dally with God, no marnell,
though they be bold with your souls, consciences, your children, and your
estates, and all that belong to you. Many a poor Gentleman, that cannot rule
his wife, I know, is feign to wear their mark in capite; and somewhat they
must have in marsupio, though the other lie for it in carcere. They must be
fed with the daintiest cheer, the best wine, the best beer, the chiefest
fruits that can be got; when ofttimes the poor husband is fain to slink away
hungry to his rest.

In the end, they prove Plagiarij, stealing away their children, and sending
them beyond the seas, to their utter ruin and overthrow. This is too common a
practice. Some friends of mine One M. Dutton, a Lancashire Gentleman.
have felt the smart thereof. The Priests practice with a young man in London.
I think it will not be amiss to insert, how they dealt with a young man here in
London, who is Grandchild to the Archbishop of York, about the end of
February last. They persuaded him, what a fine life it would be to live beyond
the seas; and withal told him, that, if he would go-ouer to one of their
Colleges, he should want no maintenance: and, for that he was not fully
grounded in their religion, he was referred to one to confer withal. It
fortuned, that he came to that man that must indoctrinate him, while I was by.
I, smelling their knavery, could not rest quiet, till I had found out the young
man, and inquired his business with the Priests, with whom I had seen him
often conversant; who presently told me their project, and acquainted me,
that he must suddenly take his journey: o Saint Omers. But, my self discovering
unto him diverse of their cheats and tricks, and assuring him, that he should
find the case altered, if he went out of England; the young man, being very
ingenuous, was deterred, and (I hope) will have no more familiarity with them.
Some of the Priests Agents dealt in the same sort with a very pretty modest
Youth, one Henry Syluester (son to the no less worthy than famous Poet,
Iosuah Syluester, the Translator of Du Bartas); who, being a scholar at Suttons
Hospital near London, was drawn to such places as the Priests often frequent,
and there had books bestowed on him. They inueigled and wrought so far with
him, that he consented to be sent beyond the seas. And away they had packed
him, but that their plot was in time discovered. Many others have they of late
days seduced: but, I hope, their Kingdom is now almost at an end.

As for you who have occasion to live near the walls of these Adversaries, and
it may be, sometimes, of necessity, must converse and have some commerce with
them, take heed you be not corrupted by them. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, though with the workers. Be like unto the River
Arethusa, which passes through the Sicilian Sea, and yet takes no saltnes.
Virg. eccl. vlt.
Live blameless in the midst of a perverse and crooked generation. Phil. 2.15.


And let me now speak unto you who are my Brethren of the Ministry, and should
(in regard of your office and example) be as Angels in the Fi^mament of the
Church: Perceive you not how heresy begins to spread, as that of Arrius in the
days of Athanasius? Soz. eccl. hist.
Serpit vt Gangrena, it creeps as a Gangrene: and yet mourn you not for our
Sion in her widow-hood, nor pray for the peace of Jerusalem? Behold you not the
rank of our hollow-harted Neuteralists, who think the time is come, to pull
down our Culuer-house, our little Church? How often have thou heard them, O
God (though they whispered unto themselves) say of the enemies of our peace,
Why are the wheels of his Chariot so long a-comming? Iud. 5.28.
Expectarunt diem: They have long looked for a day. I hope they will but expect,
till their very eyes drop out of their heads. Again, understand you not, how
laborious and vigilant our Adversaries now are, forbearing no time, sparing no
pains, to captiuate and destroy? Witness the swarms of their books, which
you may hear humming up and down in every corner both of City and Country. I
speak it with grief; and in this respect, cor meum, tanquam cera liquescens:
my heart is as melting wax. I verily believe, they have vented more of their
pamphlets within this Twelue-month, then they did in forty years before. They
have Printing-presses and Booksellers almost in every corner. And how do they
by this means put their poor Disciples upon the tenters, selling that book
for forty or fifty shillings, which they might afford for eight or ten; and
that for ten, which they might afford for one? For instance, I refer you to
the Cat alogue in the latter end of this book. I speak this by the way, to
discover their extorting policy, who make a Treasury for themselves by these
means, and raise no small sums of money. You are those whom God has set up
as Lamps in his Sanctuary, to give light unto those that sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, to guide their feet into the way of Truth: hide not
your glory under a bushel; let not your beauty be eclipsed: but (as the Spirit
to the Angel of Philadelphia) Hold that which you have: Reu. 3.11.
Stand with your loins girt: Ephesians. 6.14.
Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: and remember, that
Vincenti dabitur, To him that overcomes, shall it be given: Reu. 3.
Nec paranti ad praelium, nec pugnanti ad sanguinem, multo minus te^giuersanti
ad peccatum, sed vincenti ad victoriam; Bern.
Not to him that prepares to fight, nor to him that resists to blood, much
less him that shows his back in cowardice, but to him that ouercomes to
conquest. And hence Saint Hieromes pen, like a Lance, was charged against
Vigilantius and others. Eusebius. eccl. hist. l. 3. cap. 22.
Saint Augustine, in his disputations, spoke hot words, coals of Juniper,
against the Arians, the Pelagians, the Donatists, and the Manichees. Be you as
vigilant and severe: Res postulat, the times require it: and therefore begin
to blame the Church of Ephesus, for embracing the doctrine of the Nicolaitans;
and the Church of Smyrna, for embracing the doctrine of Balaam; and the Church
of Thyatyra, for embracing the doctrine of Iezabel: and shame not to tell the
Lady of Rome, that, notwithstanding all her paintings and complexions upon her
face, the cup of fornication is in her hand. Apoc. 17.
Peter spoke as much unto Simon the Sorcerer, that he was Acts 8.23.
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; Paul unto Elymas, O full of
misc^iefe, and enemy of all righteousness; Acts 13.10.
Polycarpus, to Marcion, calling him Diaboli primogenitum, the devils
firstborn.

Strabo.
Strabo describes a certain fountain to be in Arabia beyond Jordan, which
poysoneth all Beasts that drink thereof: for which cause it is ordained, that
the Heardsmen shall make restitution for such Beasts as perish by drinking of
it; unless they prove, by violence they approached. In like sort, there is a
well of abomination: many wild Asses run thereunto to quench their thirst:
and yet they that taste thereof, perish. The Pastors of Christ's flock, who have
Peter's Pasce for their charge, if they keep not their Hold, that is, hold
their sheep within their fold, their soul shall answer for the same, except
it shall appear, they drank the deadly waters of sin, through their own
wilfulness, rather then the others negligence.

The Shepherd cannot step aside, but the Wolf is ready to seize upon his
Flock. There are many Wolves; so termed, not so much in regard of the
composition of their bodies, as the disposition of their minds; for they shall
come unto you insheepes clothing: but believe them not for inwardly they are
ravening. There are subtle Serpents, that still wait for their booty: Their
poison is like the poison of a Serpent, Psalm. 58.4.
Psalm. 58.4. or as the Apostle: Their tongue is full of deadly poison. James
3.8.
Inficit, Interficit: The infection thereof does not only begin of late to
spread, but has left many for dead, that there is little hope of their
reviving; Non aegroti, sed defuncti, being not diseased, but deceased. They
are no sooner feuerous, but their Physician holds them to a dyet-drink: they
shall not have the water of the Sanctuary, that would cool them; but Marah,
the harsh, bitter, and ill-brewed drink of damnation, to destroy them.

I have read of one Exagon, an Ambassador to Rome, being at the Consuls
command cast into a Tun of Snakes, that they licked him with their tongues,
and did him no harm: But these Snakes, though they were sent us from Rome,
bring such poison with them, non in cauda, sed in lingua, not in their tail,
but in their tongues, that with their very breath they can infect and infest.
How many souls have they so killed in our land!

Aspidis et morsu laesum dormire fatentur
In mortem, antidotum nec valuisse ferunt.
It behooves us to be in our generation, as wise as these Serpents, though as
harmless as Doves. Mat. 10.16.
Against the incantations of such Sirens, let us ring the Musical bells of
Aaron, and sing the sweet songs of Sion, that is, arm our selves with the
(...) of God, treasured up in the Scriptures: so shall not the Locusts of the
wilderness, with their Scorpion-like tails (who now swarm in such abundance)
hurt any of our little ones with the deadly sting of their contagious error:
but, having the seal of God in their foreheads, they shall be able to resist
all such as cease not to persecute the Spouse of Christ, and to make war with
her seed.

Now for the better discovery of the impious tricks and devices of the Priests
and Jesuits, and that all who meet within any of their modern books (whereof
I told you, there is such plenty) may hoot at them for most abominable
Impostors and liars. Let me entreat you to read a few of such Tales as I have
culled and collected out of their books lately sent over, the most or all of
them according to the frontispice printed at Doway; and you would think, any
solid wit could not be miscarried by them, but rather admire the poor shifts
they are driven unto, for the keeping of their weather-beaten cause aflote. So
palpably do they proceed beyond the bounds of modesty and reason, vt nemo
eorum obtestationibus et iactationibus quicquam credat, nam eos mentiri ^t
dupliciter mentiri certissimum est, says Luther. Luth. defen. v^. caen^. Fol.
381, 382.
Let none believe their protestations and vaunts: for it is most certain, they
lie, and that lowdly. If they will needs be Architecti mendaciorum, still
hammering untruths; I would advise them to lay probable foundations, and choose
such Materials as are more malleable.

To begin then with one Tale of theirs, and it is a pretty one, alleged by
one Henry Fitz-Simons Jesuit, in his book called The justification and
Exposition of the Sacrifice of the Mass, Lib. 1. page 131. Fitz-Simons lib. 1.
page 131.


In all the Tales I use their own words.
In Deep (says he), a Town of France, a woman of the Protestant Religion,
dandling her infant, that never before could speak; the child distinctly
pronounced, To Mass, To Mass. The mother, warned so admirably, went instantly
with the infant in her arms to Church, and found therein a learned man
preaching of Religion. His Sermon being ended, she felt her self so
sufficiently resolved, that, renouncing her heresy, she forthwith became
Catholic. It pleases God indeed to use the weak sometimes to confound the
strong; to employ the child, to convert the parent; and to indoctrine the
innocent, to refute the insolent: but that he should show any such Miracle, for
the justification and ratifying of that most impious and idolatrous Sacrifice
of the Mass, is beyond the lists of reason, I may well say, the bounds of
Christian faith, to believe. But for want of better Argument, you shall hear
what other Tales have flowed from the f^oth of their understanding, to delude
the ignorant, and confirm this said Sacrifice.

Fitz-Simon Lib. 2. part. 6. page. 402.
A Mariner being supposed to be drowned, a Bishop of his Country caused Mass
to be said for him. The Mariner at that time had been some twenty days
without food, borne up and down upon the keele of a boat, and then ready for
famine to die. In the hour (as after was known) of the oblation for him, a
man appeared, and delivered him a portion of bread: whereby suddenly he had
full force and vigor; and shortly after, by a ship sailing by, he was rescued:
Fitz-Simon, qui supra, Lib. 2. part. 6. page 402. R.L.P. in lib. Instit. The
most divine Sacrifice. Fol. 36.
There was a Gentlewoman near Naples, in Italy, whose husband was a Captain:
and she, having tidings that he was slain in a battle, caused weekly Masses
to be said for him. It fell out, that this Captain was imprisoned: and after
by good testimony it appeared, that at the very same time Masses were saying
for him, his chains and fetters fell from him, and could not be fastened. Let
me help to prompt this Tale-teller, with another of the same Cut. A Friar that
had more mind to fill his own purse, then to empty Purgatory, did very
zealously and resolutely in his Sermon before his Offering, avouch and warrant
his Auditory, that whosoever came up with money to the Altar, and would think
of any his dearest friend, whom he thought to be a Prisoner in Purgatory,
should obtain this grace by that indulgence, that at the very instant of the
moneys thrown in, and clinking in the basin, the soul should leap out of
Purgatory.

R L.P. in lib. praedici. Fol. (...)
The aforesaid Author reports of another Prisoner supposed also to be dead,
whose Brother (being an Abbot) saying Mass for him: his bands fell always,
and could not restrain him, whereat his enemies at length wearied, gave him
liberty to redeem himself.

Quorsum haec? Why do they take such pains, and employ their brains upon
these Inventions, namely, to hook-in the people, and bring greist to their
Mill, that their Masses may go readily away for ready money?

But these former Inventions are but slight work, posted over by some Prentice
of the coining trade. Behold here following a more worthy Masterpiece,
wherein a chief Architect, and a more nimble Interpreter of the Puppets, is
brought-in for an Actor.

A gentlewoman of England, in one of the years of Iubile, traveled to Rome;
where being arrived, she repaired to Father Parsons, who was her Confessor,
and he administering unto her the blessed Sacrament (which, in the form of a
little Wafer, he put into her mouth), observed, she was long chewing, and
could not swallow the same: whereupon he asked her, whether she knew what it
was she received? She answered, Yes, a Wafer. At which answer of hers, Father
Parsons being much offended, he thrust his finger into her mouth, and thence
drew out a piece of red flesh, which after was nailed up against a post in a
Vespery or private Chapel within our Lady-Church: and though this were done
about some twenty years since or more, yet does that piece of flesh there
remain to be seen, very fresh and red as ever it was. Witness I. Marks
Jesuit, in a book of his written of late, and entitled, The Examination of
the new Religion, page 128. Yea, here is a knocking and long-lasting lie,
worthy to be nailed upon a post or pillory, like the ear of a Rogue or a
railing Moore. This Moore lately lost his ears in Cheapside, for speaking
against the Protestant Religion, etc.


Father Parsons was but a slender Iuggler, that could not, without putting his
finger into her mouth, suborne red for white. I doubt, that he that invented
this Tale, had sometimes been at the shop of Cowbuck the Smith (held by some
to be the putatiue Father of Parsons), and there had seen the bottom hoo^e
of a horse-foot nailed against the Posts (which use to be the triumphant
Trophies of Farriers) and therefore thought he should meet with some that would
believe, a piece of raw flesh could be as solid and lasting. But I do not
read, that this woman was ever possessed with that belief, as to adore the
foresaid post, with the forged Appendix: and I am glad to find, even in the
weaker sex, more truth, in calling a Spade, a Spade, then plain dealing in her
Master, that would mock her and others by a trick of Leigerdemaine: and
therefore the Tale-maker was here defective. For, to show the acceptance and
effect of this Miracle, he should have added, that the woman, yea and some
wisemen too, adored not only the flesh, but even the nail with which it was
crucified or rather postified. This my newcoyned word fits their newfound
Fable.

A Letter was sent unto Father Parsons at Rome, signifying unto him, that a
kinsmans house of his here in England had been for the space of forty years
together molested by Devils; but, by one Sacrifice or Mass offered by Father
Parsons, it was delivered: and his kindred who lived there, having been all
their life time before zealous Protestants, have all of them since become
Catholics. Io. Marks, in lib praedict, page 130. I believe, many houses in
England, within these forty years, especially those that pertained to the
friends and wel-wishers of Parsons and his fellows, have been much haunted
with sprites, not of the kind of Fairies, but of those of whom ingenuous
Chaucer speaks; Chaucer.
that where the Limiter Ex^rcising Priest went up and down, within his
station, there were no devils nor Hobgoblins to molest, especially the weaker
sex in the night time; the reason he gives is demonstratiue, For See, There
n'is none other Incubus but he.

But this difference I observe between the ancient Priests of a course thread,
and these refined Scraphicall Masters of the Jesuitical Loome: they drove away
Spirits only by their presence: but these can dart out a Mass from over Sea,
some thousand miles off, and with it blow away all the devils that dance in
such or such an enchanted Castle in England; whereupon, all the Protestants
that dwell within kenning, must needs turn Romanists: Test me ipso, quoth the
Devil.

There was a man in Corduba, within the con^ines of Spain, aged fourscore
years and odd; who for the space of thirty years, had been in a dead palsy,
and bedred, and then had a burning desire to hear Mass and to have the
Bishops blessing; and so caused himself, by his servants to be transported to
S. Stephens Church. The Mass heard, and he born back to his house, within few
days he (to all men's admiration) became whole and sound, and was as lusty as a
man but of twenty years. He lived eighteen years after: during which space,
he came every day thankfully to the said Church, to acknowledge the miracle.
Kelli^. in a Treatise of his, called, Gods blessing, page 71. At Corduba in
Spain? A Palsy, and yet fourscore and eighteen years? I am glad it is so
far off: I hope they will have me excused, for traveling so far to
enquire the truth. And yet, in another respect, I should wish to live in that
air, where Masses grow so medicinal, that they prolong a man's life, till he
and all his friends be weary of him: like the Isles of Arren in Ireland, which
will not let the candle of our life be blown out, though it be in the snuff:
whereof a blundering Friar wrote, Vbi tam diu viuunt homines, ita quod habeant
taed^um de suo viuere.

Leo Tuscus, a Confessor, Martyr, and Pope, upon a certain time was tempted by
a woman, who would needs kiss him; but the holy man by no means consented to
such immodesty: yet, with much struggling, she kissed his hand, whether he
would or no. Whereupon, he commanded it to be cut off, because no corrupt
flesh should remain about him. Which when the people perceived, they earnestly
intercessed our Lady for him; and she most mercifully restored it again: and
then he said Mass as before, and acknowledged our Lady his Savior. In lib.
in^it. The lives of the Martyrs, transl.
If our sacrificing Priests and ^esuites should execute so severe a Law upon
themselves, the King would have in this City many Subjects not only inwardly
lame in their obedience, but also outwardly lame in their lims. I know two
Priests in London, F.H. F.M.
who are very unable at this time to do the King any service in the wars;
for which, they have a necessary excuse, though not legal, having employed
themselves in other hot wars already: so that now they are fitter for an
Hospital, than the Camp. And yet when the time of their Lying-in is expired,
they will creep out of the shell again, and look as bold as their brethren,
laying it on with Masses, in stead of muskets. Yet (me thinks) they should use
very favorably their judical power in Confession, who themselves have had so
much need of Indulgence. To say nothing of a Catholic Maid, supposed to have
been, with others, oppressed in the ruin at the Blackfriars; whose office
has been to carry bands and shirts unto the Priests chambers: but, whatsoever
her ill luck has been, she has met with some infectious blasting vapors,
which now sequester her from all company; being posted off, by her Ghostly
Fathers, unto the Physicians.

But to leave these noisome corners, and to return to the more pleasing path of
our old wonder-working Tales: He had need be a good Surgeon, who could
cement a broken piece, especially a hand so long cut off. But this is like unto
the Tale of Saint Dominick; whose legs cut off at the knees, by praying unto
our Lady, they were, without the help of any Artist, graffed on again; Read,
concerning S. Dominick, a Book written by a I. Heigham, intit. The life of S.
Katharine of Siena.
or like that of Saint Denis, who, for a mile or two, carried his head in his
hand; or not unlike the Story of Saint Winifred: of whom they report, Her head,
once cut off, sprung and grew on again; but lopt off a second time, where it
fell, there arose a fine silver stream, or a pleasant Fountain of running
water, which at this day (as they vaunt) cures the Diseased: and the drops of
blood which Saint Winifred there lost, are yet to be seen. The place of this
beheading, and where the miracle is more extant, is at Holiwell in Wales, not
many miles off the City of Chester: whither once every year, about Mid-summer,
many superstitious Papists of Lancashire, Staffordshire, and other more remote
Countries, go in pilgrimage, especially those of the feminine and softer sex,
who keep there their Rendeuouz, meeting with diverse Priests their
acquaintance; who make it their chief Synod or Conuention for Consultation, and
promoting the Catholic Cause, as they call it; yea, and account it their
chiefest harvest for commodity and profit, in regard of the crop they then reap
by Absolutions and Indulgences. Let me add, that they were so bold, about
Mid-summer the last year, 1623. that they intruded themselves diverse times
into the Church or public Chapel of Holiwell, and there said Mass without
contradiction. It is not unlike, they will easily presume to the same liberty
here in England, which they have used of late in Ireland; The bold attempts of
the Papists in Ireland.
where they disturbed the Minister at a Funeral, erected one or two Frieries,
with open profession, in their Monastical habits, and have intruded titular
Bishops, to supplant the Churchgouernment there in force: as we see in like
manner old M. Bishop, sometimes Prisoner in the Gatehouse, now perking up and
flanting with the vain, aeriall, fantastic bubble of an Episcopal Title, far
fetched, and yet lightly given, has rambled up and down Staffordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and other places, The Bishop of Chalcedon.
under the name of the Bishop of Chalcedon; catching the ignorant, vulgar, and
devoted Romanists with the pomp of his Pontifical Attire, and that empty name
of a Bishopric: whereunto he has as much right, as he has Lands there.

I commend the thriftinesse of the Popes Holiness, in erecting Bishoprics
with such small cost. The Title stands him in nothing but a piece of parchment,
with a Bosse of Lead, signed sub annulo Piscatoris. As for jurisdiction and
revenues, there needs nothing, but to send into England this new Puppet of his
own making. The honest, liberal, Pope-holy, Lay-Catholiques of England, many
of them, especially the more ignorant, and therefore dotingly devout, are so
mad of these trumperies, and so sick of their money, that his Benedictions,
Beads, Rings, Relics, Agnus Dei, and the like, will be good Merchandise,
better (perhaps) than Virginian Tobacco, and feeding as much as that fume.
Physicians say, and experience shows, that, for a Consumption, Asses milk is
not the worst Cure: and sure, to feed a-fresh the declining and staruing
fopperies of Popery in this Land, what better nourishment, than those no small
sums which are daily squeezed from many simple burden-bearing Animals, whose
radical moisture of their purses is daily exhausted by the Horse-leeches of
Rome?

The name of Rome is able to these weak and bleared eyes to imbelish any thing,
to gild-ouer and make acceptable any Pills, though being nothing else but sheeps
trittles. A bundle of Beads worth three pence, if sanctified from Rome, shall
strain out of Catholic purses so many pounds. The Preaching, the Liturgy of
the Church of England, is but dry meat, and has no poison in it, because it is
not basted by the cookery of the Popes Court. The catechizing of children here
is unfruitful, because not performed by the sublimated, pedanticall
Instructers, the Jesuits; such reverend Fathers as Ledesme, Vause, Dauies,
Cox, Cortin. The confirmation of our children by our English Bishops, though
done in decent form, and with convenient prayer, yet (forsooth) has no sacred
influence, because our Bishops have no Crozier staff, no Holy water, no
Unctions, no Chrisme, no binding of foreheads for seven days, no deligate
Authority a DOMINO DEO NOSTRO PAPA. But, if an Eutopian, Chalcedonian,
New-nothing, Puffe-paste Titulaedo come with faculties in his budget from Rome,
where he was miraculously created ex nihilo, then what gadding, what gazing,
what prostration, to receive but one drop of that sacred deaw! The least flash
of light from the snuff of a Roman Lamp, out-shines and eclipseth all the
twinkling petty sparks of the Church of England. Strange it is, that any of our
Nation should so basely degenerate, as to captiuate their wits, wills and
spirits, to such a foraine Idol Gull; composed of palpable fiction and
diabolical fascination; whose enchanted Chalice of heathenish Drugges and
Lamian superstition has the power of Circes and Medaeas cup, to metamorphize
men into Bayards and Asses. The silly, doting Indian Nation fall down and
perform divine adoration to a rag of red cloth. Damianus a Goes, de mor. Gent.
l. 1^
The fond and brainesick Papists of our Nation do little less, when they
adore the very Cope and Vestments (belonging to Bishops and inferior Priests)
where they lie alone, falling down to them, and kissing them.

But to view their new-intruding Hierarchy a little nearer: Me thinks, the
Ministers of the Province of Canterbury, now meeting in Convocation, are very
forgetful, in suffering themselves to be destitute The new Archdeacons of
London and Lancashire.
of a worthy member, the new-stampt Archdeacon of London, M. Collington; who,
by the experience he has had in exercising Jurisdiction over his
fellow-Priests, as also in conuenting the Laics, is able, if he were called
by authority to the Synod, to give very good advice for reformation, or
deformation of the Church of England, and laying it under the Popes sacred
foot. The like defect also is in the Province of York, by the absence of the
Archdeacon of Lancaster, M. Cli^ton. No doubt, these two new Chips, cloven out
of the old Block of Rome, are the only sound Timber to build up our Church, or
rather to make wormewoodden Images, for besotted Laics to adore. I now hasten
to acquaint you with another of their tales, and it is a crafty one.

A poor old man in Rome, lost his upper garment: and being unable to buy
another, he came to the shrine of the twenty Martyrs, and prayed alowd unto
them to help him to rayments. At his departure, he met with one at the very
Church door a Priest, who delivered unto him from the Pope a Purse, that had in
it to the value of some twenty pound in silver. The poor man amazed, and not
knowing what he meant having never before in all his lifetime had the carriage
of so much money; the Priest told him, Our holy Father the Pope commanded me to
deliver it unto the next man I met going into the Church-dore, who shall have
need of it, and bid him still pray to the Martyrs. The poor man
returnedioyfully to his home, and ever after visited the place once a day.
Thomas Lee, in Tract. de Inuocat. et Adorat. Sanctor. Cap. 14. page 212. I see
no reason why this should come into the Legend of strange Narrations, for that
the Popes ears might easily be so long, by the Priests information, without
any inspiration from heaven, as to take notice of the poor man's desire, who
(belike) was not so cold for want of his coat, as he was warm with zeal, to
cry alowd for a new. But this by the way. I learn the Popes price of Martyrs,
namely, that they are worth pounds apiece. Well might the Pope have rated them
at a higher value, whenas he yearly, nay, daily gets far more in their
names, by bartering their pretended Supererogations of Martyrs and Saints.

In the year of our Lord 1612. one Lucia, an Italian Virgin, came to a Town
called Multauia, in Bohemia, where is taught the Waldensian doctrine, first
preached to them by one John Hus, and by him generally received; whereby the
traditions of the Roman Church are at this day there utterly neglected. This
Virgin understanding of diverse their strange opinions, that they denied
Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Benedictions, and hallowings of Water, the
observing of Fasting days, and the like; she spoke somewhat disgracefully of
their Religion: whereupon, she was adjudged and appointed by the Magistrate,
to be burned in a field near unto the Town where she then remained. But the
maid not willing to be led by them unto the place of Execution, they began to
tie ropes about her, and so to force her along: but she often crossing
herself, and inuocating the blessed Virgin, Mother of God, could not be
removed by the strength of ropes, or Oxen, or any power they used. At length
she vanished from them, and by a Miracle was brought unto a Nunnery, about an
hundred miles off that place; where, to this day she lives, to praise God for
her deliverance. Richard Stannihurst, in the Preface of his Book, entitled,
The Principles of Catholic Religion. He that made this tale, had a Chimaera
in his brain.

Desinet in piscem mulier formosa superne.
He had heard of an old Fable of the Gentiles, of the Image of Aesculapius,
Vid. Liuium de Vest. virgin.
that was to be brought into the City of Rome, but by no means would it
stir, though drawn with ropes, till there came a Vestall Virgin, that with
her girdle drew it after her. This botcher patcheth such a one together, and
fittens; that, in stead of an immovable Image drawn by a Virgin, here is a
Virgin that could not be drawn like the Image. And so he got a piece of bread
and cheese, and came away.

A tale to some such purpose, is repeated of one Clarence a sacred Virgin, by
the said Author; Stannihurst. vt sup.
the one as well to be believed, as the other: yet of both I say to the
Relator, Cui tua non odium, velcui portenta cachinnum
Non moueant posthac, is mihi prodigium est.


One George Sephocard, a Sc^ish Protestant happened to travail into France,
with a Brother of his: where seeing them one day go in Procession, this George
scoffed at them, but accordingly he was rewarded: for presently he fell to a
pitiful screeching, and so died. The night after his death, John Sephocard his
brother, and companion into that Country, had a pitiful Vision. He thought
he saw a thousand Devils in hideous and ugly shapes tormenting his dead
Brother. But he, having had a fair warning thereby, changed his former
Religion and course of life, and became Catholic. F. Baker in his Watchword,
page 20. Here is a Procession of lies, one after another, ordine longo. But
yet, that a man should smile at their Procession, is not strange; nor that he
should die, no marvel; nor that another should dream, no great wonder: but
they had best take heed, how they apply these narrations of unexpected deaths,
lest the Story of Blackfriars be as well inuerted upon them.

Oswald Mulser, in the County of Tiroll, near Oenipont, would not be contented
but with a Priestly Host: he received it no sooner into his mouth, but he
began to sink into the ground, which swallowed him alive. Fitz-Simon in his
Justification and Exposition of the Sacrifice to the Mass, page 100. This is a
mere fiction, intended for the magnifying of the Priesthood: it is the steame
of their impious policy, adterrorem incutiendum, et fucum faciendum populo; to
gull, terrify, and amaze the simple, ignorant people, and by bringing them
into admiration of their Priesthood, the sanctity of their attire, and the
divine potencie of their Sacrifice; by this means to inchaunt and bewitch
their innocent simple souls, and so to offer them up for a prey to their great
Idol at Rome. Surely our Savior Christ ate of the same he gave to his
Disciples: but our sublimated Priests will have finer bread then is made of
wheat. I marvel, none of our people in England sink into the ground, for
daring to eat of the same bread with the Minister.

Francis Zauier, Apostle of the East Indies, and Jesuit, as often as he
extraordinarily traveled in the Indies, so often did a Crucifixe in Spain, in
his parents house*sweat. At length, when the B. Bauiere dyed, the aforesaid
Crucifixe, during a year after, did every Friday sweat blood. Hen. Fitz-Simon
in Lib. praedict page 123. He had read, be like, the verse of the Poet: In
templis sudauit ebur pecudesque loquuti
Infandum.


Anno 36. of Henry the Eightth, a Priest did pronounce at Paul's Cross, and
there confessed in public, that he himself saying Mass, pricked his finger,
and bebloudied the Corporas with the Altar-clothes, purposing to make the
people believe, that the Host had blood miraculously. One Epachius a Priest, on
Christmas Eeue, being at Martens, resorted often to his own house to drink,
even after midnight: whereby he was made incapable to receive the blessed
Sacrament on Christmas day, as having in the beginning thereof, at midnight,
broken the Fast. The chief of the Town being allied unto him, not knowing of
such his intemperance, desired him to sing Mass. He, as he was presumptuous,
undertook to celebrate. But as he received the heavenly Host, suddenly he
began to ney like a horse, to tumble and wallow on the ground, to foam at the
mouth, and to deliver up the blessed Sacrament, which he was not able to
swallow: upon the disgorging of which, it was seen to be carried away visibly
in the air. The Priest being in this plight, he was by his kindred borne out
of the Church, remaining subject to the falling sickness all his life. Surius
in vita S. Godefridi. l. 3. c. 12. It seems to me no more strange now to hear
of a drunken Priest, of the Jesuitical fraternity, then when I read Petrus
Cluniacensis Abbas his book: in which he reports, l. 2. c. 2.
of some forty and odd Benedictan Monks, and Dominican Friars, that were most
famous and notorious Letchers and Bredenbachius has a Catalogue of others, who
were Coniurers; Lib. 1. collat. sacr. c. 13. et 45.
Thomas a Cantiprato, Th. a Cantip. l. 2. de proprutat. Apum part. 6. cap. 40.
of diverse others, who were very wicked and carnal, one of which had his mouth
and nose putrified, that none could tolerate to look on him: another of which,
a fire from heaven consumed the hands and arms to his cubits, during his
being at the Altar. Petrus Damianus Pet. Dam spec. exempt. D. 1. F. 77.
and Palladius Pallad. in hist. Lausiaca, sect. 17.
report of six other Priests that were Sodomites; one of which was hideously
deformed with a canker, another devoured of a wild beast, and the rest
miserably ended their days. All this is storied by their own Writers.

Several Miracles have been done in England and elsewhere, says F. Richard
Conway the Jesuit, by the honoring of Saints Relics; which Protestants
(says he) will not heed.

One M. Anderton, a Lancashire Gentleman, was cured of the Stone, by the
Relics he had of F. Campian the blessed Saint: and being afterward of
another disease, laid out so for dead (vt ei iam pollices ligarentur) that his
thumbes were bound; by the help of the said Martyr, his flesh being laid upon
his body, he was raised to life. Rich. Conway in Apol page 281. This is like
unto diverse the blasphemous Fables, which you shall find in the Revelations of
Saint Bridget, lib. 4. or like that of Vegas the Friar, in comment. in cap. 6.
Apoc. Aug. de vera relig. Gregor. hom. 29. in Euang. Paul. Bombin. in vit.
Mart. Campian.
What prodigies are these? What horrible imp^eti^s? Are they not Anti-christi
and Pseudo-christi, that breathe out these damnable forgeries? that shame not
to affirm, that the bones of a Traitor can raise a dead man, as did Elias his
bones? or that the flesh of Campian, could perform that which was so much
admired in our Savior himself, when he was amongst us in the flesh? How can
they but blush at these things? When Father Campian came an Apostle into
England, there was an Earthquake (say they) and so there might well be. Nay
the great bell of Westminster told of it self. But that I think is a lie.
When Father Campian was arraigned, Judge Seth his finger burst out a-bleeding
through his glove, Thames ouerflowed, and diverse other observations have our
imposturizing Renagadoes. But those saltlesse gulleries are no whit answerable
to this their villainous and profane fiction. If M. Anderton were thus
strangely raised, it is marvel his friends in Lancashire speak not of it,
with many of whom I conuersed, and am sure (had it bin true) would have recited
this tale in their discourse. Again, if Relics be thus powerful, I wonder
they had not tried, and brought some of them for the reviving of their Priests,
or any other of them that were killed at the Blackfriars: or why made they not
use of some of them, for the curing of Lady Blackstones, and such as were, by
the mischance at the Blackfriars, sore wounded?

Campians Saint-ship sure came but from Tiburn. And yet what admirable virtue
do our Papists conceive to be in the poor Relics of Story, Felton,
Sommeruile, Ard^n, Parry, Lopez, Garnet, Campian, and the rest of that
Saint-traitorly Cru^? The very paring of their nails does help to do
miracles. Their pictures are so sanctified, that they are hung over the Altars.
And I much marvel, there were never strange wonders performed by the wood of
the Tree at Tiburn; considering, it has been blessed by some of their sacred
bodies, and bedewed with their last spritefull breath. Campians girdle.
But did you never hear of Campians girdle that he wore? Then read one
Edmunds his book of miracles, and that will tell you strange news: Hierosolyma
(inquit) been nouit ad quem pertinuit: Tiburnus non ignorant, qui locus erat vbi
Pater ipse Campianus martyrio coronatus erat: Jerusalem (quoth he) knows this
girdle: for, it girdedabout the Sepulcher of our Savior. Tiburne knows it,
the place where Father Campian received his crown of martyrdom: yea, says he
further, and the Devils know it, who detest all such manner of geere, and whom
it has vexed so sore, that it has put them to extreme torments. This Girdle
cured Lepers, the blind, the dumb, all manner of diseases. If the Girdle that
embraced only his bare apparel, could do such miracles, what then should I
think of the Rope that embraced Father Campian's holy neck? yet I hear of no
wonders done by that. The besotted Egyptians, that kissed, with earnest
devotion, the Ass upon which the Idol Isis sat; and the lymphaticall Priests
of Baal, that lanced their own flesh before an Idol of wood, had as much
religion, and I think more wit than our modern Reliquesauers have. God has
given them over to the spirit of illusion, to believe unsavory lies. He that
sits in the heavens, laughs them to scorn. Psalm.
Almighty God, with his Angels and Saints, will have them (these misshapen
monsters) in derision.

Conway in apol. page 290.
A Virgin, a kinswoman of mine, says Conway an English Priest, was freed from
the Devil by anointing herself with oil, into which another Priest that
prayed for her, had mingled his Tears. I think, of late days our Romish
Priests have wept too little, and laughed too much: and that is the reason, we
are pestred with more fiends, than friends. But when the sword of justice is
drawn, and inflicted according to the weight and measure of their detestable
designs, we shall, I hope, have fewer of them come over. This Couey of
night-birds may shroud themselves warm under the gentle wings of their holy
Father at Rome. I am sure, as yet they play the Bats and Moles with some of our
Contrymen; either trenching themselves in the Mines of their Labyrinths at
home, or masking in their gold and silver abroad, in the fashion of Rake-hels
and Ruffians. How to kenne or smell a Priest.
If, about Bloomesbury or Holborne, thou meet a good smug Fellow in a gold-laced
suit, a cloak lined through with velvet, one that has good store of coin in his
purse, Rings on his fingers, a Watch in his pocket, it may be of some
thirty-pound price, a very broad-laced Band, a Stiletto by his side, a man at
his heels, willing (upon small acquaintance) to intrude into thy company, and
still desiring further to insinuate with thee; then take heed of a Jesuit, of
the prouder sort of Priests. This man has vowed poverty. Fear not to trust
him with thy wife: he has vowed also chastity.

But are Priests tears so precious, that they are an Antidote against the
poison of Devils? Oh yes: who knows not, that there is admirable power in a
Priests breath, his gloves, his hose, his girdle, his shirts, to scortch the
Devil; in his Albe, his Amice, his Maniple, and his Stole, to whip and plague
the Devil? Or has none read of the dreadful power of Holy Water, hallowed
Candles, Frankincense, Brimstone, the Book of Exorcismes, and the holy potion,
to scald, broil, and to sizle the Devil? of the dreadful power of the Cross,
and Sacrament of the Altar, to torment the Devil, and to make him roar? If any
think these strange, I refer him to a Book written by D. Harsenet, now Bishop
of Norwich, the Title whereof I have set in the Margent: A Declaration of
egregious Popish Impostures, to withdraw the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects
from their allegiance, and from the truth of Christian Religion, vid. c. 14.
15. 16. 18 and 20.
and you shall find, that one Father Edmunds, alias Weston, F. Dibdale, F.
Thomson, F. Stemp, F. Tyrrell, F. Dryland, F. Tu^ce, F. Sherwood, F.
Winkefield, F. Mud, F. Dakins, and F. Bal^rd, Priests and Jesuits, have
stoutly and strongly confirmed all this long since. If the Book cannot easily
be gotten, I wish it might be imprinted again, for that the Priests
exorcising power is there fully discovered: and I have heard, that the most of
these Books which were formerly printed, were bought-vp by Papists, who (no
question) took so much delight in reading them, that they burned as many as
they could possibly get of them. But, to acquaint you with the strange power of
a Catholic Priests breath: Plin. in hist. not.
Pliny in his Natural Story, tells us of certain people, that do anhelitu or
is enecare homines, kill men with the breath that comes from their mouths. And
Leno in the Comedy is noted to be of so strong a breath, that he had almost
blown down the young Gallant that stood in his way: but the Poets Ovid.
Virgil. Homer.
tell us, that Hell has a more deadly breathing than all; so as if a Bird do
by chance flee over the Stygian Flood, she is quelled with the smell, and falls
down stark dead. Now, the company of Priests, for potency of breath, do put
down Pliny, Leno, Hell, the Devil and all: for, the Devil, who can well
enough endure the loathsome odors and euaporations of hell, is not able to
endure the vapor issuing from the mouth of a Priest; but had rather go to
hell, than abide his smell. And hence it is (I think), that, in their baptizing
of children, the Priest breathes and spets into the mouth of the child: which
(no doubt) is very sovereign, especially if the priests lungs be but a little
vlcerated or pockified. One William Trayford, and Sarah Williams (as you shall
read in Bishop Harsenet's Book, page 71.) being possessed, Trayfords Devil
rebounded at the dint of the priests breath, and was glad to get him out at
Trayfords right ear, like a mouse, rather than he would come out jump against
the priests mouth. M^ngus the Canonist gives us a rule, that if the Devil be
stubborn, and will not obey the formidable exorcisme of the Priest, then that
the Priest shall os suum quamproxime ad energu^enum admouere.
Sarah Williams lay past all sense in a transe, being utterly bereaved of all
her senses at once: the priest no sooner came near her, but she discerned him
by the smell. Was not this a jolly rank smell? Yea, but this is but a
flea-biting to the priests gloves, his hose, his girdle, his shirts, which had
in them a dreadful power to burn out a Devil, nay, all the Devils in the
parties aforesaid possessed. Which Devils, because the priests knew so well
their names, shall not here go vncited: Page 181.
Lusty Dick, Killico, Hob, Corner-cap, Puff, Purre, Frateretto,
Fliberdigibbet, Haberdicut, Cocobatto, Maho, Kellicocam, Wilkin, Smolkin,
lusty jolly Ienkin, Portericho, Pudding of Them, Pour-dieu, Boniour,
Motubizanto, Nur, Bernon, Delicate. The chief of these Devils, when one of the
priests gloves was but put upon the possessed's hands, durst not abide, but was
scared, and went straight away. One of the great Devils was slipped, ere he was
aware, into Sarah Williams leg: Page 81.
where finding himself caught within the Priests hose which she had on, he
plunges and tumbles like a Salmon taken in a Net, and cries, Harro ho: out
alas! pull off, pull off: case the poor Devil of his pain (oh, a goodly ginne
to catch a Woodcock withal). O but let me tell you of another trick, though
not so cleanly as I could wish. Page 87.
One Fid (Landresse ^o the Devils incarnate) was washing a Buck of foul
clothes: amongst which, was one of the Priest-Exorcists shirts. The Devil
comes sneaking behind her, trips up her heels, and pitcheth her on her hip.
And wot you why the Devil played her this unmannerly trick? Because she was
washing-out a foul shirt of one of the Priests, which afterward served to whip
the Devil out of one of the possessed. There are yet other Anti-daemoniacks of
special account, which, in the Diuell-hunting sport, are in stead of little
Beagles to fill up the Cry. And they are the Amice, the Albe, and the holy
Stole; very scorpions and whips indeed: and therefore beware, Devil. page 89.
F. Edmunds no sooner laid the Amice upon Sarah Williams her face, but a spirit
puffed at it, and could not endure to let it alone. The sacred Stole was but
wound about another neck that was possessed, and it so pent and begirt the
Devil, that he stared, fumed and fomed, as he had been stark mad; and, in the
end, was squeezed out with pure violence, as water out of a squirt. An
heroical combat was performed between Maho, one of the devils, and the
Priest, during seven hours long. page 90.
Maho the devil stood upon his guard, would not come in. He was summoned by
the Priest, first, with Salve Regina, and Aue Maria; then with Mengus club,
with his whip, with Holy Water. Maho stood out, till the Priest prepared
himself to afflict him with the Maniple: and then he came in, and yielded to
parley or dialogue with the Priest in a mild and temperate voice. See the
puissance of the Catholic Romish Church, whose silliest rag has power to
change the devils roaring note, and to cause him to speak in a mild moderate
key! Latet anguis in herba: a man would little suspect, when he meets with the
Amice, the Stole, and the Maniple, wound up in a little casket, that there were
such black hel-metall within them, to excoriate and lancinate a devil. All
these tricks and many more were acted at Denham in Buckinghamshire, about the
year 1590.


But I conclude: Nisi naenijs, tricis, et puppis vsa esset Roma, poenas iam diu
dedisset: If it were not for puppets, apes-faces, and gawdes, with which Rome
allures, maskes, and disguises the poor silly people, she had long since sung
the doleful Song mentioned in holy Writ; Desolatione magn^ desolata est, et
turpitudo eius gentibus reuelata; that is, she had bin clean desolate, and
her turpitude had been opened to the eyes of all the world. As for all the
tricks and iuggling shifts (so often discovered) which the Priests, these
Exorcists, use; the Exorcist driving the Devil within the lists of the
possessed body (with Come aloft, Iack-an-apes) from one part to another: to
what end do all these their dealings tend, but to this project, that the
stande^s-by may be persuaded of some point of Popery, or of the Priests power
over the Devils?

If any Christian in these days has been truly and really possessed by the
Devil, and if the Romish Priests have truly such a scourging power to whip
out Devils, why use they it not effectually when most need is? For example ^
There was one M. Blewet, a man of great revenues, and one M. Fowell, a man no
less famoused, both of which either were or seemed to be indiuelled. How
often had they been Exorcized in this Kingdom, by Francis Kemp, by Philip
Woodward, by F. Edmunds, by F. Campian, by F. Sherwin, by F. Hill, by F.
Walpool, and diverse others, but especially, F. Collington, and F. Warmington,
who often promised, they would make the Devil speak in M. Blewet, and M.
Fowell. But as those two had many sweating combats here in England, so had
they tormentings at Loretto, Sichem, Lile, Louaine, Doway, and elsewhere beyond
the Seas; and all the consolation which they found, was to return worse, and
farther from hope of deliverance, then when they went. The Popish sanctuaries
rather added strength to the devils. And yet our Popish Thrasonical Priests
will brag and boast, that they can toss a devil like a Tennis-ball, or a Dog
in a blanket; whereat they are very nimble, especially in a possessed woman, in
whose body they can canuas a devil by contrectation and certain enchanting
nips, making him ferret up and down, from tongue to toe, from toe back again
to finger. Oh the formidable magical power of sacred anointed hands, not only
infusing chastity but also sanctity by their touch!

I could here set forth another Theater of their Exorcising plots and
attempts, to weet, their practicing with Grace Sowrebuts of Salmisburie, in the
County of Lancaster; whom one Thomson, alias Southworth, a Priest, caused to
accuse Iennet Bierly, Helen Bierly, and Jane Southworth, (the one of them her
Grandmother) of Witchcraft, of the killing of the child of Thomas Walshman,
with a Nail in the Nauill, the boiling, eating and oyling, thereby to
trans-forme themselves into diverse shapes: This was done about 14. years ago.
all which, at the Assizes holden at Lancaster, proved to be false; and the
said Grace Sowrebuts confessed, that she was persuaded and counseled to accuse
the said parties of Witchcraft, by M. Thomson, alias, M. Christopher Southworth
a Priest, who comploted this, to gain to himself some credit by exorcising,
or vnwitching her. This confession of Grace Sowrebuts, with the Examination of
others, who discovered the Priests impious dealings, was taken before William
Leigh, Bachelor in Divinity, and Edward Chisnall Esquire, two of his Majesty's
Justices of peace in that County. The Examinations were put since in print by
Thomas Pots, Esquire.
Sure, these iuggling exorcismes are but ordinary with Priests and Jesuits:
but such a malicious and bloody project of subornation, must be a master-trick
of some sublimed spirit, fit to instruct a nouice Assassine, and to read a
Lecture in the Jesuits dark chamber of meditation.

The Boy of Bilson.
For the next unmasking of our Mirabilaries. I might add the Narration of
certain Priests, practicing with the Boy of Bilson. Anno 1621. whose name was
William Perry, Son of Tho. Perry of Bilson, in the County of Stafford. But
because there has been so lately a true discovery of the notorious Impostures
of certain Romish Priests, in their pretended Exorcisme or expulsion of the
devil out of the said young Boy; I refer you to M. Rich. Baddeley his book
upon that occasion written: and I entreat you to consider, whether they deserve
not the reputation of the rarest Mounte-banks of these times. Quam falsa
dicendo voluptatem ceperint, eandem vera legendo et audiendo amittant. In
praesat. lib. praedict.


Two Maids possessed with the Virgin Mary, Michael the Arch-Angell, etc.
About some seven years since, two Catholic Maids, forsooth, the one called
Mary, the other Amye, resorting to the Gatehouse in Westminster, took such
benefit by the Priests conversation with them, being sometimes sequestered from
all the world besides, that they were cast into extaticall raptures, and
possessed, not with Devils, as the vulgar sort of those that undergo the
Priests hands, but with heavenly and glorious guests, pretended to enter into
them, and inhabit them, to the great admiration of the stupid, gullifyed,
Romanizing beholders, and to the no small renown of the Spiritual Fathers
then present; F. Benet, F. Aston, F. Palmer, F. Hanz. In very deedlaw, they
were sometimes possessed with the Virgin Mary, other-while with Saint Michael the
Arch-Angell, Saint John the Baptist, M. Molineux the Martyr, and M. Roberts the
Martyr, Two Tiburn-martyrs.
and diverse other as well Masculine as Feminine Saints; and, in the name of
these Saints, did give blessings to such as were present. The substance of
which narration has been, upon the Examination of one of their Exorcists,
confessed. Yet when this was blown abroad, and began to breed scandal unto
the Catholic cause, one of the maids gaue-ouer her pretended guest, and the
other was secretly conveyed away.

One Hanz, alias, Hance possessed with the blessed Trinity.
One of the forenamed Priests calling himself Edward Hanz, alias, Hance, borne
at Lutterworth in Leicestershire, had a trick beyond all his fellows, and
durst aspire so high, as to pretend himself to be cast into a deep admirable
ecstasy, and to be corporally possessed (horresco referens) with the blessed
Trinity. Neither was he more abominably knauish in this his Impudency, then
some of his own Coat, who were then blockishly foolish in their credulity. For
some of them, when he acted this his Trinitarian rapture come and kneeled to
him, bringing Oblations triplici numero, to present unto the Trinity,
inhabiting this Mounte-banke. Among which gifts presented by these Lozels, one
was gold-coine, an oblation never unacceptable to those that pretend creare
Creatorem. That it is no fiction in me to relate this their fiction, may
appear by the Examination of the said Hanz taken, Iulij 5. 1616. before the L.
Arcbishop of Canterbury, the LL. BB. of London, Lincoln, Rochester,
Litchfield, the Deane of Westminster, and Sir W. Bird, D. of the Law: before
whom he denies not such his rapture and possession. For being then demanded,
whether he ever took on him to be Verbatim, out of the Examination.
possessed with the blessed Trinity, saying of himself, I God the Father, that
made the world; I God the Son, that redeemed the world; I God the holy Ghost,
that sanctified the world, the glorious, blessed and undivided Trinity, do
give you my blessing, and do command you to adore me: And being further
asked, whether some that were present, did not adore him, and some other
refused: he answered, This Hans with his cogging transe, is so bold and
blasphemous, as to allude unto S. Paul's rapture, 2 Cor. 12.3
That once or twice when he was about those actions, or in the Interim of
them, he was in a transe, and his soul did see very supernatural and
admirable joys: and then whether God Almighty or an Angel (he will not
meddle with it, but refers it to God Almighty and his Church) spoke in the
name of God and the blessed Trinity, and gave a Blessing, and that himself at
those times, had no power in himself, but that the Organs of his body were
used to a supernatural purpose, and by a divine or supernatural cause: And as
God did cause the Air to speak, in giving down the Law, saying, I AM THE LORD
THY GOD; and did cause Balaams Ass to utter words: so he might cause the
Organs of this Examinates body, to speak as best pleased the will of his divine
Majesty: and the truth of the whole action, he does refer to God Almighty
and his Church. And he does say further for his part, that no humane person
whatsoever living can use the Name of the blessed Trinity; saying, I the
blessed Trinity bless you, without sin, unless God almighty do take the
creature, and speak in him: and then it is Gods own word, and not the word of
the party. But touching adoration, there was no commandment of it, to his
remembrance: and if any did it, it was no more than due to the eternal
Trinity, who may be adored in all places.

This imposture, though never so odious and blasphemous, yet flew abroad, and
was fostered as a true Miracle. For confirmation whereof, report was added,
that this holy Priest thus possessed by the Trinity, walking up and down the
streets daily amongst the Heretics, yet none of them had the power to
apprehend or lay hands on him.

I could acquaint you with other his horrible and sacrilegious impieties: but
let this suffice. It was foretold by Saint John, that their adulterous Mother
should have her mouth full of blasphemies; Apoc. 13.6.
which, to her shame, we do now observe. And according to that of the Apostle,
The spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times, some shall depart from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking
lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with an hot iron: 1. Tim.
4.1,2,3.
which being the property of false prophets, it is more then manifest, who
are specified, especially if we ponder those words of the Apostle, Such should
forbid marriage, and command men to abstain from meats, etc.

To these two last blasphemies, it will not be amiss to add what our Papists
report of Katharine of Sienna. In vit. Sanct. Katharin de Sienna.
She (forsooth) and Christ Jesus, by an admirable kind of permutation, did
enterchange their hearts; so that Christ had the heart of Katharine; and
Katharine, that of Christ. Oh you ignorant and desperately-superstitious
Pontificians, who justify this Fable! Observe you not? understand you not,
that this miraculous chaffering of hearts subuerteth a very Principle of
Christian Religion (received also by your selves) which is, that quod Christus
semel assumpsit, nunquam dimisit, what Christ did once assume (to weet, by
hypostaticall union) he never left the same.

I cannot by the way omit a fantastical relation of the Papists, which I read
in Baronius, how the Virgin Mary visited Fulbert in his sickness, and gave him
her breasts to suck, much comforting him thereby. (...) Baron. (...) 1028. ff.
5.


I believe, there escaped at that time some drops of milk from Fulbertus his
lips, he being not accustomed to suck, and those are they which are kept in a
silver image of the Virgin Mary, in her Church at Rhemes, and are there
worshipped.

There was of late, viz. an. 1621. one imprisoned either in the Gate House or
New-prison, who called himself Newton: he pretended, he had a Vision by night of
the Virgin Mary appearing unto him, and saying, Newton, see that thou do not
take the oath of allegiance. Vid. High Commission Records.
And being of this publicly examined, and asked, How he knew it to be the
Virgin Mary which appeared? he answered, I knew it was she: for, she appeared
unto me in the form of her Assumption. Of what nature that idle Vision was,
the Reader may find in M. Widrington, who handles the same, and does in part
discover the vanity thereof. A pretty Argument this was against taking the
Oath. Since I heard thereof, I asked a Priest, M. Rich.
what he thought of this vision of Newton's. He told me, that This Newton was
a very holy man, and has had other visions besides that: which if he should
repeat, would make a man tremble and quake. Heretics (quoth he) have no such
visions and heavenly apparitions. I know not whom he meant by the word
Heretics: but if he mean us Protestants, who have more reason to inuert the
phrase upon them; sure, we are not such listners to miracles. Prodigia nulla
facimus: signa nulla edimus: we work no wonders: we show no visions, as Acosta
a Jesuit of theirs once asseuerantly delivered. Acost. Ies. de salut. Indor. l
4


Our Savior Christ himself (as Saint Augustine observes) Aug. Tract. 13 in
Ioh. 3
has given us a caution against these miracle-mongers; willing us to take
heed, that we be not deceived. Mark 13.5
Yea, their own Preacher Stella (whom of late time they have gelt, as they do
all other their Writers, when they meet with any thing that makes not for their
turn) entering into this contemplation, taught publicly, that Miracles now
would rather be an hinderance unto faith. Stel. in Luc. 11


Katharine de Bus, dwelling in the City of Lile, in the County of Flanders, in
the year 1602. was possessed of the Devil; insomuch that she could be
scarce a quarter of an hour in peace, without being seized upon and troubled
by the enemy: which made her speak (to the purpose) diverse sorts of
Languages; as, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. When they came near unto her with
the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, she writhed and wrested her self
strangely, both with her legs, arms, and back, gnashing her teeth, and grizly
drawing of her mouth. The parents of this wench labored so much, that she was
diverse times exorcised, sometimes by certain Fathers of the order of the
Capuchins, sometimes by other Priests: unto whom the wicked Spirits answered in
diverse Languages, confessing at that time, that they were seven in number. They
spoke diverse injurious things, and told the faults of diverse that were present.
No means could be used for the casting out of these wicked Fiends, till there
was found a man that was come from Mountague, and had brought with him a piece
of the Oak of our Lady. Whereupon, one Sir Siluester Dennys, who came to see
her, took the said piece, and made the Patient to eat it: and immediately after
she had swallowed it, the enemy (who called himself Houilliu Clicquet and
Clinquart) showed himself in her throat; crying out, that he scorched and
burned, because of the wood which was eaten: and he added, that he was
compelled to depart, and that there remained in her as yet three. And being
demanded, by whose merit and intercession he was to depart; The wicked spirit
answered, Of Mary of Mountague. Afterward, being demanded, what sign he
would give of his departure, he^ said, He would burst a glass of the
Church-window. And immediately after, two of them departed with the said sign
of bursting the glass; and the third, saying that he was the last of ten,
cried out (in going forth) with aloud voice, Viue N. Dame de Mountague, qui
nous faict sortir: Honor be to our Lady of Mountague, who makes us to
depart. And from that day afterward, the said Katharine remained whole and
perfectly free from the possession and vexation of the enemy, inioying al^her
limbs and senses as freely as ever she did before: In lib. intit. Miracles
lately wrought by the intercession of the glorious Virgin Mary at Mountague;
and translated out of the French into English, by Rob. Chambers, Priest, page
209. 210. et seq. This buzzing relation, penned and published by the Priests
themselves, is suitable and (in a sort) parallel to that which Brerely tells us
of diverse who were dispossessed of Devils, by kissing of the Altar and the
Priests vesture. But I will cap this tale with a fresh-bleeding new Story,
fetched not far without the walls of London.

A certain Catholic collapsed Lady (whose name I spare, for the respect I
bear to her best friends) about some two or three years since, departed from
her husband (yet living) and went over to Bruxels, and was admitted into the
order of Nunnerie, I mean a Nun at large, one of the vncloistred sisters of
the order of Saint Clare, and there she remained a while, till there appeared
in her some passion incompatible with Nunship. She came over into England a
companion with a religious Jesuit, since of great note, F. D. and remaining
afterward an enlarged Nun in London, was (as it seems) more visibly taken
with a disease befalling that sex, called flatus vterinus: and thereupon, that
this matter might be carried the more cleanely, it was given out, that she
was possessed with an evil spirit, which did make her belly to swell like a
woman with child. Certain it is, many were deluded by this occasion: and the
practice of the Priests to hide her blemish, and gull poor people, was lewd
and abominable. For a certain Jesuit P. T.
(whom I could also name, being a smug, spruce, liquorish, young fellow, a fit
man to be called Father (forsooth) at every word, and of no high stature; and
so, fit to be a disguised Olympio, to act the part of Casina in Plautus, or to
act a womanized Chaerea in Terence his Eunuchus) put on the Ladies or such like
womanish apparel, with a Veil over his face: and that some found Ignaro's
about the Town might be persuaded of the Priests power for the casting out of
Devils, they were suffered to come to her chamber, where were two other Jesuits
One of these, namely, F. D. about half a year after, was a chief Actor in a
true lamentable Tragedy, yet memorable by a Downfall.
(provided for the purpose, to act their parts in this Comedy); who no sooner
fell to their prayers, and began to use their exorcizing spells, but thereupon
the supposed Lady began to utter her mind both in Italian, Latin and Greek:
which much astonished the standers by, they little dreaming of this deceit.
Neither was this all: I will yet proceed farther in this so comicall a
Narration.

It was wont, when an Interlude was to be acted in a Country Town, the first
question that an Hob-naile Spectator made, before he would pay his penny to
go in, was, Whether there be a Devil and a Fool in the play? And if the
Fool get upon the Devils back, and beat him with his Cox-combe till he
roar, the play is complete. Here is Fool upon Fool, but extra scenam, off
from the Stage; the gaping, admiring, believing Spectators. But to make this
pageant complete, this disguised Devil must roar; and that was, by the
bringing the consecrated Host in a Pix, and applying it under the head of this
Sheeknaue-Iesuite, or Hee-lubberly Lady. Then his Diuel-ship raues and
struggles, as if he would rather go to hell again, then endure the
tormenting presence of the Holy Pix. Diverse other feats were performed upon
this occasion, which I will spare to declare, till I receive Command on the one
side, or Challenge on the other.

Whether she ever heard of her self thus acted in her absence, I know not, but
sure I have heard from a credible author, that she was active, or rather
passive in one tragical part of this Mummery; which (me thinks) she should
rather some other had performed it for her. Forsooth, these Medicinal
Diuel-purgers were not to seek for the device of the consecrated potion (in
imitation of that which was given to Sarah Williams at Denham
beforementioned): this potion must make her vomit up no less then seven
Devils: and to that end, she was let down into a dark room, and there shut
up for a time without light; and, after the operation of this Diuel-scowring
vomit, light was let-in, and seven Todes showed to her in the place, as
regorged by her, and being no less then (doub^lesse) dreadful Devils.

This last circumstance I do not auerre upon knowledge, as acted by them; but
rather think it giuen-out by the party and others, to pretend, that some great
miracles have been wrought in her, or by her, that she might have the better
pretense to have been resembled unto Mary Magdalen, out of whom seven Devils
were cast.

Leaving it then in medio, till I receive better information; yet sure I am,
she carries the name of working miracles. And indeed well may it be so said,
that she and her Copes-mates the Priests do work miracles: for, to my
understanding, it is little less than a miracle, that any of our Nation,
incapable of Bedlam or a Babble, should be stricken with such stupidity, as to
believe in these Iugglers and Romish Mounte-banks.

If I should here recount all the Lies and Tales of Priests, concerning the
multitudes that have been dispossessed of Devils, by the help of a whole Beuy
of Ladies; Our Lady of Mountague, our Lady of Loretto, our Lady of Hales, and
our Lady of Sienna: no reasonable Volume would receive or contain them. I
refer him that would spend idle time in idle fables, to Rob. Chambers his
book before-cited, and to T. P. his book entitled, The History of our blessed
Lady of Loretto, and to Lipsius his dotages of our Lady of Hales, and to I.
Heigham his book entitled, The Lady of Sienna: and you will need no other
Register of their Impostures, no golden Legend. Doting Metaphrastes, fabulous
Lippoman, lying and voraginous Iacobus, superstitious Antonine, confuse
Vincentius, have so cloyed the dwellers upon earth with delusions and lies,
that (for very shame) the Papists have exploded and pared out of their
Portesses and Breuiaries many and sundry of their fabulous Histories, being
indeed forced thereunto by the derisions and outcries of Christians against
them. Yea, Claudius Espencae^s (one of their own) tells us, Espenc. in 2 ad
Tim. et digres. l. c. 1. 11.
that their Legends and Portesses were as full of idle vanities, as any Stables
could be full of dung. What fruit was there in those things, whereof you are now
ashamed? Romans 6.11


Who (me thinks) could be so bewitched, as be born in hand, that A house was
carried in the air from Palestina to Loretto; T. P. page 40.
that a Dalmatian Priest coming many miles to Loretto, and carrying up with
his hand his bowels quite pulled out of his belly, by one only prayer to our
Lady there, was instantly healed; T. P. page 181. 182. This is as true, as was
our Dalmatian ventriosus Marcus Amonius.
that a blockish Image in a wall, does work as high miracles, as ever were
performed by the eternal Son of God; that Vid. Full. Andros. Naucler.
Costerum.
Saint Francis had the prints of our Saviors wounds; that the two Tails of our
Saviors Ass, the S. John Baptis^ head showed both at Ami^s and at Rome.
two heads of Saint John the Baptist, the milk of our blessed Lady, are this day
to be seen; that at the great Franc-Sales in his introduct. to a devout life
Fitz-Simon.
Lake of Vister, Saint Patrick (who chased all the venom out of Ireland) is one
day by the Priests yet visible, and that As N^ had with the nymph Aeg^
they have then conference with him; beside, that there is a wonder-working
Purgatory of his; that a A Carmelite ^uru^tting, reported by all the Priests
now in London: and one of them swore to me, that he saw it.
Carmelit came lately to Paris, and there saying Mass, every day, at the
eleuatio^ (...) consecrated Host, himself was still elevated or hoised on
cock-horse into the air; that F. Steuens a Priest (now in London) has a
Cross, whereunto are affixed some Relics of a dead Martyr, one M. Maxfield:
which Cross being stolen from him, and carried one day almost fifty miles (as
was known), the night following, came back of its own accord, and he found it
in the morning under his beds head: If any man, being 50 miles from London,
want an Hackney to carry him back, let him hire F. Steuens galloping Cross.
which Cross, surely, must be a kin to a Stone in Anglesey, reported to be
of that property, that how-farresoeuer a man carried it in the day, it would
return of it self at night into the Island; that the very sight of Garnets straw
has made (at least) five hundred in our Kingdom become good Catholics: Vid.
the true Christian Catholic, written by I Heigham.
which if it be true, I see no reason, but every Thresher in England should
become a Romanist, because they deal with strawes, which have as perfect an
effigies of F. Garnet, as any other straw without cquiuocation ever yet had;
that M. Gennings executed at Tiburn, Vid. a Book intit. The life and death of
Edmund Gennings, page 86.
his belly being opened, his bowels cut out, and his heart in the Executioners
hand, yet the Martyr cried out, Sancte Gregori, ora pro me; Holy Gregory, pray
for me; that the same man's holy anointed Thumb, being touched by a Virgin
after his death, of it self came off, bone and flesh, from the rest of the
hand; Page 93. A Tale of Tom Thumb.
that when one M. Dakins a Priest, executed at Tiburn, was a-dying, Heigham, vt
sup. page 146.
a certain Virgin, a kinswoman of his, though many miles remote, longing after
some of the Martyrs flesh, she not knowing how to obtain her desire, yet being
full of faith, one of M. Dakins holy toes did miraculously yield it self into
her virginal hands; S^on protests, that he heard him speak the same, vid. S^
of miracles, page 25.
that Robert Parsons could make the Devil speak in any English Bishop or
Heretic whomsoever; that Robert Parsons being apprehended by a Pursuiuant at
Norwich in Cheshire, and put into a chamber fast bolted and locked upon him,
the door did three times together miraculously and of its own accord flee
open; R. Parsons a pick-lock equiuocator.
that one F. Scroop a Priest, being in a Gentleman's house in Lancashire, and
certain Pursuiuants coming to search for him, notwithstanding he was in the
midst of the Roum with them, yet he became invisible to the said Searchers; I
think, sometimes visible gold (...) make a man invisible
that one Katharine Riland within the City of London, with eating one bit of
flesh forbidden by her ghostly Father, was instantly choked; G.A.P. in his book
called, The rules of obedience, page 12. G.A P. page 41
that one Thomas Vincent of London, scoffing at a Priest saying M^ss, forthwith
fell mad, and, for many days after, was heard pronounce no other words but
these, O holy Priest, O holy Mass; that old F. Chambers taking the confession
of a Nun at Bruxels, her name M. Stan, she was me^amorphosed, and seemed unto
him a flame of fire; ^ Pi^ing^ a Priest in (...), the (...)
that whenever a certain Priest put his finger nigh Sauerius his heart,
there issued out blood and water; Tu^sel vit Save (...) c. 4.
that Holy Father Philip Nerius, upon a certain night as he was walking, and
falling into a certain ditch, was presently caught by the hairs of his head by
an Angel, and so delivered; Bar. in an. 1550
that an Image was crucified at Beritum, and did bleed; that the devil held
both S. Edmunds his hands, that he could not make the sign of the Cross;
(...) in his protest. page 162.
that M. Christopher Cusake, an Irish Jesuit, had a Crucifix which could speak?

Are these graceless saltlesse gulleries, either to be believed or
countenanced? Is it possible, that men of wit, understanding and spirit, should
be intoxicated and carried away with such muddy devices; the end of which is,
non ethnicos conuertendi, sed ipsos euertendi, Tertul. de praescr. verse.
haereticos.
not to convert and bring any unto the knowledge of the truth, but rather to*
make them wallow in the mire and sink of error; in which themselves have long
stuck fast? And by reading of all which you may find, that the Devil has no
greater cunning, nor preuaileable art, then to support the Romish Religion by
such palpable, gross, filthy and idle inventions. What is there in them (for
the most part) more then in the Poetical fiction of the Gods; the Fables of
Homer, Herodotus, Ovid, Bocace, and the rest? All is but the deceits of lying
tongues, the presumption and bragging of Inchanters, and the ceremonies of
Augurers, Pythonists and Arts-masters in Incantations: against whom the Poets
themselves had many inuectiues, and condemned the Priests of that time, as we
do the Friars of this Age: as Euripides, Eurip. Ion.
Hei mihi! versipelles vt homines semper odi,
qui componentes iniusta, deinde fr^udes adornant.


The examples before-recited, show the collusions the Priests use, upon
pretense of miraculous power: nor is their diligence less in other means,
which they use by daily solicitations for their own advantage; Priests have
their Agents.
every Priest of action, and any ability, having two Assistants assigned unto
him: whose office, like the Familiars of the Inquisition, is to straggle
abroad, for the bringing-in of game. These subseruient procurers are Laics,
and though not able to maintain Argumen^, yet pry in by-corners, nay, and put
forward in open places, to shake and try any weak wavering Protestants; and if
they can get but to intertaine conference, and give ^are to their boasts and
insinuations, then they bring them to be better hammered upon the Anuill of
their great Masters. Sometime they deal with tender game, scarce yet fledge, I
mean, young Youths, whom they inueigle, to transport to the nests of their
Seminaries. I have given you some examples before, and could afford you more.
If at the Schools o^ Westminster, Paul's, Winchester, Eaton, Christ-Church or
Suttons Hospital, there chance be some young man discontented, for the loss
of a place in the University he hoped for; or in the Universities, some young
graduate, half distracted or discouraged, upon the loss of some fellowship,
or other promotion he aspired unto; Oh then there is matter to work on; none
of these, I warrant you, shall escape without promise of better preferment;
there needs not one to inform them, what provision is made beyond the Seas at
Saint Omers, Doway, Lisbon, Louaine, Spain, Rome, for all such Nouices; what
beautiful Colleges, stately Edifices, large Revenues thereunto annexed; what
great liberty, what good company, what practice of Piety.

Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit auceps.
Like the Fowler, they can allure with diverse these pleasing notes, to tempt to
their lure, and bring the Foot within the Snare: sed terminu sistius gaudij,
mors est, Bern.
the end of this proves the most deadly and dangerous. Some of their scouts
have I known about the university of Oxford, as one Kinsman, Ford, Mason; and
diverse others could I point, at this present, here in London, who indeed are
no less perilous and pernicious then the Priests themselves. If they can
find any, for extraordinary pregnancie of wit, learning, parentage, friends,
especially possessions, fit to serve their turns, and condescend to their
expectations, by no means must such escape their fingers.

What other shifts have the Priests to wrest and wring from their poor
Disciples, wherewithal to maintain their pomp and bravery?

How a Gentlewoman of Saint Giles in the fields near London, was cheated by a
Priest.
A Gentlewoman of the parish of Saint Giles in the fields near Holborne, was
of late time sick, and being one that was well inclining and warping toward
the Popish pale or bent, sent for a Priest, a man very famous about this Town,
to come unto her, and assist her with his best comfort and counsel; who
understanding her desire, was soon with her: and being come, she acquainted
him, how the case stood between Almighty God and her distressed soul; and
having laid herself open unto him, after the form of Catholic Confession,
her Ghostly Fa her the Priest, told her, that she should not need to take any
farther thought or care of her Soul, but commit all to him, his Absolution
would be available, and by Prayer himself would intercede for her. Yet one
thing farther he must tel^ her; that she might be more certain of M rcy and
Indulgence, if there were some care had for the saying of so many Masses for
her after her death at the high Altar. The woman listened to this, and liked it
very well. Yea, but the Priest had not said all; These Masses (he told her)
could not be had without a round sum of money. She demanded of the Priest,
what the whole charges might be. He told her, About some thirty pounds. The
poor gentlewoman answered, She had not so much money in her custody; but
plate she would deliver him, sufficient to raise such a sum: and accordingly
she delivered it forthwith to his possession; who, having met with such a
booty, had little desire to visit any more his sick patient. The woman within a
short time after grew so weak in her body, that she was past ho^e of
recovery, and then sent again for her spiritual Doctor to come and administer
some of his ghostly physic to her. But my Gentleman had taken pains enough
before, and by no means would be brought the second time unto her. A good
Caucat here was, for her, and others to take heed of such cogging and
insinuating companions. It pleased God, this Gentlewoman recovered; and, making
good use of that abuse she received by this Priest in her sickness, she
altered her Religion: and now, to the comfort of diverse worthy and painful
Ministers about the City, she is become a good Church-woman, and spends the
most of her time in Gods service, going daily unto Sermons, and following
nothing so much as her devotions. The Priests insinuating with one Mistress
Reid, and fishing for her estate.
In Summer 1623. A Gentlewoman named Read, lying at that time sick at
Bednall-greene near London, and having Land of inheritance, of above five
hundred pounds, per annum, was vehemently set upon by some Jesuits and
Priests; insomuch, that she was inclineable to refer her estate to their
disposal. Whereupon, some of her near kin, repairing to a Doctor of
Divinity, of good note in London, informed him, how far the Priests had
wrought with her. Whereupon, he by conference and instruction, did set her
right again (as by Gods blessing, he has confirmed diverse others). It is
very probable, that the greatest part of that estate should have flowne beyond
the Seas, as much other our Country goods and Riches do, to vnderline the
Nunneries.

The Priests visiting M. Netlam, to get from him his Land.
In August last, one Musket a Jesuit, and another Priest, came to Francis
Netlam, lying very sick in M. Dawsons house in Fetter-Lane; and understanding
of some Lands or possessions he had, to a round value, inquired of him, how he
disposed of these his revenues, and to whom he meant to leave them after his
decease. He acquainted them, that he had brothers and sisters, poor, and of
his own Religion (to weet, Papists) who did expect them. But these insinuating
Priests, more regarding themselves then their Disciples, dealt so far with
him, that he was content to give his Lands to themselves, or whom they should
nominate, so to be at their disposing. Which granted, M. Muskets care was such,
that a Will was drawn, and the Lands thereby conveyed to the Priests, or to
some other for their use. Thereupon returning to the house where this sick
Catholic lay, they requested the woman of the house (Mistress Dawson, her
husband not being within), to be a Witness to the said Will. But she,
understanding the Contents thereof, refused so to do: neither would she
suffer them to go to the sick man's chamber, unless their intent were better.
So soon as her husband came home, she told him what the Priests would have
done. Thereupon, her husband entreated the Lecturer of the parish, and another
Minister, to persuade the said Francis Netlam, not to be so foolish and
unnatural, as to give his Land from his needy brethren, to these cheating,
coozening, and colloguing Priests. The sick man followed the counsel of these
Ministers, in whom he found more plain dealing, then in the other his
spiritual Fathers. And notwithstanding he had been long misl^d by the said
Romish Impostors, he desired to be prayed for (according to the form of our
English Church) in Saint Dunstanes in the West, at their next Wednesday
Lecture: an^ further to express his conformity to our Church, he received the
blessed Sacrament with us before his death.

Hence then observe, how industrious our Priests are, not only to get
Proselyte men and women, but also Proselyte Lands and possessions:
notwithstanding all their pretended poverty, bonus odor lucri, they will omit
no opportunity to get what gain they can. I know this to be true, that in
those parts where I have lived, and where are most Papists of any part of this
Kingdom; there is not a Popish Gentleman in all the Country, but there is a
Priest to his Steward, and disposer of household and revenues; neither does the
Owner let, set, or sell any land, without the approbation and consent of these
pretended spiritual guides. And that indeed is it which causes Papists the
more to abound, for that a Landlord led by such directors, will not suffer any
one quietly to live upon his Land, but such as the three-quarter Lord Priest
takes to be his holy children, and will be ready to do him service. A fine
engine to wheel about, and scrue whole families and Towns, by the pully which
twineth the long rope of Spiritualls reaching out ad temporalia.

Another of their engines is, If an offender come to one of these Priests to
Confession; as they inioyne him, for one part of his penance, to say so many
Pater-nosters, so many Creeds, so many Aue-maries, by scores every day: so
likewise they impose on his head a pecuniary mulct, he must pay into the hands
of some other Priest 40, 30, 20, 10, 8, or 5 pounds (according to the ability
of the party), to be distributed by the said Priest, a judicious man, in pios
vsus. Which money once fingered, is very iudiciously shared betwixt these two
shriuing Priests, who ( Iudas-like) will have no waste, et tenentes marsupium,
tenentur amarsupio.

Again, that their Lamps may want no Oil, their pockets no weight, how do
they gripe, exact and extort from their poor Disciples! If a Shoemaker, or a
Tailor, that has naught but what he earnes at his fingers ends, chance to
come under their fingers, his money is ill got, unless he offer to his holy
Father a third or fourth part of his gain. If a Country Farmer be so rich in
Tenement or Land, that he have but two Oxen to yoke, and three kine to milk,
before the years end one of the beasts must be sold, to buy the honest Priest
a new suit, perhaps of swaggering Satin. Nay, I have known a taxation such,
that out of a man's means worth ten pounds per annum, the Priest must perforce
have forty shillings a year at least. And in a great Shire, where I have
conuersed, there is not a man of that Religion, of 40 pounds a year reuenew and
upward, but he must, at his own charge, keep a Priest in his house: perhaps
some poor neighbors that are benefited hereby, contribute some small matter
toward it.

Thus, while they pretend, that they are forced to creep into private houses
for fear of persecution, they carry more dominion over the Family, then any
Parish Priest does in those Countries where Popish Religion publicly
prevails.

The Author of The.B of Londons Legacy.
I should have commended M. Muskets wit, if he could at so easy a rate have
purchased M. Netlams inheritance. Sure, it was a better plot, and his time
better spent, then in writing and forging his book, called The Bishop of London
his Legacy. A pamphlet, that I much wondered who could have so little wit, and
less grace, to be the Author thereof, till that an incendiary brother of his
F. Med.
(who took dislike at it) confessed unto me; and F. Musket himself, in some
sort, acknowledged his paines-taking therein. O perfrictam frontem! What
impudence was here joined with ignorance! How lewdly did he and his Precursor
Kellison belly Him, who is now as glorious a Star in the heavens above, Non
comet a fuit, sed Stella.
as He was a shining Lamp in the firmamenr of the Church here on earth! Sophocl.
(...), (as Sophocles commended Philoctetes) He fought a good fight, both in
defense of the faith, and in exp^gnation of Heresies, Schisms and Seditions
brought-in by these our Adversaries. And as Augustine spoke of Cyprian, Multi
erat meriti, multi pectoris, multioris, multae virtutis: Aug.
He was worthy, wise, well-spoken, religious.

Now whereas they seek to get Prosel^tes by ^hese monstrous forgeries and
trumperies, for my own part, I confess, that upon the first view and reading
of it, I was somewhat moved with wonder, and withal with possibility of
credence; which made me the more diligently to enquire of it; especially
reading there, that the Bishop was reconciled to the Church of Rome, by a
certain Priest there not named. I curiously searched among the Priests, to
learn who that might be. They named to me F. Preston: but him I find to have
constantly disauowed it, on examination: and otherwise I found good cause to
think, that he spoke his conscience in that denial. Then was I posted off to
F. Palmer a Jesuit, and that he was the very man: but asking him very
seriously and privately about it, he told me, he never saw the Bishop of
London. And verily, if this Jesuit did mean to equivocate with me, he had
no reason to speak doublely on that part, but rather to avouch, that himself
did that deed, or knew who did it, that he might the better hold me in belief
of that narration. In fine, I found this tale to be nothing but a comicall
fiction: and on better weighing this ridiculous shameless pamphlet, so belying
Integrity, so outfacing the open Sun with audacity, and so far degenerating
from all show of verity; I concluded, that the frame could not be sound, which
was built upon such a rotten foundation; nor that Religion sincer^, which ^ath
slanderous leasings for her daily food. As Tertullian says in the behalf of
the Chri^tians first persecuted by Nero, that he that knew Nero well, might
easily understand, non nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum: Tertul. in
Apologet. cont. Gentes.
it was like to be a good thing, which Nero opposed. So when I view the
shameless slanders which such Iugglers lay upon that reverend Bishop, I must
needs say, that I reverenced his memory the more, and might well think him the
more constant in his Religion, by their faining him to be wavering.

M. Anderton.
Yet, thus I must needs testify of one the most sufficient and ingenuous of
their Priests, that, notwithstanding it might make somewhat against their
common cause, he plainly told me, he was sorry that ever any such book
should be suffered to come forth; for it would do them more hurt, then any
book they ever wrote: meaning, as I take it, that the forgerie in it was too
palpable. But I find, that the book is subscribed by public authority and
particular commendation to it, nor will they inflict any censure upon the lewd
Father of this monstrous lie. And hence it is, that of late they have altered
The Title, and changed the Frontispice into a more dark phrase, making it a
Prosopopeia.

Does Master Musket, who has four or five hundred (as I have heard him boast)
that come to his chamber to a Sermon, feed them with no better fare then such
windy, light, empty, nay noysom exhalations? I can then call it but, The
dreamed bread of the sluggard. They may eat, but not be satisfied. Perhaps he
may parallel this and greater fictions out of the Golden Legend, when he
preaches upon any By-Saints-day.

But I hear (me thinks) the noise of our hooting Noctua's, the Priests and
Jesuits, blind guides, and lovers of darkness more then the light, who are so
far from believing that any cataract or filme is on their eyes, that they are
rather persuaded, themselves are the most quicke-sighted. They know and see a
far off, that although, non adhuc miserendi tempus, non adhuc exultandi dies,
the time to have mercy, The wise words of him that wrote The word of Comfort.
their appointed day be not yet come, yet they shall have a time and a day when
Vaevobis, wo^ be to their Adversaries. Their best days of late (perhaps)
seem to them but a leaden, or at best, a silver age: but a Priest now in
London told me sometime this Lent (and it has been the merry tune of many
more), that they should ere long have golden days. Many of the Jesuits have
of late cried, Woe to England. Their meaning is locked up in a misery, and how
they will explicate themselves, I know not. Nocte dieque suum gestant in
pectore ^estem; though they escape restem.

Let me then premonish the ignorant, and feebler sort especially, who are like
weak and silly flies, that they take heed how they be caught in such cobwebs,
wherein the chief thread they spinne, is, that none out of their Church can be
saved. And further, let them beware, lest they deprave their ingenuous
disposition, in tampering with tools that may cut their fingers, and so
venture into that web of heretical fraud, which they want strength of wit to
break through. I know, that whom nature or education has made simple, heresy
will make proud.

For who more insolent then the ignorant? Which Erasmus noted long ago, Erasm.
in Spong. aduers. Hutten.
and may well be applied unto many of our English Papists, who when they might
be informed de vita Christi, et de via Christiani, they are resolved aforehand
not to be satisfied.

Oh the blindness of understanding of those that are called Lay-Catholickes!
Just here were the complaint of the Prophet, My people be in captivity,
because they be without knowledge. Esa. 5.13.
Surely, when I begin to weigh and meditate on the abuses that our Kingdom in
general, and these weak members thereof in particular, sustain by those
Hornets and Drones who flee up and down, stinging and wounding with the wily
insinuation of error, sucking and gathering honey in our gardens, yea, resting
upon diverse golden flowers; my heart begins to bleed, my bowels to yearne, and
my soul is plunged in much heaviness. For woe is me! Are we not all sons
to one Father? all Subjects to one King, cuius sub vmbra suauiter quiescimus,
we rest under his shade, and his boughs have been long distended for our
security? How grievous (alas!) is it now to him to hear, that any his
children and servants should be a prey to the Harpies of Rome; that vipers
should eat out their substance, and dispoile them of the means of the true
knowledge of Christ! All these things, unless they keep you still muffled,
you may easily discern. Are they not Lords, not only over your faith, but
also your inheritance, 1 Pet. 5.
although, according to the rule of their Canonist, Praelatio ecclesiastica
ministerium habet, non dominium: Linwood. The Priests and Jesuits in their
books pretend that they are servants to those over whom indeed they lord it.
Their office binds them (nay, the Jesuits vow ties them) to Service, rather
then Dominion. How is it possible (me thinks) that they should bring you to
that servitude as I find they do, so subiugate your understanding, and
imprison your wills, that if they command any thing, quamuis adinteritum
animaeet corporis, you are ready to obey them? and do they not accordingly
make vassals and slaves of you?

Good Friday cheer. A Procession from Holborne to Tiburne.
Yesterday being Good Friday, this present year 1624. they made some of you in
the Morning, before day, go in Procession to Tiburne, in penitential manner;
the form of which is, for a man to walk naked from the girdle up ward, and
scourge himself with a whip. The same day twelue-month last past, at a place of
your solemn meeting in London, you made one whip himself so long, till he
swouned, and was thought to be past hope of recovery, so that hot water was
instantly fetched to revive him. At Bruxels (as a Priest told me, saying he
saw it, and boasting of the meritorious work) a woman, about a year since, so
cruelly scourged her self, that she died of it. Is this Mortification, to
murder our selves, lest sin murder us, to abolish our life in the flesh,
lest we should live after the flesh? I am no enemy unto austerity of life, and
taming or chastening our bodily sinful members, Romans 5.
to bring them in subjection to the spirit, to abate the lusts of the eye, and
pride of life, to depose the Tyrant sin from his dominion: whatsoever tends
this way, for the better whetting of our members to become weapons of
righteousness, I wish were more, rather then less used in our reformed
Churches; so it be without the opinion of merit, without public ostentation,
without excess, and unnatural hating and disabling our corporal faculties.
Such kind of enormous flagellant Tragedies, prove sometime as absurd remedies
against sin, as a Philosopher did bring against sickness; who visiting his
diseased friend, that complained of the irksomeness of his disease, and desired
his advice for curing the same, or easing his pain, departed from him, and
shortly came again, and told him, he had brought a medicine to cure all his
diseases, and rid him of pain. The Patient hearing that welcome word, promised
he would take the medicine. To whom presently this Kil-cow Physicion showed
under the lap of his coat a short sword, which would make short work. To say
no more of this outrageous devotion: as it is Baalaiticall, Like Baals Priests,
who did lance their sides, etc.
we cannot, unless we wink, but see it is also Pharisaicall. If bitter
chastisement in this case be requisite, why should it not be performed as
privately, as our Savior inioyneth Mat. 6.
secret prayer in the Clozet, the door shut, etc? Must this be done before
hundreds of spectatours? Yes verily, else the price of the satisfaction, the
glory of the merit, the ouer-weight of supererogation, would be made lighter by
many an ounce. And indeed, as in this, so in all the rest of the whole pageant
of Popery, every thing must be theatricall ad pompam, else the gazing Vulgar
would not be so frequently and easily caught.

Lastly, if such enjoined penances must be performed in an ambling fashion,
with rouing abroad, would no other place serve to gad unto, but Tiburne? Is no
other place in England left sacred and unpolluted? Oh, but there is more virtue
in the goal they run unto, then in the race they undertake. It was ancient,
to visit memorias Martyrum; and so, the sending of Disciples to visit Tiburne,
makes a deep impression in their minds, of the Saint-ship of some that have
there paid their debt to our Laws. We know, Martyr and Persecutor are
Correlatiues: and so, in this action of pretended humiliation, there is
intended an increase of the Romanists hatred against the Church and State of
England, as persecuting, and guilty of the blood of those whom they adore. Thus
every step in such pilgrimage, makes those Penitents to walk further from us:
nay, in every stripe voluntarily received in that Journey, the Confessor that
enjoined this performance, thinks he scourges the Protestants.

Dear Countrymen, let me, in the spirit of meekness, and out of the
tenderness of my heart and affection enlarged toward you, a little entreat you
to consider, how you are hood-winkt and disguised. Do yet, at last, lay your
hands on your hearts, and loath these despicable Impostors, returning unto the
truth, and assuring your selves, that never any true Religion did assist and
credit it self by such iuggling shifts, tricks and devices, as the Jesuitical
brood are observed daily to practice, and many of which (I am sure) they shame
to hear of.

The Perjury of Tho Cornford Jesuit.
For example: Blush they not at this; that, one Thomas Cornford a brother of
theirs, examined before my Lords Grace of Canterbury, June 25. 1612. did first
give unto himself, the name of John Underwood, and so subscribed it; affirming
that he was a married man, and that he had married the daughter of one
Robinson in Irkinburge, where his wife at the time of his Examination remained?
He added also, he had been married unto her twelve years, and that he had by
her six children. He said he was by condition a Farmer, and that he came to
Town, to move the Lord Vaux, that himself might be Tenant to his Lordship,
for a certain house and land lying in Irkinburge, where his wife, Robinsons
daughter, remained. But this fellow, after, upon some remorce of conscience, or
fearing lest his condition and estate might by some other means be
discovered, does of himself offer to manifest unto his Grace, his condition
and profession; unto which, as it were on a second examination, he is admitted;
and then acknowledged, That for the space of six years, he was brought up in
the College of Rome; and that there he took the orders of Priesthood,
according to the manner of that Church; and that from thence, some 12 years
since, he was sent by mission into England, where by F. Garnet he was
admitted into the Society of Jesus: he acknowledges also, that his name was
Tho. Cornford, and so subscribed the same the second time, after that before
he had subsigned by the name of John Underwood.

Will you understand how this ingenuous Jesuit did conciliate such contrary
sayings of his? Thus he performed his part: Excellent equivocation.
Whereas he affirmed himself to be a married man, his meaning was, that his
wife was his Breuiarie, and that he had been married unto it 12. years: as
for his children had by Robinsons daughter, those were his ghostly and
spiritual children. The reason why he called himself a Farmer, was, because
he was so to God, according to that Text, Read rationem villicationis tuae:
Give an account of thy Farmer-ship. The reason why he said, he came to take a
Farm of the L. Vaux, was, because he was ready to do him any service for the
spiritual tilling of his soul.

Read D. Sheldons book of the Miracles of Antichrist, page 28. where you may
read of another holy brother of the Ignatian society, who did in the same sort
wilfully p^ure himself.

Thus much for my present occasion, by way of declaration, what wholesome use
(by Gods grace) I have made of the noxious and balefull weeds that grow in the
Papal garden; whereof, through my own vanity and leuity, having taken some
taste, it has pleased God to turn those poisons into an Antidote, happy for my
self, and (as I hope) not unfruitful for others.

But first, I am not ignorant, that some particulars related by me, are like
to procure me the hatred, and perhaps, some malicious machinations of those
that thought to hold me in perpetual captivity. But I protest to God, that as
I have in sincerity of heart, without malicious inuenting, or adding any thing,
given account of those passages that came to my knowledge: so I do not hate
the person of any of those, who have pretended to have been my Instructers
while I remained with them; but wish to them, as unto my own soul, a sight of
those corruptions and errors, wherein they are deeply dyed, and whereof they
did cast some tincture upon me; and also an acknowledgement of Gods Truth
resplendent in the Scriptures, a forsaking and abominating of that pernicious
trade, of being Factors and Brokers for the Papacy: The superstitions and
tyrannies whereof, I marvel, if they see not; and I much more mourn, if,
seeing and inwardly acknowledging, yet they should entertain and practice, for
the keeping the poor Lay People in awe, which I take to be one of the
chiefest Arcana Imperij, secrets of State, for the maintenance of their
religion.

Secondly, I hold my self bound in conscience, upon the sight of mine own
error, and consideration of the scandal which I have justly given, to make
public protestation of my recovery, with unfeigned and hnmble submission unto
our reverend Mother the Church of England (the most orthodox and pure Church
now extant in the world, and most suitable unto the Apostolic and Primitive
times, both for faith and discipline). Before her feet I prostrate my self
with deep sorrow of heart, that I have through rashness of heart, discontent,
or any other mis-guiding passion, played the runaway out of her family and
obedience. Wherein my fault is far the greater, forasmuch as I, by that
calling which she has vouchsafed me (although unworthy) in her family, ought
to have been a guid^ unto others, to keep their feet in the ways of Truth
and Peace. I implore her motherly indulgence, to open her lap to me, her
wandering returning child, and to vouchsafe me such pardon and absolution, as
the power of the Keys which she has received from our Savior, does afford
and extend unto penitent Delinquents. Nor did I think it sufficient, to do
this by a simple profession of the cure of my understanding; but I also held it
necessary for me to add a manifestation of such particular means as I best
knew to be used by our adversaries, as stratagems to besiege us, and snares to
entrap us. Whereupon it may perhaps please some to whom that care belongs, to
make use even of these slender informations, for the preventing of future
mischiefs in that kind, now grown very far against the Church of England.

Thirdly, it behooued me not to be forgetful of the bond of nature, and of
that duty which I owe to my aged Father, a Minister in the Diocese of Exon.
whose righteous soul has been vexed with my infamous deuiation; whose
fatherly care and pains toward me, even then when I most forgot him, and my
self, has not been wanting in his writing to me diverse Letters of Argument
and exhortation: which, together with other means, concurring with Gods mercy,
have been the loud Calls that have pierced my ears, and made me look back,
and withdraw my foot out of the horrible mire and clay wherein I stuck. Even of
him, whom above others I have deeply offended, I humbly crave fatherly pardon
and blessing, not only secretly in my heart, but more publicly and
authentically thus under my hand.

What a great debt lies upon me, not only in regard of my first being; my
education especially in learning, and fitting me for the Ministry, by his
care and cost, but also for the reparation of that discontent which he has
justly taken at my obliquity! All that I can promise and vow, with the
assistance of Gods grace, is, that I hope to pay double in future comforts, for
that which I have run arrerage by procuring fatherly sorrows. Faxit Deus.
Lastly, to touch again on that string which before I have struck, but never can
sound too often: This streaming of my pen from the fountain of my heart, runs
that course, whither all things else ought to tend, even into the Ocean of Gods
glory exalted by his Mercy, in reaching out his helping hand to such miserable
creatures as my self, entangled in danger, and ready to tumble into perdition.
To his glorious name I offer up my self, my soul and body, as a lively
reasonable sacrifice, vowing to bend al my faculties and future endeavors, to
the publishing of his Truth, and to the setting forward, by word, and by
example, that orthodox faith, and Church, which I have wickedly co^temn'd. And
in special, I make oblation of my particular thanksgiving, as a repeated
Morning and Evening Sacrifice, for the double deliverance vouchsafed me; the
one Corporal, and concerning this life; which in me, beyond expectation and
natural reason, was prolonged, when I was saved, tanquam torris erutus e
flamma, I mean, in that general and woeful downfall at the Blackfryers,
wherein many less sinners then my self breathed their last. The other
deliverance is spiritual, being in some sort a child of that mother, as
proceeding from the due cogitation of the other; I mean, the loosing of my
bands, the vnfettering of my heart and soul from the Babylonian captivity, the
dispelling of that cloud of Romish errors, which obscu^ed, though not wholly
extinguished the light of Gods Truth in me. There were (I know) that said unto
me, Psalm. 41 8.
An evil disease cleaves fast unto him: and now that he lies, he shall rise
no more. But thou (O Lord) have put a new song into my mouth: Those that sit
yet in darkness, shall see it, and fear: For, The Snare is broken, and I am
delivered. Lord, establish me in thy Truth: thy Word is Truth.

FINIS.
A CATALOGVE OR Note of such English books (to the knowledge of which I could
come) as have been printed, reprinted, or dispersed by the Priests and their
Agents in this Kingdom, within these two years last past, or thereabouts.
INprimis, the DOWAY BIBLES, that is, the old Testament only in two Volumes,
with Notes, reuised by D. Worthington, and reprinted here in London: sold for
forty shillings, which at an ordinary price might be afforded for ten. THE
NEW TESTAMENT translated by the Rhemists, and reprinted in quarto: sold for
sixteen or twenty shillings, which might be afforded for a Noble, or less.
THE SAME TESTAMENT in English, lately printed in decimo sexto: sold for twelve
shillings, which might be well afforded for four. THE ANCHOR OF CHRISTIAN
DOCTRINE, in four parts, written by D. Worthington: the three last-parts
printed in London, and sold by him at his Lodging in Turnbull street for
foureteen shillings, which might be afforded for five shillings. THE
PROTESTANTS APOLOGY, written by Brerely, reprinted and sold for seventeen
shillings, and might be afforded for six shillings, or less. SAINT AUGUSTINES
CONFESSIONS, translated by Tob. Matthew, and sold for sixteen shillings, being
but a little book in octauo, and might be afforded for two shillings
sixpence. Two other books in octauo, lately written by Tob. Matthew, and sold
very dear. THE AVTHOR AND SVESTANCE OF PROTESTANT RELIGION, written by Smith,
a Priest now in London, and sold for six shillings, and might be afforded for
twelve pence. LVTHER HIS LIFE AND DOCTRINE, a railing book, written by Louell a
Priest, who is at this present in London, sold for eight shillings, worth two
shillings. AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE PESTIFEROVS WRITINGS OF ENGLISH SECTARIES,
in two parts, written by D. Norice a Priest, now resident in London, sold for
eight shillings, might be afforded for four shillings. THE GVIDE OF FAITH,
written by the said Author, and sold at an unreasonable rate. THE
PSEVDO-SCRIPTVRIST, by the same Author, a book of some twelve sheets of paper,
and sold for five shillings. THE CHRISTIAN VOVV, by the same Author, a book of
ten sheets of paper, and sold for two shillings sixpence. The loud lying
Pamphlet, termed, THE BISHOP OF LONDONS LEGACY, written by Musket a Jesuit,
and reprinted with a preface of a new disguise: the book contains about
sixteen sheets: they squeezed from some Romish buyers, six or seven shillings
a piece. A dear price for a dirty lie. Yet I wish, they that have any belief
in it, might pay dearer for it. THE SVMMARY OF CONTROVERSIES, written by D.
Smith, sold as dear as the rest. THE NEW RELIGION, NO RELIGION, written by
one Flood a Priest now in London, sold at a high rate, and so are all the rest
following. THE SVM OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE, written in Latin by Petrus Canisius,
and translated into English by I. Heigham a Priest in London. THE TRVE
CHRISTIAN CATHOLIC, by the same Author. THE LIFE OF SAINT KATHARINE OF SIENNA,
by the same Author. THE PROTESTANTS CONSVLTATION, a dangerous book, lately
written by an unknown Author. JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH, lately come out of the
Press, Printed in London, by Simons a Carmelite now in London. Two other
Books, written by the same Author; called, THE WAY TO FIND EASE, REST, AND
REPOSE UNTO THE SOVLE. BELLARMINES STEPS in English. HIS ART OF DYING WELL, in
octauo. THE EXERCISE OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE, by S. B. THE VOCATION OF BISHOPS, by
D. Champney now in London. THE IMAGE OF BOTH CHVRCHES, by M. Pateson now in
London, a bitter and seditious book. THE EXPOSITION OF THE MASS. A TREATISE OF
THE REAL PRESENCE, by Goddard a Priest now in London. THE LOVE OF THE SOVLE,
Printed in London. THE FOLLOWERS OF CHRIST, by F. B. DEMANDS TO HERETICS, in
two parts, by D. Bristow now in London. AVRICVLAR CONFESSION. MISSALE PARVVM
PRO SACERDOTIEVS. THE OFFICE OF OUR LADY, Or the PRIMER, two or three sorts of
them lately printed. THE IVDGE, by G. M. THE RIGHT WAY TO GOD, by Pursell an
Irish Monk now in London. SIX BOOKS FVLL OF MARVELOVS PIETY AND DEVOTION,
by G. P. THE APPENDIX, by Doctor Norrice. A DEFENSE OF THE APPENDIX, written by
Master Sweet a Jesuit lying in Holborne. AN ANSWER TO THE FISHER CATCHAT IN
HIS OWN NET, by the same Author. These three last books containing but some
six sheets of paper, either of them are sold by the Authors and their Factors
for two shillings or half a crown a piece. SOLILOQVIES, by R. T. THE ROSARY
OF OUR LADY. MEDITATIONS UPON THE ROSARY. AN EXPOSITION OF THE ROSARY. THE
MYSTERIES OF THE ROSARY. AN INTRODVCTION TO A DEVOVT LIFE, by I. York, a
Jesuit now in London. MIRACLES NOT YET CEASED, by P. L. P. a saltlesse book.
THE KEY OF PARADISE. A HEAVENLY TREASVRY OF COMFORTABLE MEDITATIONS, by Antho.
Batt, a Friar now in London. THE WORD OF COMFORT, written upon occasion of the
fall of the house at the Blackfriars. THE UNCASING OF HERESY, by O. A. THE
TREASRY OF CHASTITY. THE WIDDOVVES GLASS. THE ECCLESIASTICAL PROTESTANTS
HISTORY, by D. Smith. THE GROUNDS OF THE OLD AND NEW RELIGION. THE HIDDEN
MANNA. THE WANDERING SAINTS. THE LITTLE MEMORIAL. AN OVERTHROW OF THE
PROTESTANTS PVEPIT-BAB^ES. THE UNITY OF GODS CHVRCH, by one Master Steuens a
Jesuit now in London. POINTERS MEDITATIONS. THE PROOF OF PVRGATORY. A COMFORT
AGAINST TRIBVLATION. LEDISME HIS CATECHISM, lately printed here in England.
THE RECONCILEMENT OF THE DALMATIAN BISHOP. THE POPES POWER. THE LIFE OF SAINT BEDE. A TREATISE OF FREE WILL, by Doctor Kellison Rector of the College at
Doway and now in London. THE SACRAMENTS OF THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH, by F. S. P.
DAVYES HIS CATECHISM. THE VISIBILITY OF THE CHVRCH. THE CATHOLIC GVIDE. A
TREATISE AGAINST THE MARRIAGE OF PRIESTS, by Wilson a Jesuit. A GAGGE OF THE
NEW GOSPEL. A SECOND GAGGE. THE HONOR OF GOD, by Anthony Clerk. An idle
frothy book, by a brayn-sicke man. THE PRELATE AND THE PRINCE, a seditious
book. THE RVLES OF OBEDIENCE, by G. A. P. SAINT PETER'S KEYS, by Edmund Gill,
Jesuit. SAINT AUGUSTINES RELIGION, written by Brerely, and reprinted. THE
REFORMED PROTESTANT, by Brerely. There was a Printing House suppressed about some
three years since in Lancashire, where all Brerely his works, with many other
Popish pamphlets, were printed. THE VIRGINAL VOVV, by F. S. THE MIRROVR OF
WOMEN. MEDITATIONS ON THE PASSION. A DIALOGVE BETWIXT OUR SAVIOVR AND THE
SAINTS. OBSERVATIONS, concerning the present affairs of Holland, and the
united Provinces, by You know the hand. THE INGRATITVDE OF ELIZABETH OF
ENGLAND UNTO PHILIP OF SPAIN. THE SPIRIT OF ERROVR, by D. Smith. MEDITATIONS
ON OUR SAVIOVRS WORDS ON THE CROSS. EVERY SAINTS PRAYER. THE CATHOLICS
CROWN. THE THREE CONVERSIONS reprinted, written by F. Parsons. GRENADES
MEMORIAL. GRENADES COMPENDIVM. GRENADES MEDITATIONS, Translated. THE LIFE
AND DEATH OF CARDINAL BELLARMINE. THE SHEDDING OF TEARS. PARSONS RESOLVTIONS,
reprinted Anno 1623. SIONS SONGS, or the melody of the Blessed. THE DAILY
PRACTICE. THE ENEMIES OF GOD, by M. Barlow a Priest now in London. THE HOLY
TRIVMPH. THE PROSPERITY OF THE VISIBLE CHVRCH. THE MANVALL OF PRAYERS,
reprinted. A WATCH WORD, by F. Baker. THE APOLOGIST, by Richard Conway. A
TREATISE OF THE INVOCATION AND ADORATION OF SAINTS, by Thomas Lee. THE
PRINCIPLES OF CATHOLIC RELIGION, by Richard Stannihurst. OF THE CONVERSION OF
NATIONS, of the Miracles, of the Martyrdomes, and of the union of the members
of the Catholic Church, by George Allanson lesuite. A TREATISE OF TRVE ZEAL.
F. DRVRY HIS RELIQVES, somewhat found in his study after his death. FLAGELLVM
DEI, or A Sword for Contradictors: a ridiculous pamphlet written by P. D. M.
COFFIN, against D. HALL his book, entitled The Honor of the married Clergy.
WALSINGHAM* HIS SEARCH, in quarto. WALPOOLE, against Doctor Downham, of
Antichrist. FOX HIS CALENDAR, reprinted Anno 1623. FITZ-HERBERT, of Policy and
Religion, reprinted. TREATISE OF FAITH, by F. Percy.
Faults escaped.
Page 3. a bloody catastrophe. dele. 18. Hell, Rome. 21. 40 years 12 years.
35. poison foison. 39. Aesculap. Cybele. 52. blood bled 42. 43. 44 a lie a
lowd-ringing lie. 44 Seth. Aleph. 45 bare apparel. bare neck. 44. 45. 54. 55.
46. Sword of Justice. dele. 47. one dele. 48. Hell, Auernus. 55 who, dele. 57.
his, their. 62. found fond. 70. one, dele. 87. of heart, of youth. 29. marg.
speaking, atheistical scoffing. 81. Two lines left out: the words are, This my
self did then see, together with two or three hundredth more, present at that
meeting. 67 Norwich. North-witch. 32. In marg. F. M. F. Me. 76. In marg.
omitted, This reverend Bishops most pious and constant departure, was related
by his worthy son at Paul's Cross: against the sincere Truth whereof, I do
not hear that any of those dogs can bark.

THE NAMES OF THE Romish Priests and Jesuits now resident about the City of
London, March 26. 1624.
OLD Father Bishop, the nominall Bishop of Chalcedon. F. Ouerton, his
principal Chaplain. D. Kellison, Rector of the English College at Doway. D.
Worthington, the Translator or Corrector of the Doway Bibles, and Author of the
Anchor of Christian doctrine. D. Collington, the titular Archdeacon of London,
lodging in Saint Jones. D. Wright, a grave ancient man, Treasurer for the
Priests, and very rich, thought to be worth thousands of pounds: he lodges in
the White-Friers. D. Norice, one that has written diverse books of late,
mentioned in the former Catalogue. D. Smith senior, sometimes of the College
of Rome, and Author of diverse pestilent books. D. Smith junior, Author of
diverse other books no less dangerous. D. Champney, Author of the book
called, The Vocation of Bishops. D. Bristow, sometimes of the College at
Doway. F. Blackfen a Jesuit, an ancient man, lodging in Drury Lane. F. Sweet,
a Jesuit well known, lodging at the upper end of Holborn. F. Musket a
Jesuit, lodging ouer-against S. Andrews Church in Holborn, a frequent
preacher, and one that has much concourse of people to his chamber. F. Fisher
a notorious Jesuit, lodging near the Sauoy. F. Haruy, a very dangerous
Jesuit. F. Austin, a Jesuit, an aged man. F. Boulton, a Jesuit, lodging in
Saint Jones. F. Macham, a Jesuit, lodging near the Custom House. F. Barlow,
a Jesuit, lodging about the Custom House. F. Townsend, a Jesuit, a little
black fellow, very count and gallant, lodging about the midst of Drury Lane
acquainted with collapsed Ladies. F. Brown, a Jesuit, lodging in Saint
Martins Lane. F. Palmer F. Palmer
both Jesuits, lodging about Fleetstreet, very rich in apparel: the one uses
to wear a scarlet cloak over a crimsin Satin suit. F. Rivers. F. Rivers.
both Jesuits. F. Lathom a Jesuit. F. Goddard a Jesuit, lodging about
White-Fryers. F. Pateson a Jesuit, lodging in Fetter-Lane. F. Hammershed,
lodging in White-Fryers. F. Armestrong a Jesuit, one that insinuates
dangerously, and has seduced many. F. Flood a Jesuit, lying about Fleet-Lane.
F. Flood a secular Priest, lodging in the Strand. F. Kerkam a Jesuit. F.
Anderton a Jesuit. F. Moore a Jesuit. F. Moore a secular Priest. F. Skinner a
Jesuit. F. Simons a Carmelite, Author of diverse late foolish Pamphlets: his
lodging is in the lower end of Holborne. F. Low a Jesuit. F. Simons next
neighbor. F. Knox a secular Priest. F. Shellay a secular Priest. F. Price, a
secular Priest, who was long a prisoner in Newgate. F. Wilson lodging about
Bloomisbury, and one that escaped at the Blackfriars. F. Hilton a secular
Priest, one that escaped the same time. F. Medcalfe, now lodging in Shoo-Lane,
a good companion, but not guilty of much learning. He is often deep laden with
liquor. F. Richardson a Benedictan Friar, of great acquaintance about the
Town: he lodges at the farther end of Grayes-Inne-Lane. F. Root a secular
Priest. F. Hunt a Carthusian Friar, lodging in Holborne, an old man. F. Conway
a Jesuit. F. Steuens a little man, a Monk. F. Wild a secular Priest. F.
Smith. F. Smith.
two secular Priests, besides the two Jesuits of that name, now resident in
London. F. Green lodging over against North-hampton Stables. F. Houghton a
secular Priest. F. Southworth. F. Southworth.
both secular Priests. F. Edmunds. F. Edmunds.
the one, as I have heard, a Jesuit; the other, a Franciscan Friar. F. Melling
a secular Priest, lodging in Holborne. F. Louell a secular Priest, lodging in
Holborne. F. Townely a secular Priest, lodging about the Strand. F. Maxfield a
secular Priest, lodging in Holborne. Simon Maxfield a Deacon, lodging in
Fleet Street. F. Gerard a secular Priest, lodging about Westminster. F. Dauyes
an old blind man, lodging about Holborne Conduit. F. Bently, I know not of what
order. F. Pursell an Irish man, a Monk, a young proud fellow. F. Walsingham,
lodging* about the Customehouse. F. Linch, an Irish man. F. Gerald, an Irish
man. F. Sherlock, an Irish man. F. Stannihurst, an Irish man. F. Carrig, an
Irish man. F. Houling, an Irish man. F. Chamberlain a secular Priest, lodging
about the Blackfriars, a man of great employment. F. Turpin. F. Annieur a
Frenchman. F. ^astle. F. Jones, alias, Hay, a Jesuit. F. Jones a secular
Priest. F. Martin a Monk, a Citizens son of London. F. Bastin. F. Wood, a
very dangerous fellow. F. Bellingam. F. Young. F. Harris. F. Baldwin. F.
Conniers. F. York. F. Brooks. F. Arncot. F. Hughes. F. Scroope. F. Langtree.
F. Vmpton. F. Bold, a Benedictan Monk. F. Bradshaw, a Jesuit. F. Line. F.
Doughty. F. Read. F. Chambers. F. Halsal. F. North. F. Cox, a Jesuit. F.
Banister. F. Eueleigh. F. Powell. F. Skinner. F. Edwards. F. Io. Worthington.
F. White. F. Stroud. F. Iennings. F. Bat. F. Sanders. F. Dier. F. Heigham. F.
Rimmington. F. Molineux. F. Birket. F. Kinsman. F. Durham. Two Priests, lodging
in Mistress Fowlers house in Fetter-Lane, whose names I cannot learn.
These be all the birds of this feather, which have come to my eye or
knowledge, as residing in or resorting to this City: yet above seven times so
many there are, that ouerspred our thickets through England, as appears by
the empty nests beyond the Seas, from whence they have flowne by shoales of
late; I mean, the Seminary Colleges, which have deeply disgorged by
several Missions of them, and also by particular computation of their divided
troops; whenas in one Shire where I have abode sometime, there are reputed to
nestle almost three hundred of this brood.

Though they be here set down by one name, they are not unfurnished of
diverse other names, which they change at pleasure.


