TWO MARRIAGE SERMONS: THE FORMER ON PROVE. 19. 14.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

THE LATTER ON JOHN 2. 1-12.

By that learned and judicious Divine Mr WILLIAM BRADSHAW some time Fellow of
SIDNEY COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE*

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Fulke Clifton, and are to be sold at his
shop on New Fish-street hill under Saint Margerets Church. 1620.

A Good Wife Gods Gift.

A MARRIAGE SERMON ON PROVE. 19. 14.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for FVLKE CLIFTON. 1620.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL MY LOVING COSENS, Mr JOHN SCVDAMORE of Kenchurch in
Hereford-shire, and Mrs ELIZABETH SCVDAMORE his Wife, many happy days together
with all true Blessedness both temporal and eternal.
RIght dear, and unfeignedly beloved in Christ Jesus, I have a long time much
desired some good occasion of testifying mine hearty affection to your selves
in particular among others of that Family, which I acknowledge my self so
deeply indebted unto. And I seem now at length to have lighted on that, that I
have so long longed for. Being to publish a wedding Sermon of a worthy Friend
deceassed, Mr. W. Br.
(which I wish, if Gods good will had so bin, he had lived to do himself)
containing matter concerning the holy disposition and Christian managing of
Marriage Feasts; I thought good to adioyne to it (being it self but short) some
Meditations of mine own, of somewhat a near subject, the occasion of such
Feasts, to wit, A good Wife, by Solomon said to be Gods Gift. That which here I
address unto you, as to remain a Monument of mine hearty well-wishing unto
you, so to abide by you, as a Monitor to put you both in mind, what a blessing
of God you enjoy either in other, and what cause you have to be thankful to
him either for other. Since it pleased God by his providence and your Friends
agreement to bring you together, and to knit that sacred knot between you, I
have not yet bin so happy, as to be an eye-witnes of your Christian and
religious cohabitation and conversation: but have by many bin informed of it,
to my great joy, that you tread both in the steps of your pious Parents, and
therein show your selves to be their Children, Romans 9. 8.
not according to the flesh only, but (which would have bin their greatest
comfort, had they survived to have seen it, and shall be your chiefest
happiness both here and hereafter) according to the promise, even of eternal
salvation, annexed to the gracious Covenant of Faith in Christ; which by your
godly practice you show your selves to have common interest in with them. And
indeed to speak in the Holy Ghosts language, then Eorum filij dicimur, quorum
actus imitamur. Origin. in Ezech. hom. 4. and Greg. Romans mor. lib. 20. cap. 17.
are we truly the Children of our religious Parents and Ancestors, when in
goodness and godliness we take after those that we come of. Ioh. 8. 39. Etiam
virtus fecit mihi fratrem Iesum, patrem Abraham. Origin. in Ezech. ho^. 8. and
in Romans c. 4.
They are Abraham's Children, that do Abraham's works; and Romans 4. 12, 23.
Israel spiritalis a carnali, non nobilitate patriae, sed nouitate gratiae, nec
gente, sed mente distinguitur. Aug. doctr. Chr. l. 3. c. 34.
that tread in the steps of Abraham's Faith, who is the Father of all the
Faithful. Those that take other courses, and degenerate, (as (...). Homer.
Odyss. (...). Eurip. Heracl. Hi^c Demosthenes, (...). Aristid. in Cimon. Et
inde diverbium, (...). Neminem prope magnorum virorum filium optimum reliquisse
satis claret Tales plerique habuerunt, vt melius fuerit de rebus humanis sine
posteritate discedere. Spartian in Severo.
too many do,) from the Faith and Piety of their Parents, are in Gods account,
as our Savior terms the Jews, but (...). Matthew. 12. 39. and 16. 4. Spuria
soboles: vt recte Piscat.
a bastardly brood; rather Ezech. 16. 3. non de eorum semine, sed de imitatione
generati. Greg. mor. l. 20. c. 11. quibus eos non necessitudo, sed morum
similitudo iungebat. Origin. in Romans 4.
Hittites and Canaanites, then Romans 6. 6, 7. Vide Aug. epist. 200.
right Hebrews, or Ioh. 1. 47.
true Israelites, though they come of Abraham or Israel either after the flesh.
They are not Galat. 6. 16. Psalm. 128. 6. and 125. 5.
the Israel of God, unto whom the blessing is promised of mercy and peace; yea
of Esai. 26. 3 and 57. 19.
peace, peace; that is, of Psalm. 119. 165.
much peace, Ioh. 14. 27.
true peace, Pacem omnimodam. Iun.
all manner of peace, such peace as no Esai 48. 22. and 57. 21.
wicked one ever had or can have. Which Philip. 4. 7.
peace far surpassing all humane conceit, that you may constantly retain in
part here, and attain finally unto the full fruition of it hereafter; hold on,
I beseech you, in that good course, that by Gods goodness you have already
entered into, and have made some good progress in. Hold on, I say: yea hold
out: For Matthew. 24. 13. Apoc. 2. 10.
it is holding out to the end, that must bring you to 1. Petr. 1. 9.
the end of your Faith, the salvation of your Souls. And that you may so do;
(because standing still is dangerous; and Vnum e duobus necesse est, aut
proficere, aut prorsus deficere. Bern. in Cant.
unless daily we win ground, we soon fall behind hand and go backward;) let
it be your continual care and constant endeavor 2. Pet. 3. 18.
to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to
whom be glory both now and for ever: And to whose holy protection committing
you and yours now and for ever, I take leave of you for the present, and rest
in Him.

Your affectionate Kinsman and hearty well-wisher, Thomas Gataker.

Faults of moment to be amended.

Page 5. lin. 5. for clipped read slipped. p. 6. l. 4. after those put in his.
p. 7. l. 2. for her read here. p. 21. in marg. for (...) read (...).

A GOOD WIFE GODS GIFT.
PROVERBS 19. 14. Houses and Riches are the Inheritance of the Fathers: But a
prudent Wife is of the Lord.
THERE be two things especially that commend a work, Author opus laudat.-Ovid.
de pont. lib. 4. eleg. 9.
the Author, and the Matter. Both of them conspire to commend this Book, as in
the Title of it they are both expressed.

Prove. 1. 1.
The Proverbs, or Parables of Solomon, the Son of David, King of Israel. For
the Author, Author.
(to omit the Principal, 2. Pet. 1. 21.
Gods Spirit: for, (...). 2. Tim. 3. 16.
All Scripture is inspired of God:) the Penman of it was Solomon, 2. Chron. 1.
12. 1. King. 3. 12.
the wisest mere man that ever was in the world since Adam, by the testimony
even of wisdom it self.

For the Matter; Matter.
it is Proverbs or Parables, (as the word in the Original signifies) (...) a
(...) quod (...) and dominari significat. (...) sive dignitates, quae vitae
Dominae and moderatrices esse debent. Cartwright in Prove.
Master-sentences, such as rule or sway, and are or may be of principal use in
man's Life.

Now consisting for the most part of such Aphorisms and short Sentences, from
the beginning especially of the tenth Chapter; it is not necessary, that they
should have any coherence one with an other; neither indeed for the most part
have they. Coherence.


Yet this and the next before it, have some connection: verse. 13.
the former being of the inconvenience that comes by a bad wife;

verse. 14.
This latter of the benefit that a good wife, that a wise and a discreet woman
brings with her.

There Solomon compared two grand evils together, and made a bad wife the worse
of the twain:

Here he compares two great benefits together, and makes a good wife the
better of the two.

For the former; verse. 13.
A foolish Son, says Solomon, is his Fathers sorrow: and a brawling wife as
a continual dropping.

(...). Plut. de tranquil. Dolores eo acerbiores, quo interiores. Aug. in
Psalm. 45.
Mala intestina grauissima. Evils are the more greiuous, the nearer, and the
more inward they are; as diseases in the entrails. And Molestissimu^ malum
intestinum and domesticum. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 29.
mala domestica, domestical evils, vex a man most, when Matthew. 10. 36.
a man's enemies, as our Savior speaks, Mica. 7. 6.
are those of his own house.

(...). Hesiod. oper. Hinc Themistocles (...). Plut. (...). Et v^tus verbum,
Aliquid mali esse propter vici^um malum. Plaut. Merc act 4. sc. 4.
It is no small inconvenience to dwell near a bad neigbour; were such a one
further of us, he would be less troublesome to us. And surely if to have good
neighbors be a matter of no small moment, then somewhat also it must needs be
for a man to want such, and much more for a man to have them that dwell near
him euill-affected toward him. An evil at the next door may be bad enough, and
may prove over troublesome; an evil within doors, at home, in a man's own
house much more.

But again within doors there are degrees also: in a man's own family there
are some nearer then others. A son is nearer then a servant, and a wife then
a son. Quot serui, tot hosts. Sen. epist. 47. Macrob. Sat. lib. 1. c. 10.
and Fest. lit. Q. Quot. serui, tot fures. Serve. ad Virg. eclog. 3.
It is a sore cross to be troubled, and it be but with bad servants. It is no
small vexation to find untoward and unfaithful carriage toward him Psalm. 41.
9. Ioh. 13. 18.
in those that eat his bread, that feed at his board; much more to sustain it
at the hands of her, that takes up the same bed with him, Mica. 7. 5.
that lies in his bosom. No evil to a bad bedfellow, (...). Aesopus apud
Gabriam. Coluber in sinis.
to a bosome-euill, to that evil that lies within or about the breast.

Though true mercy and compassion in some measure extend it self unto all
those, whose miseries and calamities we are acquainted with: yet the
misfortunes of our dear friends affect us more then of mere strangers: And Qui
ignotos laedit, latro appellatur; qui amicos, paulo minus quam pari^ida.
Petron. satyr.
the wrongs and injuries offered us by professed and pretended friends we are
wont to take more to heart. Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 20.
It was not mine enemy, says David, that did me this wrong; for then I could
have borne it. But it was thou, o Man, my companion, my guide, and my familiar
friend.

But Brethren are nearer then Friends. And howsoever Solomon truly says, that
Prove. 18. 24. (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 3.
a Friend sometime sticks closer to a man then a Brother: yet in nature a
(...); (Psalm. 133. 1.) (...). Menand. Vide Hierocle^ de amore fratern. and
Muson. de lib. to l^end. apud. Stob. tom. 2. cap. 82 Hirc vetus verbum, (...).
Plato polit. 2.
Brother is nearer then any Friend is or can be. There is a civil knot only
between Friend and Friend; there is a natural band between Brother and
Brother. And therefore, Prove. 18. 19. (...). Aristot. polit. l. 7. c. 7.
A Brother offended is harder to win then a strong City; and their contentions
are as Vectes arcis: qui ferrei aut anei esse solent. Psalm. 107. 16. Esai. 45.
2.
bars of brass. It is easier glewing of bords together, that have bin
vnglewed, again; then healing up the flesh that is gashed and divided: and the
reason is, because Contiguum ibi, istic continuum soluitur.
there was but an artificial connection before in the one, there was a natural
conjunction in the other.

But Children they are yet nearer then either Friends or Brethren. They are
Parsque tui latitat corpore clausa meo. Ovid. epist. 2.
parts nostri, viscera nostra; they are as Pignora nostra, Viscera nostra;
potius quam opes, v^i Ovid. ep. 1. 2. Sa^. 16. 11. Philem. 12, 20.
our very bowels, and part of our selves. And therefore no marvel if Solomon
say, that Prove 10. 1.
A foolish Son is a sorrow to his Father, and an heaviness to his Mother.
And, Prove. 17. 21.
He that begets a Fool, begets himself sorrow: and the Father of a
Fool Nemo quisquam fere vnquam sic dolet, vt non ide^ aliquando gaudeat.
Sedenim qui omni momento dolet, is vere dicitur non gaudere. Drus. observe. l.
1. c. 22. Vise and Agell. nect. Attic. l. 2. c. 6.
shall have no joy.

But behold here a further evil then any of the former. An evil wife, a
contentious woman worse then any of them all. Husband and Wife are nearer then
Friends, and Brethren; or then Parents and Children. Children, though they
spring from their Parents, yet they abide not always with them. They are as
Prove. 5. 16, 17.
rivers rising from one head, but taking several ways, making several
streams, and running apart in several Channels. But man and wife must bide by
it. They are as two streams, that rising from several heads, fall the one
into the other, Prout Alpheum Arethuse aiunt commisceri.
mingle their waters together, and are not severed again till they are
swallowed up in the Sea. Children are as Genes. 49 22. Psalm. 128. 3.
branches shooting out of one stem, divided and severed either from other, or
as grifts and siences cut of, or boughs and branches clipped of from their
native stock, and either planted or engraffed els-where. Man and Wife are as
the stock and sience, the one (...). Rom 11. 24.
ingraffed into the other, and so fastened together, that they cannot again be
sundred, or as Ezech. 37. 17 Vno Vt siquis geminos co^ducat cor^^ce ramos,
Crescendo iungi, pari^erque adoles^ere cernit. Ovid. metam. l. 4.
those two pieces in the Prophets hand enclosed in one bark, and making both
but one branch. And Genes. 2. 24.
Therefore, says the Holy Ghost, shall a man leave Father and Mother, and
(...) Christus Mat. 19. 5.
be glewed unto, or (...). Moses.
cleave fast to his wife: and They Ita Mosen supplet Christus: quomodo and
Math. 4. 10. ex Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20.
two shall be one flesh.

The nearer the bond then, the greater the evil, where it falls out
otherwise then it ought. Prove. 19. 14.
A foolish Son, says Solomon, is the calamity of his Father. And how is he
his calamity? He is (...) Prove. 10. 5. and 17. 2. and 19. 26. and 29. 15.
filius pudefaciens, such an one as shameth his Parents, and makes them glad
to hide their heads in the house. But Prove. 19. 13.
an evil wife is as the rain dropping in through the tiles, that makes him
weary of the house, that vexes him so that it drives him out of doors.

Yea Prove. 27. 15.
as a dropping in a rainy day, when it is foul without and it droppeth within.
So that it makes a man at his wits end, uncertain whither it be better for
him to be abroad in the rain, or to bide within doors in the dropping. And for
this cause Augustine compares an evil Conscience to a badwife, (and it may
seem that he pleased himself somewhat in the similitude, August in Psalm. 33.
and in Psalm. 35. and in Psalm. 45. and alibi.
he makes use so often of it:) which when a man has many troubles and
afflictions from without, and would look home, hoping for some comfort from
within, is much more troublesome to him then any of those outward crosses are;
is as a rock or a shelf to Seamen in a storm, where they hoped to have found
harbor and shelter against it.

Yea further, not as a dropping only that drives a man from his house and
home, and that when it raineth; but Prove. 19. 13.
as a continual dropping in such a day: So that a bad wife is worse then a
quartane ague, wherein a man has two good days for one evil. He that has an
evil wife, is as one that has an evil soul, a guilty conscience, that
evermore sticks by him, that euery-where accompanies him, is a continual
evil companion with him In cubiculo, in cubili ipso. Aug. in Psalm 45.
at bed and board, Qua^ nec fugere, nec fugare licet. Lips. in politic.
Conscientia^ enim a Deo (comite^ individ^a^) accepimus, quae diuelli a nobis
non potest. Cic. pro Cluent.
such as he cannot shift of or shun. And no marvel therefore if it be deemed
the greatest temporal evil, because the most continual, and the most inward,
for a man to be matched with an evil wife, or a woman with an evil husband:
For what is said of the one, is as true of the other, the relation between
them being alike.

To draw all to an head then. An unkind Neighbor is a cross: but an
unfaithful Friend is a great cross; an unnatural Brother a greater: an
ungracious Child yet a greater: but a wicked, unquiet, or disloyal wife is
the (...). Menand. Penus malorum est omnili mulier mala.
greatest of all, and if we believe Solomon, goes beyond them all. In regard
whereof he also els-where pronounces, that Prove. 21. 9. and 25. 24.
it is better to abide on a corner of the house top without, then to continue
with such a one in a wide house: yea that Prove. 21. 19. Sirac. 25. 18, 22.
(...). Menand. Mala mulier quauis fera truculentior. H. Steph.
it is better to live in the wilderness with the wild beasts, then with such.

But to leave this that is without my Text, and yet next door to it, (so near
her do good and bad neighbor together,) and to come nearer home: Some it may
be hearing Solomon speak on this manner, might say, as our Saviors Disciples
sometime said, Matthew. 19. 10. Sum.
If the case so stand between man and wife, it is good then not to mary.

Now to such Solomon seems to answer in the words of my Text, that It is not
evil to mary, but it is good to be wary: that it is not the abuse or badnes of
some, that ought to make Gods ordinance the less valued, or the less
esteemed, being in it self and of it self a matter of great benefit: that as
the inconvenience is great and grievous that a bad wife brings with her; so
the benefit on the other side is no less that comes by a good wife, by a
wise and a discreet woman: who is therefore here commended as a special Gift,
as a principal Blessing of God, such as goes beyond any other temporal
Blessing whatsoever. And surely (...). Hesiod. (...). Simonid. apud Clem. Alex.
strom. l. 6. Sors potior maliere proba non ^btigit vnquam Vlla viro; contraque
mala nil tetrius vsqua^ est. Erasm. (...). Menand. Salus and exitium mulier est
aedibus. H. Steph.
as there is no greater temporal cross or curse then the one; so is there no
greater temporal blessing then the other. verse. 13.


Now this Solomon to show, as before he compared two great evils together, and
found a bad wife to be the worse: so here he compares two great benefits
together, and affirms a good wife to be the greater.

House and possessions, wealth and riches, land and living is Psalm. 4. 6.
(...). Antiphanes. (...). Sophocles. (...). Hesiod. Prima fere v^ta and cunctis
notissima templis, Divitiae vt crescant. -Iuven. sat. 10. Totus populus in
alijs discors, in hoc convenit: hoc suspiciunt; hoc sibi, hoc suis optant. Sen.
epist. 115.
that, that most men regard, and look after: yea men are wont to seek wives
for wealth. But says Solomon, as Psalm. 22. 1. (...). Mena^d.
a good name, so a good wife, a wise and a discreet woman is better then
wealth; her price is far above pearls: For House and possessions are the
inheritance of the Fathers; but a prudent wife is of the Lord.

Which yet we are not so to understand, Meaning.
neither the former part, as if worldly wealth, and riches and possessions were
not Gods gifts: for Prove. 10. 22. (...). Pindar. Pyth. 8. (...). Aeschyl Theb.
It is the blessing of God that makes a man rich: Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
unless he build the house it will never be built: and Deuteronomy. 8. 18. (...).
Pindar. Pyth. 8.
it is he that gives men power to gather wealth together.

Nor yet again the latter part; as if Parents had no hand, right or power in
disposing of their Children, or in aduising them and providing in that kind
for them. Judge. 14. 2.
Sampson requires his Parents consent. And Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
God charge his people not to make matches between their Children and the
Canaanites, either by giving their Daughters unto the Sons of the Canaanites,
or by taking the Canaanites Daughters unto their Sons: which he would not
do, were not they at all to deal in the disposing of them. And many, no
doubt, would they take advice of their Parents, and not follow their own
fancies, and make their wanton eye, or their wandering lust, their chooser and
counsailer in such cases, might do much better then for want hereof they do.

But the meaning of Solomon is this only, that the one is a more special gift
of God then the other; that there is a more special hand of God in the one
then in the other. As that is a less benefit then this: so that is in man's
power more then this.

So that two points then here in Solomon's words offer themselves unto us:

The former, that A good Wife is Gods gift.

The latter, that Gods providence is more special in a Wife then in Wealth.

For the former. A good wife is Gods gift. Point 1.
For a prudent wife, says Solomon, is of the Lord. And Prove. 18. 22.
He that finds a wife, (that is, a good wife, as, a (...) Eccles. 7. 1. Prove.
22. 1. and Genes. 11. 4. Ellipsi^, qualis est and Esai. 1. 18. and Mal. 1. 14.
Vise Camium ibid.
name for a good name, Tanquam vxor mala ne vxor quidem sit. Drus.
as if an evil wife were no wife, deserved not the name of a wife:) has found
a good thing; and has obtained a special favor from God.

It was one of the first real and royal gifts that Genes. 2. 22.
God with his own hand bestowed upon Adam. And it must needs be no small
matter that God gives with his own hand. Reason.
The Kings Almoner may cast small silver about: but if the King give a man
somewhat with his own hand out of his purse or pocket, it is expected it
should be a piece of gold at least. The woman was Gods own gift to Adam. And
she was Gods gift bestowed on him Genes. 2. 18.
to consummate and make up his happiness. Though he were at the first of
himself happy, yet not so happy as he might be, until he had one to partake
with him in his happiness.

It was God that at first gave Adam his wife; and it is God that gives every
man his wife to this day. Genes. 24. 7, 56.
God, says Abraham to his servant, will send his Angel along with thee, and
will prosper thee in thy journey; when he sent him about a wife for his Son
Isaak. And Matthew. 19. 6.
Those that God has joined together, says our Savior, let not man sever. As
Augustine says, that (...) ^^minem sineh mine, pr^creat hominem ex homine.
Aug. de verb. Ap. 11. Ier. 1. 5.
He that at the first created man without man, does now procreate man by man:
so he that gave man a wife at the first immediately, does still give men wives
by means; Prove. 18. 22.
good ones in mercy, Eccles. 7. 26.
evil ones in wrath; the one for solace and comfort, the other for trial,
cure, correction, or punishment. No marriages are consummate on earth* that were
not first concluded and made up in heaven: and none are blessed here, that were
not in mercy made there.

For the latter; Point 2.
There is a more special providence of God in a Wife then in Wealth. Humane
wisdom and forecast, endeavor and industry may strike a greater stroke and
have a more special hand in the one then in the other. Men of wealth may leave
their heirs land and livings but (...). Mena^d Haud facile coniuge^ nanciscier
bonam. H. St^ph.
they cannot so easily provide fit wives for them.

For first, Reason.
they may be deceived in their choice. Many have good skill in choosing of
wares, in valewing of lands, in beating a bargain, in making a purchase, that
are yet but blind buzards in the choice of a wife. Yea the wisest that are may
be soon here ouer-reached* Since all is not gold as we say, that glistereth.
Ierem. 17. 9.
The heart of man, says the Prophet, is deceitful above all things. And, 1.
Cor. 2. 11. Corda humana alienis oculis clausa snut. Greg. Romans mor. lib. 25.
cap. 9. Non est hominis scire quid sit in homine, nisi forte quis ad hoc ipsum
fuerit vel sti^itu Dei illuminatus, vel angelica informatus industria. Bern. in
Ca^t. 65.
None can tell what is in man or woman* but their own Spirit that is within
them.

Secondly, they cannot lincke hearts as they list. A Father may find out a fit
wife, and think such a one a meet match for his Son* and her Parents may be
also of the same mind with him, as willing to entertain the motion as he is
to make it; and yet it may be, when they have done all they can, they cannot
fasten their affections. As Fides suadenda no^ imperanda Eern. in Cant. 66.
Religionem imperare non possumus: quia nemo cogitur vt credat invitus.
Theodori^us apud Cassiod. var. l. 2. ep. 27. Non est religionis cogere
religione^, quae sponte suscipi debet. Tertull. ad Scap. Quis enim imponat mihi
necessitatem vel colendi quod nolim, vel quod velim non colendi? Lactant.
institut. l. 5. cap. 13. credendi. Lipsiu^ polit. l. 4. c. 4.
Faith, so Nescit amor quo (non) libe^ cogi. Tertull de pudic.
Love cannot be constrained. Cant. 8. 6, 7. non extorquebis amari. Claud.
Honor. Coss. 4.
As there is no affection more forcible; so there is none freer from force and
compulsion. The very offer of enforcement turns it often into hatred. There are
secret lincks of affection, that no reason can be rendered of: as Non amote,
Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare: Hoc vnu^ possum dicere, Non amote. Martial.
ep. 33. lib. 1.
there are inbred dislikes, that can neither be resolved, nor reconciled. When
Parents have a long time beaten the bush, an other often, as we say, catches the
bird: affections are set some other way, and cannot be removed. And things fall
out many times so unexpectedly, such strong liking taken to some suddenly not
once thought on before, and such strange alienation of affections, where there
has bin much laboring to linck them, and that where outward inducements of
person estate, years etc. have concurred, that even a natural man's dim eye
may easily see and discern a more special providence of God often carrying
things in these cases: And the tongues even of such are enforced sometime to
confess, as the Egyptian Magitians of Moses his miracles, Exodus 8. 19.
Digitus Dei hic est, There is a finger of God here; so with Rebekkaes profane
friends, in such Marriage matches; Genes. 24. 50.
A Domino factum est istud; This is even Gods own doing; and there is no
contradicting of it.

To make some Use of these Points.

First, Use 1.
Is a good wife such a special gift of God? then is Marriage questionles a
Blessing, and no small one, of it self: one of the greatest outward Blessings
that in this world man enjoys. Psalm. 128. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Blessed is every one, says the Psalmist, that fears God, and that walks
in his ways. For thou shall eat of the labor of thine hands: happy art thou,
and it shall go well with thee. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine by the
sides of thine house: and thy Children like the Olive plants round about thy
table. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears God. In the first place
comes the Wife as the first and principal blessing, and the Children in the
next. And surely to reason backward to that the Apostle does: Rom 11. 16.
If the root, says he, be holy, the branches also be holy: and, If the
branches, say I, be holy then the root that bears them much more. So here,
If the branches be blessed, the root that bears them much more. If Children
be a Blessing, then (...) ^^^rocles de nupt. apud Stob. to^. 2. cap. 65.
the root whence they spring ought much more to be so esteemed. Psalm. 127. 3.
Behold, Children and the fruit of the womb, are the gift of God, says Is
enim ex titulo Author videtur.
Solomon. Children are the gift of God; but the Wife is a more special gift of
God: she comes in the first place, they in the second: And gifts are usually
answerable to the greatness of the Giver. It was a witty answer of a great
Prince, when he was disposed to be rid of a bold begging Philosopher: he asked
a groat of him, and the King told him, (...). Drachmam dare no^ est regium.
It was too little for a Prince to give; he requested the King then to give him
a Talent, and the King told him, (...). Talentum petere non est Cynicum.
Antigonus Thrasyllo apud Plut. in apophth. Et Sen. d^ benef. l. 2. c. 17.
It was too much for a Beggar to crave. And surely God indeed in his special
gifts to us, is wont Non quaero quid te accipere deceat, sed quid me dare.
Alexand. apud Se^. de benef. lib 2. c. 16. Idem Perillo amico cu^ ad filias
elocandas tale^ta qui^quaginta assignasset, is autem december suffi^ere
affirmasset, (...). Plut. in apophth.
to regard not so much what is fit for us to ask or to expect, as what
stands with his goodness and greatness to give.

Genes. 1. 31.
God, says Moses, looked upon all that he had made and behold all was very
good. And (...). 1. Tim. 4. 4.
Every creature, or ordinance of God, says the Apostle, (and he had spoken of
Meat and Marriage in the words before-going:) is good. All Gods Creatures and
Ordinances are good then; Use 2.
but some are more excellent then others. And Marriage being of this latter
sort, it is not holy only, but even honorable also. (...). Hebr. 13. 4.
Marriage, says the Apostle) is honorable among all men: and no disgrace then
to any man. So are we to esteem of it, and not to contemn what God has
graced, or to dishonor what he has honored. We shall but wrong the giver in
debasing his gift.

Again, is a good Wife such a special gift of God? Then if we find in
marriage, inconveniences, hindrances, distractions, disturbances: Let us learn
what we are to ascribe it unto: Not to Gods gift or ordinance, but Si Dei
beneficia vtentium prauitate perpendimus, nihil non nostro malo accepimus.
Nihil invenies tam manifestae vtilitatis, quod non in contrarium transferat
culpa. Sen. quaest. nature. l. 5. c. 18.
to man's corruption abusing Gods gift, perverting Gods ordinance, and turning
that to his own evil, that God has given him for his good. For Iam. 1. 17.
Si Deus bonus, Diabolus malus, nec a bono quicqna^ mali, nec a malo quicqua^
bon^ potest provenire. Aug.
there is nothing but is good as it comes from God. But as (...). Aristot. de
sens. c. 4. Cum aqua ipsa nec saporem nec odorem habeat.
pure water may take a taint from the pipe that conveigheth it, and Tinguntur,
eorumque trahunt similitudine^, in quorum oram subeundo venere. Plin. hist.
not. l. 2. c. 18.
the Sun beams receive a tincture from the colored glass that they pass
through: so our foul hands and filthy fingers often soil and sully Gods
Ordinances, and our filth and corruption does often so taint and infect them,
that they loose not only much of their native grace, and so strangely
transformed, that Esai. 58. 5. and 1. 11, 12, 14. Secundum libidinem suam
celebrando, sua iam, non Dei fece^ant. Tertull. advers. Marc. lib. 2.
God himself can scarcely discern his own in them, but they miss also of
their fruit and efficacy, and Improb^ nihil prodest; quia quicquid ad illum
pervenit, prauo vsu corrumpitur. Senec. de benef. lib. 5. c 21. Nihil potest ad
malos p^rvenire, quod prosit, imo nihil quod non noceat. Ibid.
of good and commodious, through our own default, become evil and
incommodious unto us. And as Potestas a Deo, abusus ab homine. Anto^. sum.
part. 3. tit. 22. c. 2.
Tyranny in government is not the fault of Gods Ordinance, but of man's
corruption abusing it: so in these cases, the evil and inconvenience is not
the fruit of Gods Ordinance, but of man's corruption accompanying it.

If we shall find then in the married estate troubles and distractions, etc.
(as Qui non litigat caeleb^ est. Hieron. adv. I^vin. (...). Menand. Semper
habet lites alternaque iurgia lectus, In quo nuptaia^et, minimum dormitur in
illo. Iuven. sat. 6.
the single life is commonly commended for quietness;) Non queramur de autore
nostri Deo, si beneficia eius corrumpimus, and vt essent contraria, efficimus.
Sen. quaest. not. l. 5. c. 18.
let us not accuse God; as Adam sometime closely did; Genesis 3. 12.
The woman, says he, that Thou gave me; she gave me of the tree, and I ate:
as if he had said, If thou had not given me the woman, she had not given me
of the fruit; and if she had not given me it. I had not eaten of it. (...).
Homer. Iliad. (...).
Gods gifts are all good. But let us lay the fault where it is; upon our selves
and our own corruption, that Mal^^ animu^ ^mnia in (...) verti^^ (...) quae
optimi specie venerant. Sen* epist* 98.
turns honey into gall, and good nutriment, Tit. 1. 15. Vis^ Galen. de
facult. aliment. lib. 1. Dulcia s^in bilem vertent, stomachoque tumultum Versa
ferent. Horat. sat. 2 lib. 2. Quemadm^d^m stomachus morbo vitiatus and
colligens bilem, qu^scunque accepit cibos mutat, and ^mne (...) causam doloris
trahit: ita animus ca^us, quicquid illi (...) suum and perniciam, and
occasionem miseriae facit. Sen. de benef. l. 5. c. 12.
as the foul stomach into choler, or, Quaecunque illi^ contigerunt, in
natura^^ suam vertunt, and ex se speciosa profuturaque si meliori darentur,
illis pestifera sunt. Ibid.
as the spider and toade, into venime and poison. Else shall we be like those of
whom Solomon says; Prove. 19. 3.
The folly of a man perverteth his way, and his foolish heart fretteth against
God.

Secondly, Is a good wife Gods gift? then let those that want them, learn how
and where to seek them. Do thou want a wife? and would have one, and
such a one, as thou may have comfort in? Seek her of God, seek her with God.

Seek her, Use 3.
I say, first at Gods hands, seek her where she is to be had. Humble thy self
in the sight of God, and betake thy self by prayer and supplication unto God.
Iam. 1. 17.
Every good gift, says James, is of God from above: and to be sought therefore
at his hands: and if every good gift, this more specially, that is so special
a gift, and of so principal use. And, (...). 1. Tim. 4 4.
Every Creature or Ordinance, says Paul, is to be sanctified by prayer. And if
every Ordinance of God should be sanctified by prayer; and it ought (...).
Marc. regul. spirit.
to vshter all our actions, be they civil or sacred* then this also among
others, yea this above and before others, (...). Menand.
as that which (through the blessing of God upon it) may prove a matter of the
greatest benefit unto us, and without it a means of the greatest evil.

Yea, seek her as of God, so with God. Use 4.
Ask counsel at the mouth of God, when thou go about any such business. 1 Timothy 4. 4.
The Ordinances of God, says the Apostle, are sanctified unto us, as well by
the word of God, as by prayer. Then are they sanctified unto us by prayer, when
we crave leave for the use of them, and a blessing upon the use of them by
prayer at Gods hands. Then are they sanctified unto us by the word of God, when
we have warrant, and take direction, for what we do in them, out of Gods word,
when we ask counsel at Gods mouth. Then we seek them with God, when we seek
them by good means, when we seek them in due manner.

For when it is said that a good wife is of God; we are not so to conceive it,
that we are in such cases to use no means at all; but we are to use none but
good and lawful means, such as God has appointed, either prescribed or
permitted. 1. Cor. 7. 39.
The wife is bound, says the Apostle, while her husband lives: but if her
husband be dead, she is at liberty to marry where she will, but yet, (...).
in Domino, in the Lord.

Wherein they offend, either that go too near, matching within those degrees
that Levit. 18.
God has inhibited: or that go too far of, matching Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. 1. King.
11. 1, 2.
with such as they are by religion prohibited to mary; and so transgressing
those rules and directions that the word of God gives.

As also those that be under the government of others, or that desire those
that be in the power of others to dispose of; they then seek in the Lord, when
they advise with, and are content to be disposed of by those, whom God has
given power over them; or when they seek not to them in the first place, but
to those, by whom God will have them to be disposed. That which not Gods people
alone, but Genes. 34. 6, 11. Virginitas non tota tua est: ex part parentu^
est; Altera pars patri, data pars est altera matri; Tertia sola tua est*
Catull. carm. nupt.
the Heathen also, by the light of Nature, saw to be equal and right. When
they take other courses, they seek beside God, and cannot hope or expect any
blessing from God, whose order and ordinance therein they break. In a word,
would thou be blessed in thy wooing, in thy wiuing? Take God* with thee in
wooing, invite him to thy wedding. He, if he be pleased, will turn thy water
into wine; if he be displeased, he will turn thy wine into vinegar.

Thirdly, Use 5.
learn hence what principally to aim at in the choice of a wife: to wit, at
virtue and wisdom, discretion and godliness: for that is indeed true wisdom.

Solomon says not, a fair wife is the gift of God. And yet is (...). Act. 7.
20. de Mose. divinitus venustus. Beza and Pisc.
beauty Gods gift; and (...). Menand. (...). Plat. polit. lib. 3. Gratior est
pulchro veniens in corpore virtus. Hinc Aristoteles, (...). Idemque (...) Stob.
tom. 2. c. 63.
a gift of good regard. Neither says he, a wealthy wife is the gift of God:
And yet is 1. Chron. 29 12, 14. 2. Chron. 1. 12.
wealth also Gods blessing, where it is accompanied with well-doing. But, a
discreet, or a wise woman is the gift of God.

Many indeed there are, that choose their wife by the eye: Genes. 6. 3.
The Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men to be fair: and they took them
wives of them where they liked: as if they were to buy a picture or an image to
hang up in the house, or to stand somewhere for a show. But (...). Nescio quis
apud Eustath.
Beauty, says the Heathen man, without virtue, is like a bait floating
without an hook; it has a bait to entice, but no hook to hold. And, Prove.
11. 12. (...). Veteres apud Eustath. Iliad. (...). Eurip. Chrysostom.
A fair woman, says Solomon, without discretion is like a gold ring in a
swines snout. Prove. 31. 30. Color terrae bonitatis incertus est author. Pallad.
de re rust. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is but (...). Clem. Alex. paeag. l. 3. c. 1.
Resest forma fugax: quis sapiens bono Confidat fragili? Sen. Hippol. Florem
decoris singuli carpuntdies. Sen. Octav. Forma bonum fragile est; quantumque
accedit ad annos Fit minor, and spatio carpitur ipsa suo. Ovid. art. l. 1.
(...) Isocr. ad Demon.
vanity: but a woman that fears God is praiseworthy indeed.

Others again regard wealth only; as if they went about a purchase, as if
they were to mary not them but their money, as if they were to wed not the
wife, but her wealth. But Solomon, when he says, Houses and Riches are the
inheritance of the Fathers: but a prudent Wife is of the Lord: he implies that
these things may be severed, the one may be without the other. Lands may come
by inheritance; when Virtus non est haereditaria. Non est res beneficiaria.
Sen. epist. 89.
virtue may not. Bona, vnde bonu^ facias, non vnde bonus fias. Aug. de temp.
238.
Goods they are wherewith men may do good, but not such as make those good that
have them. (...). Themistocl. apud Plut. apophth. Malo viru^ qui pecunia egeat,
quam pecunia^ quae viro. Cic. offic. l. 2.
Better it is, said the Heathen man, to have a man without money, then to have
money without a man: so better it is to have a wife without wealth, then to
have wealth without a wife. And surely, what comfort can a man have of wealth
with such a wife, that shall be as a corrosiue to his heart, Prove. 12. 4. Sicut
in ligno vermis, ita perdit virum suum vxor malefica. Hieron. cont. Iovin. l. 1.
as corruption and rottenness in his bones?

Again, let Parents learn here what to aim at in the education of their
Children, whom they desire to dispose of, Use 6.
and to dispose of so as they may be a blessing, not a cross or a curse to
those that shall have them: Not study only how to provide portions for them:
though an honest care also is to be had in that kind. 2. Cor. 12. 12.
Parents, says the Apostle, ought to lay up for their Children. And, 1. Tim. 5
8.
He that provides not for his issue, is worse then an Infidel. Nor how to
trim them up, and set them out, in whorish or garish manner, to make them
baits to catch fools with; but labor to train them up in true wisdom, and
discretion, in the fear of God, and such graces as may make them truly
amiable, as 1. Pet. 3. 3. (...). Cle^. Alex. paed. l. 3. c. 1.
well in Gods sight as in man's eyes; in houswifry, and industry, and skill to
manage household affairs: that so they may be helpers to their Husbands, (and
not hinderers;) as Genes. 2. 18.
to that end they were made at first.

Yea hence let the wife learn what she is to strive to, Use 7.
and labor for, that she may be indeed a good gift of God: 1. Tim. 2. 9, 10.
1. Pet. 3. 4, 5. Cultus magna cura tibi magna virtutis incuria. Cato Cens. apud
Ammia^. hist. l. 16. Cul^us corporum nimius and formae cura prae se ferens
animi def^^mitatem. Sen. ben. l. 1. c. 10. (...). Crates. (...). Sophocl.
(...). Lysander apud Plut. in praecept nupt. (...). Clem. Alex. paed. l. 2. c.
12. (...). Ibid. l. 3. c. 2. (...). Ibid. c. 11. (...). Ibid. lib 2. cap. 9.
Not so much to deck and trick her self up to the eye, as to have her inner
man adorned with holy skill and discretion, whereby to carry her self wisely
and discreetly in that place and condition that God has called her unto: That
she may with the wise woman, Prove. 14. ^. (...). Menand.
build up the house; and be Prove. 12. 4. Dignae suo co^iux fida corona viro.
a crown and Prove. 31 2^.
a grace to him that has her. That Pro. 31. 28.
her Husband and Children may have cause to bless her, and to bless God for
her; and count it a blessed time when they came first together.

Let her consider what a fearful thing it is to be otherwise. For her that
was (...). Basil. Sell.
made for a help, to prove not an help but an hurt: for her that was given
for a blessing, to prove a cross and a curse. As one says of Eve, Genesis 2. 18.
reaft from Adam as a rib, Use 8.
and shot by Satan at him as a shaft: bestowed on him by God to consummate his
felicity, but made by Satan's slight and her own default, the means of his
extreme misery.

Fourthly, let men be admonished hence, whom to ascribe it unto, if ought have
bin done in this kind for them: even to God himself principally, whose
special gift a good wife is. Let us take heed how in this case Habba. 1. 16.
we sacrifice to our yearne, or burn incense to our net. Ascribe not what is
done for thee, to the mediation of friends, or to thine own plots and policies,
smoothnes of language, fairenes of look, or the like. No: acknowledge God to
have bin the principal agent in the business: regard man and thine own means,
but as his Instruments. Of him she is, says Solomon: not Genesis 2. 22. and 1.
27.
as a Creature only made of him, bnt as Genesis 2. 22.
one matched unto thee by him: nor as knit to thee by his ordinance, Use 9.
but as (...) To^us vtvi atque foeminae fatalis est. Aes^hyl. Eumen. Hae^
scilicet res vna, si v^a, fato gub^rnatur. Dunaeus ad Lys.
assigned thee by his providence: For that is it, that Solomon here principally
aims at.

Yea let them hence learn what they owe unto God, whom God has vouchsafed
such a blessing unto. Has God bestowed such a Wife on thee, as Solomon here
speaks of? It is a precious Jewel; such as thy Father could never leave
thee. It is a greater Treasure then the greatest Prince on earth, then the
mightiest Monarch in the world is able to bequeath to his Heir. We see how
Parents are often troubled in making search for their Sons, and yet when they
have done their best endeavor, miss of that they desire. We might here rise by
degrees on the better side, as we did before on the worse. As evils, so good
things, the more inward the greater. A Prove. 17. 2. and 14. 35 Luke 12. 42.
(...). Menand. (...). Eurip. Mel^agr. De beneficijs ac fide servoru^ in
Domin^s, consule sis Senec. de benef. l. 3. c. 18. 27. Et Valor. Max. l 6. c. 8.
trusty servant is no small blessing; a (...). Hesiod. Hinc de vicinis prospici
Cato praecepit, apud Plin. hist. not. l. 18. c. 6.
kind neighbor is a great one; Prove. 17. 17. and 18. 24. (...). Amicus alter
ipse. Zeno apud Laert l 7. (...). Anima vna corporum duorum incola. Aristo^
ibid l. 5. (...). Menand. (...). Pi^d. Nem. 8.
a faithful friend a greater; Prove. 10. 1. and v. 20. and 17 6. and 23. 15.
(...). Menand.
a wise son yet a greater; and a prudent wife the greatest of all: a greater
blessing then any of the former, that yet for temporal blessings may seem of
the greatest. And how do married persons then stand engaged to God above others,
whom he has blessed in their choice? A great measure of thankfulness owe they
unto him, proportionable in some sort to the blessing bestowed on them.

Yea as there is a greater measure of thankfulness required of them, then of
others whom God has not blessed in that manner: so there is a peculiar kind
of thankfulness required on their part. All Gods favors require thankfulness:
and the more favors the more thankfulness: but some special favors require
some peculiar kind of acknowledgment, proportioned to the quality of the
favor received. Psalm. 127. 3. Genes 33 5.
Children are Gods gift: and our thankfulness to him for them is to be showed in
such duties, as he requires of us in the behalf of them, Ephesians. 6. 4.
in the careful education and training them up in good courses. In like
manner: Thy Wife thou have of Gods gift: and thy thankfulness to him for her,
must be showed in the performance of such duties, as he requires of thee in
regard of her, Ephesians. 5. 25, 28, 29, 33. Coloss. 3. 19.
of love, of kindness, of concord, counsel, contentment etc.

Fifthly, Use 10.
Is the Wife given unto her Husband by God? then must she resolve to give her
self wholly to him as her Owner, on whom God has bestowed her, to whom he has
assigned her. When Parents have put out their Children, the Children must be
content to be guided by those to whom they commit them: and when God has given
a Daughter, she must be content to live with him, and be guided by him, whom
God has given her unto. Neither is she to forsake him. For Matthew 19. 5, 6.
they are not to be sundred, nor severed, whom God has conjoined and made one.
And there is a foul brand therefore upon her, Prove. 2. 17.
that forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God.
Nor to refuse to be ruled by him: but Ephesians. 5. 22. 1. Pet. 3. 1.
submit and subject her self unto him, unto whom God has given her: for
Coloss. 3. 18.
that is comely, says the Apostle, in the Lord: and to be embraced therefore
of her, as her Lot by God assigned her.

Yea, Use 11.
is the Wife given the Husband by God? then should he esteem her as a gift of
God: and 1. Pet. 3. 7.
live with her, as with one given him and bestowed upon him by God. We cannot
abide to see any thing that we have given an other euill-vsed. And it be but a
dog, an hound, or a whelp, if we see it neglected, where we bestowed it, we are
wont to take it evil. But if we should see a jewel of some value, bestowed by
us on a friend as a token of our love toward him, set light by him, or should
find it cast aside in some corner, would we not much more be grieved at it,
and judge that he set as light by our love, as he does by our loue-token. And
has not God then just cause to take it evil at thy hands, when he shall see
his gift abused, evil entertained, and worse used; when he shall see her
misused of thee, whom he has as a special favor bestowed on thee, and has
therefore given thee Ephesians. 5. 33. Coloss. 3. 19.
a special charge well and kindly to use? How are we wont to be grieved, when
we see matters fall our amiss, where we have bin means to make the match? If
the wife be misused, that we have helped one to, we are wont to count it a
wrong to our selves. And no marvel then, if God himself take to heart the
wrongs done by us, to those that he has joined to us, if Malach. 2. 13, 14, 15.
he have a quarrel against him that shall transgress against her, whom he
has inseparably joined to him, to be his Companion and his wife by Pactum
salu, pro inviolabili. Number. 18. 19.
a Covenant of Salt.

Lastly, Use 12.
if a good Wife be such a special gift of God, then a good Husband is no
less. For the Husband is as needful for the Wife, as the Wife is for the
Husband. Genesis 3. 16.
Thy desire, says God, shall be unto him. And if the Husband then be so to
esteem of his Wife, and to be thankful to God for her; then is the Wife no
less to esteem so of her Husband, and to be thankful likewise to God for him.

In a word, let both man and wife so esteem either of other, as joined by Gods
counsel, as given by Gods hand; and so receive either other as from God, be
thankful either for other unto God, seek the good either of other in God; and
then will God undoubtedly with his blessing, accompany his gift, to his own
glory, and their mutual good.

FINIS.
A MARRIAGE FEAST. A SERMON ON THE FORMER PART OF THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE
EVANGELIST JOHN;

By that learned and judicious Divine Mr WILLIAM BRADSHAW sometime Fellow of
SIDNEY COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for FVLKE CLIFTON. 1620.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND RELIGIOUS, Mr GEORGE WILMER Esquire, and Mrs MARGERET
WILMER his Wife, increase of spiritual grace, and mutual comfort in CHRIST
JESUS.
WORSHIPFVLL AND beloved in Christ; At the solemn knitting of you together,
was this Sermon preached by that worthy Servant of God, and our common friend,
now with God, then first (as I have heard him say) performing that office that
then he did. Which of late lighting upon, among other his loose papers, I
thought it would not be amiss rather to send it abroad, then to suffer it (as
it might soon perhaps otherwise) to miscary and so perish* The piety and
pithines of the discourse it self seemed to require no less of me: that which
any indicious and religious, I assure my self, will with me easily acknowledge.
The rarity likewise of the subject the rather encited me thereunto. He treads
a tracke not so usually beaten. Of Marriage Sermons, that entreat of Marriage
duties, there are extant not a few. Such as handle the religious managing of
Marriage Feasts, I suppose not many; I remember not to have seen any. It is
that, that this holy Man of God does here principally insist upon: and it is a
point very necessary, and of no small use. For to let pass that gross abuse,
too too frequent among the prophaner sort, that esteem such meetings never
well seasoned, or aright celebrated, unless filthy discourse and Qualia
fuerunt veterum quorunda^ Epithalamia: and Iescenini versus de quibus Festus
and Seruius ad Aen. l. 7. non, vt illi, ab opido Campano; nec a fascino, credo,
depellendo sic dicti; sed a fascino, quod obscoenitatis notio^em habeat apud
Horat. epod. 8. and Varro orig. lib. 6.
obscene songs be as common as any ordinary service; as if they were not
dealing with a sacred ordinance of God, but were about the sacrilegious rites
of some impure Idol; and so, like the idolatrous Jews, that turned b Bethel
into c Beth-aven, making a Brothel-house of a Bride-house: As also to pass by
the brutish and swinish disposition of those that think there is no true
welcome, nor good fellowship, as they term it, unless there be deep
carousing and drinking of healths to Bride and Bridegroom, and every idle
fellows Mistress, till the whole companies wits be so (...). Synes. de insom.
Mergit mente^ extrema potatio. Sen. ep. 12. Vnde (...) dixit Pythagoras; (...)
Chrysippus; Ebrietate^ insaniam voluntariam Augustinus ad sacr. virg. and
Basilius Ebriu^ (...).
drowned in drink, that not religion only, but (...). quod de Ira. nescio quis
apud Plut.
reason it self is utterly exiled, and the meeting may well seem to be rather
a drunken match then a Marriage Feast. To let pass, I say, the palpable
loosenes and lewdnes of such: even the best at such meetings are too prone by
ouer-sight, and forgetfulness of their duty to ouer-shoot themselves, and to
exceed that Christian decorum that in such solemnities ought to be observed. It
was not without cause that Job 1. 5.
Job was so jealous of his Children, what time they held their mutual meetings
of somewhat the like nature. Eccles. 11. 7, 10.
Youth, and Prove. 23. 31, 32
wine, and mirth, and other delights, are pleasing and enticing objects, and
Hinc Prouerbiu^ (...). Vinolentia clavum non habet. Eustath. Odyss. l. Et
(...). Insanire facit sapientes copia vini. Sthenelus apud Athen. dipnos. l.
10. (...). Homer.
carry the wisest often unawares further then Religion well warranteth. (...).
Clom. Alex. paedag lib. 2. cap. 1. L^gatur Plut. sympos. lib. 7. cap. 5, 7, 8.
Which yet is not spoken simply to condemn such solemnities: (It was wisely
and wittily said of the Heathen Man, that (...). Demoerit.
Amans life without festiuities, (...) like along and wearisome w^^ without
Innes:) but to show what need there is o^ direction and admonition for
Christian carriage in that kind. (...). Plut. de and. poet.
Lycurgus did not well nor wisely, when he cut down all the vines in his
country, because the wine that came of them was too much abused by many.
Neither ought Marriage Feasts to be utterly abandoned, nor Music, or other
honest mirth be exiled and banished from them, because too many ordinarily
exceed in the one, and not a few wretchedly abuse the other. Yea, if mirth and
festiuitie be ever seasonable, it is at such times: Math. 9. 15. and 22* 1, 2.
Genes. 29. 22. Ier. 7. 34. and 16. 9. and 25. 10 and 33. 11. Legatur Plutarch.
sympos. l. 4. c* 3.
Christ himself and the Spirit of God yield and approve it. Only Christian
(...). Hi^rax de Iustitia apud Stob* cap 5.
Sobriety ought then to be both our (...). loan. 2. 8, 9. (...). Plut. sympos.
l. 1. c. 4. qui tamen (...) pronunciat. Arbiter bibendi Horat. ^arm. 1. 3. In
convivijs potandi (male, putandi) Modiperat^res magistri. No^nius ex Varrone
rerum human. lib. 20.
Feast-Master, and our Mirth-Master, our Lord of Rule, not of Misrule, to
moderate both our diet and our mirth at such meetings. And the rather should
Sobriety and Modesty be at such times observed, not only in regard of Heb.
13. 4.
the holiness and honourablenes of that blessed Ordinance of God that then we
deal with, that we may Act. 10. 15.
not pollute that, that God has purified, nor dishonor that, that he has
honored; but for that also we are then laying as it were the first foundation
of a new Family: and (...). Eurip. Herc. fur.
the building proves commonly as the foundation is well or evil laid. In
solido extruendum. Vitruv. architect. lib. 1. cap. 5. and lib. 3. cap. 3.
It is evil building on a quagmire; and laying a foundation in wet weather. A
sober and a modest entrance gives good hope of the like progress; as (...).
Hinc Diogenes stolido and amenti adolescentulo, (...). Ebrius pater te genuit.
Plut. de liber. educ.
the contrary is a foul presage of evil after-demeanure. This how to prevent
is breifely, but effectually here showed. That which I have therefore thought
fit to present You rather with, then any other of the Authors friends; that
under your names that might come abroad to the use of others, that was
principally at the first intended for your good; and partly also thereby to
renew with you the remembrance of him, by whose holy hand you were publicly at
first joined together. Which conjunction God in mercy of his good pleasure long
continue, and so bless and sanctify unto you, that you may have mutual
comfort either in other by sincere holiness here, and eternal conjunction
either with other in perfect happiness els-where.

Yours in Christ, Thomas Gataker.

A MARRIAGE FEAST.
IOH. 2. 1 -- 12. 1. And the third day there was a Marriage in Cana of Galile;
and the Mother of Jesus was there.

2. And both Jesus was called and his Disciples to the Marriage.

3. And when they wanted Wine, the Mother of Jesus said unto him; They have no
Wine.

4. Jesus said unto her; Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not
yet come.

5. His Mother said unto the Servants; whatsoever he says unto you, do it.

6. Now there were set there six water-pots of stone, after the Jewish manner
of Purification, containing two or three firkins a-peece.

7 Jesus said unto them; Fill the water-pots with water. And they filled them
up to the brim.

8 And he said unto them; Draw out now and bear unto the Governor of the
Feast. And they bare it.

9 When the Ruler of the Feast had tasted the Water that was made Wine, not
knowing whence it was, (but the servants that drew the water knew) the Governor
of the Feast called the Bridgrome,

10. And said unto him; Every man at the beginning sets forth good wine; and
when men have well drunk, then that that is worse: but thou have kept the good
wine till now.

11. This beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galile; and manifested
forth his glory: and his Disciples believed in him.


I Cannot handle every thing in this Story, which shall offer it self: But
must only insist upon those parts thereof, that may most directly concern this
present solemnity.

The maine scope and drift of this whole Narration seems to be this. Scope.
To show, what an honorable estimation and account our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, does make of the holy and honorable estate of Marriage, notwithstanding
that himself was borne of a Virgin, and did himself in his own person live
and die a Virgin.

This honorable estimation of his, is manifested, In his gracing and
countenancing, the solemnization of this special Marriage, mentioned in this
Story.

Our Savior graceth and countenanceth it two manner of ways.

1. By his presence and company at the Feast. 2. By working a miracle at it,
and that the first miracle that ever he wrought.
Of both these in order; omitting to speak any thing, of the matters that
pass between Christ and his Mother, between Christ's Mother and the Wayters,
between Christ and the Wayters, and between the Governor of the Feast and the
Bridegroom. Because the Doctrine flowing from these particulars, is not so
pertinent to this present Occasion.

But before that we descend into particulars, let us first in the general
observe from the maine scope and drift of this Story, this instruction.

That the more that Satan and his accursed Imps, The general Doctrine.
shall labor to disgrace and discountenance any sacred Ordinance of God; the
more will God grace and honor the same.

The truth of this appears in no one thing more, then in this matter of
Marriage. It is wonderful to consider, how the Devil has ever labored to
disgrace and put it out of countenance: How he has made the day of ones
Marriage, as ignominious and reproachful, as if it were the day of ones public
penance or execution; what laughing and scoffing, what flearing, jering, and
nodding the head is there, not only of such as are yet single, but of those
that are themselves married persons; not only of profane swaggerers, and those
of the damned crew (as they are called) but of those (many times) that have the
reputation of Civil honest men, yea of Professors of Religion. In so much, as
if those that are to be knit together in this sacred bond, were to measure
their estate by the minds, words, and ordinary behauiours of the Spectators,
yea many times of those, who seem to honor the Solemnity with their presence
and attendance: It were better for them to stand as long in a white sheet, or
to be carted through the streets, then to present themselves into the
Congregation to knit this holy and inviolable knot. For in that case lightly
you should have none but unhappy boys, and such persons as are naught
themselves, to make signs of disgrace; good minds use to pity them that are
so publicly (though deservedly) disgraced. But here, for the most part, all,
good and bad, old and young, set themselves, though not with their hands, yet
with their hearts, countenances, and words, to cast dirt and puddle water in
the faces of those that are to enter into this Calling, as if they were to
enter into a Calling most sinful, and shameful, and most odious and vile both
in the eyes of God and man.

This is indeed a hellish and damnable iniquity; but behold yet a greater
iniquity then this: Satan has so wouen his own impuritie, with the pure
Ordinance of God, that a Marriage, is accounted no Marriage, if it be not
solemnized with beastly and profane Songs, Sonnets, Ijggs, indicted by some
hellish Spirit, and chaunted by those, that are the public incendiaries of
all filthy lusts; and these are ordinarily made in the scorn and derision of
this Holy Estate, to delight and solace the Guests withal. But indeed they
tend to no other end, but to despite and disgrace this worthy Ordinance of God,
and to make it seem in the eyes of men, nothing else but a matter of
obscenenesse and filthiness. So that if God himself had not had a special
care, to uphold, to grace and countenance this Estate, by how much more Satan
labors to make it odious and vile, all the world long before this, had bin a
very Stews and Brothel-house. See then, the care that God has to honor this
ancient Ordinance of his; how (notwithstanding that Satan has ever done his
uttermost to disgrace it, and make it vile) God subjecteth the whole world unto
it, not fools only, but wise, not poor, but the richest, not profane persons
only, but the holiest and the religiousest that ever were, not base persons,
but Kings and Emperors: So that not only all sorts and degrees of men, but in
a manner every man and woman in the world, he brings under this yoke; so that
the whole world (to account of) is as it were, but a married person: And this is
so much the more to be wondered at, that the Devil can make that so shameful,
which is so common. It is not so in sins, nor it would not be so in this, if
it were not a special divine Ordinance.

This should encourage us, The Use.
with all alacrity and confident Spirits, to submit our selves to any of Gods
Ordinances, and with so much the greater courage and heart, by how much the
more contemptible, and despised, they shall appear to be amongst men. For the
more that men do despite Gods Ordinances, the more will God honor the same,
and those that with honest hearts shall undergo the same. You may see Genesis 2.
that the very first work that God did, after the very first creation of man
and woman, was his marying of man to woman: and you see here, that one of the
first Wonders that Christ wrought was in honor of a Marriage.

We come now to the first point, wherein Christ graceth and honors Marriage,
and that is, by vouchsafing his presence at the solemnization of it, or at the
Marriage Feast.

Wherein these two points are to be considered in order.

1. The inviting of Christ unto the Marriage. 2. His coming unto it, being
invited.
From the first point let us learn these Instructions in order. Invitation.


That the Marriage Feasts, The 1. Doctr. in special.
and Solemnities of Christians, ought so to be ordered, that nothing ought to
be done or committed therein, that may not beseem the presence of our Savior
Christ.

Of this judgment and affection were these Parties, that at this time invited
our Savior Christ, else they would never have invited him. For far be it that
we should think, (yea the Story shows the contrary) that these Persons
called Christ to this Feast, to vex and greiue his Soul, with scurrile and
ribald merriments, and with wanton and unchaste sports and delights; or that for
reverence of Christ's presence, they excluded and laid aside any lawful
delights fitting such an Exercise; and therefore, though there was a solemn
Feast at this Marriage, and though out of question the day was spent in delights
and pleasures, (as is most meet for such matters) yet they were such delights
and pleasures, as they durst call our Savior Christ unto, yea and make him a
partaker of.

Fie therefore and a shame of such mirth as does not beseem the presence of
Christ, The Use.
of such words, as beseem not his ears, of such actions and exercises as
beseem not his holy eyes; such mirth and pastime is not befitting any
Solemnity, much less so honorable a Solemnity, as Marriage is or ought to be,
which is a sacred knot, whereby two persons are inviolably knit together by the
hand of God. As therefore this day, many of you are called to feast and rejoice
with these Parties, that are to be united in a faithful bond: So I beseech
you, as you will answer it before the Lord, and look for a blessing upon these
Parties, in love of whom you are assembled, that you would look to your mirth,
and see whether it be such, as in your Consciences you are persuaded, that
Christ Jesus himself, if he were present, would not be offended, but well
pleased with it. Consider whether thy mirth and laughter be such, as Christ
Jesus would be delighted therein with thee: For Christ our head, mourns with
those that mourn in him, and rejoceth with those that rejoice in him:
Otherwise assure thy self, that that pleasure of thine, with which Christ
Jesus is displeased, shall be turned into pain; that that joy of thine,
wherein Christ does not joy with thee, shall be turned into sorrow; that
laughter of thine, that is offensive to him, shall be turned into tears. There
cannot be a greater wrong offered* to a man, then for any to make themselves
merry with that, which shall greiue and vex him: How much more is it an heinous
wrong unto God, when men shall be assembled to solace and delight themselves in
those things, which do anger and displease him. Especially at such a time,
when he should be moved to bestow a blessing upon the Parties married; and
then, when we beg all joy and comfort for them at the hand of God. Verily, the
monstrous profane abuses that ordinarily use to be upon such Occasions, are no
doubt the special causes, of so many curses, that the Lord lays upon many
that enter into this honorable state, when the same shall in such vile manner
be profaned and abused by them.

Secondly, The 2. Doctr. in special.
the example of these virtuous persons that were married in Cana, and of them
that made this Feast, is to be imitated of all true Christians, that have given
their names to Jesus Christ: they must call Christ Jesus to their Wedding, they
must invite him to their Marriage Feast.

And great reason it is, that among others, nay above all other Guests, Christ
Jesus should be one.

For 1. 1. Reason.
If you that are to be married be Christians, Christ Jesus is the greatest friend
that you have in the whole world, in heaven, or in earth: And nature and
custom has taught men this, to call their chiefest and best friends to their
Weddings. So that inviting others and passing by him, it shows that they make
higher account of others then of him, and that (at the least) he is none of
their dearest friends. And they are deadly enemies to Christ that take not him
to be their dearest friend.

2. 2. Reason.
As Christ is the dearest friend to every true Christian, so is he the nearest
neighbor: Thou needs not send far for him, he is dear always, and at hand to
those that call upon him: And it is the use ever to invite our nearest
neighbors, if they be our friends. Now the Devil is his Inmate, who has not
Christ for his nearest neighbor.

3. 3. Reason.
There is none has more interest in the Bride and Bridegroom, then Christ
Jesus. He first gave them both to their Parents; He has kept and preserved
them to this estate; He it is that has given them their health, wealth,
strength, beauty, and whatsoever is worthy or lovely in them: He could take it
away at his pleasure again; yea he could in a moment take the Bride from the
Bride-Grome, and on a sudden, and in the twinkling of an eye, turn all this
preparation of joy into heaviness and grief.

4. 4. Reason.
All Christians, are the Sons and Daughters of God, and they are married in
the house of God: Their Parents upon earth are but Gods deputies. What a shame
were it then to exclude Christ Jesus, and not to invite him?

5. 5. Reason.
He sends all those things, wherewith thou solemnizest thy feast: they are all
his presents. And will thou fail to invite him, that sends provisions in so
franckly and liberally to thee?

6. 6. Reason.
Who is it but Christ Jesus, that can bless any Marriage, and make it
comfortable and joyful to the Parties? Who but he can curse it, and make it an
iron yoke to both the parties? Therefore great cause there is to invite him
above all other.

But alas (it will be said) Christ is now in heaven, and will not come, though
he should be invited; That for our parts we would count our selves happy, if
he would vouchsafe to come to us.

I answer, that though Christ Jesus be locally absent in regard of his body,
yet in regard of his Spirit he is present: and if men's hearts were set upon
him, as they ought to be; if they did but desire his presence, they should
find his presence, even in as comfortable a manner, as if he should descend
from the Right Hand of his Father, and in his body, go with the Bridegroom
and Bride to Church, and sit down at the table with them.

You therefore that are interessed in this present Action, The Use.
where so many Guests are invited, examine your own Souls and Consciences,
whether you have not forgotten the principal Guest: It were better that the
day of thy Marriage had bin the day of thy Burial, then that it should be said,
Thou wast married, and Christ Jesus not remembered: And therefore if your
Consciences smite you in this, see that before you go out of this place you
invite him: It is not too late; thou art now in his presence, lift up thy heart
and mind, and desire him, that he would be present, and that thou may have
his blessed company; and then you shall be sure of a blessed and joyful issue.

Thirdly, Doctr. 3.
Christians that would have Christ Jesus present, at their Feasts and
Mariage-Solemnities, may learn hence, what persons they are to invite to keep
Christ company. For in the Text it is specified of this Wedding, that the
Mother of Christ was there, and the Disciples of Christ; all godly persons, all
special friends unto Christ. We say in the Proverb, Its merry when friends
meet; And we know by experience, that if men invite their special friend, they
will have a care what company they entertain him withal. If it may be, they
will take order that some that they know he loves shall be invited to keep
him company, at least such as they think he does not hate. Neither can a man
do his friend a greater wrong, then to invite him to feasting and merriment,
when together with him, he inviteth such as will by all possible means
disgrace and despite him.

Beloved, Use.
Christ Jesus is the dearest friend thou have in the world, what interest he
has to be a bidden Guest, to all Christian Marriages, I have showed before.
There Is none but will say, they have called Christ Jesus to their Marriage, and
do desire above all things, that he would bestow a blessing upon them; you come
to the Church in this solemn manner, to that very end and purpose to call him:
But how do Christians use Christ Jesus at such times? Certainly men usually
provide Christ such companions, as if they should rake hell for them. Such as
set themselves, by blasphemy, ribaldrie, and all kind of profanesse, to
despite Christ Jesus, and to offer all indignities possible to Him and his
Religion. Is it therefore any wonder, that Christ his own ordinance to some
should prove a curse; when he himself, in the solemnization thereof, shall be
in such a manner cursed and blasphemed, and when men at such times in steed of
inviting the Mother of Christ and his Disciples, to keep Christ company,
shall bid Annas, and Caiphas, and Malchus, and other such like mates, whom they
know will set themselves to disgrace and scorn Jesus by all possible means.

In the second place it is to be considered, Christ's presence.
that Christ comes to the Marriage Feast being called.

Whence in order, let us observe these Instructions.

First, 1. Doctr.
the wonderful meekness and lowliness of Jesus Christ; that being called,
would vouchsafe his presence, to countenance and grace the marriage of these two
Persons, who as it seems were but some poor couple, else they would in all
likelihood have forecast to have had wine enough. It would be thought a folly
worthy to be chronicled, if a Swineheard or a Shepherd, should presume to
invite the King, and his Council, to his wedding. All the Kingdom would be in
a wonderment, if being so invited, they should come and grace his Marriage with
their Presence and with Gifts. Is it not much more to be wondered at, that the
King of Glory, the Eternal Son of God should descend so low, to grace with
his high and holy presence, so base and lowly a Couple.

As Christ was, Use.
so ought much more all his Ministers to be: Kings and Princes may and ought in
such Cases to keep State; but it must not be so with the Ministers of Christ;
They must be as Christ and his Apostles were, 1 Cor. 9. 22.
All unto all, that they may gain some. Though they ought to rebuke Kings and
Emperors when they are called unto it, yet they ought also to subject
themselves to the meanest and lowest of Gods people, and should not think much
to go to the meetings of the meanest, if a Christian Soul should desire it.

Observe secondly, 2. Doctr.
what a wonderful grace and countenance herein Christ shows to this
Ordinance. Verily, if he had done no more, but this, to sit down at the Table
with them, to eat of their meats, and to drink of their cups, it had bin a far
greater honor, then if he had sent a Company of Angels from heaven visibly to
have waited upon and served the Bridegroom and Bride, that same day. If the
Antichristian Papist had but such a president, to grace their impure Votaries,
their Monks, and their Nunns* if Christ had but gone in that manner, being
invited, to a Monastery, a Priorie, a Nunnery, or a Hermitage, it had bin
enough to have cried down Marriage for ever, and to have advanced their loose
single life infinitely above it.

This should teach us to make the same use of it for the magnifying of Marriage,
Use.
which they would have made of it, if they had it for their counterfeit
Virginity; though its most probable, that the Papists would not have showed
themselves so forward for it, if they should have perceived that Christ had bin
such a friend unto it.

Note thirdly from hence, 3. Doctr.
that Christ Jesus is no enemy to honest mirth and delight, at such meetings
and solemnities as this, but has by his own presence and precedent approved
it. Though we do not read in the Scripture, that Christ ever laughed, yet we
need not think that he was so rigide and austere, that he could endure no
mirth and delight; As though men in his Presence were in their silent dumps,
and made dumb shows only one to another. Surely then would not Christ have
bin so often invited to Feasts as he was; or if he had, he would not have
frequented them so often: For the special use of Feasts are for friends to
rejoice and make merry together in; and therefore in the Holy Tongue have their
(...) Chaggim.
name, from leaping and rejoicing.

So that we see hence, Use.
That there is a season and a time when Christians may rejoice together, yea
and that in the presence and before the face of Christ Jesus himself; he
sitting by, and looking on. Servants use to be most merry amongst themselves,
and the presence of Master and Mistress damps their mirth. But the Servants of
Christ may be as merry in his presence as behind his back. Yea they are more
merry when he sits at table with them, then when he is absent.

I observe this the rather, to cross an illusion of Satan, whereby he usually
persuades the merry Greeks of the world; That if they should once devote
themselves to the Service of Jesus Christ, that then they must bid an
everlasting farewell to all mirth and delight; that then all their merry days
are gone; that in the kingdom of Christ, there is nothing, but sighing and
groaning, and fasting and prayer. But see here the contrary: even in the
kingdom of Christ, and in his House, there is marrying and giving in marriage,
drinking of wine, feasting, and rejoicing even in the very face of Christ. Nay
its not possible, that any person upon earth, should joy as the servants of
Christ do. Do but consider the joy of a condemned person, when at the place
of Execution he has received a pardon: Such is the joy of Christ's servants,
especially then, when Christ comes unto them. For before he uses to come, he
suffers men to be as persons at the point of Execution, he brings them even to
the pit of Hell, to Hell mouth, and then when he comes to them, he brings a
Pardon with him. Christ's servants indeed have many greifes, and qualmes come
over their heart; but it is then with them, as with women near their time of
bringing forth; they are in travail with some joy. Clean contrary it is with
wicked ones; who have ofttimes many flashings of joy: but when they are in the
height of it, they are then big-bellied, and ready to travel of some sorrow:
and their own woeful experience makes them expect it. For its very usual with
them in the extremity of their mirth to say, I pray God I hear of no sorrow,
I have bin this day so merry. And good cause they have so to fear, that cannot
be merry, except the Devil play the Musician; that cannot sing, except the
dittie be made in Hell. Let all our jolly Gallants and merry Companions
therefore know, That the Children of God can be merry and pleasant, though they
cannot cog, lie, swear, swagger, talk lasciuiously, and filthily, etc. And
they shall then be everlastingly merry, Esai. 65. 13, 14, 18, 19.
when the wicked that now seem to be made of nothing else but mirth and
pleasure, shall gnash their teeth and howl in Hell for ever and ever.

4ly. 4. Doctr.
Since Christ is ready to come to our Marriages and Weddings; This should teach
us, to provide for him, those dishes, that himself best loves, and that he
uses most to feed upon. In which provision, thou needst not to put ever the
more in the Pot for him, or upon the Spit, or in the Oven. But the Table that
thou art to spread to Christ must be in thy heart; see that thy heart stand
syncerely affected unto him; yea thou must dress and prepare thy Soul for
him. Ioh. 4. 32, 34.
For as the special meat that he prepared for himself to feed upon, was, his
doing of his Fathers will; so the best dish that thou can prepare for him,
is, Thy obedience to his will.

Those therefore that call Christ to their lewdnes, Use.
ribaldrie, blasphemy, etc. they call him to a banquet of Carrian, or a worse
matter then that; and offer him a bowl of vinegar and gall to drink.

The second means, Miracle.
by which Christ dignifieth Marriage, is, by working a Miracle, yea the first
Miracle that ever he wrought, a Miracle whereby he turns water into wine, yea
into most excellent wine. I must in regard of Time, handle all these points
together confusedly.

1. 1. Doctr.
Hence observe that Christ being called to the Marriage, comes thither God as
well as man; yea and graceth the Marriage with the manifestation of his Deity;
so that those that have this grace to call Christ Jesus to their Marriage, (and
all such call him, as heartily call upon him,) they shall feel his presence,
yea and his divine power in his presence; for Christ never comes being called,
but he leaves behind him some prints of his Godhead and divine power.

And this may be a sign unto thee; Use.
That thou never did heartily call Christ Jesus, unto thy house, and unto thy
table, if thou have had no sense and feeling of his divine power, doing a
greater work and more powerful within thy self, then is the turning of water
into wine.

Secondly, Doctr. 2.
Observe how Christ recompenceth those that are kind unto him, how in their
necessity he works a Miracle to supply their want. So that they, that have
this grace, to invite Christ Jesus, and to call him to their Feasts, rather
then they shall want any thing needful for them, he will work Miracles.

What greater encouragement can men have then this, to make Christ Jesus
always their cheifest Guest? For then, rather then they shall die for hunger
or thirst, he will rain milk, and honey, and Quails from Heaven, to feed
and nourish them.

Thirdly, Doctr. 3.
In that Christ upon present necessity turns Water into Wine, the present
Feast requiring it; It teaches us, That Christ's extraordinary works are not
for gazing and wonderment, but for special use, according to the several
necessities of his Servants. They wanted wine, the soul and life of a Feast;
and Christ by Miracle makes wine.

And first this again, Use 1.
should be a wonderful encouragement, especially to persons entering into the
state of Matrimony, which seems to bring many necessities with it, to make
special account of such a Guest, who will not only supply their wants in
general, but their special wants, belonging to their special places. He that
but in a matter of ceremony and complement, turned water into wine, that there
might be no dishonor to that Feast, where he was a Guest: Will he see any
needful thing wanting to them that marry in his fear?

Secondly, Use 2.
this should comfort men against the overmuch cares of this world, for Wife,
and Children. He that now turned water into wine, can turn stones into bread*
lead into silver, brass into gold, and will do it rather then thou should
want, and if in his wisdom he did see it good for these he can also as,
easily turn a bad Husband into a good, and a bad Wife into a good, a Poor man
into a Rich, a Base man into a Noble, a Cottage into a Palace etc. Make much
therefore of Christ. For on the contrary side, exclude Christ out of your
Feasts, and he will turn thy wine into water, if not in the glass, or in thy
mouth, yet in thy stomach; so that it shall do thy Spirits no more good, then
if thou had drunk a cup of cold water.

Thirdly, Use 3.
this should teach us to imitate Christ. Does he in this manner honor Marriage
by a Miracle? Surely, those persons that are married, should honor him with the
like-Miracle. They should endeavor also to turn water into wine. But how?
Surely, whereas their former lives and conversations have bin unto Christ but
(as it were) a cup of heartlesse water; they should be unto him by their
amendment, as a cup of wine to cheer up his heart.

FINIS.

