News out of German.

A most wonderful and true discourse of a cruel murderer, who had killed in
his life time, nine hundred, threescore and odd persons among which six of
them were his own children, begotten on a young woman which he forcibly kept
in a Cave seven years, with the manner how he was taken, and the abundance
of wealth that was found in the said Cave: executed at Berkessell on the 14. of
June.

Translated and published according to the Dutch and French Coppyes. By G.P.
1584.

Imprinted for George Pen, dwelling at Ipswich.

A Letter written to a noble personage of the City of Mentz, by a Gentleman
of credit, who saw this murderer executed.
RIght honorable and my especial good friend, I have not at this time any
news wherewith to acquiant you, but only this strange and admirable occasion
which lately happened: the truth whereof I trust my credit is sufficient with
your honor to confirm, and the rather, for that I not only heard the
murderers examination, but was also an eye witness of his death. And albeit it
may seem incredible, yet thus much I can assure you, that I saw the scrole
which was found in the murderers Cave, wherein he had written the names of al
one that he had murdered, and I heard him also affirm it with his own mouth.
The discourse thereof follows, which I commit to your judgment, and so I
commend your honor to the heavenly protection.

A rare and strange Discourse, of a notorious and cruel Murderer, named
Christeman Gempertinga, who leading a bloody life of long time, and being at
last apprehended therefore confessed that in his life time he had slain nine
hundred, three score and four persons, and intended to murder still, till he
had made up the account of a thousand. For which horrible murders, he was
executed in the Town of Berkessell, near to the City of Mentz in Germany.
IN the Forest of Frasburg, within a league of Berkessell, there lived for the
space of 13. years one Christeman Gempertinga of Corpen, two leagues distaunce
from Collen, whose only maintenau^ce was by robbing and spoiling of the
passingers, and such a fit and commodious place for his purpose he had provided
himself of, as he might at pleasure discern them that traueiled on the hye
ways, either to Mentz, Dietenhausen, Treuers, or Duche de Luxenbourg, to which
places Merchauntes did ordinarily traffic, because they were Towns of great
commodity for their affairs. And as they travailed through this Forest, he
and his companions would set upon them, and having robbed them of their goods
and treasure, would likewise dispoyle them of their lives, and afterward cause
them to be thrown into a deep pit in the Forest, which he had ordained for
the purpose: as for their apparel, weapons and such like, he carried to his
Cave, which in time was so well stored with Harquebuses, Swords, Murrians,
Partisans and Corssetes, that a great strength could not have over come him and
his companyons.

And for the goods, which he took from the Merchauntes and passengers, his
Cave was so well furnished there with, being of all sorts of Merchandise, and
wares belonging to the Allemaignes and other Nations: as the quantity thereof
was judged sufficient to furnish a Fair and the value thereof esteemed more
worth, then 70000. Florins of gold of Allemaigne. And besides, there was found
in his Cave also when he was taken, so great store of wine, bread, flesh,
reysons, and figs, as would have suffised him for one whole year. Amongst all
the passengers that traueiled through this Forest, it chanced one day, that a
proper woman of Popert near ye Rhine A Coopers daughter went to see her
brethren and had occasion to pass that way, this villainous murderer having
espied her, made have to her, and having dispoiled her of such things as she
had about her, intended to murder her, as he had done all the other: but being
overcome with the sight of her fair face and body, held his hands, and
entreated her to keep him company there in that place, and be contended with
that kind of life which he used, otherwise he would likewise kill her. The
woman fearful of death, and seeing the horrible massacre of dead bodies in
the pit before her, whom she should keep company if she denied his request:
consented unto him, and promised never to betray or reveal him to any, whereby
his life might stand in any hazard. On this condition he lead her with him into
his Cave and there she lived with him for the space of 7. years, in which time
she had 6. Children by him, which so soon as they were borne, he would take
them and break their necks and pull them by the feet and head to streatch
them in length and afterward would go hang them up on a high place that he
had provided for the nonce: and then he would stand looking on them, and seeing
the wind to make them wave up and down, this merciles villain would say:
Dance dance my loouing Children, for Gempertinga your Father does sound you
a dance. It was a marvelous grief and great heart breaking to the poor
woman, to see her tender Infantes used so despitefully by their own Father,
and gladly she would have been rid of that kind of life, but that she could
not get thence by any means: for he had tied her with a chain, and she could
go no further then the Chain gave her liberty, which policy he used, least
she should escape away while he and his companions were abroad, and so his
dealings might be discovered. After that he had robbed and killed for a long
season, he grew doubtful of his companions, and every day did more and more
mistrust them: so that at length he devised a mean to ease his doubt, and one
day making merry amongst them, he conuayed in their meat and drink such a
violent and extreme kind of poison, as they all dyed thereof within 5. or six
hours after: which he perceiving, threw them into the pit to the other bodies
that they had murdered.

When he was thus rid of his companions, and had no body left with him but the
woman, he wexed somewhat doubtful of her likewise: but God willing to reveal
the horrible villainies of this murderer, caused the woman to be very
importunat in request to him, that she might go see her friends, and wrought
also in his mind so accordingly, that he gave her leave to go, assuring him
self on her promise, that she would never reveal him. She went and saw her
Parents, and returned again without uttering any word of him, which made him
the more willing to suffer her to go again, and entering the streets of
Berkessel, she saw little children playing, the sight whereof, and the
remembrance how villainously her own children were murdered, caused her to fall
into extreme complaints and passions, at last she brake forth into these
dolorous speeches. O God which do maintain all things, and from whom the
death of my children cannot be hidden, and who know the promise I have made
by constraint: behold me in mercy, and pity the anguishes I have endured in
my flesh and blood.

These her complaints were so pitiful both in show and hearing, yt many
gathered about her to know the cause of her lamentations, and very earnest they
were with her to understand the cause of her passionate afflictions: but they
could by no means prevail in their inte^ts, for that she said, she had
protested secrecy of her greefes by solemn oath, and she would not utter
them to any. Some of them that stood by and heard her words, infourmed the
Justices in ye Town of the matter, whereupon she was brought before them, and
there she continued in the same obstinate opinion she did before:
nevertheless, they labored still with her, and gave her to understand, that a
wilful oath might endammage her soul, and by revealing it, she might e^cape
many dangerous threatninges for the contrary. By which persuasions she
animated her self, and from the beginning to the end she discoursed the whole
circumstaunce by particulers, of the murderer and his living: whereupon, the
Justices concluded with her, what course she should take to prevail in this
matter, both to betray the murderer, and save her self blameless. Not long
after they put in readiness thyrtie well appointed Soldiers, who should follow
the woman a far off till they found the Cave: and she (according to the
Justices direction (took with her a bag of Pease, which she scattered along
the way as she went, by which means the Soldiers could not miss of the right
way to the Cave. When she came to the Cave, the murderer was very glad of her
return, and jesting familiarly with her, at last he laid him down on the
ground, and laid his head in her lap, where by her rubbing and soft
scratching it, he fell a sleep. Within a while after, the Soldiors came to the
Cave, and finding him thus sleeping, they laid hands on him, and bound him so,
that he could not resist them: which he perceiving, cried out, O thou
disloyal whore, it is long since I misdoubted this thy treachery, and I thought
to have sped thee with the rest of thy fellows. The Soldiers brought him with
them to Berkessel, where being put to the torment, he confessed all his former
villainies, and that he had murdered 964. persons, and how he intended to
continue in murdering still, till he had slain so many as came to a thousand,
and then he would murder no more: and to verify his words, the Soldiers
presented the Justices a scrowle, wherein the names were written by his own
hand, of all them that he had murdered, and on what several days he murdered
them. Heervpon he was condemned, and had his legs and arms, and bones broken
with an iron instrument fit for the purpose, and afterward was laid on a Cart
wheel without the Town (as it is the manner in other Countries) where he lived
for the space of nine days after, being daily sustained with drink and meat,
to maintain his life in some extreme pain: and all the goods that were
found in his Cave, were brought to the Town, and they and the woman kept in
hold, the Magistrates being not as yet resolved how to deal with them. It is
thought, that had not the Soldiors found him so sleeping, they could hardly
have taken him, he had so many Caliuers, Harguebuses, and Dags ready charged in
his Cave, and was of himself such a stout, strong and active man, and the
place where he was, did serve him in all respects able to resist a great number.

The consideration of this strange and monstrous discourse, I committee to
your honors good construction, accounting it a part of my duty, to make your
honor acquainted with any notable thing I can hear of: And so I humbly take
my leave.

FINIS.

