A SPARK TOWARD THE KINDLING OF Sorrow for SION.

A Meditation on AMOS 6.6.

BEING THE SVMME OF A Sermon preached at Sergeants Inn in FLEET STREET.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Star in Corne-hill, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir Randol Crew Knight, ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S
Sergeants at Law.
Right Worshipful,
IT cannot but be most true of our times, that the blessed Apostles spoke
almost sixteen hundred years since; 1 John 2.18.
Hora est nouissima; The last hour is now a running. And, 1 Cor. 10.11.
we are those on whom the ends of the world are fallen. Toward the end
whereof, we were also long since forewarned by our Savior himself, That
Matthew. 24.12. Charitas refriguit valde circa ifla tempora in ^^ni statu: and
iniquitas plus solito caepit abundare. Fascicul. temp. ad an. 879.
Iniquity should grow rife, and Charity wax cold. That which had it not been
foretold us, yet Reason might inform us, and our own daily Experience does too
evidently enforce on us. For (...). Hebr. 8.13.
the older every thing is, the nearer it approaches its end. And in every
thing ordinarily In imo pessimu^. Sen. epist. 1. Quema^modum ex amphora primu^,
quod est sincerissimum, esslait, grauissimum quodque turbidumque subsidit: sic
in aetate nostra, quod est optimum primum est; segnius and languidius est quod
superest propius a fine. Ibid. 108.
the worst comes last. (...). Menand. (...). Antiph. (...). Idem. (...).
Bion. apud Laert. (...). Plato Axioch. (...). Eurip. Oenom. - subeunt morbi
tristisque senectus. Virg. Georg. 3. Non immerito semper una ponit morbos and
senectutem. Sen. ep. 108. -circumsilit agmine facto Mo^borum omne genus.-
Iuuen. sat. 10. Eccles. 12.1-8.
Old Age is the common receptacle of all bodily evils and maladies. And
howsoever (...). Solon. (...). Eurip. Phoen. (...). Idem Beller. - non omnia
grandior aetas Quae fugiamus habet: seris venit vsus ab annis. Ovid. met. l. 6.
(...). Soph. Oedip.
Skill may increase as years come on, being gathered much by observation, that
asks Time and continuance; yet (to omit that Hinc diuerbiu^, (...). Vise
Eras. chil. 1. cent. 5. adag. 36. (...). Democr. apud Stob. 115. (...). Herod.
hemiamb. (...).- Eurip. Aeolo. Hinc deliratio, and delira senectus.
Judgment also grows weak commonly with the brain, the seat of it) (...).
Pherecr. (...). Men. Sopho^. Scyr. (...). Iunc. de senect.
Practice necessarily fails, as ability impaireth, while age brings with it
as 1. King. 1.1. (...) Eratosthenes; and (...) Patrocles dixit. Senilis byems.
Ovid. met. 15.
an abatement of natural heat, so (...). Iunc. de se^. (...). Plato Axioch.
a decay of sense, and consequently issuing a coldness from the one, and a
numnesse from the other. Hinc Augustine. Christum ait in 6^ aetate tanquam in
mundi senectute venisse. retract. l. 1. c. 26. and de Genesis ad Man. l. 1. c. 23.
Vise 2. Esdr. 5.55, 56. Ambr. de bon. mort. c. 18. et Sidon. epist. 6. lib. 8.
Sed and quae contra banc Tremellij sententiam columel. de re rust. l. 2. c. 1.
disseruit.
This Age of ours is the worlds Old Age. Antiquitas mu^di inventus est seculi.
That which we call Antiquity, was indeed the worlds Youth. Time is grown
gray with us, that was green with them that then lived. And no marvel then,
2. Tim. 3.1.-5. 2. Pet. 3.3. Iud. 17, 18.
if into this last Age of the world, as into a filthy sink, or common sewer of
some great house or vast City, all the Vices of former times be gathered
together: And as Ier. 9.3. 2. Tim. 3.13. Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? Aetas
parentum peior auis tulit Nos nequiores mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Horat. carm. 3.6.
evil things are wont to wax worse by continuance, be grown rancker now then
ever they were; The Devil himself, it seems, also bestirring himself, and
Apocal. 12.12. Extrema mundi atrocius tentaturus aggreditur: quia tanto fit
feruentior ad saeuitiam, quant^ se sentit viciniorem ad poenam. Gregor. moral.
lib. 34. cap. 1. Furore pestis peior in nouissimo. Prudent. Steph. 10.
raging the more fiercely, because he sees his time to be but short. Yea no
marvel is it, if, according to the nature of Old Age, though there be Dan.
12.4. Vrgente mundi fine scientia proficit, and largius cum tempore excrescit,
Gregor. moral lib. 9. cap. 8. Sicut and per incrementa temporum creuit scientia
patrum. Idem Ezech. l. 2. hom. 16. Hinc nos nanos Gigan^um humeris insidentes,
vnde possint plura ^is and remotiora videre, dixere Bern, Carn. Joan. Sarish.
in metalog. Petr. Bles. epist. 92. Bannes in Thom. par. secundam secundae.
Stella in Lucam. Castrens. contr. Wessel. de indulg. and alij.
more light now, then ever there was, yet there be ^ 2.10. ^erner. in Fasciae,
(...) ad ^^. 1415. Ecclesiae tempora in 4. aetates disp. r^itur: in prima er^t
scientia conscientiae coniuncta: in secunda scientia a conscientia seiuncta: in
tertia conscientiae plus quam scientiae: in qu^rta neque scientia, neque
conscientia. Nostra secundae propinquior, in qua plus multo luminis, minus
ardoris.
not heat (...) answerable to that light, nor affection to good things in any
due proportion to the skill and knowledge of them; if, as O sol^ fortes
garrulitate senes. Maximinian. in eleg. Gallo perperam inscripta. Inde lingua
(...). dicta, (...).
the manner of old men is, we be (...) Factis procul, verbis tenus
philosophi. Epictet. apud Gell. l. 17. c. 19 ignaeua opera, lingua philosopha.
Paecuvius. (...). D^^o^r. Quae philosophia fuit, facta philologia est. Senec.
epist. 108.
full of tongue, but weak and feeble of hand, having much speech and dispute,
but little performance or practice; not Apocal. 3.16.
a luke-warmnesse, but Zeph. 1.12.
a key-coldnesse, nor a bare numnesse, but a mere Apocal. 3.1.
deadness (as in the last ruins and decays of Old Age, is rather (...).
Plato apud Plut. de ser. numin. vind. (...). Iunc. de senect. Itaqu^ Alexis
senex interrogatus quid ageret, (...).
a lingering death, then a lengthening of life) having generally possessed the
hearts and minds of the most. I need not make any long appeal to Experience,
for the justification of this Charge. For the rifenesse of Iniquity, of all
kind with all sorts; Quando etenim vberior vitiorum copia? Inuen. sat. 1.
Praeter paucissimos quosdam qui mala fugiunt, quid est aliud poene omnis coetus
Christianorum, quam sentina vitiorum? Saluian. de prouid. l. 3. c. 8.
who ^eeth not what an height Impiety and Impuritie are grown to in most
places? Even so great, Vltraiam vix quo progrediatur habet. Ovid. Fast. 1.
that the rancknesse and ripeness thereof, seems to call ^loud for Apoc.
14.14, 15, 17, 18. Psalm. 119.126.
the sharp fickle in the hand of the destroying Angel, the Executioner of
Gods Anger. And the general broiles as this instant in all parts almost of
Christendom, may well persuade us, that even the (...). Apoc. 8.2.
bottomless pit is broken up, and set open; and Apoc 20.3, 7.
Satan and his limbs let loose; for how long, he best knows, Apoc. 20.1.
Esai 37.29.
who has their tedder (which in these evils, is our chief comfort) in his
hand. Mean while our Coldness and Numnesse appears in nothing more then in
this, that Ierem. 2.30. and 3.5. (...). Plut. de merb. animi. Quid amentius
qu^m in malis esse, and malorum intelligentiam non babere? Salu; de prouid. l.
6. c. 12.
we are grown insensible of our own evils; and notwithstanding the ruefull
and lamentable estate of the Church of God, in most parts at the present, and
the insupportable afflictions that the Lords Faithful Servants, our Brethren,
and fellow members in Christ Jesus, do by occasion of these hurly-burlies
daily endure; yet An non cord captiui, sensu capti, qui inter suorum supplicia
rident, qui iugulart si in suoru^ iugulis non intelligunt, qui morise in suoru^
mortibus non putant? Salu. ibid. c. 10.
the most regard it not, nor take any notice at all of it, save as matter of
news and nouelty, to furnish discourse, or to feed their itching Act. 17.21.
(...). Demosth. ad epist. Philip.
Athenian-like humors withal. Quis, r^g^, interfici alter^ iuxta se videt, and
ipse non met^it? quis donum vicini sui ard^^^ ^e^^it, and (...) efficere
^mnibus medis ^ititu^, (...), ipse incendio concremetur? Saluian, de prouid. l.
6. c. 7.
A great coldness, and a strange numnesse indeed, arguing an utter want of
zeal to Gods Truth, and love to his flock, when nothing affects men, but
what they personally feel, or fear may befall themselves. Yea even among
those few, to speak of, that seem to take these things to heart, hard it is to
find a fellow-feeling affection any thing proportionable to the occasion given
of it, or such as could not but possess us, were spiritual life and heat so
fresh, and so vigorous in us as it ought. To help therefore (...). 2. Timoth.
1.6.
to re-enkindle this heavenly Fire, that with many seems (...). Apoc. 3.2.
languishing and ready to go out, and to repair this holy Romans 12.11. Apoc.
3.19.
Heat, so much every where Matthew. 24.12.
impaired through the Iniquity of the times, I here tender my (...), vti
Homer. odyss.'s.
Spark, taken from the sacred Apoc. 8.5.
Censer, and in that regard not mine own. Which howsoever it may seem, being
so little as it is, likely of it self to do little: (And yet (...). Eustath.
ad Him. Et N^nus Di^rys. l. 5. (...).
a little spark (...). James 3.5. Sirac. 11.31. Scintilla res parua est, and
poene dum cernitur, non videtur; sed si fomlt^m compreh^^derit, nutrimenta sui
quamuis paruus ignis inuenerit, moenia, vrbes, latissimos saltus regionesque
consumit. Hieron. in Gal. c. 5. De parua scintilla complentur prunae, and ignis
a^^ensus comburit multos frugum aceruos. Ben-Syrae apud Drus. adag. and quaest.
lib. 3. cap. 23.
meeting with some kind of matter may do much, and has many times been
means of raising a greater fire then could easily again be quenched: And a
weak word may prove powerful and effectual in this kind, accompanied with
his Spirit, of whom it was sometime said; Luke 24.32.
Did not our hearts glow within us, while he talked with us?) Howsoever, I
say, of it self it may be deemed unlikely to do ought; yet it may do
something, and not a little, by provoking some others, better stored in this
kind then my self, to bring in greater plenty of fuel, toward the raising,
maintaining, and feeding of this Fire. Some little effect. I found of it,
(which the rather encourages me now to publish it) by some that seemed to be
affected with it at that time, when it was delivered in your Worships hearing
among others. Since which time, the notes of it lay by me, not looked after,
among my loose papers, till of late requested to reuise M. W. Teelinck of
Middlebrough his Balance of the Sanctuary.
the work of a Reverend Divine, somewhat of the like subject, translated out
of his own language, wherein he writ it, into ours; (which work I wish had
lighted on a more skillful Translator) I was thereby put in mind of them, and
having as well as I now could (being above a twelue-month since it was
preached) by help of mine own memory, and the notes of some that then writ,
supplied them, and so far forth perfected them, as my present employments
would permit, I thought good to add this my Spark to that Fire, which that
worthy man had so happily begun to kindle, and I wish many others may second
him and me in. That being so done, I make bold to present unto your Worship,
partly as to one that are, I doubt not, affected seriously with Joseph's
Afflictions; and will therefore, I presume, like well of the Argument therein
dealt with; and partly also as to one, from whom I have at diverse times
received sundry favors and kindnesses, my thankfulness for which, I do
willingly take occasion hereby to acknowledge. Wherewith concluding, I leave
your Worship to Gods gracious protection, and rest


Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, THO. GATAKER.

A SMALL SPARK toward the kindling of Sorrow for Sion.
AMOS 6.6. But they are not grieved for the affliction of JOSEPH.


THE Minister and Messenger of this Prophecy was Amos; The Prophet.
not N^m est ipse qu^ patrem Esaiae 1.1. legimus. Hie^on in Amos, and Basil. i^
Esai.
the father of Esaias, as Vt plaerique putant. Hieron. in Esai. Sic Clem. Alex.
s^rom. l. 1. Epiphan. vit. prophet. and Graeci plaerique. Riber, in prophet.
min. praelud.
some of the Ancients have thought: Not their Ille (...) scribitur, and
robustum significat: est^ (...) and populu^ ^vulsus interpretatur. Hieron. in
Amos. Imo, onerans, vt Arquer. vel onustus potius, vt Ximen sieve (...), quasi
baiulus, vt Hieron. ipse in Io^l.
names only in the original, but their descents also (if the Jewish Rabbines
report may be believed) were diverse: the one, as Ignoratur familia ^ius;
traduntur tamen fratres fuisse Amatsias Rex and Amot^. R. Kim^bi in Esa^.
they say, of the race royal: this other (as himself confesses) a poor
peasant, Amos 7.14.
neither a Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, but a silly (...) Cap 7.14.
(...) Cap. 1.1.
neat-herd, and a plucker of sycomores, till it pleased God extraordinarily to
call him unto that office.

The Prophecy.
Now this Amos, though bred and brought up Chap. 1.1.
at Tekoah 2 Chronicles. 11.6.
in Judah, (whither Chap. 7.12.
Amaziah therefore would have him sent back, as a vagrant, to the proper place
of his abode:) yet was he sent by God (as H^sh. 4.1. and 5.1
Hoshea and some others) to the Ten Tribes, to Israel: but so, as that in his
Sermons he deals with either, sometime Chap. 2.4.
with Judah alone, sometime Chap. 2.6.
with Israel, or the Ten Tribes apart, and sometime Chap. 3.1.
with all Israel jointly together.

This Chapter.
That part of his Prophecy contained in this Chapter, whereof my Text is a
parcel, is directed as to either, so principally Verse. 1.
to Sion and Samaria, the head-cities of either.

For that in them those were, Saluian, deprouid. l^. 7. ca. 2. de Aquitanis. Et
de Carthagine, ibid. c. 12. Video quasi scaturientem viiijs ciuitatem; plenam
turbi^, sed magis turpitudini^us; plenam diuiiijs, sed magis vitije. Sic and
Eulog memor ab. l. 2. c. 14. Praepoters vi^ijs and diuitijs. Et Sidon. epist.
7. lib. 8. Sic vitijs, vt diuitijs incubantes.
qui vt diuitijs sic vitijs primi fuere, (to use Saluians words) that were as
foremost in wealth, so Nullum non bominum genus concurrit in vrbem, and
virtutibus and vitijs magna Pretia ponentem. Sen. ad Helu. c. 6. Quo cuncta
vndique ^trecia, ant pudenda confluunt, celebranturque. Tacit. Annal. Vt in
mare fluminae omnia, s^c vit^^ in magnas aulas (vrbes etiam) influere. Pius 2.
Papa apud Platinam.
forwardest in wickedness: And Obtinet itaque ^ic proverb. quod Ezech. 16.44.
habetur, Qualis matter, talis filia. Minora enim oppid^ and vrbes sunt
Metropolis sine matricis ciuitatis quasi filiae, Number. 21.25. Vise R. Ca^ium in
Ezech. and Drus. quaest. 1.6.
from thence as from a Wellhead was profaneness and naughtiness derived and
diffused into all coasts and quarters of either Country: according to that of
Micah; Mica 1.5.
What is the wickedness of Jacob, but Samaria? or what are the high places of
Judah, but Jerusalem?

For the distribution of it: Division of the Chapter. Parts 2.
The Chapter consists of two parts.

There is, 1. Propositio, a general proposition; Proposition.
Verse. 1.
a woe to the secure ones in Sion and Samaria, in the forefront of it.

2. Perpolitio, Explication*
a more particular explication thereof, in the rest of the chapter: And therein,

1. Verse. 2.-7.
Disceptatio, Branches 2. Disceptation.
a disceptation or debating with them concerning their sins. 2. Verse. 7.-
Denunciatio, Denunciation.
a denunciation or threatening of Gods judgments against them for the same.
There is malum culpae in the one, malum paenae in the other; flagitium in the
one, and flagellum in the other: Man's sin in the one, and Gods wrath in the
other; the practice of evil in the one, and the punishment of evil in the
other. Disceptation. Branch 1. Sins 4.


The sins that they are charged with in the former are four: 1. Their
security: Sin 1.
Verse. 3. and Chap. 9.10. So Ezech. 12.27.
They put the evil day far from them, when it was even at the very door
with them. 2. Their cruelty: Sin 2.
Verse. 3.
They Appropinquare faecitis. Riber. Ad^ouetis. Inn.
draw unto them (or, set them down in) the chair of violence. 3. Their riot,
and excess: Verse. 4, 5, 6. Esai 5.11, 12. Job 21.11, 12.
They lie stretching themselves on their Iuory beds; eat the fat lambs out of
the fold, Sin 3.
and calves out of the stall; use all manner of variety of music and
melody, inuenting daily new means of mirth; drink their wine in deep
carousing cups; and anoint themselves (...)
with the principal and pretiousest ointments. Sin 4.
4. Their rechlesnesse: like Matt. 24.38.39
those of Noah's time, they gave themselves wholly to this voluptuous course of
life; and as they did nothing else, so they minded naught else; Verse. 6. Esai
5.11, 12.
they had no regard at all unto ought that from the hand of God either befell
themselves or others.


And these sins are aggrauated; Amplification ^
1. Verse. 2.
By the mercy and bounty of God toward them, who had blessed them far above
other their neighbor nations. Amplification 2.
2. Verse. 6.
By the misery and distressed estate of their poor brethren at that very
time, when they reuelled and rioted in that manner, Branch 2.
in the words of my Text. Plagues 4.



The Judgments threatened in the latter part are likewise four: 1. V^rs. 7.
Captivity and thraldom. 2. Verse. 8.
Destruction of their City. 3. Verse. 9, 10.
Desolation by sword and plague. 4. Verse. 11.
Ruin of houses, as well great as small.


Which judgments should be effected Verse. 12, 13.
for those sins of theirs, Verse. 14.
by a foreign Nation that should like a violent land-floud overrun their
whole Co^^trey from Number. 34.8 5.
Chamath to D^ quo I^sh. 13.3 and Ier. 2.18. Ita Iun. and Riber. Est autem
Shichor Nilus: vt recte Ios. Scalig. de emend. temp. l. 5. and ad Fest. Etsi
dissentian: Beroald, chron. l. 2. c. 7. and Drus. obseru. l. 9. c. 17. (...)
Nilus, q^^ and (...), and (...) and, a nigredine Aethiop. (...) vnde and (...)
antiqui^', vt Dio^ys. perieges.
Shichor, from North to South, from the one end of it to the other.

Whence we might well collect these general observations:

1. Flagitium and flagellum, vt acus and filum: That Man's sin and Gods wrath
are as needle and thread: Observation 1.
the one makes way for the other; the one draws on the other: (...), Plato,
(...), H^siod apud Plut. de s^ra number. vind.
where the one goes before, there the other will come after, even as close as
the crewell follows upon the needle, or the shoe-thred upon the bristle.

And it is a vain thing therefore for sinners to flatter and sooth up
themselves, and to bless themselves in their sins; to imagine that though they
continue in the practice of sin, Application.
yet they may escape the judgments due thereunto. For Psalm. 140.11. Number.
32.23. (...). E^ri^. apud Plut. de sera vind.

(...). Homer. N. ^. Raro antecede^te^ scelestum Deseruit pede paena cla^do.
Hor. carum. 3.2.

N^hil impune perpetrari, Oraculi vox. Ammian. hist l. 29.


evil shall pursue the wicked man to destruction: it shall even dog him, as
the hound does the Dear, unto death: And Romans 2.3.
we know that the judgment of God is just against those that do such things.
Yea Deuteronomy. 29 19.
God has threatened that he will show no mercy to such as continue in their
sinful courses, promising impunitie to themselves, even for this cause,
because they presume on his mercy.

2. Centuriatores praesat. cent. 5.
Ingentia beneficia, ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia: That where God
multiplieth his mercies, and men multiply their sins, there God will
multiply their miseries. And the greater blessings and favors God has
vouchsafed any people or persons above others, the greater judgments of God
shall second those blessings, Observation 2.
if the blessings be abused.

That which may well serve for a warning to us that live in this land,
Application.
whom God has blessed abundantly with sundry special favors above many round
about us, that we take heed how we abuse this his goodness, and make this
grace and favor an occasion of wickedness or wantonness: lest Vt rebus
laetis par sit mensur a malor^^, Iu^e^. sat. 10.
as he has heaped upon us blessings extraordinarily above others, so he
inflict also upon us judgments extraordinarily above others; and as he has
made us mirrors of his mercy unto others, Observation 3.
so he make us spectacles also of his wrath.

3. Certaeruinae praeuia est incuria: That Matthew. 24. 38, 39, 40, 41. 1 Thessalonians.
5.2, 3.
Rechlesnesse is an ordinary fore runner of ruin. Solent suprema facere
securos mala. Sen. Oedip. 2.2. Vis^ currum luxuriae apud Bern. in Ca^^. 39. Qui
sibi (...) promittit, securus inuaditur. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
Men are never nearer ruin, then when they least regard it; never nearer
falling, then when they least fear it; never less safe, then when most
secure; never more secure usually, then when in least surety or safety, when
destruction is even at their doors. Application.


That which may justly make us to fear some sudden surprisall, considering the
great security that has so generally ouerspread us, Judge. 18.7.
a rechlesse people, like those of Laish, because we think we sit sure; as if
we had Esai 28.15, 18. Vbi cum Orco ratio habetur, ibi and fructus incertus,
and vita colentiu^. Post Catonem Varro de re rust. l. 1. c. 4. and Columel. l.
1. c. 3. Contra Tranio apud Plaut. Mostell. Pax mihi cum mortuis. and Lucan. l.
9. Pax cum morte data est. Et da Sabinians Ammia^. hist. l. 18. Per Edessena
sepulchra, quasi fundata cum mortuis pace, nihil formidans, more vitae
remissioris flurius agebat.
made a covenant with death and destruction, and though all Christendom were
scourged, yet should we be sure to escape scot-free; or as though we were seated
out of the reach of Gods rod, and needed not therefore to fear his wrath.

But, Plaut. Cas. 3.5. Division of Text Branch 1.
vt de via in semitam regrediamur, leaving these generals, to come nearer home,
and confine our selves to a narrower compass: in my Text observe we these
particulars: 1. The Negative, Non: it is a negative sin that they are charged
with; not so much the doing of that they should not do, as the not doing of
that they should. 2. Branch 2.
The duty required of them, but wanting in them; dolor, (...) vnde (...)
aegritudo; grief, sorrow, yea sickness: for so the word properly signifies:
as being a sin, not to be grieved at the heart, yea not to be heart-sore and
sick again with grief, as things then stood. 3. Branch 3.
The ground of this grief, of such and so great grief, contritio, (...)
breach, Reg. Bibl.
a breach, a fracture, a rupture, or Super contritione. Hier.
a contrition rather, a breaking to (...) vnde quidam nostrum tractum volunt.
shiners, as the word properly imports: a most heavy and extreme calamity,
though not personally on themselves, yet on those that ought to be right near
and dear unto them, their brethren: which calamity what it was, is not here
particularly expressed, but is described elsewhere: 2 (...) 1^, 26.
Their affliction was bitter, (by the incursion of strangers, their enemies)
for there was nothing almost shut up, nor left them, nor any at all that helped
them. 4. Branch 4.
The person thus afflicted, Joseph: put, sometime Psalm. 80.1, 2, and 77.15.
for all Israel in general: because Joseph was a principal Patriake; and, 1 Chronicles. 5.1. Genesis 48.16, 22.
upon the disinheriting of Reuben, the double portion, part of the birthright,
being deuolued unto him; Number. 1.10.32, 33. and 2.18, 20. Deuteronomy. 33.13, 17.
his issue made two Tribes: sometime more specially Chap. 5.6, 15. Hieron.
prolog. 12. Prophet.
for the Ten Tribes, as because they had two of the Ten, so for that also 1
King. 11.26. Riberi^ Amos 5.
Jeroboam the first King to the Ten Tribes was of that stock, of the
posterity of Joseph.


Here mentioned the rather, as Augustine imagines, Quia nobilis inter fraetres
vel i^ malis quae pendit, vel in b^nis quae rependit. August. de doctr. Christ.
l. 4. c. 6
because Joseph was famous among his brethren both for the evil that he
endured, and for the good that he did. As I take it, in way of allusion to the
practice of Joseph's Brethren; when they had stripped their brother Joseph, and
put him into a pit, where they meant he should perish, and had left him there
in much anguish of mind and desperate distress, it is said Genes. 37.23, 24,
25, 27.
they sat them down to eat and drink, not regarding the misery that he
poor soul was in the whilst, till they spied the Midianites, unto whom they
sold him for a slave.

Sum of the Text.
So that, that then which the Prophet here complains of, and reproves in
them, is this, that though their brethren, the seed of Joseph and the other
Tribes that adhered thereunto, were in great distress, in grievous calamities,
such as they seemed to be even broken to pieces with the violence and
extremity of them, and such as might well have made them even sick again
with sorrow; yet they gave themselves wholly to eating and drinking, to
feasting and banqueting, to riot and reuelling, never once minding or taking to
heart the miseries of their poor distressed brethren; no more regarding their
ruefull and forlorn estate, then Joseph's brethren did his, when either they
had cast him into the pit, or had sold him away for a slave.

This, you see, is the Sum and the Substance of this short Sentence: Let us
now proceed to the Instructions that may be raised out of it.

Observation 1.
And first from the negative Note, Non; we observe, that There are privative
sins as well as positive. As well the omission of necessary duties, as the
commission of contrary evils and enormities, may make a man stand guilty of
sin in Gods sight, and bring Gods wrath down upon persons and people. Malac.
3.18.
Not serving of God, and Eccles 9.2.
not sacrificing is a sin, as well as profane service: yea Exodus 5.3.
not sacrificing, as well as 1 Cor. 11.29, 30
the profanation of a sacrament or sacrifice, may bring pestilence upon a
people. Number. 9 13.
He that observes not the Passover in his due time, or Leuit. 23.29.
that humbles not his soul at the solemn time of fast, that soul shall be
cut off from among his people. 1 Samuel 15.8, 11, 26.
It was the not slaying of Agag, that lost Saul his Crown; and Exodus 4.24, 25.
the not circumcising of Moses his first borne, that had like to have cost
Moses his life. And not the robbing only, but the not releeuing and
compassionating of the poor, Luke 16.19, 20, 21.
was the rich man's ruin, and Matthew. 25.40, 41.
shall be sufficient matter to condemn many at the last day.

And the reason hereof is manifest:

For, Reason 1.
1. there are Affirmative as well as Negative precepts. Munster, in praecept
affirm. and neg.
The Jewish Rabbines have taken a curious account of the Commandments in
Moses, and they reckon them to be 613. in all, whereof 365. negative, just as
many as there be days in the year; and 248. affirmative, just so many, say
they, as there be limbs or bones in man's body; to show that Psalm. 103.1. and
35.10.
all parts of man are 1 Cor. 15.58.
at all times to be employed in the doing of Gods will. But to let pass such
their ouer-curious and superstitious observations, certain it is that there
are in Gods Law as well affirmatiues as negatiues; yea that as In negatiuo
praecepto affirmatiuum inteliigitur: and contra. Aisted. system. Theolog. l. 2.
c. 3.. 2. can. 12. and Tilen. syntagm. loc. 36. these. 33.
every affirmative includes a negative, so Praeceptis negatiuis subest
contraria affirmatio. Cal^in instit. l. 2. c. 8. 8, 9.
every negative has an affirmative infolded in it: and that there is Deuteronomy.
27.26. Gal. 3.10.
a curse imposed as a penalty as well on the breach of the one, as on the
breach of the other: and that the one is as well broken by the omission of that
that therein is enjoined, as the other by the practice of that that therein is
inhibited.

Reason 2.
2. Christian men are in the word of God compared unto Esai 61.3.
trees: and those not arbores infaelices, such as by kind and nature are
unfruitful, and bear no fruit, or bad fruit; but such as by nature are
fruitful, and bear good fruit, as Psalm. 80.8, 14.
vines, Psalm. 52 8.
olives, Iam. 3.12.
figs, and the like. Now in such trees barrenness or unfruitfulness alone is
cause sufficient to set them apart for fuel. And therefore not Esai 5.4.
the wild vine only that bare bad fruit, but Ezech. 15.2, 3, 4
the barren vine, and Luke 13.6, 7.
the fruitless fig, and Matthew. 3.10. and 7.19.
every tree that either bears not, or bears not good fruit, is adjudged to
the fire.

Use 1.
The use whereof is, 1. to meet with a vain conceit that many are possessed with.
There is a kind of negative Divinity, and negative Christianity, that
carries many away, grown rife among men: they are good Christians; and why so?
they are neither Papists, nor Puritans, Heretics, nor Schismatikes. They can
easily tell what they are not; not so easily what they are. And so for life and
conversation; they thank God, with Luke 18.11.
the Pharisie, they are neither adulterers, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor
back-biters, nor liers, nor swearers, nor oppressors, nor extortioners. And it
were to be wished that some could say so much. All this is well: but this is
nothing near all. A man may truly say all this, and yet be far enough from
sincerity. And unless thou go further then all this, thou art far enough
yet from that that thou should be, yea and professest to be, when thou
make profession of Christianity. It is not the omission of evil only, but
Iam. 1.27.
the practice of piety, charity, justice and equity that God requires of
thee. And howsoever therefore thou may conceive that Bonum est non fecisse
malum.
he is a good man that does no evil; it is most certainly and undoubtedly true
on the other side, that Malum est non fecisse bonum. Chrysostom. in sermon. de
virt. and vit.
he is an evil man that does no good.

The second use hereof is to exhort and incite us to a diligent practice of
those good duties that God requires of us; Use 2.
and not to content our selves with a bare forbearance of evil, but to apply
our selves to a careful and conscionable performance of all such religious
offices as our callings either general or special, public or private, exact
of us. For would any of us endure idleness and slothfulness in our servants,
though never so honest or innocent otherwise? But we are Gods servants: and no
more will he endure the like in us, then we would in them. And therefore not
only Luke 16.1, 2.
the riotous and wastfull Steward, that embecilled his masters goods; but
Matthew. 25.30.
the idle and thriftlesse Servant also, that employed not his masters money,
shall be bound hand and foot, and cast out into utter darkness to his
everlasting destruction. The messenger of God, Ex Socratico decreto, non minus
peccatum tacere ^eritatem, quam lequi falsitatem. Petrus Cant. verb. abbreu. c.
90.
if he deliver not Gods message, though he teach no false doctrine, yet because
he teaches not at all, may bring a woe upon himself. ^ Cor. 9.16.
Woe unto me, says the Apostle, if I preach not the Gospel. And, Ier^m. 1.17.
Go and speak to them, says God to Jeremy, all that I command thee, or else
I will destroy thee. So that Gods Minister may De silentio suo damnabitur.
Bern. de temp. Et Aug. homil. 28. In magno sum non periculo, sed exitio
const^tutus, si ta^uero.
damn himself as well by his silence, and by saying nothing, as by soothing
men up in their sins. Ezech. 3.18. L^gatur Amb^os. epist. 29.
If he hold but his peace, as others may perish by him, so he may perish with
them, he may perish for them. And the ministers of justice, not only if they
do injustice, but if they do not justice, (and yet that is a kind of
injustice too) may draw down Gods judgments upon the whole state. Ier. 21.12.
Execute judgment betimes, says God, and deliver those that are spoiled out
of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go forth like wildfire, that no
man can quench. And the rich, that God has blessed with temporal estates,
though they rob not Lazarus, yet if they relieve him not, if they be not 1 Timothy
6.19, ^0.
ready to communicate, when the necessities of Gods Church and children require
it, may have their part for their unmercifulness with Luke 16.24.
the rich glutton in hell fire.

But what duty was it, in the neglect whereof this people were found faulty,
and for the want whereof they are challenged by the Prophet in this place? It
is grief and sorrow, yea such store of grief, as might make them (...) Ita
Plaut. Trinum 1.1. si in te aegrotant arts animi tui; omnibus ^micis morbu^ tu
incuties graut^^, vt te videre audireque aegroti sient. Observation 2.
heart-sicke withal.

Where in the second place we observe, That It is a sin sometime not to be
sorrowful, yea not to be even sick again with sorrow. Such and such things,
says the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, are reported to be among you: 1 Cor.
5.1, 2.
Et vos non doluistis, and your fault it is that you have not sorrowed, that
you have taken the matter no more to heart. And, Ier. 5.3.
Thou have smitten them, says the Prophet Jeremy; sed non doluerunt, but they
have not sorrowed, they have hardened their hearts against thine hand. And,
Prou. 23.35.
They have stricken me, says the drunkard, sed non agrotaui, but I was not
sick; they have beaten me, but I felt it not: I was never the worse; and
because never the worse for it, therefore never the better. And in this place,
But they are not grieved, Reason 1.
or they are not sick again with grief.

The reason hereof:

1. As Puerile est dol^ris opinione vexari. Sen. de constable. sap. c. 4
it is a folly to be grieved without cause, or to be grieved more then there
is good cause for, to be grieved where there is nothing but matter of joy: so
it is no less folly, yea a spiritual Plorante medico, ridet phren^ticus, and
plorantib' amicis. Aug. de temp. Quid tam perditi luctus, quam in luctu res
desiderare luxuria? quid amentius quam in malis esse, and malorum
intelligentia^ non habere? lugent cuncta, tu l^tus es? quanquam in his omnibus
nulla res minus culpanda est quam ame^tia: quia voluntas vacat crimin^ vbi
furore peccatur Quo magis hi culpandi sunt, qui sani insa^iun^. Saluian. de
prouid. l. 6. c. 12.
frenzy, to rejoice where there is just cause of grief; and a fault not to
have our grief and our sorrow proportionable in some sort to the causes and
occasions of it. The former argues a kind of deadness, the latter some
degree of madness; either of them an unsoundness of judgment.

2. Sorrow is as physic, though nothing toothsome, yet wholesome: though not
simply good of it self, yet very useful, yea needful and necessary for some
persons at some times. Eccles. 7.4, 5.
More behouefull for men many times is mourning then mirth. Reason 2.
It is a bitter pill or potion, that may make a man deadly sick for the
present, which yet for him to refuse when his Physician prescribes it, that
is, when God inuiteth to it, and gives cause of it, may prove as much as his
life is worth. Not to add, that Psalm. 126.5.
the seed of true joy is here sown in sorrow: and for sinners, crasie ones,
sick of sin, there is no Esai 61.3. Matthew. 5.4.
way to sound joy, but by sincere and serious sorrow.

Use 1.
That which may 1. minister occasion unto us to consider seriously of the nature
of sin, what misery it has brought in upon all Adams posterity. For this
sorrow is a simple that was not known in the world, till man by eating of the
forbidden fruit, came to be acquainted with sin. It is a weed that sprung up
presently upon our first parents transgression. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 3. c.
18.
Thorns and thistles, briers and brambles were before, though not Genesis 3.18.
in that abundance that they now are; this weed was not at all before. The seed
of it was sown in the sin of our first parents, and to this day the world
could never again be rid of it. Genesis 3.16.
It came in with sin: Sirac. 40.1. (...); Menand. (...). Soph. (...) Plat.
Axioch. (...). Ibid. Quid est di^ viuere nisi diu torqueri? Aug. de temp. 113.
it will continue as long as sin lasts, and Apoc. 21.4.
it shall cease when sin cease, but till then it shall not: we shall never
want matter of sorrow, more or less, so long as we live here. Yea sin has
brought in such a necessity of sorrowing, that, whereas it was a sin for our
first parents to have sorrowed in Paradise, yea or not to have ioyed
exceedingly in their then present happiness; now it is a sin for the sons
of Adam not to be sorry, having (as they have full often) just occasion of
sorrow. And there is not, nor can be any just cause or occasion of sorrow, but
either sin it self, or the effects and fruits of it. And therefore if
naturally we abhor grief and shun sorrow, let us blame sin, let us shun
sin, let us learn to abhor sin that has given the cause of it. That is
the desperate disease, that has caused us to stand in need of, and
constrains us to swallow down this unpleasant potion, which if we take not
in willingly, it will go worse with us.

2. Is it a sin not to sorrow sometime, Use 2.
and that in some sort proportionably to the occasion thereof give us? Then
what will become of those, that are made all of mirth? that are set always
upon the merry pin? that never knew what any sorrow meant, unless it were such
as 2 Samuel 13.2.
Ammons, such as 1 King. 21.4.
Ahabs, when they are crossed in their corruptions, curbed of their lewd
courses, or restrained of their wicked will? As for that 2 Cor. 7.10.
dolor secundum Deum, that holy, godly, saving, sanctified sorrow, that the
Apostle commends, and the Prophet here calls for, it is a mere stranger
with them, they cannot tell what it means, they were never acquainted with
it. Surely our Savior reads such their destiny, where he says, Luke 6.25.
Woe be to you that now laugh, for you shall wail and weep. Esai 65.13, 14.
When Gods servants, that now weep, shall rejoice, such shall be confounded:
when they shall sing for joy of heart, such shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
shall houle for vexation of mind. Verse. 7.
The mirth of such shall cease; Cap. 8.10.
it shall be turned into mourning: and Prou. 14.13.
their joy shall end in grief. Yea such, as Job speaks, Job 21.13.
go piping and dancing to hell. Not that joy or mirth is Si duo ista
propo^as, vtrum est melius ridere, an plorare? nemo non istud potius elegerit:
sed propter salubrem poenitentiae dolorem, in fletu officium posuit, in risu
beneficiu^. Aug. de verb. Ap. 9.
simply evil, or utterly condemned: Christianity not admits only, but
Deuteronomy. 16.11.15. Luke 15.31.
requires mirth many times: yea, to speak as the truth is, Psalm. 33.1. and
32.11. and 68.3. Prou. 29.6.

Gaudebit sapiens: cateri lasciuient. Gaudere nisi sapi^nte^ negant Stoici.
Aug. de c^ust. l. 14. c. 8. Gaudere non est impijs. Idem Psalm. 96. Sapientes
vero soli fruuntur gaudio. Sen. ep. 113 Non potest gaudere nisi fortis, iustus,
temperans: stulti a^ mali non gaudent. Idem ep. 59.


none can truly and soundly be merry but such as are truly and sincerely
religious; Romans 14.17. Galat. 5.22.

Gaudium v^^u^ non nascitur nisi ex virtutum conscientia. Sen. epist. 59.
Caeterae hilaritates frontem remittunt, pectus non implent. Ibid. 23. Sola
virtus praestat gaudium securum and perpetuum. Ibid. 27. Gaudium non dicitur
nisi in bonis. August. de sermon. Dom. ^n mont. l. 2.


none have just cause of mirth but they. But this semblable tenor and constant
carriage without any alteration at all either way, howsoever things go, and
whatsoever the occasions are, is an evil sign, and argues a great want of
that religious regard that ought to be in all those that profess the fear of
God. And yet is this a sin too-too rife in these times, and that even among
those that seem best affected. What cause has every one of us given us of
grief, by our sins, by the sins of the land we live in, by Gods judgments
in diverse kinds both abroad and at home? And yet how few are they that take
things to heart as they ought, or as the occasions require? How little grief
any where, unless it be worldly and carnal grief, (such as that of the
Israelites, H^sh. 7.14.
when they houled upon their beds for their corn and their wine) because they
are abridged by occasion of such occurrents of their worldly profits, or their
wonted pleasures? What shall we say of those, that in a rebellious and
preposterous manner, bend themselves to a clean contrary course, then most of
all giving themselves to mirth and iollitie, when most cause is given of
mourning and grief? How near God takes to heart such profane and
irreligious carriage, by the Prophet Esaias himself shows, when he says: Esai
5.11-14.
Woe be to those that rise early in the morning to follow strong drink, and
sit by it till night, until the wine have enflamed them: That have the Harp
and the Viole, the Taber and the Pipe, with wine (that is, all manner of
music and mirth) in their feasts: but they regard not the act of God, nor
consider his handy-worke. Therefore is my people led captive, because they have
no knowledge of these things: and their honorable men are famished, and their
common people destroyed with thirst: Yea therefore has hell enlarged her
self, and widened her mouth beyond all measure; and their glory, and their
multitude, even all those that make merry so, (of what state or degree soever
they are) shall go down together thither. And yet more pregnantly and more
peremptorily: Esai 22.12, 13, 14.
In that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and mourning, and to
cutting of hair and girding with sackcloth: But there was nothing but mirth
and iollitie, slaying of oxen and killing of sheep, eating of flesh and
drinking of wine: 1 Cor. 25.32.
Let us eat and drink (say they) to day, for to morrow, the Prophets say, we
shall die. And Hebr. reuelau^ in aures meas. Sic. 1. Sam. 9.15.
it was spoken by the Lord of hosts himself in mine hearing; Ne viuam. I^n.
Est formula iuramenti, qualis et illa Psalm. 95.11.
Let me not live, if this impiety of yours be done away till you die for it.
It is an usual thing with the Lord, when he will express his implacable wrath
against some kind of evil demeanure, to say, yea sometime to swear it, that
no sacrifice shall serve for that sin. So speaks the Apostle of total
apostasy joined with malicious opposition; Hebr. 10.26, 29, 27.
If men sin wilfully, after they have acknowledged, and upon acknowledgement
embraced the truth, trampling under foot the Son of God, and profaning the
blood of the Testament, and despighting the Spirit of grace; there remains
now no more sacrifice for sin, but a dreadful expectation of vengeance, and
of a fiery rage, that shall burn up such opposites. And so God swears of
Elies house for the horrible sins of his sons; 1. Sam. 3.14. 13, 11.
Now therefore I have sworn concerning the house of Eli, that the impiety of
Elies house shall not be expiated with sacrifice nor offering for ever: but I
will take vengeance on his house for ever, and I will execute such fearful
judgment in Israel, that both the ears of every one that hears it shall
tingle withal. And in the like manner speaking by the Prophet of those that in
the pride of their hearts, and height of their profaneness, will needs run a
clean contrary course to that which God calls them unto, abandoning
themselves wholly to rioting and reuelling, when fasting and prayer, and all
manner of humiliation had much better beseemed them, and the present state and
condition of the times required it, he professes, yea protests solemnly,
that he has sworn by himself, (for there is the form of an oath in the
original; and it is a fearful thing when God threatens, much more when he
swears and voweth any man's destruction) that this sin of theirs shall not
with any sacrifice whatsoever be expiated or done away to their dying day. It
is Number. 15.30.
sinning with an high hand, rather of Psalm. 19.13. (...)
pride then presumption, in reproach of the Lord, and contempt of his word: and
Number. 15.30.24, 25, 27, 28.
for such sins under the Law there was no sacrifice assigned, as for other
sins, but Number. 15.30, 31
the soul so sinning was to bear his iniquity, and to be cut off from among
his people. So desperate is the estate of such as will even set themselves
wilfully unto a cross course to that that in such cases God requires of them.

3. This may admonish us to labor for, Use 3.
and to learn spiritual wisdom, (...). Thales apud Laert. and Stob. c. 3.
Quod Auson, tamen Pittaco ascribit: (...), Tempus vt noris iubet. Hoc Pittacum
dixisse fama est Lesbium: Sed (...) iste tempestiu^^ tempus est.
whereby to discern aright of the times and seasons; when it is time for joy,
and when time for grief, when it is time for mourning, and when time for
mirth; when time to feast, and when time to fast: for Eccles. 3.4. Matthew. 9.15.
there are due times of either. And both joy and grief, as fish and flesh, is
naught and vnfauourie, (...). Isocr. ad Demon.
when it comes out of his due season. The one is wont to breed strange
diseases in men's bodies; the other argues much to be amiss in men's souls,
and may be a means to bring down Gods judgments not upon the persons only so
affected, but upon the land also wherein they live.

But what, may some say then, is a just cause of sorrow?

I answer, yea the Spirit of God answers by the Prophet in this place: As
Ezech. 9.4.
the transgressions of Jacob, so the afflictions of Joseph* as not our own
sins alone, but Psalm. 119.158, 136.
the sins also of others; so not our own crosses only, but the calamities of
others, of our brethren especially after the faith.

Observation 3.
And so we pass unto a third observation, to wit, That it is the duty, and
has been the practice and property of Gods people, to take to heart the
crosses and calamities of their brethren, and to be affected with them as their
own. Romans 12.15, 16.
Rejoice, says the Apostle, with those that rejoice, and weep with those that
weep: and be like affectioned one toward another. In this kind we have two
notable examples, the one of Daniel, the other of Nehemie. Of Daniel it is
said, that in the time of the Captivity, though himself were Dan. 2.48.
highly advanced by Nebuchadnezar, and continued in that height of honor, as
well Dan. 5.29.
under his son Belshazzar, as also Dan. 6.2.
under Darius, as being the chief President then in the whole state; yet upon
the consideration of that calamity that his countrymen were then in, and had
been a long time, though himself were in some sort free from the same, Dan.
10.2, 3.
he mourned three whole weeks together, and during all that time, eat no
pleasant meat, nor came there a bit of flesh or a drop of wine within his
mouth, nor any ointment (which was a thing Eccles. 9.8. 2 Samuel 12.20. Matthew.
6.17.
ordinary and usual with them) upon his body. And of Nehemie it is recorded,
that though he lived in Persia, in Artaxerxes his Court, being in high account
with him, as Nehem. 1.1, 11. and 2.1.
being servant in ordinary and Cup Bearer to him, that Kings themselves thought
no disgrace to them to do service unto; y^^ when Nehem. 1.3.
he heard how crossely things went with his people in their own Country, it
so affected him, that as one oppressed with grief, as if his legs would not
bear him, Nehem. 1.4.
he sat him down and wept, and fasted and prayed, and mourned diverse days
together: yea so great was his grief, that he could not conceal it, but the
heaviness of his heart so discovered it self in his look, that Nehem. 2.2.
the King himself could not but take notice of it.

And the reason why all Christians ought to be in the like manner affected.

1. Christian charity requires it. Reason 1.
For 1 Cor. 13.5.
Love seeks not her own things, but the things of others: Phil. 2.4.
nor regards her own estate, but the estate of others; Galat. 6.10.
of those especially that are of the family of faith. She counts their
thriuing her gain, their crosses her loss, their disasters her affliction,
their mischiefs her misery. Like the woman of Canaan, that cried to our
Savior, when her daughter was distracted, Matthew. 25.22.
Miserere mei Domine; Lord have mercy on me; my daughter is miserably vexed
with a Devil. (...). Basil. Sell. sermon. 19. Ad seipsam petit adiutorium, quia
in filia sua velut in persona propria torquebatur. Amor enim natorum ipsorum
dolorem traijcit in pa^^^^es. Simon d^ Cass. in ^^ua^g. l. 5. c. 24. Filia
mali^m suum reputat. Petr. Ri^bard^ in Euang.
Her daughters torture was her torment, the child's malady the mothers misery;
she could not be well, while her daughter was so ill; she could have no rest so
long as her estate was so restless: she was her self like a possessed person,
so long as the devil was in her daughter.

2. The consideration of our own frailty may enforce it. Reason 2.
Eccles. 9.2.
All things, says Saloman, come alike unto all. (...). Menand. apud Plut. de
tranabque;. (...). Xenoph. Cyri exped. l. 7.
No man can say, this or that I shall never endure. Cuiuis potest accidere,
quod cuiquam potest. P. Syrus apud Sen. ad Marc. c. 9. Et de tranque. c. 11.
Scito omnem conditionem versabilem esse; and quiequid in vllum incurrit, posse
in te quoque incurrere.
That that befalls one man, may befall any man: and much more then, may that
that befalls many. Sirac. 38.23.
That that is their estate to day, may be thine tomorrow. Iter illis liberum
and ad te. Sen. de tranque. c. 11.
No person or people have any such armor of proof, as is affliction-free; but
that it may come home to them, and pierce even to the heart with them. Bern. de
temp. sermon. 57.
Bonus senex, says Bernard, I have known a good old man, who when he heard of
any that had committed some notorious offense, was wont to say with himself;
Ille hodie, and ego cras; This man is fallen to day, and Galat. 6.1.
thus may I fall to morrow; and so bewailed other men's slips and falls Sic Moses
Exodus 34.9. quod obseruat R. Ki^^chi in Malac. 1.
as his own. And the like advice, and that upon the selfsame ground, does
the Apostle give us concerning the outward miseries and temporal afflictions
of our distressed brethren: Hebr. 13.3.
Think on those, says he, that are in bonds, as if you were bound with them;
and those that are in affliction, as if you were in their body, say Laur. Valla.
some, that is, in affliction with them; but rather, as being your selves also
in the body, not the body of Christ, or the Church, as Calvin. in epist.
some (of which also anon) but Theophryl. Caietan. Erasm. Eeza.
in the body of flesh and frailty, subject to the like afflictions, which you
know not therefore how soon they may befall you.

Reason 3.
3. The neerenesse of conjunction that we have one with another does
necessarily exact it of us. Romans 12.5. 1. Cor. 12.12.
We are all members of one body. And there is a natural sympathy between the
members of the same body, being quickened all by the selfsame soul. Have we
an eye to Christ our head. Though our head be in heaven in happiness, and his
body here on earth, yet Hebr. 4.15. Et nos ibi sedemus, Ephesians. 2.6. and hic
ipse laborat. Aug. in Psalm. 55.
has he a sense of those infirmities, that his body is here annoied with.
Compassio etiam cum impassibilitate perdurat. Bern. de grad. homil.
Though he be free from all passion, yet is he not without compassion: though
he feel nothing himself, yet has he still a fellow-feeling of those miseries
and distresses that his limbs here endure. Mark his speech to Paul, or to
Saul rather: Act. 9.4, 5. Me, inquit, non meos. August. de sanct. 14. and de
diverse. 35.
Cur me persequeris? Why do thou persecute me? and, I am Jesus, whom thou
persecutest. Aug. homil. 15. and in Psalm. 49. and in Psalm. 90. and in Psalm.
130. and in Joan. tract. 10.
When men, says Augustine, stand thick together in a throng, and one chance
to tread on another heels or toes, Cur me calcas? cur me comprimis? Why do
thou kick me, or tread on me? says the one to the other. It is the toe or the
heel on the foot that is trodden on, kicked or hurt. And the toe is far
enough from the tongue, or the heel from the head. And yet when the toe or the
heel is hurt, the tongue in the head speaks and complains as if it self
were trodden on. Such a fellow-feeling there is between the one and the other,
that the one suffers in the other, and therefore the one speaks for the
other, and complains of the wrong sustained by the other, as done to it
self. In like manner here Saul spurneth against, and treads upon Christ's
feet here on earth, and Christ their head cries from heaven to him, Saul, why
do thou hurt me? Christus loquitur, Christus pa^itur, quia in membris
Christi Christus often: loquitur caput pro corpore, corpus in cap^te. August. in
Psalm. 30.
Christ speaks for them, because Christ suffers in them. Matt. 25.42, 43
Tanto nos affectu amare dignatur, vt quod nos patimur, ipse sepatitestetur.
Idem homil. 15.
I was hungry, says he; I was thirsty; I was naked; I was sick; I was
harbourlesse; I was imprisoned. One Augustinus de Roma Archiep. Nazaren. in
Council. Basil. sess. 22.
Augustinus de Roma, was censured in the Council of Basile, for affirming that
Christ was maximus peccatorum, the greatest sinner in the world: and yet his
meaning, it may be, was not amiss, though the manner of speech improper,
having an eye to 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.
the guilt of our sins imputed to him, and Esai 53.6. 1 Pet. 2.24.
the burden thereof imposed upon him. But Saluian an Orthodox Writer sticks
not to say, that Egodico, Christu^ non solum egere cum caeteris, sed plus multo
egere quam caeter^s. Saluian. ad Eccles. Cathol. l. 4.
Christ is maximus mendicorum, the greatest beggar in the world: as In omniu^
pauperu^ suoru^ vniuersitate mendicat. Ibid.
one that bears his part and has his share in all the wants and necessities,
in all the straights and miseries that all his members in all parts of the
world sustain or endure. For An non eget, qui esurit, qui s^tit? Ib.
is he not in want, says he, that complains of hunger and thirst, and
bareness and poverty, and restraint of liberty? Or who can be in greater
want then he that sustaineth all these, so often as any godly man suffers them?
Non eget miseria, sed eget misericordia; non eget deitate prose, sed eget
pictate pro suis. Saluian. ibid. Esurit in terris, qui dives est in coelis.
Aug. in Psalm. 75.
He wants not indeed in regard of any misery, and yet he wants in regard
of mercy: he suffers not in his Deity of himself, and yet he suffers out of
his pity to his. Yea look we at an inferior member: Saul turned into Paul,
and become a member now of that body, that he was a persecutor of before; 2
Cor. 11.29.
Who is weak or ill, says he, but I am weak with him? Who is scandalized,
but I am burnt with it? In a word; 1 Cor. 12.16.
If any one member be honored, all the rest rejoice with it; if any one
suffer, ( Cum patiuntur membra corporis eiusdem, quomodo alia membra licet
superiora, non compatiuntur membris vnius corporis laborantib^? Amb. ep. 22
be it never so base an one) all the rest suffer together with it. Thus it is
in the natural body of man; and Cum membra quaedam sint in tribulatione,
quaedam in pace; and is it os co^tristat illoru^ tribulatio, and illos pax
isterum consolatur. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
thus it cannot but be in the mystical body of Christ.

4. We ought to have a fellow-feeling of our fellow members afflictions, Reason
4.
because our sins may have an hand in the procuring of their sufferings.
Neither need this seem strange, that our sins should be the cause of plagues
and judgments upon others, when we the mean while remain free our selves.
(...). Plut. de ser. vind. Vide Medicos sape venam in pede aut brachio
incidere, cum totu^ corpus doleret: quidui idem hic fiet ^ Lips. de constant.
l. 2. c. 17. (...) Plut. de ser. vind. Cum alieru^ peccata Deus in alijs
videtur vlciset: Ostenditur hoc quanta sit connexio vniuersitatis lu populo, vt
non tantum in seipsis singuli, sed etiam quasi parts in t^to existimentur.
Aug. in Josh quast. 8. Tanquam v^i^^s hominis and vnius corporis membra sunt
vniuersi. Ibid.
We see the like in the practice of Physic and Surgery. For is not the
neck feared and rowelled often, for the rhewme that runs down into the eyes?
A vein is opened in the arm or the foot, sometime to turn the course of the
blood, spending it self ouerfreely some other way, sometime to ease the pain
of the head, and sometime to correct the distemperature of the whole body
besides. I^sh. 7.1, 5, 11, 12. De anathemate quia vsurpauit viius, in eos qui
nec fecerant, nec factum no^erant, vindicta processit. Aug. contra Julian. l.
6. c. 7. Vnius facinus plurium fuit postis, Saluian, de prouid. l. 7.
For Achans sin, many of the host of Israel were slain, and yet was Achan
still untouched. Genes. 20.18.
Abimelechs whole household were plagued for his oversight: and 2. Sam. 24.15,
17.
thousands of David's subjects destroyed for the trespass of their Sovereign.
1. King. 14.12.
Ieroboams dear son died for his Fathers offense. And God, says Theodoret,
when Exodus 12.29. Patu^ ergo Bion, (...). Plut. de sera nam. vind.
he smote Pharaohs firstborn, drew blood of the arm for the cure of the
head: which because it mended not thereupon, came also after to confusion. And
why may not then the sins of our Nation also be in part the cause of those
heavy disasters befallen our brethren in fomine parts? which unless therefore
we take better to heart, may in the next place light on us.

Observation 4.
And so we will pass to the fourth and last Observation, to wit, that it is a
fearful thing for men not to be affected with Gods hand upon others,
especially upon their brethren: As 1 Cor. 5.2.
not to mourn for the sins of others; so not to be possessed with grief and
thought, when Gods children are in danger and distress. It is somewhat to this
purpose that Vrias says to David: 2 Samuel 11.11.
The Ark of God, and Judah, and Israel abide in tents, and my Lord Joab, and
my Lords servants are encamped in the open fields: and should I then go home
to make merry, to take mine ease in my bed, and my pleasure with my wife? As
thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do it. He thought it a most
unworthy and unbeseeming course for him to solace himself, while his
fellow soldiers, his Commander, but 1 Samuel 4.3, 4.
God's Ark especially attended by the Priests, were abroad at fight in the
field. And surely, (not to repeat here again Esai 5.11-14. and 22.12-14.
those places formerly pressed to this purpose, that do pregnantly prove the
same, or insist upon the judgments Verse. 7.11, 14. Chap. 8.9, 10.
hereafter denounced against this people for their faultiness herein;) when
Gods Servants shall be up in arms, constrained to stand upon their guard at
home, or lie abroad in the field, for their just and necessary defense; much
more when they shall be beset and besieged by their blood-thirstie adversaries,
expecting every hour to come into their hands; and most of all, when they
shall be discomfited, overrun, subdued or surprised by them, and brought
unto servitude and thraldom under them; it is a most unworthy thing indeed for
others not to be affected seriously therewith, though they be out of the
reach, Reason 1.
or the report of the gunne or gunshot themselves.

For I. It argues a great want of Christian charity, and brotherly love; a
want of bowels, of tender pity and compassion: as Luke 16.19, 20.
in the rich Glutton toward Lazarus. And what is more odious then an
unmerciful man? Redeo crudelior et inhumanior, quiae inter homines fui. De
spectaculis Sen. epist. 7.
What more against man's nature, then to be inhumane? When Homo sum, humani
nihil a me alienum puto. Terent. Heaut. 1.1. Humanitas specialis and domestica
virt^ hominis. Ambr. offic. l. 3. c. 3. Nulla magis conuenit homini virtus quam
clementia, cum fit nulla humanior. Sen. de clem. l. 1. c. 3.
Humanity takes its denomination from man. Or what is more abominable, then
an uncharitable Christian? What more contrary to Christianity, then an utter
want of Charity? when as John 13.35. Ditectio sola discernit inter filios Dei
and filios Diaboli. August. in 1. Joan. tract. 5.
Charity is the Badge or Cognizance of Christ, and (...). Greg. Naz.
the very Character of a Christian. John 13.35.
By this, says our Savior, shall all men know you to be my Disciples, if you
love one another. But where there is no compassion, there certainly, there is
no love. 1. John 3.17.
He that sees his brother to be in want, or in any distress, and has no
compassion on him, has no love at all in him. He is no Christian man
therefore, he is scarce a man, that has no compassion of other men's miseries.

2. It argues a want of spiritual life. Reason 2.
1. John 3.14.
Hereby we know, says the Apostle, that we are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren. 1. John 2.10.
He that loves his brother, abides in light: and consequently, in life: For
John 1.4.
that light is life. But 1. John 3.14.
he that loves not his brother, abides still in death; and 1. John 2.9.
in darkness. Sincere love of the brethren, and a fellow-feeling of their
miseries, is a sure argument of life: the want of it, an undoubted sign of
death. It is but Membra putrida and mortua sensum non habent. Aug. in Psalm 120.
Tales sunt Christiani qui de alienis malis aut afflictionibus non dolent. Ide^
hom. 15
a rotten limb, a withered hand, or (...). Ex Herodoto Plut. de fratern.
dilect.
a wooden leg, that feels not, when the head, or but the heel only, is
hurt. And surely those that have no fellow-feeling of their fellow members
afflictions, are at the best, but as glasse-eyes, or silver noses, or Iuory
teeth, that stand for a show in the face or the mouth, but afford little use,
and partake not in pain, because they partake not of life with the rest of
that body, which by Art only they are set in, or fastened unto. It is no
marvel if a piece of wood, or glass, Reason 3.
or metal feel nothing, though the head be slashed and cut to the very
skull, or the whole man be sick at the heart.

3. It argues a want of love to Christ, when men have no commiseration of the
members of Christ, being in want or misery, in distress, danger, or
extremity. Nom tam vos, quam Deum in vobis persequuntur: patitur enim in vobis
Deus. Martial. epist. 2. Contemnitur Christus, cum contemnitur membrum Christi.
Aug. in Psalm. 30. Insectantur and oderunt seruos Dei, and in eis Deum. Saluian.
de prouid. l. 8.
It is not so much they that suffer, especially when they suffer for Christ's
cause, as Christ that suffers in them. It is not so much they that want,
whatsoever the occasion of their want be, as Christ that wants in them.
Matthew. 25.35, 36, 42, 43.
It is I, says he, that was hungry, and thirsty, and sick, and naked, and
harbourlesse. And Mat, 25.40.45
it was done to me, that was done unto them: it was denied unto me, that was
denied unto them. And therefore well says the Apostle, John 21.20.
even the Disciple that Christ loved, and who, no doubt, likewise loved Christ;
1. John 3.17.
If any man see his brother to be in want, and shut up his bowels of compassion
from him, how does (I say, not the love of his Christian brother, but) the love
of God, (yea or of Christ;) dwell in him? Zech. 12.10.
When God, says the Prophet Zachary, powers out on the house of David the
spirit of grace, Si frater es, compatere fratri pro te patienti: si membrum es,
commorere capiti pro te morienti: Compunctus pro eo qui pro te prior punctus
est. Si non doles, luges, plangis; deliras, desipis, belluam sapis, hominem
diffiteris. Bern. in Psalm. 90.
it shall work in them a compassion toward him whom they pierced: that is,
toward Christ himself who was pierced for their sins. But, as the same
Apostle reasons, 1. John 4.20.
How can a man say, I love God, whom he never saw, when he loves not his
neighbor, whom he daily sees? So we may well conclude, that those can never
have any compassion of the sufferings of the head, which they never saw, that
have no compassion of the miseries of his poor distressed members, Ocu^^
augent dolorem Cic. epist. famil.
that are every day in their eye. Yea Nondum vidi crucifixun^^ uicrucifixo
com^^us no^ sum. Ber. de temp. 64
they never with the eye of faith, yet saw the one, that have no compassion or
commiseration at all of the other.

4. It argues a want of love to Gods cause, Reason 4.
a want of zeal of Gods glory, then which nothing should be more dear unto
us, not our selves, not our own safety, were we affected as we ought; and
which is oft-times much eclipsed and obscured by the sufferings of Gods Saints,
and by the victories, triumphs, and successes of the Adversaries of his truth.
This is that which the blessed Saints of God use ordinarily, as a strong
inducement to move the Lord to mercy, in behalf of his Church and children,
ouer-borne by their ouer-mightie and malicious Adversaries; that Psalm. 74.18,
19. and 79.10, 11. and 89.50, 51.
his name was reproached, when the enemy prevailed, and his honor thereby
impaired: yea this was that, that most troubled and vexed them, in their
fiercest afflictions, not their own miseries so much, as Psalm. 10.13. and 42.3.
the dishonor of Gods name, which their Adversaries were wont to triumph over
in them. It was 1. Sam. 4.18.
the Captivity of the Arc, that affected old Eli more, then the slaughter of
his sons; 1. Sam. 4.19, 21.
it was that, that his daughter in law took to heart, more then the loss of
her dearest husband; and was the death both of him and her. But how little do
they regard this, that are not touched at all with those calamities, that at
the hands of such, Gods servants sustain? And what a fearful estate are they
in, to whom it is all one, whether Gods Church sincke or swim, whether his
truth prevail, or be trodden down, whether his Arc or Dagon keep possession,
whether his honor be vpheld, or let lie in the dust?

Reason 5.
5. It argues a want of child-like affection, and awful respect to their
Father. For can a good child see his father take a staff in hand to smite one
of the servants, or much more the rod in hand to correct some of his brethren,
and not be grieved at it, or affected at all with it? especially knowing
himself not to be wholly free from such faults as he corrects them for;
yea, it may be, for ought he knows by them, more faulty then they. It is by
the Prophet made a note of Gods children, that Esai 66.2.
they tremble at his word. And if they tremble at his word, sure much more Act.
5.11.
at his wrath, though lighting on others only. Psalm. 119.119, 120.
Thou take away the wicked of the world like dross; says David: And though
he were none of that crew, but one that loved Gods Law; yet, My flesh, says
he, ^ra secura queque Horrenda menti. Sen. Herc. fur. 3.2.
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of these thy judgments. And if
Gods children be so affected with the judgments of God executed upon wicked
worldlings, for their rebellions against God, and their oppositions to his
truth; how much more with those his chastisements, that he exercises his
children with, being inflicted upon them by the hand of his and their
Adversaries, ( Esai 10.5, 6. (...). Plut. de sera vind.
whom he uses often as executioners,) for the profession of his truth?

6. It argues a want even of natural affection, not of grace alone, Reason 6.
but even of that also that corrupt nature has left in it. And (...). Romans 1.
28, 30.
want of natural affection, the Apostle Paul makes a note of men given up
(...).
to a reprobate mind. In regard whereof, also Bernard says, Soli filij ira
ira^ non sentiunt, nec tristantur in tristib^^. Bern. ep. 256.
They are the children of wrath, that have no sense of Gods wrath; and that are
not affected when their brethren are afflicted.

Now to make use of both these Observations jointly together; this might serve
to inform us, that Quis (...) illa^ vbi nullu^ aud^u^ tangit affectus,
stuporum i^^^ane^, qut nulle presf^^ erigatur and excitetur, nullo flectatur
atque inclinetur affectu, non omnibus vitijs iudiert esse priorem? humanitatem
potius totam amittunt quam veram assoquuntur tranquillitate me non enim quia
durum aliquid ideo rectum; a^t-quia stupidum est, ideo sanum. Aug. ciuis. l.
14. c. 9.
Christianity allows no such Stoicisure, as strippeth men of humanity, and
brings in a kind, either of Istud nihil dolere non sine magna contingit
mercede immanitatis in animo, stuporis in corpore. Crantor apud Cic. Tuscul.l.
3.
brutish immanitie, or Canine aquanimitatis stu^or. Tertul de bono patient.
doggish stupiditie. No: Coloss. 3.12, 14. Non est enim pondus verae virtutis
insensibilitas cordis: qui^ and valde insana per stuporem membra sunt, quae and
incisa, sentire dolorem no^ possunt. Greg. mor. l. 2. c. 16.
the more sincere grace, questionless the more love: and the more love to our
brethren, the more bowels of compassion, the more tenderness of affection, and
the more effectual apprehension of other men's misfortunes.

Use 2.
But not to insist upon this, to pass rather unto that, that is our principal
aim: The maine use hereof, is to admonish us every one, laying to heart that
which the Prophet here speaks, to cast our eyes about into foraine parts
abroad, and consider what cause God has given us to be even sick again with
sorrow. Nor let us think that we have no such cause, because all is well (if
all be so well yet) with us at home. Can all be well with the right side, when
there is a pleurisy in the left? Or Ecce spina^ calcat pes, quid tam long ab
oculis quam pes? long est loco et situ, proxime est charitatis affectu.
modicum pungit spina, and perparu^^ locu^ tenet in pede. Vide quomodo illuc
oi^a conuertantur membra: incuruat se spina dorsi, oculi inquirunt, manus
operantur, totu^ corpus se inclinat, and nihil vacat, sanum est caput, sani
oculi, sana manus, sana catera membra: ipse pes sanus est, nisi vbi punctus
est. Sed per compassionem charitatis calantitas communis est omnibus. Aug.
homil. 15. and in Psalm. 130. Anima and in toto corpore tota est, and inqualibet
eiu^ part: and ideo cum fit aliquid in enigna particula corporis quod sentiat
anima, quam^i^ non siat in toto corpore, illa ta^u^ tota sentit, quia totam non
latet. Idem de Triuit. l. 6. c. 6.
all well with the head, I say not, when the whole body is heart-sick, but when
the heel or toe but, that is farthest off the head, is hurt? much more when
there is a fracture in thigh or arm, or a rupture in some principal part of
the body? Can we hear daily reports of our brethren in foraine parts, either
assaulted, or distressed, or surprised by Popish forces, and a main breach made
into the state of those that are by bonds, civil and sacred, so nearely knit
to us, and yet esteem all as nothing, or think that we have no just cause to
mourn and lament?

Neither let any man say; What is their affliction to us? What are those parts
to these? What is France or Germany to England? For what was Jerusalem to
Antioch? Or what was Iuduo to Macedonia and Achaia? Yea, not to go far; What
was Judah to Joseph? Or Samaria to Sion? And yet is Sion here taxed, even as
well as Samaria, for the not commiserating of Joseph's afflictions. A sign thou
art but a sorry Christian, whosoever thou art that so speak or think,
that no more regardest Christ's cause: a sorry servant of God, that no more
regardest his glory; Quod non dolet cum pang^^ar aut vellicatur; pro putrido
aut mottuo merito habetur. Aug. homil. 26.
no living limb of Christ's mystical body, that a^t no more moved with the
miseries of thy fellow members. But far be it from any of us to be thus
minded, or to entertain any the least cogitation in this kind.

If there be then at the present, so just, so great cause of grief unto us, as
any one that has but half an eye may easily soon see, in regard of the
distressed estate of our brethren abroad It stands us upon to take heed
then, that we stand not guilty of that sin that the Prophet complains of
in this people, in not being so affected, as we ought to be therewith, because
we sit in quiet and at ease our selves, here at home. For Qui inter suor^^
supplitia videbat, quo ^ugulari se in suerunt lugulis non intelligebat, qui
mori se in suetur^ mortibus ^on putatbat; quid ^ltiud talis populus agebat,
nisi vt cum D^noper^lere adhoc fortasse nosles, tamen ipse enigeret vt per^re^?
Saluian. deprouid. l. 6. c. 10.
if the report of their calamities move us no more, then they have done many
hitherto, we may justly fear, lest, as God presently after threatens this
people, Verse. 14.
he cause the scourge to come in among us, that is as yet but shaken at us, and
Esai. 28.15.18.
to pass through us, like a land-stood that bears all away before it, and so
that deluge wholly ouer-whelme us, that is in part broken in upon them.

But what is then to be done? or whereby must we show that we are unfeignedly
affected with the afflictions of Joseph? Duty 1.


To this I answer:

1. We should take some time amids our affairs and delights, to consider
seriously of the troubles and calamities of our distressed brethren abroad.
Vulgo dicitur, Quod non videt oculus, cor non doles. B^rn. de temp. 96. What
the eye sees not, the heart rueth not. Psalm. 137.5, 6.
Let them not be out of mind, because they are out of sight, with us. Neither
let our profits and pleasures, the pursuit of the one, or enioyment of the
other, so wholly take us up and possess us, as they did this people; but that
we set some time apart to Dan. 9.3. and 10.12.
meditate on their miseries, that may whet up our affections to compassion and
commiseration toward them. Let us make their case our own, and consider with
our selves, what a woeful estate we would deem our selves to be in, were it
with us, as it is with them, surprised by an enemy, restrained of their
liberty, that liberty especially, that a Christian should esteem above all
other, of Gods solemn and sincere service, and the ministry of his word the
chief food of their souls; enforced to swears to a foraine Prince; exposed to
the might and malice, the insolences and outrages of those, that be so evil
affected to them, and to the truth professed by them, that they hold them
Vultis in regno Gallia Christianissime Regem proclamare Nauarraeum Caluinistam?
cade^ opera hominib' imperare inbetis cane^. Reginald, in Rosaeo su^.
no better then dogs, Iudaeis ipsis acer^^^res hosts Christi, and mult^
magis detestandi. Maldon, in Joan. 4.9. Caluini pseudo-euangelium Alcorano in
nu^^o melius, in multis tetrius and flagitiosius esse asserit Gifford. in
praefat. ad lib. Reinald. Et vt in Henricu^ 8. poti' quam in Tuream moueat,
monet Caesare^ Polus Cardinal. defen. vuit. Eccles. t. 1.
worse then Turks or Jews, Fieri nequit v^ Lutheranus morieus saluetur,
Ge^ennam euadat, and aeternis ignibus ^ripiatur: si mentior, damner ipse cum
Lucifero. Coster. resp. ad refut. Osiand. propos. 8. Certain it is that
whosoever in this new faith and service has ended this life, is in hell most
certainly. Bristo. motiu. 36.
damned Heretics, cursed caytifes, Legatur Simanc. instit. cathol. ca. 45.
number. 13.
unworthy to live on Gods ground, fit for nothing but fire and faggot. Psalm.
41.1. Duty 2.
Blessed are they, says the Psalmist, that consider of the distressed estate
of their poor brethren: the Lord will deliver them in the time of their
trouble.

2. We should humble our selves in the sight of God, and repent us of our
sins, as well hidden and secret, as open and notorious, that they may not
stand in the way, to hinder the prosperous success of Gods cause, or be in
part a means of the continuance of those evils, as we showed before that they
might be, that are at the present on any part of Gods Church. Do as beasts in
a teame; if one of them be lashed at, all the rest strain together, and strive
to draw away with it. Yea repent we of our sins, that we may be the fitter,
and better able effectually to intercede for them, and to prevail with God in
their behalf. Considering that C^m displicet i^ qui ad intercedendum
adhibetur, irati animus ad deteriora prouocatur. Greg. registr. l. 1. ep: 24.
it is a means rather to incense further then to pacify the wrath of the
offended, when one comes to entreat for another, whom he is angry with
otherwise. Lam^nt. 3.40, 41.
Let us first therefore search our ways, and reform our lives, and then may
we with better confidence and assurance of success, lift up our hearts and
our hands unto God in heaven, in behalf of his poor servants distressed here
on earth.

3. We should strive by prayer to God for them; Duty 3.
as Act. 12.3, 2.
they did for Peter, when he was imprisoned, and looked every hour to go the
same way that James went; as 2. T^^ss. 3.1, 2.
Paul requires the Thessalonians to do in his behalf, that he might be
delivered from wicked and unreasonable persons. Yea as the same Apostle
requesteth the Romans, we should rouse up our selves, and (...). Romans 15.20.
wrestle with God by earnestness of suit and supplication, of prayers and
tears to him; as Genesis 32.24, 26. Hosh. 12.3, 4.
Jacob that would not let the Angel go, till he had wrung a blessing from
him; as Matthew. 15.22, 25, 27.
the woman of Canaan, that would take no nay, that would not be answered, till
she had obtained her suit in her daughters delivery; as L^k. 18.5, 7.
the poor Widow in the Parable, that by mere importunity, enduced, or
enforced rather, the unjust Judge at length to do her right, and to avenge her
of her adversary. So Tertullian describes the manner of the Christians of his
time in the like cases; Coimus in c^^tum et congregationem, vt Deu^, quasi m^n^
facta, ambia^us: grata Deo est vis haec: v^ta fundimus, coelos tundimus, Deum
tangimus, misericordiam extorqu^mus. Tert^^^. apolog.
We beset God, says he, as it were by troops: we offer violence unto him, but
such as he well likes of; we pour fo^rth our prayers; we send up our cries:
we rap at heaven gate: we wrest and wring mercy and grace out of Gods hands.

Duty 4.
4. We should show our compassion toward them, by being forward, according to
our ability, to help and relieve them. 1 John 3.18.
Let us love, says the Apostle, not in word and tongue; but in deed and truth:
Else, 1 John 3.17.
If any man have this worlds good, and see his brother to be in need, and
shau^^^ up his bowels, yea or his purse either, against him, (for if the one be
not shut, the other will soon open:) there dwells no love of God in that
man. That love that is in tongue only, is not in truth. And, Iam. ^^^.16.
what avails it, says James, if, when a brother or a sister wants meat or
apparel, you wish them warmth and food their belly-full, but you give them
nothing of that, that they stand in need of? What are they the better for your
good wishes? No* our brethren are not of the Chamoeleon kind; to live with
Hesh. 12.1.
Ephrain upon wind; to be fed with fair words. We must go further then so,
if we will show our sorrow for them to be sincere. Esai 16.5.
Let mine outcasts, Moab, dwell with thee: do thou shelter mine exiles from
the face of the Spoyler. Esai 21.14, 15.
Ye inhabitants of Tens^^ bring forth water for the thirsty, and supply
those that fly with bread. For they fly, poor souls, from the sword, from the
drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the extremity of war. And for
those that abide abroad still in distress, do as they did at Antioch, when a
general death was foretold; Act. 11.29.30
The Disciples, every man according to his ability, resolved to send succor
to the brethren in Iewry; which they did also out of hand accordingly, by the
hands of Barnaba^ and Saul. Imitate those worthy wel-willing Macedonians, of
whom the Apostle bears witness, and it remains upon record to their
everlasting re^owne, That 2 Cor. 8.2, 3, 4.
to their power, yea beyond their po^er, they showed themselves willing, and
pressed the ^p^^tle instantly to accept of their free gift for the relief of
the Saints. Otherwise, if we withold our helping hand, as Ester 1.15.
M^^decai sometime told Ester, God may by other means send help and
deliverance to his distressed ones; but Iud^ ^^ 3.
the Curse of Mer^z may light upon us; we and ours may be destroyed: the
destruction threatened them, may be inflicted upon us: or though it be not, yet
as Deborah says to Barak, Judge 49.
It shall not be to our honor, we shall lose the honor of being instruments,
and means under God, of their delivery.

Now I dare not say, as the Geneua translation here has it, but without
warrant from the Original, that No man (among us) is sorry for the affliction
of Joseph: or with Jeremy; Ier. 12.11.
There is no man that lays it to heart: or with Esaias, Esai 64.7.
There is no man that calls upon Gods name, or stirs up himself to take
hold on him: or with Ezekiel; Ezech. 22.30.
There is no man that stands up in the gappe to make up the breach: or with
Esaias again; Esai 51.18.
There is not any one that takes Sion by the hand; that helps to succor and
support her. Many, I doubt no^, there are, of whom Deboraes song may be sung;
Judge. 5.2.
Praise ye the Lord, for the willing people: and the Lord increase the number
of them, and reward abundantly, what they do in this kind, into the bosom of
them and theirs. But yet it is not to be doubted, but that there are too many
among us, in whom this prophecy is too too truly fulfilled. And the most, yea
the best and the forwardest, it is to be feared, are over defective, and come
far short of that, that should be, in that duty, whereof the Prophet
lamenteth and complains of an utter want in them. Well, as one speaks in
another case, Gemendus est valde, qui non ge^^t. Gregor. in Euang. homil. 34.
Dolendus magis es, si non dolas. Bern. de co^sid. l. 1.
They are worthy to be bewailed, that do not heartily bewail the distresses
of those, whom it so nearly concerns them to have a regard of. They are but
Dolenda intueri nee d^lere, me^ti^ est signum and damnationis i^dicium, mem^^^
enim quod d^l^rum non sentit, mortuum est: and morbus insensibilis est and
incurabilis. Bern. medit. c. 12. Quod valde putre est, nec dolet. quod non
delet, non pr^ s^n^ habendu^^, sed pro mort^^ computandum est. Aug. homil. 28.
carcasses of Christians, that are so affected; and show evidently thereby,
that there is no spirit of life in them. But let us all in the fear of God, as
we desire to escape the judgments hereafter denounced, rank our selves among
those rather, that are truly and unfeignedly touched; yea that are even sick at
the very heart again, with grief and sorrow, for the afflictions of Joseph,
and the distresses of Sion, and esteem them (for so they are indeed, if they
be Christ's) as their own. Neither let the backwardness of any such as were
here taxed, pull any of us back; nor their coldness cool our zeal and
courage therein; but let it rather be, as the blast of the bellows is to the
fire, a means the more to enkindle and inflame our affections. It shall be a
means to feale up, as our love to Gods Church, so our good will to Gods cause.
It shall argue a beginning of spiritual life in us. And it shall give us an
assurance of eternal life laid up for us: which Ma^th. 10.42. and 25.34.
our Savior himself has promised to reward all those with, that commiserate,
and out of commiseration are careful to supply and relieve the wants and
necessities of any his distressed ones: as Matthew. 18.5. and 25.40.
reckoning whatsoever is in this kind done to them, to be done unto himself.

FINIS.

