Two Sermons:

TENDING TO DIRECTION FOR CHRISTIAN CARRIAGE, Both in AFFLICTIONS INCVMBENT, And
in IVDGEMENTS IMMINENT.

THE FORMER on PSALM. 13. 1.

THE LATTER on HEBR. 11. 7.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. in D. and Pastor of ROTHERHITH.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND. 1623.

(...) DAVID'S Remembrancer.

A MEDITATION ON PSALM 13. 1.

Delivered in a Sermon at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street.

By THOMAS GATAKER, Bachelor in Divinity, and Pastor of Rotherhith.

ESAI. 62. 6, 7. You that are mindful of the Lord, be not silent: Give him no
rest, till he repair Jerusalem, and till he make her the praise of the Earth.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JAMES LEY Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice
of his Majesty's Bench.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
ALBEIT Speech have no small advantage of Writing; in that Habet nescio quid
latentis (...) viva vox; and in aures disc^puli de autoris ore transfusa
fortius sonat. Hiero. ad Paulin. Viva illa, ut dicitur, vox lectione before
alit. Quintil. institut. l. 2. c. 2. Quod memoria lapsus ciccroni quasi ex
Tuscul. l. 2. tribuit Erasm. in Hieron. and in Adag. Atqui Cic. epist. ad
Atlic. lib. 2. epist. 8. Ubi sunt qui aiunt, (...); Quanto magis vidi ex tuis
literis, quam ex illius ser^one quid ageretur?
it has a greater viuacitie accompanying it, than the other has by much: the
latter seeming to be but as (...). Greg Naz. epist. 52. Et (...). idem epist.
38.
a dead shadow of the former; Elocution Actio quasi vita quaedam est orationis.
Quintil. institut. lib. 11. cap. 3.
the very vital spirit and chief grace of an Oration, and that, which OF
(...). DionysHalicar. de Demosthene. Oratorem plane perfectum, and cui nihil
admodum desit, Demosthenem facile dixeris. Cic. de clar. Orat. Quo ne Athenas
quidem ipsas magis credo fuisse Atticas. Ide^ de perfect. Orat. Grae. little
Oratoru^ praestantissimi sunt (...) qui fuerunt Athenis; little autem princeps
facile Demosthenes, admirabile est quantum inter omnes unus excellat. Idem de
opt. genesis Orat. Cujus commemorato nomine maxima eloquentiae consummati^
audientis animo oboritur. Val. Max. memorab. l. 8. c. 7.
that most eminent Orator and Quomodo Facundiae Parentem Ciceronem. Plin. hist.
not. l. 7. c. 30. Atqui, cum Demos^enes Graecae, Cicero Latinae eloquen^*
Principes extiterint; Demosthenes and prior fuit, and exmagna part Ciceronem,
quantus est, fecit. Quintil. institut. l. 6. c. 3. and l. 10. c. 1.
Father of Elo^, (...) not the Prime pa^ only of Oratorie, but in effect Acti^
in dicendo una dominatur. Huic prima^dedisse Demosthenes dicitur, cum
rogaretur, quid in dicendo esset primum, huic secundas, hui: tertias. Cic. de
Orat. l. 3. and declar. Orat. Val. Max. memor. l. 8. c. 10. Quintil. instit. l.
11. c. 3. and Aug. epist. 56.
all in all, and the sum of al, being Hinc Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 10. In
Demosthene magna pars Demosthenis abest, quia legitur potius quam auditur.
wanting in it: In regard whereof, it is not wont to make so deep an
impression, or to work upon the affections so powerfully as Nulla res magis
penetrat in animos, eosqu^ fingit, format, flectit. Cic. declar. Orat. Tantum
dictis adjicit gratiae, ut infinite magis eadem audita quam lecta delectent.
Quinti^l. instit. l. 11. c. 3. Multo magis, ^t vulg^ dicitur, viva vox affic^t.
Nam, licet acriora s^nt, qu^ legas, altius tamen in animo sedent, (...)
pr^nunciatio, vultus, habitus, gestus etiam dicentis adfigit. Plin. epist. 4.
lib. 2. Hinc (...) D^mosthenis orationem, quam eis recitasset, ad^antibus
Rhodijs, (...); Quidsi ipsum, vel, Quid si bestiam ipsam audivissetis? Cic. de
Orat. lib. 3. (...). not. lib. 7. cap. 30. Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 10. Plin.
jun. ep. 4. lib. 2. Quintil. instit. l. 11. c. 3. and Hieron. ad Paulin.
that does; and it is accounted therefore but (...) Ignat. epist. 1. (...).
E^stath. ad Odyss. (...) ex Pausania.
a second shift, and as sailing with a side-winde, where a direct fore-winde
fails. Yet herein has Writing the ods of Speech; in that by it we may speak
as well to the absent as to the present; by it men restrained by sickness,
weakness, or otherwise from public ^mployment, yet may notwithstanding much
profit the public, and sitting themselves still at home, benefit others
abroad; yea by it, not the Sola ^es est que homines absentes praesentes facit.
Turpilius de vicissitudine literarum. Quid enim tam pr^sens est inter absentes,
quam per epistolas and alloqui and audire quos diligas? Hieron. ad Nit^. Sunt
literae doctrina quaedam, qua quisque valeat quamvis long absenti verba
mitter^ man^facta in silentio, quae rursus ille cui mittuntur, non auribus, sed
oculis colligat. Aug. de Trinit. lib. 10. cap. 1. Voces signa sunt, per qu^
praesentibus loquimur: inventae sunt literae, per qu^s possemus and cum
absentibus colloqui. Ibid. l. 15. c. 10.
living only may converse with the living, (...). Homer. Iliad. (...).
though never so far both by sea and land severed either from other, but the
living also may have profitable commerce and dealing with the dead, as Hinc
illud Luc. 16. 29. Habent Mosem and Prophetas: audiant illos. Mortui siquide^
loquuntur adhuc: quod de Abele Spiritus Sanctus Heb. 11. 4. and de Samuele
Siracides Eccles. 46. 20.
we have by means of their writings still extant with those that died and
departed this world, even thousands of years since, to our exceeding great
comfort and inestimable gain. Being therefore moved by some that heard of it,
and the matter delivered in it, but could not be present at the delivery of it,
to make this weak discourse, by help of Pen and Press, more public, as
dealing in an Argument not unfitting the present times, and such as they
desired to be more fully either instructed or directed in, which by means
thereof they supposed that both themselves and many other might be; I was the
rather induced to condescend to this their desire, that by presenting of it to
your Lordship, the prime Member of that grave and reverend Society, where it
was by word of mouth delivered: I might give some poor pledge and testimony
of my due and deserved respect to your Honor, and of my thankful
acknowledgement of such favors, as have from time to time, by your Lordship
been showed me, as well during the time of mine employment at Lincolnes-Inne,
(where your Lordship was one of the first whom I received kind acceptance
from, being Reader at the time of my first access thither,) as since also.
Having therefore during my late restraint by some infirmity and weakness that
constrained me to keep home, and to intermit my public employment, taken some
time to reuiew, supply, and enlarge my former Meditations of the Subject then
handled, (which I could not so well find time for before) I make bold to
tender them here (such as they are) unto your Lordship, and entreating only
your courteous acceptance of them, without further troubling your Honor amids
so many weightier affairs, commit both your self and them to the gracious
protection and holy direction of the Highest.

Your Lordships to command in the Lord, THOMAS GATAKER.

DAVID'S Remembrancer.
PSALM. 13. 1. How long, O Lord? Will thou forget me for ever? How long will thou hide thy face away from me?
THIS Psalm, as appears by the Occasion.
whole tenor of it, was composed by the Prophet DAVID during the time of some
grievous and tedious temporal affliction; and that accompanied also (as may
seem) with some spiritual desertion.

And it may well for the subject matter of it be Matter.
termed

(...) Sicut Psalm. 38. (...)
DAVID'S Remembrancer; as being penned by him for this end, to put God in mind
of him, and of his present forlorn and distressed estate.

The Psalm consists of three principal Parts. Parts 3.


There is first Verse. 1, 2.
a grievous complaint of his present Part 1.
condition; propounded by way of expostulation; Complaint.


1. Verse. 1.
In regard of God; who seemed not to regard him. 2. Verse. 2.
In regard of himself, by means thereof driven to his shifts, and in a manner
at his wits end. 3. Verse. 2.
In regard of his adversaries; who took occasion thereby to triumph and insult
over him.
There is secondly Verse. 3, 4.
an humble suit and request Part 2.
commenced by him to God, and conceived in three distinct parts, answering the
three branches of his former complaint. For 1. Verse. 3.
He requesteth Request.
God that he would Respice, refertur ad, Usque quo avertis faciem? Exaudi, ad,
Usque quo obliuisceris? Aug. in Psalm. 12.
Behold and hear; that he would vouchsafe to regard him, and turn his face
again toward him, and not send him away, inaudita querela, unheard and
unanswered.

2. He adds some Reasons why he desires and requires God thus to hear and
regard him. Reasons 2.


^. Verse. 3.
In regard of himself, that he sleep not in Reason 1.
death: not meant, as some think, of De somno peccati. Ruffin. in Psalm. 12. In
peccato. Aug. in Psalm. 12. and contr. advers. leg. l. 1. c. 11. Cassiod. and
Remig. and ex ^que Lombard. De somno peccati qui ducit ad mortem. Acacius
Caesar. quaest collect. 4. apud Hieron. epist* ^d Miner. and Alex.
sleeping in Sin; though 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6, 7. Ephesians. 5. ^ 1 Cor. 15. 34.
Sin in Scripture be often compared to Sleep; no^, as others, Theodoret. and
E^thym.
of the ^eath of grief and despair; though that be said too to be a kind of
Death; and Genesis 27. 46. Io^ 3. 20, 21. Eccles 7. 28.
makes a man's life often no better, yea more bitter than Death: nor yet as
others. Cum ^ peccato, quod est ad mortem irrevocabiliter perseveratur. Bern.
in Cant. 52. Ne poenitentiam ^ mortem differens, dormiam cum morte peccati in
inferno. Hugo Card. in Psalm. 1^.
of dying eternally, of being everlastingly damned: but Iun. Calvin. etc. Vide
Drus. lib. 3. quaest. 27. and H^resbach. in Psalm.
of temporal death, (that is usually termed 1 Cor. 15. 6, 51. John 11. 11, 14.
a Sleep; and is nothing indeed but Ti (...). Quid mors est? Somnus est
consueto longior. Chrysostad pop. Antioch. de imag. sermon. 5.
a Sleep longer than usual; yea in some sort Ier. 51. 39. Nobis cum semel
occidit brevis lux, Nox est perpetua una dormienda. Ca^ull. epig. 5. Quicunque
nascimur, brevi post lumine Aeternus impedit sopor. Ben. Lamprid.
a perpetual Sleep, because to continue Job 7. 9, 10. and 14. 12.
as long as the world lasts:) that Job 10. 20, 21. Psalm 39. 13.
he might not die in this distressed Reason 2.
and discomfortable estate.

2. Verse. 4.
In regard of his malicious and evil affected Adversaries; Psalm. 38. 16.
that they might not have longer or further cause of joy and triumph in his
overthrow, as having now without all help or hope of recovery, gotten the
upper hand of him.

And there is thirdly Verse. 5.
a cheerful and a comfortable Part 3. Conclusion.
Conclusion, wherein as recollecting himself, and controlling the voice of
sense with the voice of Faith;

1. Pr^fitetur.
He professes his trust and confidence in God. 2. Pollicetur. Branch 3.
He promises himself assured help and deliverance from God. And 3.
Paciscitur.
He praises God for it, as if already he had received it: (...). Vides animum
been sperantem? Petit, and prius quam acceperit, tanquam qui accepisset,
gratias agit. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 12. Contra quam Bern. in Cant. 10. Gr^tiarum
actio beneficium non praecedit, sed sequitur.
See the picture of an hopeful heart, says Chrysostom, he craves aid of
God, and before he have it, he renders thanks for it, as if already he had
it.
And thus have you the Sum and Substance of the Psalm, with the several
parts of it. Branch 1.


To return to the first Branch of his Complaint, which I purpose only to
insist on. Branch 2.


First, for the Manner of it, or Phrase it is conceived Manner.
in; there are four several Readings, though Readings 4.
in effect for sense and substance much the same.

For 1. Some read the words of the former Reading 1.
Part, without stop or stay, as one continued sentence; Graec. Sept. Lat.
Vulgat. Ang. Genev. Reg. Bibl. Calvin. alij.
How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? But they both neglect the
pause in the Hebrew; and beside make no very good sense.

2. Others make a pause, but a pause misplaced; Reading 2.
and they thus read them; Usquequo, Domine, oblivisceris me? In finem? Remig.
in Psalm. 12. Erit hoc usque quo in aeternum? Hugo Card. ibid. Sic Vatabl. and
Leo Iudae.
How long, O Lord, will thou forget me? For ever? As elsewhere, Psalm. 74. 10.
How long, O God, shall the Adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy
Name for ever? But the pause here in the Original, is after Domine; not after
Obliuisceris.

3. Others placing the pause aright, read the words as an Aposiopesis, that
is, a broken or imperfect Reading 3.
sentence, not unfit to express passion. Quousque, Domine? subaudi, non
intueberis? oblivisceris mei in aeternum? Iun.
Qu^usque, Domine? How long, O Lord? As if he had said; How long will it be ere
thou mind me? In aeternum obliuisceris? Will thou never again think on me?
How long will thou hide thy face away from me? And the like we may find in
diverse other places; Psalm. 79. 5.
How long, O Lord? will thou be angry for ever? Shall thy jealousy burn like
fire? And, Psalm. 89. 46.
How long, Lord? Will thou hide thy face for ever? Shall thy wrath burn like
fire? Yea the very selfsame Aposiopesis apparently, where he says; Psalm. 6.
3.
But thou, O Lord, how long? And, Psalm. 90. 13.
Return, O Lord: how long? And let it repent thee concerning thy servants: As
also of^ Ier. 13. 2. Apoc. 6. 10.
elsewhere.

4. It may well be read by way of Reduplication, Reading 4.
Per epimonen repetendo ingeminat. Cassiod.
(a form very fit also to express the vehement affection of a soul
surcharged with sorrow, and pincht in with pain;) enclosing the middle part of
the Verse within a Parenthesis: How long, O Lord? (will thou never remember
me?) how long, (I say) will thou hide thy face away from me? And the like
Reduplication is found also elsewhere, where he says, Psalm. 94. 3.
How long shall the wicked, O Lord? How long (I say) shall the wicked exult?

Either of the two latter may well stand with the Context of the words in the
Original.

Secondly, For the Matter and substance of it: Matter.


1. There are two things complained of: Substance.


1. That God had forgotten him.

2. That he had hid his face away from him. Both Nec oblivio, nec aversio cadit
in Deum. Remig. in hunc Psalm. Neutrum De' revera facit, sed more nostro
Scriptura loquitur. Aug. and Ruffin. in hunc locum. Per (...) de Deo perinde ac
de homine loquitur. Humanu^ siquidem oblivisci, and faciem ab eo quem oderis
avertere. Muscul.
humanitus dicta, spoken by way of resemblance from the manner of men, and the
one going a degree beyond the other. Gravius est aversionem faciei, quam
oblivionem sentire. Muscul in hunc loc.
It is more to hide his face from him, than not to remember him.

Genes. 40. 23. and 41. 9. Hinc qu^stio apud Senecam, an obliti ingrati sint
dicendi* de bene^. lib. 3. cap. 4, 5.
We may out of vnmindfulnesse sometime forget one, whom we wish otherwise
well unto: but when we do wittingly and willingly Esai. 58. 7. and 53. 3.
(...); Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 38.
turn or hide our face away from him, it is a sign that either we hate and
abhor him, or at least desire not to mind or remember him. In oblivione
remissio est benevolentiae and curae, in avers^e faciei indignatie and odium.
Muscul.
There is an implication of bare neglect in the one; an intimation of anger and
indignation, of displeasure and evil will in the other.

For God therefore to forget DAVID, not to mind him, or look after him, is
much! If his eye be never so little once off us, the spiritual adversary is
ready presently to seize on us, Aeriae potestates tanquam milvi
circumvolitant, ut pullum infirmum abripiant. Aug. in Psalm. 62. and in Psalm. 90.
as the Kite on the Chicke, if the Hen look not carefully after it.

But for God, DAVID'S Psalm. 4. 6, 7. and 18. 18. and 73. 25. (...). Theophyl.
ep. 30. ex Homer. Odyss. (...).
only joy and stay, to turn his face away from him, that he may not mind
him, as if Psalm. 27. 9.
in anger and euill-will toward him, he had cast off all care of him, yea were
resolved to reject him, and were willing to expose him to the will of those
that would Psalm. 38. 16.
rejoice in his ruin: this is much more. There is an vnmindfulnesse of him
implied in the former; an evil mind* toward him implied in the latter.

And surely, if Psalm. 30. 5.
in the favor of God there be life; yea Psalm. 63. 3.
his favor is better than life it self: then undoubtedly (...). Theophyl.
epist. 37.
such apprehension of his disfavor and displeasure must needs be as death, yea
more bitter than death it self to the soul so deserted.

2. Both these are further aggrauated by the circumstance of time; the long
continuance of either. Circumstance


1. For the time past; he had been long in this estate already. 2. For the
time to come; it was uncertain how long it would last.
Now for God Esai. 54. 8. Psalm. 30. 5.
for an instant to be angry with some of his, and to hide his face from them,
cannot be but most (...). Theophyl. ep. 37. (...) Idem epist. 24. Nam fruendis
voluptatibus crescit carendi delor. Plin. epist. 5. l. 8. E^, Tum est tormentum
carere divit^js, cum illas iam senseris. Sen con^rov. 6.
heavy to those that have formerly enjoyed it, and been before in his favor:
(for In carcere natus ac nutritus puer, de matris suae anxietate miratur. Bern.
de diverse. 12.
as for others; those, we say, that were never out of hell, think there is no
other heaven.) The least frown of his face, or bending of his brows, is a
very hell it self to such: Psalm. 30. 7.
Thou turnedst but thy face away, says DAVID, and I was troubled.

But to have it last and continue so for a long time together, what a daunting
and dismaying must it needs be to that soul, that shall esteem it self in a
manner to lie so long in hell, and to have in some sort an hell so long here
out of hell, where it had a kind of heaven before?

And yet further again, though this heavy and disconsolate estate should last
long, and were yet to last far longer; yet if there were some certain stint
of time set how long it should last; the eye of the soul being fixed upon that
term, it would be some comfort to consider how the time wore away. But where
the eye of the mind meets with no object to stint it, but (as it is with
persons distressed at Sea in a thick fog, that have rowed and wrought long
till their hearts ache again, and beaten to and fro, but can descry no shore;
or as it is Quib' cruciatus and ad finem per torment a proper at, and sine fine
deficiens durat. Ita fit miseris mors sine morte, finis sine fine, defectus
sine defectu: quia and mors vivit, and ^nis semper incipit, and deficere
desectus ne^cit. Greg. mor. l. 9. c. 47.
with those that are in hell, whose torments have no stint, but are boundless
and endless) it is as far from an end still, for ought it can descry, as at
first; it has lasted thus long, and Psalm. 74. 9.
it is uncertain how long longer it may last: This is that that might break
an heart of stone or steel, that might enforce the forlorn soul to sink
down under the heavy burden and unsupportable weight of it, overwhelmed with
horror, and swallowed up with despair, were there not somewhat else (even
Psalm. 37. 24.
an hand of God himself) to support and uphold it.

And yet was this, as we see here, DAVID'S estate at the present. He complains
that God had forgotten him, yea he had hid his face from him: this
discomfortable estate had lasted long with him already, and it was uncertain
yet how long it would last.

Whence observe we this Instruction, that Gods Doctrine.
Church and dearest Children are often in that case, what for outward
afflictions, what for inward desertions, that both in the sight of others, and
to their own sense and feeling, God seems to have rejected them, and not to
regard them.

Aliorum judicio. Calvin. in Psalm. 13. Sic Esai. 53. 4.
In the sight, I say, of others: for so say the profane proud, oppressing and
pursuing the poor; Psalm. 10. 11.
God has forgotten them; he has hidden away his face, and will never more
look after them. And DAVID'S enemies of him, (if he were Author of that
Psalm;) Psalm. 71. 11.
God has forsaken him; let us pursue him, and seize on him: for there is none
to deliver him.

Yea to Exsensu proprio. Calvin. in Psalm. 13.
their own sense and feeling. For so Sion Galat. 4. 26.
the Mother of the faithful complains; Esai. 49. 14.
The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me. So the Children of
the Church, and those no (...).
bastardly brood Maith. 12. 39.
neither, but such as continued firm unto God, and faithful with him,
complain also, That Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 24.
though they had not forgotten God, nor dealt disloyally with him; yet God had
forgotten them and hid his face away from them. So DAVID, 1 Samuel 13. 14.
a man after Gods own heart, and (as his name sounds) the Lords Darling, or
(...) amasiu^ vel amabilis. Unde Dido Poenis. Inde and Solomon
the beloved of the Lord, yet makes grievous complaints oftentimes unto God,
and in holy manner debateth the matter, and expostulateth with God, both here
and (...) 2 Samuel 12. 25.
elsewhere: Psalm. 42. 9.
I will say to God my rock; Why have thou forgotten me? And, Psalm. 88. 5, 14.
Lord, why reiectest thou my soul, and hidest thy face away from me? I am like
to the dead, that lie slain in the grave; that are cut off from thine hand,
and thou remembrest no more.

Yea not Psalm. 22. 1, 8.
DAVID alone as a Type of him; but the only begotten of God himself, Coloss.
1. 13. Ephesians. 1. 6. Matthew. 3. 17.
his Son of Love, as he terms him, his dearest Darling, (though Romans 8.
32. O quantum dilectus, pro quo filius ipse, aut non dilectus, aut saltem
neglectus? Bern* de temp. Vide and Salvian. de pr^vid. l. 4.
he thought him not too dear for us) when he was on the Cross, not in his
enemies eyes and account only, Matthew. 27. 43.
that twitted him with his trust in God, who seemed then not to regard him, but
to his own sense and feeling too, seemed neglected and forgotten, as by that
bitter and lamentable complaint that he then made, appears; Matthew. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And if it were so with Christ,
Psalm. 110. 1. Matthew. 21. 45.
DAVID'S Lord; no marvel if the like also sometime befell DAVID: if this
betided the head, no marvel if it betide the body too: If it were sometime
the state of the Psalm. 2. 8. John 1. 14.
native Son, that had never been other; no marvel if it be the state often of
adopted Sons, of such as have Galat. 4. 6.
of Servants been made Sons, of such as have from Bond-slaues been advanced
to that honor.

Which yet we are not so to understand, as if Explication.
God could forget any man, or as if God could forg^t ought. Oblivio in Deumnon
cadit. Aug. in Psalm. 9. and in Psalm. 118. Conc. 15. Et Muscul. in hunc loc.
Nihil Deus ignorant, nihil obliviscitur. Greg. Mor. l. 25. c. 4. Neque oblivio
in Deum cadit, quia nullo modo mutatur, neque recordatio quia non obliviscitur.
Aug. in Ps. 87.
Oblivion is a defect, and cannot befall him, who is perfection it self. But
as we are said to forget things, when we do no more regard them, or take
notice of them, or look after them, than if we had forgotten them: Psalm. 45.
11.
Forget thy people and thy Fathers house, says the Psalmist to Rharaobs
Daughter; And rich men are said to forget their poor kindred and acquaintance:
So Tunc meminisse dicitur Deus, quando facit; tunc oblivisci, quando non facit.
Aug. in Psalm. 87. and in sentent. Prosper. 108. Oblivisci dicitur, cum non
miseretur. Hugo Victor. de essent. divin.
is God said to forget m^n, when he does not respect them, when he takes no
care of them, when for good he no more regards them, than if he had clean
forgotten them.

Now in this manner does God indeed forget Distinction.
some; some he seems to forget, though indeed he do not forget them.

As Ambrose says, That Quosdam deserit, quosdam deserere videtur. Ambr. in
Psalm. 118.
God does wholly forsake some: as he did Matthew. 27. 5.
Judas and 2 Samuel 7. 15.
Saul, whom he utterly cast off. Some he seems to forsake, but he forsakes
not indeed. As our Savior Christ, albeit Esai. 53. 4.
God seemed to have forsaken him, when not only Act. 2. 23.
he left him in his cruel enemies hands, and Luke 22. 53.
suffered them to work their wills upon him, but even 2 Cor. 5. 21. Esai. 53.
6, 10.
powered out his own heavy wrath and indignation upon him; and he complained
therefore as before, That Mark. 15. 34.
his God had forsaken him; yet was he not indeed then forsaken, but even then
Hebr. 5. 7.
heard and helped; John 16. 32.
nor was he ever left alone; but though Matthew. 26. 56.
his Disciples all forsook him* and fled from him; yet his Father forsook him
not, but abode ever with him: And DAVID, though Psalm. 22. 1.
he complain sometime in the same terms that our Savior did; yet elsewhere
Psalm. 31. 22.
he acknowledges that how soever he had said in his haste, (in the heat of
temptation,) that he was cast out of Gods sight, yet even then did God hear
him, and grant his requests.

In like manner, some God thus forgets indeed. (As Hosh. 8. 14.
they forget him; so he forgets them.) Hosh. 1. 6.
Call the Child Loruchamah, says God to Hoshea; for I will have no more
mercy on the house of Israel; but (as the Vulgar Latin has it) Oblivione
obliviscar. Vulg. tanqua^ esset a (...) dextra. quum sit a (...) nistra.
I will utterly forget them: or rather (after the Original) Ut omnino
condonem. Iun. and Livel. Sed prorsus tollam eos. Leo Iud. a facie scil. mea.
Vatabl.
I will never forgive them: but Hosh. 4. 6, 9.
because they have forgotten the Law of their God, I will forget them; when I
have visited their ways on them, and rewarded them for their deeds. Minatur
and memoriam damn andorum, and oblivi^ne^ damnatoru^. Ruffin. in Hose.
God threatens, (says Ruffine) both to remember to damn them, and to forget
ever to show mercy upon them, when he has once condemned them. Some he seems
to forget, when he does not. Deus benos non negligit, cum negligit. Nec
obliviscitur, sed quasi obliviscitur. Ruffin. in Psalm.
He neglects not the godly, no not when he neglects them: Yea, Obscuris
super nos dispositionibus Deus saepe unde nos aestimatur deserere, inde nos
recipit; and unde nos recipere creditur, inde derelinquit: ut plaerunque hoc
fiat gratia quod ira dicitur; and hoc aliquando ira sit, quod gratia putatur.
Gregor. mor. l. 5. c. 5.
he remembers them then best, when he seems least to regard them, when he
seems most of all to forget them. Though the wicked, when he has his will on
the poor, thinks that Psalm. 10. 11.
God has forgotten them, and does not at all mind them; yet Psalm. 9. 18. and
10. 12.
the poor, says the Psalmist, shall not always be forgotten; nor the hope of
the afflicted perish for ever. But Psalm. 9. 12.
God when he makes inquisition for blood, will make it appear then that he
remembers them, and that he does not forget the poor man's complaint, nor
will ever fail any of those that Psalm. 9. 10.
seek to him and trust in him. And Esai. 49. 14.
though Zion complain that her God had forgotten her; yet the Lord tells
her, and assures her that even then Esai. 49. 15, 16.
he had her as fresh in mind, as if she were In manibus sculpsi te.
Humanitus dictum. Iun.
written upon his hands, and her present estate was never out of his eye: yea
that he could no more forget her, than a woman could Question.
her child, or than the kindest and tenderest (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 31. Etsi
filius minus interdum quam debeat filialem affectum exhibuit; matter tamen pro
suis visceribus maternu^ deserere non debet, sed nec valet, affectum. Bern. ep.
300.
mother that is the fruit of her own womb.

But why does God, may some say, then deal thus strangely with his dear ones,
and by seeming not to regard them, yea by seeming to reject them, suffer them
to be in so woeful and ruefull an estate, that they are in a manner like
persons utterly forlorn for the present?

I answer: God does this for diverse ends; whereof these are some of the
principal. Answer.


First, Ad examen.
to try their sincerity, their confidence Reasons 8.
in God, their constancy with God, whether their Reason 1.
hearts be sincere toward him, and upright with him, or no; whether they will
keep constantly in Gods ways, though God seem to neglect them, or seek to
indirect courses, because God seems not to regard them. 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.
God left Hezekiah, says the holy Ghost, to try him and to kn^w, that is,
Tentat Deus ut sciat, i. ut stire nos fa^iat; non ut sciat ipse, quem nil
latet, sine tentatione enim nemo satis probatus esse potest, sive sibi ipst,
sive alij. Aug. in Genesis contr. Manich. l. 1. c. 22. and de Trinit. l. 1. c. 12.
and ibid. l. 3. c. 11. and in Genes. quaest. 57. and 83. quaest. 60. and in
Deuteronomy. quaest. 19. and in Psalm. 36. and in Psalm. 58. and in Psalm. 44. and de
sermon. Dom. in mont. l. 2.
to make known, what was in his ^art. And Deu. 8. 2. and 13. 3.
the Lord tempts you, says Moses (...) the Israelites, to humble you, and to
prove you, and to know what is in your heart, whether you love him heartily,
and will constantly keep his Commandments or no. As a Father will sometimes
cross his Son, to try the Childs disposition, to see how he will take it,
whether he will mutter and grumble at it, and grow humorous and waiward,
neglect his duty to his Father, because his Father seems to neglect him, or
make offer to run away and withdraw himself from his Fathers obedience,
because he seems to carry himself harshly and roughly toward him, and to
provoke him thereunto: So does God likewise oft-times cross his children, and
seems to neglect them, to try their disposition, what metal they are made
of, how they stand affected toward him: whether they will neglect God, because
God seems to neglect them, forbear to serve him, because he seems to
forget them, cease to depend upon him, because he seems not to look after
them, to provide for them, or to protect them: like ^orams profane Purseuant;
2 King. 6. 33.
This evil, says he, is of God; and why should I depend then on God any
longer? Or whether they will still constantly cleave to him, though he seem
not to regard them, nor to have any care of them; and say with Esaias; Esai. 8.
17. Nec sic probatus ab officio recessit. Tu, inquit, avertis faciem tuam a me,
sed eg^ non sum aversus a te. Ruffin. in Ps. 29.
Yet will I wait upon God, though he have hid his face from us, and I will
look for him though he look not on us; for Esai. 30. 18.
they are all blessed that wait on him; and he will not fail in due time to
show mercy unto all them, that do so constantly wait on him. As 1 Samuel 13. 8,
10.
Samuel dealt with Saul; he kept away till the last hour, to see what Saul
would do, when Samuel seemed not to keep touch with him. So does God with his
Saints, and with those that be in league with him; he withdraws himself
often, and Psalm. 10. 1.
keeps aloof off for a long time together, to try what they will do, and
what courses they will take, when Psalm. 89. 19, 38, 39. 49.
God seems to break with them, and to leave them in the suds, as we say,
amids many difficulties much perplexed, as it was with DAVID at this time.

Thus was Saul's hypocrisy discovered. He would seem to depend on God; and 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7.
sought to him in his troubles and asked advice of him. But when God seemed to
neglect him, and ga^e him no answer, neither by dream, nor vision, nor by Vrim
and Thummim, neither by Prophet, nor by Prie^t, then left he God and sought to
the Sorceresse, and by the Sorceresse to Satan.

Where a question may be moved, how that is Question.
true that the Holy Ghost says elsewhere, that 1 Chronicles. 10. 14.
Saul did not at all ask counsel of God. 1 Samuel 28. 6.
Saul asked counsel of God, says one place; but the Lord gave him no answer:
And, 1 Chr. 10. 13, 14.
Thus died Saul in his sin, says another place, which he sinned, in that he
asked counsel of a Witch, and asked not of God; and therefore the Lord ^ew him.

But the answer is easy; and may be returned Solution 1.
in two Rules of the Civil Law.

1. Fi^ta pro factis non habentur.
That is not deemed done, that is not sincerely done; or Non videtur fieri,
quod non legitime fit. Reg. Iur.
that is not done so as it should. God Facta haud videntur, facta quae sunt
subdole.
accounts that as not (...), that is not done in sincerity. Take it b^ (...)
like: It is said of the idolatrous Heathen that were placed in Samaria, that 2
King. 32. 33.
they feared the Lord, and yet served their own Idols too; and yet in the very
next verse again it is said of the very same persons, 2 King. 17. 34.
Neither they, nor their children fear God to this day: Non colit rem sanctam,
qui non^ancto colit. Salvian, de provid. l. 4.
Their Fear was no fear, because no sincere fear: and so Saul's seeking to
God no seeking, because no sincere seeking. Psalm. 145. 18.
The Lord is near to all that call on him, but that call on him in sincerity.
And John 4. 24.
, The true worshippers are such as worship in Spirit and Truth. But Sapiens
nummularius Deus est: Nummum ne^ falsum, ne^ fractum recipiet. Bern. de temp^
109.
no counterfeit coin will go for current with him.

2. Factum non dicitur quod non perseverat.
That is not done, that holds not out, that Solution 2.
keeps not firm. Nihil dicitur fuisse factum, quamdiu aliquid supere^t
faciendum.
There is nothing said to be done, as long as ought is yet undone; Perseverance
is all in all. Matthew. 24. 13. Apoc. 3. 10.
He is faithful indeed that holds out to the last. Prou. 17. 17. Vere amicus
semper amat. Dr^s. Prov^. 2. cent. 1. pr. ^6. Verus amor nullu novit habere
modum. Propert. eleg. 3.
He is a true lover, that loves ever. But (...). Eurip. Troad. Aristot.
Rhetor. l. 2. c. 21. Amavit nunquam, jugi^er qui non amat.
He never loved truly, that loves not continually: He was never a true friend,
that ever cease to be a friend, that is not a friend always, that loves not
in adversity, as well as in prosperity, nor is content to take part with him,
whom he seems to love in either: So he never truly trusted in God, that ever
cease to depend upon him, that dares not trust God as well at sea as on
land, as well in adversity as in prosperity, that is ready to leave and give
over relying on God, so soon as God leaves in outward show at least to look
after him.

On the other side, thus was Jobs sincerity approved. Job 13. 24.
Why, says he to God, do thou hide thy face away from me? and carriest thy
self as an enemy toward me? Surely for no other end, Job, but to try thy
sincerity; and to make it manifest what thou art. The Devil slandered Job,
and traduced him, as if he had been but an hireling, Job 1. 9, 10, 11.
one that served God only to serve his own turn upon God; and would
therefore soon leave God, if God should seem to leave him, yea would not
stick to curse God, if he should but a little anger him, to his face. But the
Devil proved a lier, like himself: it was far otherwise with Job: As he was
no hireling, so (...). Eurip. Hecub.
he proved no changeling. As the Heathen man says of one, Nec iratum colere
destitit numen. Sen. ad Marc. c. 13.
He ceased not to worship even an angry God: Job 13. 15.
Though he slay me, says Job, yet I will trust still in him. And thus the
Saints of God approve unto God their own sincerity; in that Psalm. 44. 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 24.
though God had forgotten them, yet they had not forgotten him; though
Percussisti, i. percutiendo dejecisti. Verba enim Hebraica saepe motum
consignificant. Sic Genesis 38. 9. and Psalm. 89. 39.
he had smitten them, (that is, by smiting thrown and thrust them down) to
the very bottom of the Sea, the place where the (...) cetus. prout Genes. 1.
21. Psalm. 74. 13. Ezec. 29. 3. and 32. 2. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 148.
Whales lodge, and had ouer-whelmed them with the shadow of death; and suffered
them to be butchered and massacred all the day long, as if they were no other
than sheep sent to the shambles, and set apart for the slaughter; yet for all
this, they would not from him, nor seek to any other but him: As Diogenes the
Cynick sometime told his Master Antisthenes, (...). Diogen. Laert. Nullus tam
durus erit baculus qui a tuo me obsequio separ^t. Hieron. adv. Iovin. l. 2.
there was no cudgel so crabbed that could drive them away from him.

Secondly, God does this Ad exercitium.
to exercise the Reason 2.
gifts and graces of his Spirit in them. For many graces of God, as Patience,
Confidence in God, and the like, are like Torches and Tapers, that show dim
in the light, but burn clear in the dark; or like the Moon, and Stell^
interdi^ latent, noctu^icant. Ita vera virtus non apparet in prosperi^, eminet
in adversis. Bern. in Cant. 27.
the Stars, that are not seen in the day, but shine bright in the night.
Patientiae in prosperis null' est usus. Greg. mor. l. 11. cap. 19. In malis
quae quisque patitur, n^ in bonis, quib* fruit^r, opus est patientia. Aug. in
Ioa^. 124.
There is no use of patience when all things go well with us. Iam. 5. 11.
Ye have heard of Jobs patience, says James. But we had never heard of it,
had Job never been in trouble. I^ fides non habet meritum, ubi ratio humana
prabet experimentu^. Greg. in Euang. 26. Hac est enim la^s fidei, si id quod
creditur non videtur. Nam quid magnum est, si id credimus, quod videmus? Aug.
in Joan. 79. Ioh. 20. 29. Facile enim credimus quod videmus. Ambr. in Luc. l.
10.
There is no sight of faith, when we do sensibly see and feel as it were the
love and good will of God toward us in the pregnant and plentiful effects and
fruits of his favor. Virtus fidei credere quod non vides; merces fidei videre
quod credi^. Aug. in Psalm. 109. and de verb. Ap. 27.
It is the efficacy of faith, says Augustine, to believe what we see not; for
it is the reward of faith for us to see what we believe. But when Putas, hic
est? n^ potest non esse, sed latet. hyems est; int* est viridita^ in radice
Aug. in 1 Joan. 9.
it is winter time with us, and the sap is all down in the root, little sign
or show of it to be seen abroad, or above ground in the branches; when all
outward, yea and inward signs of Gods love and favor toward us, and of his
care and regard of us shall seem to fail and be withdrawn from us; when we
shall see and feel nothing, but arguments of his anger and wrath, 2 Cor. 7. 5.
troubles without and terrors within, Gods face turned from us, or his angry
look toward us; yet even then through these thick and black clouds to
descry and discern the bright sunneshine of Gods favor; and contrary to sense
and reason, carnal sense, and corrupt reason, to believe that Hebr. 12. 6.
Apoc. 3. 21.
God loves us, when he lowreth on us, and seems even to loath us, that we
are in favor still with him when he knitteth the brows and frowneth on us,
that he remembers us and thinks on us when he seems to forget us, that he
is a gracious God and Job 13. 16, 15.
a sure Savior to us, when he seems b^nt to destroy us; this i^ the
excellency of faith indeed. And for the exercise Aqui^ pullos s^s in ali^
port^, ^es reliqui inter pedes. Munster. in Schol. ^ R. Solomon.
of this and other the like graces in his, does God often withdraw himself from
them, as the Nu^e does from the child, to teach it to exercise the feet, and
learn to stand and go of it self without help or hold. Or as the Eagle with
her young ones, which when they are grown fledge, she turns out of the
nest, nor beare^h them ever on her wing, though Exodus 19. 4. Deuteronomy. 32. 11.
sometimes she so do, but to (...) them to (...), (...) etc. (...) Basil.
S^l. (...). 21.
^lieth from them, and leaves them sometime to shift for themselves. God led
you along the wilderness, says Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. ^. ^* 3.
to h^mble you* and to teach you, that man (...) not by bread, but by Gods
word; to teach them Pueris, qui n^e discu^t, sc^pea ind^itur ratis. Pla^t.
A^lul. 4. 1. ^ ast ubi j^m du^averit ^as Membra, ^que (...), discess^e corti^e
nare. Horat. sermon. 1. 4.
to swim without bladders, to go without crutches, to depend upon the ba^e
word of God, when bread and water should sail; and to learn, as, with the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 9.
not to trust in themselves, so (...). Bas^l. Sell. ^om. 21.
not to trust to the m^anes, but in him that works by them, and that can as
well work for us without them, when they fail.

Thirdly, All (...) e^cendam.
to en^re us to patience, and holy obedience, Reason 3.
and submission of our wills to the good pleasure of God. As a father sometime
will cross his child in those things that he has a mind to, yea and it may
be are not evil for him neither otherwise, and deny him somethings that he
does most of all desire, though they be such things as he is willing enough,
yea and has a purpose afterward to bestow on him, only thereby to enure him to
rest contented with his will, and to submit and refer his desires to his
pleasure: So does God oftentimes withdraw and withold long from his children
outward joys, inward comforts, the light of his countenance, the fruits of his
favor, the things they most desire, and that he purposes one day to (...).
Hera^lit. apud St^b. c. 3.
bestow on them, though he keep them back for the present, thereby to enure
them to patience and childe-like submission; that they may learn to practice
what Matthew. 6. 10.
they daily pray, and what our Savior as well by practice as by precept, has
taught them to say, Matt. 26. 39, 42. (...). Thymarid^ quida^. Thymarides
contra, (...). Iamblych. in vita* Pythag. Vide quid aequi^s est, tene divinae
voluntati conformando subdere, an ut ipsa tuae subserviat volunta^i. Gerson.
confol. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 1. M^ (...); Epictet. Arian. l. 2. c. 17. Deus quod
vult qui vult, semper est foelix. Sic enim hom^ ab humanis in divina dirigit^r,
cum voluntati human^ voluntas divina praefertur. Aug. in Joan. 52.
Not my will, but thy will be done. For as Romans 5. 4.
patience makes trial; so Iam. 1. 3.
trial breeds patience. As (...). Pind. Olymp. 4. Marcet sine adversari^
virtus. Tunc apparet quanta sit, quantum valeat polleatque, cum quid possit
patientia ostendit. Sen de provid. c. 2.
by patience, and by nothing more, is our sincerity approved: (nothing puts
our piety to the proof more than patience:) so such trials as these do enure
to patience and obedience: (As it is said of our Savior, That Hebr. 5. 8.
though he were the Son, yet (...).
he learned obedience by those things that he suffered:) (...). Eurip. He^ub.
Quam male inassueti veniunt ad aratra juvenci?
a lesson at the first not so easily learned of us, til by continuance of
sufferings we have been enured to the yoke. By these and the like courses
therefore God enureth and instructs his children to bear quietly such
burdens as he pleases to lay on them; as also to wait his leisure, and abide
his good pleasure, who knows what is best for them, and Psalm. 34. 9, 10. and
84. 12.
will deny nothing Psalm. 145. 15.
in his due season* unto them; but Prorsus tanquam ^grotum reficiens medicus,
and quod opus est hoc dat, and quando opus est, tunc dat. Aug. in Ps. 144.
as a wise Physician, says Augustine, dieting his patient, will both give them
what is fit for them to have, and give it them then when it is fit for them to
have it.

Fourthly, God deals thus many times with Reason 4.
his children, Adm^jorem peccati detestationem.
to work in them a greater hatred and detestation of sin; whereof this
hiding of his face from them, is often a fruit and an effect. Esai. 1. 15.
When you stretch forth your hands, says God by the Prophet, I will hide mine
eyes from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear you, because
your hands are full of blo^d. And says the same Prophet, speaking in the
person of Gods people; Esai. 64. 7.
Thou have ^id thy face from us, and have consumed us because of our
iniquities. Yea in the Lamentations the people of God complain, that Lament.
3. 42, 43, 44.
God had euerwhelmed them with his wrath, and covered himself with a cloud,
that their prayers might not pass, nor have access to his Highness; because
they had sinned and rebelled against him, and he therefore had not spared them.
And certainly that is one principal cause, the sins of Gods Church and
Children, their rebellious courses, their untoward carriage, their wickedness,
their wanto^nesse, their evil demeanure toward him, that makes God to turn
away his loving countenance from them, and that not only for a time to look
off them, till they humble themselves before him, but Multa cogitur homo
tolerare etiam remissis peccatis: quamvis ut in eam veniret miseriam, primum
fueritcausa poccatum. Productior est enim poena quim culpa, ne parva putaretur
culpa, si cum illa siniretur and poena. Ac per hoc vel ad demonstrationem
debit^ miseri^, vel ad emendationem labilis vitae, vel ad exercitatione^
necessariae patientiae, temp^raliter hominem detinet poena, etiam quem jam ad
damnationem sempitern^m reum non detinet culpa. Aug in ^an. 124.
even for some space of time after also, to look strangely upon them. He does
as a wise and discreet Father, who when his Son has offended him, though
upon his submission he be reconciled unto him, and be inwardly as well
affected again toward him, as ever, yet will make some show of anger still,
it may be, and lowre and frown on him for a long time after, that he may not
suddenly take heart to grace, as we say, again; but may by that means be
drawn to be both more seriously sorry for his offense past, and more fearful
for the future of offending his Father. So deals God with his children, when
they have done amiss and run riot, though upon their repentance he be at one
again with them, yet he concealeth it long many times; neither is his
countenance often the same for a long time after toward them, that formerly it
had been.

Thus dealt DAVID with Absalom; and thus God himself with DAVID. 2 Samuel 13.
38, 39.
After that Absalom by a train had made away his brother Ammon, and was fled
upon it to Geshur; DAVID a Father but too indulgent, ( 1 King. 1. 6. 2 Samuel 18.
5.
that was his fault, and he smarted shrewdly for it) after some space of time,
when the sorrow for his son Ammon was over, began to earne inwardly after
Absalom; and since that Ammon was gone, he was loath to lose the comfort of his
Absalom also, whom he loved but too well, and far better than his Absalom
loved him. And though he strove to conceal it, yet Sed male dissimulat: quis
enim celaveritignem, Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo? Ovid. ep. 12. Apparet
facile dissimulatus amor. Ibid.
he could not but discover it. 2 Samuel 14. 1, 2, 3, 19, 20*
Ioab wisely discerned it, and used the woman of Tekoa as a midwife, to deliver
DAVID'S heart of that that Ita Christus (...) dicitur. Basil. Sell. h^mil. 19.
it went great with, and was full of pain withal; and to draw that from him
as by constraint or importunity, which DAVID was of himself ouer-willing unto
already. 2 Samuel 14. 21, 22.
Thus Absalom his exile must be called home at length, though with some
difficulty: and the matter must proceed not as from DAVID, but from I^ab:
DAVID'S affection to Absalom must by all means be concealed: Yea, after Absalom
was returned, though DAVID, no doubt, longed still after him, and in some sort
doated on him, and was m^re seriously and sincerely desiro^ to see Absalom,
than Absalom was to see DAVID; yet, 2 Samuel 14. 24, 28.
Let him turn, says he, to his own house, and not se^ my face. And so dwelt
Absalom, DAVID'S be^ beloved some, (for he had not yet Solomon) for the space of
two years in Jerusalem, where the Court most was, and yet might not all that
while so much as see the King his fathers face, or have access once to his
presence. DAVID, no doubt, was perfectly reconciled in heart to him, and
counted it no small cross that he must thus be deprived of him; but knowing
Absoloms disposition, how soon he might be returning to some such like
practice, if he were suddenly taken into grace again, was content to enforce
himself to this harsh and unpleasing carriage toward him, (unpleasing, I say,
as well to DAVID himself, as to Absalom) to prevent some such further
mischief (if it might have been) that might otherwise* both befall himself
and Absolo^, as upon the change of his countenance toward him shortly after
ensued.

Now look how DAVID dealt with Absalom, so dealt God himself with DAVID.
After that foul abuse of Bathsheba, and the murder of Vriah, albeit 2 Samuel
12. 13.
DAVID had to Nathan freely confessed his offense, and Nathan from God again
assured him of the free and full forgiveness of it; The Lord has taken away
thy sin, thou shall not die for it: Yet the Lord, the more thoroughly to
humble him for it, and to make him the more wary for the time to come of
shunning that that might produce again such fearful effects, Est quida^
etiam tranquilli maris tremor, aut lacus qui ex tempestate requievit. Senec. de
tranquil. c. 1.
did not look upon him so lovingly for a long time after, as before he had
wont to do. Read but the Psalm that he made after Nathan had been with
him; and see how earnestly and instantly he cries and calls upon God still,
Psalm. 51. 1, 8, 9, 11, 12.
to turn his face away from his sin, and to look in mercy upon himself,
not to cast him wholly out of his sight, nor to take his good Spirit utterly
away from him, to restore unto him again those inward comforts and joys,
which Psalm. ^. 6, 7.
through the light of Gods countenance he had formerly enjoyed, but had in a
manner clean lost, and was wholly deprived of for the present. And in like
manner does God deal with many other of his dear servants, after some heinous
and notorious crimes by them committed, he withdraws often his face and
favorable countenance away from them, not till they repent only, but even
after they have repented of them, to make them wiser and warier for the time to
come, and to detest their own folly the more for the present.

Fifthly, God often thus withdraws and estrangeth Reason 5.
himself from his, Ad crucis opus consummandum.
That the cross incumbent may have its full and perfect work on them, which
if it were sooner removed, it would be the worse for them, as when the
corrasiue plaster is pulled off ere the dead flesh is eaten out: and indeed as
it were to no end for the Surgeon to clap on a corrasiue, if he should pull it
off again instantly, before it have done ought; it were to no purpose for the
Finer to put his gold into the fire, if he should either pull it out again, or
put out his fire, before the ore be melted, and the drossie matter severed: So
it would be to small purpose for God to lay crosses on us, for the bettring and
amending of us, if he should presently again so soon as we feel the smart
of them, and begin to whine under his hand, remove them away instantly, ere we
be at all bettered by them, or have that effected on us that God intends in
them.

Iam. 1. 2, 3, 4.
Count it matter of much joy, my brethren, says James, when you fall into many
trials, or troubles. Since you know that the trial of your faith brings
forth patience: And let patience have her perfect work, that you may be sound
and entire. And Omnipotens Deus quid nobis profuturum sit sciens, dolentium
exaudire vocem saepe dissimulat, ut utilitate^ augeat, dum per poena^ vita
penitius purgatur. Greg. mor. l. 14. c. 18. Vota differens cruciat, crucians
purgat, ut ad percipiendum quod desiderant, ex dilatione melius convalescant.
Idem ibid. l. 8. c. 17.
for the furthering and consummating of this work, does God oftentimes thus
withdraw himself, as it were, out of the way, and seems to keep aloof off,
when he is yet near at hand with us. He does as the Physician or Surgeon does
with his Patient, when he meets with a sore festred or full of dead flesh:
He applies some sharp corrasiue to purge the wound, and to eat out the dead
flesh, that would else hinder the cure. Quomodo cum medicus epithema molestum
and ardens imposuit, aeger ubi medicamento cruciari ceperit, rogat medicum ut
tollat emplastrum: Molestum est, inquit, mihi istud emplastrum; tollas, quaeso.
Rogat ut tollat, and non tollit. Eg^, inquit, novi quem curo. Non mihi det qui
aegrotat consilium. Opus est diu ibi sit, aliter enim nil proficiet. Aug. in
Psalm. 90. and in Psalm. 98. and in Psalm. 130. and in 1 Joan. 6.
Which being done, the Patient, it may be, impatient of pain, as soon as he
feels the smart of it, cries to have it removed. But he tells him, No, it
must stay there till it have eaten to the quick, and effected that thoroughly
for which it is applied. And to this purpose having given charge to them that
be about him, to see that nothing be stirred till he come again to him,
withdraws and retireth himself till it be full time to take it off again.
Mean while the Patient lying in pain, counts every minute an hour till the
Surgion come back again, and if he stay long, thinks that sure he has
forgotten him, while he is taken up with other Patients, or is otherwise
employed, and will never in any time return again to him: when as the Surgion,
it may be, is all this while but in the very next room to him, there by the
houre-glasse, to that purpose set up, attending but the time, till the plaster
have wrought that that it is to effect. And in the very selfsame manner does
God deal often with his dearest ones. Thus 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.
Paul buffeted by Satan, (it was no small corrasiue and heart-sore, you may be
well assured, that troubled so much so magnanimous a spirit as his was) was
instant with God more than once or twice to be rid of that evil. But Non est
ablatum, quod volebat auferri, ut infirmitas illa sanaretur. Aug. in Joan. 7.
Ita Deus and denegans exaudit, and exaudiens denegat; tribuens aufert, non
tribuens donat. Simo^ Cass^in Eua^g. l. 5. c. 24.
the answer he had from God was, that he must patiently abide it: he should
not want his grace that should enable him to undergo it. But it would be worse
with him, if it were otherwise; he would be in much peril of being puffed up
with pride, if he were wholly freed from it. Yea thus DAVID, when Gods hand was
sometime upon him, and he felt it harsh and heavy, he cries earnestly unto God,
to have it removed from him: Psalm. 39. 10.
Take, says he, thy plague away from me; I am even consumed with the stroke
of thine hand. And he pleads with God, as the Patient would do with the
Physician, when he is full of pain with that that is applied, he is sure that
the plaster has done enough by this time: Psalm. 119. 71, 67.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted. This affliction surely has
done me much good, I am very much amended by it. For Psalm. 119. 67.
Before Con^abo te, no^ cum argento tamen, ^. No^ agam summo iure tecum: quia
si ab omni scoria, ut argentum, expurgandu^ esses, totus disperires. Iun. ibid.
(...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 7.
I was afflicted I went astray; but since I have been thus troubled, I am
grown more careful of my courses; now I keep thy commandments. But Non se
norat aegrotus; sed agrotu^ norat medicus. Aug. in Psalm. 138. Inspecta vena
quid intu^ ageretur in ^groto, medicus noverat, ^grotus non noverat. Idem in
Psalm. 4^.
God saw that in DAVID, that he, it may be, saw not in himself. He saw much
dead flesh, much corrupt matter behind, that was yet to be eaten out, or it
would be ready soon to break forth into some outrage, as also afterward it
did, when DAVID came to be free from that harsh course of cure, and hard and
strict diet, that God had a long time before held him to.

True it is that Esa^. 48. 10.
God deals not with us in this kind, as the Finer does with his oar, who
never linneth melting it, and passing it through the fire again and again, as
long as any drossie matter remains mixed with it; or as those that boil
broths or curious confections for sick persons, that never leave blowing and
boiling so long as any scum at all arises on them. If he should so do, we
should never be any of us out of the furnace of affliction; even the very best
of us should be ever either in, or over the fire, always burning or boiling as
long as we lived. For so long as we live here, we shall retain some of this
dross still: Eradicari siquidem aut extirpari penitus e cordibus nostris, dum
hic vivimu^, non potest. Bern. de temp. 45.
nor will our scum be utterly purged out of us, while we abide here. But yet,
howsoever God does not go so exactly to work with us, (the cross would sooner
eat our hearts out of our bodies, than work all spiritual filth and dross
out of our souls) yet he will have that he does in this kind, work to some
purpose with us, he will not have us come out of the fire as we went in, he
will not endure we should come off the fire as foul and as full of scum, as
we were when he set us on. And that the cross may have this effect indeed on
us, Non deferit, etiamsi deserat. Aug. in Psalm. 90.
he does in mercy to us, till it be done, withdraw himself from us, that his
wonted manner of presence may not hinder the work of it. Reason 6.


Sixthly, God deals thus often with them, Adzelum acce^dendum.
to stir up and kindle their zeal, to make them more fervent in prayer, and in
seeking unto him, and to take away that coldness and remisnes that usually
grows upon them, when they are free from such afflictions. Thus Judge. 20. 21,
25, 26. Terga dederunt sceleratis ultores sceleris, and plures pau^ioribus.
Bern. de consider. l. 2. Sed recurrunt ad Dominum, and Dominu^ ad eos. Ibid.
he neglected the Israelites, though fighting in a just quarrel, and suffered
them to fall before their brethren the Beniamites, maintaining a bad cause, til
they fasted and prayed more earnestly, and by a kind of holy and religious
importunity wrested aid and assistance from God. Thus Math. 15. 22, 23. (...).
Basil. Sell. homil. 19.
he delaied and put off the poor woman of Canaan crying after him: he would
neither hear her, nor the Disciples making suit for her: he answered her at
first with a Matthew. ^5. 23. (...). Basil. Sell. ibid.
seeming kind of sullen silence; then with a cutting answer, sharper than his
former silence; Verse. 24.
I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of Israel: And, Verse. 26.
It is not fit to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to (...). Basil.
ibid.
Dogs. But (...). Basil. ibid. Beneficium distulit, ut desiderium accenderet.
Stell. in Luc. 24. Si^ ignis statu premitur ut crescat. Greg. m^r. l. 20. c. 15.
those speeches were but as blasts of the belowes, not to blow out, but to blow
up the fire of her faith, and to make it so to blaze, as should astonish those
that saw it. And Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. and 5. 6. Dissimulatio est, non indignatio.
Non est reversus spo^sus ad votum and v^em revocantis; ut desiderium crescat,
ut probetur affectus, ut amoris negotium exerceatur. Bern in Cant. 75.
Desiderium differtur ut proficiat, and tarditatis suae sinu nutritur ut
crescat. Abscondit se sponsus cum queritur, ut non invent^ ardentius quaeratur,
and differtur quaerens spons^ ne inveniat, ut tarditait sua capacior reddita,
multiplicius quandoq^ (...) quod querit. Greg. mor. l. 5. ^. 3.
it is a dissimulation, says Bernard, not an indignation, a concealment of
affection, no abatement of love, that Christ in the Cantieles ost with draws
and hides himself from his dearly beloved, and is not found of her* nor
returns to her, so soon as she calls; it is but to exercise her love, to
inflame her affection, to make her more eager in seeking up and down after him.

He does as a father that has a son at the University, who though he
understand, by his Tutor or some other friends, of his wants, yet will not take
notice of them, till from his son himself he hear of them, Let him write;
says he, himself for them; and it may be he shall write twice too before he
have what he desires; because he will by such means have him both to learn
to know his duty, and to exercise his pen also for his own good: So our
heavenly Father, though Matthew. 6. 32.
he know well enough what we have need of, Matthew. 6. 30. Psalm. 34. 9, 10.
nor will he suffer us to want ought that shall be needful for us, yet
Philip. 4. 6.
he will have our wants made known to him by suit* and supplication, ere he
will ^ake notice of them, yea he will make us sue long many times ere he fulfill
our desires, because he will have us to exercise his Zech. 12. 10.
Spirit of Prayer in us. Or as the Nurse, who perceiving that the child
begins to neglect her, withdraws her self aside, and keeps some-while
out of sight, yea and lets the child, it may be, cry a good ere she come
again to it, to make it grow more fond on her, when it has been afraid of
losing her: So DAVID, when Psalm. 30. 6.
in his prosperity he began to presume more than was meet on Gods favor, and
to grow somewhat retchlesse in that regard, as if God were now so firm to him,
that he were sure never to lose him, nor to have the effects and fruits of it
ever withdrawn from him, albeit he were not altogether so careful to use all
good means to retain it, as formerly he had been. Psalm 30. 7, 8.
Thou turnedst, says he, thy face from me: and then being sore troubled, he
sought earnestly with strong cries and salt tears, to recover and regain
again the sense of Gods favor, which by his own neglect he thus had lost. Or
D. Meriton Sermon. on 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
as a Father, says one, that holding an Apple in his hand, which the child
would feign have, lets him toil and tug at it, and with much ado unloose
finger after finger, yea, and it may be, whine and cry heartily ere he come
by it: So does God many times with us, to make us (...), To. 15. 30. Certatim
oremu^. Aug. epist. 121. Ut misericordiam exigamus. Ide^ in Psalm. 39.
wrestle with him, and as Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26. Hosh. 12. 3, 4. Talibus Jacob
funiculis Angelum detinebat, qualibus Moses resticulis Dominum ligaverat, Ex^.
32. 10, 11. Simon Cass. in Euang. l. 14.
Jacob sometime by intention and eagerness of prayer wring favor away from
him; and as Luke 18. 4, 5, 7.
the poor Widow did by the unjust Judge, even by our importunity overcome
him. Or as Luke 24. 28, 29. Finxit se longius ire, cum mallet cum discipulis
remanere. Bern. de grad. humil. Longius iturum finxit, ut in desiderium sui
discipuli magis excitarentur. Stella in Luc.
our Savior Christ dealt with the (...) Disciples, when he made as though he
would go further, though he meant not to leave them, to make them the more
instant on him, to press him to stay with them: So does Idcirco recedit, ut
aevidius requiratur. Bern. in Cant. 17.
God many times make as though he were leaving, or had left us, to incite us
to a more fervent and instant usage of all holy means, whereby we may either
keep his favor with us, while we yet have it, or fetch it again when it is
gone.

Seventhly, God does thus Ad gratiam commendandam. Cum d^t tardius, commendat
dona, non negat. Aug. de verb. Dom. 5. Site eni^ Senec. de benef. l. 1. c. 11.
Lenociniu^ est muneri antecedens metus. Et, Metus muneri p^dus imponit.
to commend to us Reason 7.
his mercy, to teach us to make more account of his favor, when by the want
of it we have felt what a bitter thing it is to be without it, and after long
miss of it, come to re-enioy it again. (...). Greg. Naz. ^t. 6.
The present evil is ever the greatest: and the fit we felt last seems
usually the sharpest. But the present good is deemed commonly the least; and
Malunt homines semper quae reliqueriant. Sen. ep. 1^5. Aliena nabis, nostra
plus (...) placent. P. Sir. -majorque videtur Et (...) vicina ^eges. ^uven.
^at. 14.
that that goes from us better, than that that abides by us: and albeit
(...). Plut. consol. ad uxor. (...). Idem de tranq.
the departure of ought from us, make it never a whit the better, yet any good
thing seems better when it is going, and better yet when it is gone, than it
did while either there was yet no fear of losing it, or it had not yet left
us. Desideria in m^nibus constituta nescimus. Ennod. lib. 7. epist. 17. Plus
sensimus qu^d habuimus, postquam habere (...). Hieree^. Consol. Pa^m. Tunc
denique omnes nostra intelligimus bona; Quum quae in potestate habuimus, ea
amisimus. Plaut. Capt. 1. 2. Discordi^ fit cha^ior concordia. Nesciunt homines
quantum boni fraternit^ habeat, qui nunquam dissederunt. Quintil. declam. 321.
Amicitiae, consuetudines, vicinitates q^id habeant v^luptatis, carendo magis
intelligimus quam ^ruendo. Cit. post redit.
We never understand the worth of any thing so well, as by the want of it.
Homines neque proxim^ assita, neque longule dissita cernimus. Apul. apol.
(...). Basil. Caes. hom. 5.
The eye cannot so well judge of an object, if it be ^ited too near it; nor
(...). Plut. de iracund.
if it be continually without any intermission in the eye. (...). Arist.
rhetor. lib. 2. (...). Synes. epist. 139.
The continued and continual enioyment of the best things, yea and of those
that best please us, though not always the best indeed, without intermission
or enter-change, is wont to breed, if not a surfe^, yet a glut and a satietie,
that so dulleth the souls appetite, that it makes us as less apprehensiue
of, so (...). Basil. Caes. homil. 1. Ign^ratur bonorum sapor in prosperis. Vix
dignoseitur quaeli^ benefici^ dum ^netur. Post migrationem cup^ta dulcesc^nt.
Ennod. lib. 7. epist. 17. Voluptates commendat rarior (...). Iuven. sat. 11.
less affected with the benefit that we enjoy in them. Quod boni habeat
sanitas, languor ostendit. Hieron. consol. Pa^m.
Health is never known what a jewel it is, till by sickness we have been
some time deprived of it. Not do Gods children know so well, what a blessing
they have of the sense of Gods favor, till by some spiritual desertion they
have been a while berest of it. But as (...). Heracht. apud S^ob. c. 3. Gratior
est reddita quam retenta sanitas. Et fessum quies plurimum juvat.
health is better esteemed, when we have been sick some time: and - post
frigora dulcior ignis. Mantua^ eclog. 1.
fire is more comfortable when we have been a while in the cold: and (...).
Basil. ^aes. (...). (...)* Pro. 27. 7. Hinc A^xerxes cum post inedia^ diutu^ in
ficus (...) pane^^ (...) deace^ incidisset, (...). Plut. apoph. Et S^crates
(...) co^dimentu^ fame, potionis silim dixit. Cic. de fin. l. 2.
our meat is then best relished, when we have fasted longer than ordinary: and
rest is most delightful, when we have been tolled and are tired: and (...).
Herodian. Per^in. Acri^s sunt morsus intermissae libertatis quam retenta. Cic.
offic. l. 2.
liberty is more welcome when we have been some time restrained of it, than
when without interruption we have constantly retained it: So Gods favorable
aspect is much more acceptable and comfortable, when (...). Greg. Naz. de Cypr.
P^st t^pestatem (...) est serenitas. (...) i^ dec^am. 321. Et dulcior lux est,
quod aliquand^ desinit, quam si jugiter permaneret. Ennod. ^. 5. op. 11. (...).
Plut. erotic.
the sunshine of his favor begins to break forth again, after some black
and bitter tempests and storms of his wrath; especially when they have been of
long continuance, and much pains has been taken for the recovery of it
again.

Desiderat a magi^ grata. Diu desiderata dulcius obti^entur. Aug. de verb. Dom.
5.
Things long looked for are most welcome, when they come at the last: And that
is commonly sweetest, that is gotten with most sweat. 1 Samuel 1. 2, 11, 26, 27,
28.
Samuel was the dearer to Anna, because she had stayed long for him, and by
earnest suit at length obtained him, when she was almost out of hope of him.
So was Luke 1. 7, 13, 14.
John Baptist to his Parents, who had long sought him of God, and were
vouchsafed him in their latter years. Genesis 35. 18. and 44. 20, 30.
Jacob loved Benjamin, because he paid so dear for him; he bought him (...).
Eustath. in Iliad. ^. (...). Hesych. (...). Suid. and Plut. de amic.
with the life of his beloved Rachel that died of him: and both him and Genesis
37. 3.
Joseph, because he had them in his old age; yea so full of joy was Jacob, when
he saw Joseph again, whom he had long wanted, and had clean given over for
gone, that Genes. 46. 30.
he desired not to live a day longer.

It is a good note of Ambroses, from 2 Cor. 1. 11.
a speech of the Apostles, that Amat Deus, ut pro uno rogent multi. Ambr. de
poenit. l. 2 c. 10.
God loves to have many sue to him for one, that he may have thanks again of
the more. So Dare vult; and quod dare vult differt, ut amplius desideres
dilatum; ut desideranti det, ne vileseat quod dat. Aug. de verb. Dom. 29.
Seruat tibi Deus quod non vult cito dare, ut and tu discas magna magne
desiderare. Idem ibid. 5. Solent enim protracta desideria amplius crescere.
Gilbert. in Cant. 6.
God loves to have his blessings and favors begged long ere he part with
them, that we may learn the better to value them, and to make more account of
them, and to be more thankful to him for them, when we have them. For when
they come vnsued for, we are wont to make the less of them. Merx ultronea
putet. Hieron. ad Demetr. and in quaest. Hebr. Cito data vilescunt. Aug. de
verb. Dom. 5.
Proffered ware, for the most part, is but slightly esteemed of. We make light
of the first and the latter rain, of the constant course of the Sun, and the
seasons of the year, though on these things depends the stay and the staff
of our life, because they come commonly in a constant and an ordinary course:
But when a little dash of rain comes after fasting and prayer upon a long
drought, we are usually as more affected with it, so more thankful to God for
it, than for all the sweet dewes or the plentiful showers that Job 38. 37.
Gods flagons shed down upon us the whole year before. Oh, says DAVID, when
he had some space of time found a restraint of Gods favor, that before he had
enjoyed, now if God would vouchsafe to look lovingly upon him, and restore him
the wonted sight and sense of his favor again, Psalm. 51. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
he would teach sinners Gods ways, and his mouth should set forth Gods praise;
and he would offer up to God any thing, that he should desire and would accept
of. And for this cause, no doubt, among others, does God make us many times sue
long for it, and cry with DAVID, How long, Lord? before it do come; to make it
more welcome to us, and us more thankful for it when it does come.

Lastly, he does so, Ad cautelam ^criorem.
to make us the more careful Reason 8.
to keep his favor, and the sense of it, when we have it, and the more wary
to shun and avoid all such courses, whereby we may either lose it or hazard
the loss of it: Quam cara sint, ubi post carendo intelligunt; Quamque
attinendi magni dominatus soent. Terent. apud Cicer. de Orat. perf.
when we shall find by woeful experience, that being once gone, it is not
usually so easily recalled or recovered.

(...). Greg. Naz. contr. Eunom. 2. Diligentius custoditur, quod difficulter
acquiritur. Quod venit ex facili, faciles segnesque tenemus; Quod spe quodque
metu torsit, habere juvat. Ovid. amor.
That that is hardly earned, is wont to be more carefully kept. A man will not
in haste or unadvisedly spend his penny, that he has labored hard and taken
much pains for; especially if he know not how to get so much again, but with
the like difficulty when that is gone: But lightly come, we say, and lightly
gone; young Gallants that never knew what the getting of money meant, are
ready when they come to it, to let all fly abroad, as if they could have it
again with a wish or a word, when they would. If God, when (for just causes
best known to himself, and for the most part for evil desert and bad
demeanure on our part) he has turned his face away from us, and carried
himself strangely toward us, he should by and by suddenly upon the first and
least bend of our hamme, or formal sob, or superficial sigh, or a forced
tear or twain, or some faint and heartlesse prayer turn it again toward us,
and look kindly again on us; - ^ocet indulgentia nobis. Ovid. amor. 1. 19.
it is to be feared that even the best of us would be overmuch careless of
retaining it when we had it. But now when we shall find by woeful and
dreadful experience in the bitterness of our spirits, that Gods face being
once clouded toward us, or turned from us, it must, or may at least cost us
many a deep sigh, and a salt tear, long looking, and much longing, even Psalm.
119. 81; 82, 123.
till our heart faint, and our eyes fail, much anguish of mind and
perplexity of spirit, much striving and struggling with our own corruption and
weakness, and much straining and wrestling by earnest suit and supplication,
by fasting and instancie of prayer, ere we can come to prevail so far with
God, as to have those thick clouds of his wrath dispelled, and that loving and
amiable aspect of his vouchsafed us again; this cannot but make us (if we be
not desperately retchlesse) exceeding careful of all good courses that may
keep and retain it with us, when we have it, and no less fearful of ought
that may again estrange it away from us. The Spouse in the Canticles, when
after long search, with much ado, she had at length lighted on her beloved,
Cant. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and 3. 1, 2, 3.
whom by her neglect of him, she had unadvisedly given occasion to withdraw
himself from her: Cant. 3. 4. Tenui, nec dimittam eum.
I took hold on him, says she, and I will not let him go again. And, Psalm.
80. 18, 19. Irae interveniunt, redeunt rursum in gratiam. Verumirae si que
forte eveniunt hujusmodi inter eos, rursum ubi reventum in gratiam est, Bis
tanto amici sunt inter se quam prius. Plaut. Amph. 3. 2.
Turn away from thy wrath, say the people of God to God in the Psalm, and Let
thy face shine forth once again on us: and then will we never go back from
thee again, nor give thee the like cause to turn thy face again from us.

And thus you see both in what sense God is said to hide his face from his, and
for a long time often (as both to themselves and to others seems) to forget
them; as also for what causes he is wont so to do.

Now hence let us learn then: Uses 8.


First, That we take heed how we censure men Use 1.
as forth of Gods favor, in regard of any outward afflictions, yea or inward
desertions, though they be great and grievous, long and tedious, sticking close
by them without remouall or amendment, producing in them many hideous and
fearful effects, so that in the eyes of the world, as well themselves as
others, God may seem to have cast them off utterly, and to have forgotten them
for ever. It has been the state of Amarum poculum prius bibit medicus, ne
bibere timeret aegrotus. Aug. in Psalm. 98. and in Psalm. 48. and in Joan. 3. and
homil. 34.
Gods best Saints, of his dearest Children, of his faithfullest Servants, yea
of the only Son himself, Dan. 4. 24. Sanctus Sanctorum.
the Saint of Saints, when he bare the burden of our sins. So that, as DAVID
speaks, Psalm. 73. 15.
if we should so deem, if we should go by this rule, and thereby judge of
men's estates, we should (...). Origin. apud Eusebius. histor. l. 6. c. 4. Secunda
intinctura. Tertull. de patient. Martyrium enim qui tulit, sanguine suo
baptizatur. Cyprian. ep. 2.
condemn, not Gods only Son only, which Esai. 53. 4.
some sometime did, as forth of Gods favor, but the whole progeny of Gods
children, the whole race of the righteous, whose Lot and Portion it has often
been to be in this woeful condition, and Math. 20. 22, 23.
to drink of this bitter cup, that John 18. 11.
Christ their head began to them; and to pass 1 Petr. 4. 10.
this sharp trial, this fiery and bloody Matthew. 22. 23.
baptism, that Luke 12. 50.
their Savior past before them. Et quomodo humana temeritas reprehendere
audet, quod comprehendere non va^et? Bern. de consid. l. 2.


If we cannot see how such courses may stand with Gods love: we must remember
that Romans 11. 33.
Gods ways, and his works, and dealings with his, are wonderful and
unsearchable, far above our reach, Pie ergo ac modeste ex Epicteti sententia
Gell. noct. Attic. l. 2. c. 18. Non esse omnes Deo exosos, qui in hac (...) cum
aerumnaru^ var (...) luctantur; sed esse arcanas caussas, ad quas paucor^
potuit pervenire curiositas.
and such as we are not able to comprehend. For Esai. 55. 8, 9.
my ways, says he, are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your thoughts.
But look how far the heaven is higher than the earth, so far are my ways
above your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts.

And yet may we in some sort even by humane courses conceive, how such things
as these are, may well stand even with the greatest love. For Pa^ ani^um,
mater^ affectum. Al^ter patres, ^ter matres indulgent. Illi excitari ^ubent
liberos, ad studia obe^nda mature, feriat^ quoque diebus non patiuntur esse
ociosos, and sudorem illis, and interdum lachryma^ excutiunt. At matres fovere
in sinu, continere in umbra volunt, nunqua^ flere, nunquam tristari, nunquam
laborare. Patrium habet Deus adversus bonos viros animum, and illos fortiter
amat. Sen. de provid. c. 2.
God, as the Heathen man well observes, has as well a fatherly discretion, as
a motherly affection. His love is not a foolish and an indiscreet love, such as
many fond mothers have, but a wise, a discreet, a Sapiens vir judicio conjugem
(sed and liberos) amabit, non affectu. Hieron. advers. I^vin. lib. 1. q. 1.
judicious love, such as wise and prudent parents have. He so loves his
children, as he has a care of their good; and disposes and administreth all
things so as may be for it. A fond mother would have her son always by her
good will at home with her, and never out of her sight; would have him crossed
in nothing, but let him have his will in every thing, though it be to his own
evil. But the wise parent drives him out at doors, sends him forth to
school, binds him apprentice, it may be, or boordeth him abroad, where he
sees him but seldom, breaks him often of his will, frowneth on him and
corrects him when he does otherwise than well; and yet Quis magis amat? pater
an matter? matter ardentius, pater constantius. ^erson modo viv. conjug. Illa
tenerius, ille fortius and virilius. Miratis tu, si Deus ille bonorum
amantissimus, quos optimos esse atque excellentiss^nos vult, (...) illis, cu^
qua exerceantur, assignat? Sen. de prove. cap. 2.
loves he him no less than the fond mother does, yea Hebr. 12. 6. Apoc. 3.
19. Dilectione, non odio flagellamur. A^g. epist. 48. Non studio nocendi, sed
desiderio sanandi. Ibid. Non erudit pater nisi quem amat, non corripit nisi
quem diligit. Hieron. ad Castrut. Molestus est and ^edicus furenti p^renetica,
and pater filio indiscipl^nato, ille ligando, ille c^dendo, sed uterque
diligendo. Aug. epist. 50. Filius enim castigatione dignus, plus amatur, si
saepius castigatur. A^br. sermon. 6.
he does all that he does in this kind out of love.

Again, further it may stand well with such a fathers love, not to correct his
child only for his faults, when he does amiss, but, when some disease shall
require it, (...). Chrysoft. in Psalm. 148. Medicum etiam urentem and secantem
diligim'. Imo etiam ad urendum secandumque conducim'.
to hire the Surgion to cut him, and to leave him fast bound in his hands, and
either to withdraw himself, while the thing is a doing, or if he be by, to
refuse to unbind him, or to do ought for him, when being in fear or in pain
he shall cry and call upon him to stay the Surgions hand, or to help to untie
him. (...). Dion: Chrysostom. ^rat. 78.
Nor would the Surgion himself, were he to cure or cut his own child, use a
blunter launcet in the cutting of him, or not cut him so much, or so deep, the
disease requiring it, as he would do with a mere stranger.

And why may it not stand then with the love of God to deal thus harshly and
sharply with his dearest children, when either their outward evil courses, or
their inward corruptions, by way either of correction, or of cure, (and yet
what is (...). Arist^t. ethic. lib. 2. cap. 3. (...). Idem rhetor. lib. 1. cap.
14. Et Aeneas Gaz. de animae immort.
correction it self but a kind of cure?) shall require it? He may love them
no less, though he hide himself from them, than the nurse, or the mother does
her child, when she hides her self a while from it, and yet to save her
own life, would be full loath to lose or to leave it. Not to add, that the
courses that God uses in this kind, are oft-times (...). Simplic. in Epictet.
as well exercises for those that be in health and good plight for the
present, as Physic for those that be crasie and sick, surprised with some
deadly or dangerous disease.

Secondly, This may be a warning to Gods Use 2.
children, to take heed how they take liberty to sin upon assurance of Gods
favor, and presumption of his goodness and fatherly loving kindness. For
though God do love us, yet he doateth not on us. Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 34. and
99. 8.
If we carry our selves saucily or stubbornly toward him, he will not bear
it; if we take bad courses, he will not endure it. He will not suffer us
through his forbearance of us to be hardened in evil: but by some means or
other he will be sure to bring us home again, if at least we belong to him, and
to his election of love. And though he cast us not off utterly, though he damn
us not eternally; yet he may so seem to forget us, so estrange himself from
us, so withdraw and withold from us the light of his countenance, that the
bright beams of his favor may never shine forth again on us, as formerly they
have done, so long as we live, and so may we come to have not a purgatory,
but a very hell in our souls while we live here; Esai. 38. 15.
go drooping and dwindling, distressed, distracted and de^ected all our life
long, and be in little better case for the time than the reprobate often are, yea
than the very devils and damned souls in hell themselves. Though we escape
with our lives, yet the cure may be so costly, and the course of Physic and
Surgery that God shall take with us, may be so harsh and unpleasant, may put us
to those bitter pangs, and unsupportable pains, that it may make us curse the
day that ever we did wittingly and willingly that that might provoke such a
wrath, or require such a cure, and wish a thousand and a thousand times that we
had been, not fast asleep in our beds, but dead and buried in our graves when
we did it.

It is a vain thing therefore for any man to presume so, as to say or think,
God will never sure deal so roughly with me, though I carry my self otherwise
then I ought toward him. Yea it is most fearful and dangerous upon such
impious imaginations to presume to displease and provoke him to wrath. For to
omit that An quia Deu^ bonus est, ideo tu malus? Ambr. de poenit. lib. 2. cap.
11. Pravi cordis est, ideo malum esse, quia Deus bonus est. Bern. in Cant.
it is a note of a most ungracious disposition for a man therefore to be evil,
because God is good; and to take liberty to himself to wrong God, because God
loves him. Art thou dearer to God than DAVID was? Art thou deeper in Gods
books, or higher in his favor than he? Yet how sharply God dealt with him;
how roughly, yea how rigorously (as might seem to fleshly reason) he handled
him, having provoked him to wrath, and incurred his displeasure, may appear by
those Psalm. 32. 3, 4. and 38. 2 - 8. and 51. 3, 8, etc.
Psalms wherein at large he complains of it. And how long it was in these
cases ere he could recover his former estate of inward comfort and sense of
grace with God again, appears likewise by his earnest suit, so often and so
instantly commenced for it, both here and Psalm. 51. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc.
elsewhere.

Thirdly, The consideration hereof should instruct Use 3.
us, not to be utterly dismayed and discouraged, if either we shall find and
feel our own estate, or shall see and observe the state of Gods Church and
children to be such as DAVID'S was at this present, and all Isreal's at other
times.

That we be not daunted and disheartened, though we meet with many afflictions
and distractions, as well 2 Cor. 7. 5.
troubles without as terrors within, and shall see no sign of Gods assistance,
but all show rather of the contrary, the fruits of Gods favor and love being
all withdrawn and withheld from us, and God seeming to carry himself not as
a friend, but Job 13. 24.
as a (...) toward us, writing bitter things against us, and suffering
fearful things to befall us. But learn, as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esai.
50. 10.
when we sit in darkness, and have no light, when we can find no light of joy
without, nor spark of comfort within, yet even then to trust in the name of
the Lord, and to stay our selves upon our God. We must remember that, as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. 7.
We walk by faith, and not by sight: So Habbak 2. 4. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11.
Hebr. 10. 38.
we live by faith, and not by senseFaith g^eth not by feeling; nay it goes often
against feeling. And this is the very pitch and height of faith, as for a man
with Abraham, Romans 4. 18. (...). Quod ^eractitus (...), apud Clem. protrept.
and Theodor. de Grae^ur. l. 1.
above hope to believe under hope, so to believe all contrary to that that we
see and feel, to believe that. God then loves us, is a kind Father, and Job
13. 15, 16.
will be a sure Savior unto us, when we feel his hand heavy on us, and he
seems even bent to destroy us.

Romans 8. 24.
We are saved by hope, says the Apostle; but hope that i^ see^e is no hope.
And so Ephesians. 2. 8.
we are sa^ed by faith; and though this Fides, vides. John 8. 56. 2 Cor. 4. 18.
Hebr. 11. 27.
faith be a kind of spiritual sight, and that surer and certainer than bodily
sight; and Fides non est quod creditur, sed qua creditur, and illud quod
creditur illa co^spicitur. Aug. de Trinit. l. 14. c. 9. Habet enim fides oculos
suos, quibus and ea videt, quae nondum videt, quibus videt tamen, se nondum
videre que credit. Aug. ep. 222. Et cum propterea credere j^bemur, quia id quod
credere j^bemur, videre non possumus, ipsam tamen fidem quand^ inest in nobis,
videmus in nobis, quia and rerum absentium praesens est sides, and rerum que
foris sunt, intus est sides, and rerum quae non videntur, videtur sides. Idem
de Tri^ l. 13. c. 1.
those things that are not seen by it, are Melius videntur quae non videntur,
quam quae videntur. Ambros. nomine de sacram. l. 1. c. 2.
better seen, than those things that are seen; yet Enervis est and debilu,
sed nec sides dicenda qu^ credit quod videt. Aug. de peccat. merit. lib. 2. c.
31. Quod videtur, s^ri potuis quam credi dicitur. Greg. in Euang. 32.
the faith (to speak properly) that is seen is no faith: for Hebr. 11. 1.
Faith is the evidence of things unseen? For a man therefore to believe that
he is in grace with God, when he has pregnant proofs of Gods favor, it is a
matter of no mastery. But 1 Pet. 1. 8.
to believe then when he sees not, yea to believe it then when he sees and
feels all to the contrary in the apprehension of carnal reason, this is the
praise and commendation of faith indeed.

We must consider what is or should be the ground and stay of our faith: not
these outward props, which we are wont so much to lean on and to trust to,
(...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 82.
not our own sight or sense, that often fails and deludeth us, but Gods word
and his truth, and the stabilitie of his promise, which Matthew. 5. 18.
though heaven and earth should pass away, and all things should return to
their first Chaos again, yet shall Josh. 23. 14.
never in ought fail any of those that depend upon it. Psalm. 119. 49, 50.
Remember thy word, says. DAVID, unto thy servant, wherein thou have made me
to put my trust: That is my comfort in my trouble; for thy word puts life
into me. And, Psalm. 119. 114.
Thou art my shelter and my shield; and my trust is in thy word. And learn we
herein to imitate the earth that we tread on. Though being a massy body, it
hangs in the midst of the air, environed with the heavens, and yet keeps
his place steedily, and never stirs an inch from it, having no props or
shores to uphold it, no beams or bars to fasten it, nothing to stay or
establish it, but the bare word of God alone. For Hebr. 1. 3.
by his powerful word, says the Apostle, he vpholdeth all things. And, Thy
word, says the Psalm. 119. 89, 90, 91.
Psalmist, O Lord, abides for ever. And, Thy (...); Basil. hexam. 1. (...).
Greg. Naz. ad Eunom. 2. Quid est quod tota^ terrae molem su^inet? and universus
orbis cui innititur? si est aliquid quod sustineat celera, ipsu^ a quo
sustinetur? non invenitur nisi virtutis verbum o^ portans. Bern. in Psalm. 90.
truth is from age to age: thou have laid the foundation of the earth, and it
stands still. It abides by it to this day by virtue of thine ordinance. And
in like manner must we learn to depend upon the bare word of God, when all
other props and stays shall be pulled away from us: to trust him upon his bare
promise without pledge or pawn. Else weedeale with him no otherwise than any
Usurer will with the veriest beggar or banckrout that is, when he comes to
borrow money of him. Though he dare not trust him on his word; nor on his bond
neither (it is naught worth; nothing better than his word;) yet on his pawn or
his pledge he dare trust either the poorest or the unfaith fullest man that is.
But as Augustine sai^ well, That Meretricius amor, plus dona dantis quam
amantis affectum diligere. August. meditat. c. 5. annulu^ magis quam sponsum
amare.
it is but a^ h^lotrie love for a woman to love the gift more than the giver;
and so to lone the giver no longer than he gives: So it is but an harlotrit
faith for a man to trust Gods pledge or pawn more than God himself, and so to
trust him no further than he sees or feels what he does. Yea thetruth is,
that in these cases, when we dare trust God no further, ^orrely on him any
longer than we have so me pledga or pawn of his providence, we must not him,
but we trust his pledge, Cum rogo te nummos fine pignore, Non babeo, inquis:
Idem si pro me spondet agellus, habes. Quod mibi non credis veteri fidoque
sodali, Credit co^itulis arboribusque me^. Mart^l. page 25. lib. 12.
as he trusts not the poor man, but trusts only his pawn, that dare not
lend him ought but upon his pawn. And hereby may we try and examine the
sincerity and the soundness of our faith, what it is indeed that we rely upon,
what it is that we trust to: If we can say, as DAVID here afterward in the
shutting up of the Psalm, That Psalm. 13. 5.
we then trust in Gods mercy, and expect safety from him, even when he
seems to have forgotten us, and to have hidden his face from us; if we can
then 1 Samuel 30. 6.
comfort our selves in the Lord our God, when all other aids and comforts have
taken their leave of us. It is a feeble faith that cannot stand without stilts,
a lame faith that cannot go without crutches. Hereby will appear whether a
man's stilts bear him up or no, if he be able to stand, when they are taken
away from him: if he can, it is a sign he rested not on them, though he made
use of them; if he cannot, it were they, not his legs that vpheld him. And
hereby may it appear what our faith and confidence is founded on, whether on
Gods word or his pledge, his pawn or his promise: If when the pledge or the
pawn is gone, yet our faith abides still firm, it is a sign that it was
fixed on God himself, and not on it: But if when it is gone, our faith falls
to the ground, it is a sign that our faith was wholly founded on it, not on
God or Gods word, which abiding still firm, our faith were it thereon founded
would continue steadfast with it. For Psalm. 125. 1.
Those that trust in the Lord, says the Psalmist, are as Mount Sion, that
stands fast, and never stirs. And this is that that we should by all
means labor and strive unto, that our faith may 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. and 16. 8.
rest and rely on God himself, and his infallible and vnfaileable Psalm. 18. 18.
word of promise, not upon the outward (...)
pledges and pawnes of his providence, nor on the ordinary effects and fruits
of his favor, that so when these shall be withdrawn, yea and withheld long, it
may be, from us, so that God may Psalm. 27. 9.
in anger seem to have hid his fare from us, and to have forgotten us, which,
as we see, has been o^t-times the state and condition of Gods children, yet
we may not be disheartened, but see Psalm. 112. 4.
light even in darkness, and be able (...). Theophyl. epist. 30.
to discern the sweet sunshine of Gods favor even through the thickest
clouds of his fiercest wrath.

So likewise for the Church of God, when we shall see it either in general, or
in some principal parts of it, so left unto the fury and rage of her malitions
and mischieueus-minded Adversaries, that God seems not to regard it, or what
becomes of it, but even suffers them to have their own will upon it; in so
much, that as Gregory Nazianzen says of his time, (...). Greg. Naz. ad Nectar.
Gods former providence and care of keeping his Church may seem utterly to
fail, and that he has ceased and given over to do for it in these days as
he had wont to do in former times: yea when we shall see it left in such
plight, not for a short space only, but for so long a time together (her
enemies might and malice Psalm. 74. 23.
daily growing more and more, and her means on the other side daily more and
more failing, and her might and power daily more and more impaired and
impouerished,) that God may seem clean to have forgotten her, and to think
no more of her, but even Psalm. 73. 1. and 77. 7, 8, 9.
to have cast her off for ever: yet (...). Menand. (...). Ap^llodor.
Qui ^il (...) sperare, desperet nihil. Sen. Med. 2. 1. Magnae indolis signum
est, sperare se^per. F^. hist. l. 4. c. 8.
must we not despair even then of her preservation, and of the raising of her
up again. But as Iehoshaphat in his straights, 2. C^n. 10. 12. Psalm. 25. 15.
have the eyes of our faith fixed upon God, and his word: who has promised
(and Psalm. 111. 7, 8.
his promise shall never fail, or prove false) Josh. 1. 9. Hebr. 13. 5. Psalm.
94. 14. 1 Samuel 12. 22.
never to lean or forsake his, though for a time Judge. 6. 13.
he may seem so to do. And we must withal remember that this is no new
matter, but the same that oft-times has befallen the Church of God formerly.
That man's extremity is Gods opportunity. Psalm. 119. 126.
It is now time for thee, says DAVID, Lord, to put to thy hand, when men have
even destroyed thy Law. So then is Gods time to help his Church, when it
seems ready to be destroyed and even utterly swallowed up for ever. Then is
the fittest time for Genesis 22. 10, 11.
the Angel to call to Abraham to stay his hand, when the knife is even at
Isaaks throat, and he given up now for Hebr. 11. 19.
dead. And then is the seasonablest time for God to set in foot for the
rescuing of his Church and children, and the deliverance of his chosen ones,
Psalm. 37. 12, 13, 14, 15.
when the enemies dagger is at their very heart, and they seem now given up
for gone. As (...). Ex Iosephi antiq. l. 18. Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 2. c. 5.
Philo sometime told his people, That he was verily persuaded that God would
now do some thing for them, because Caius was so earnestly bent against them;
yea that then Gods help is nearest, when man's is furthest off. As it is
commonly said, Ubi desinit Philosophus, ibi incipit Medicus.
Where the Philosopher ends, there the Physician begins; and Ubi desinit
medicus, ibi incipit Theologu^.
where the Physician ends, there the Divine begins: So Ubi desinit
humanum, ibi incipit divinum auxilium.
where man's aid ends, there Gods aid begins. Deliverance is often nearest,
when destruction seems surest. It is never fitter time for God to put to his
helping hand, than when all humane helps, that are wont to be as vailes and
curtains drawn between our eye and Gods hand, do utterly fail: Esai. 59.
14-18.
When judgment, says the Prophet, was turned back, and Justice stood aloof
off, and Truth was fallen in the streets, and Equitte could not enter, and all
true dealing failed; and Non potest esse salvus, qui non vult esse malus. Salv.
de provid. l. 5.
by refraining from evil men made themselves but a prey to the evil: and the
Lord saw it, and wondered that no man would stand up or put forth himself to
stand for the truth: Then did he himself put in to save by his own arm, and
by his justice to support those that were ready to sink. Then put he on
Judgment as a Corslet, and Salvation as an Helmet; and Vengeance as a (...),
and Wrath as a Cloak: to repay the fury of his adversaries, and to recompeno^
his enemies. Then, says the Prophet, God did thus: and why not till then?
Surely (to omit all other ends) to get himself the more glory. Esai. 59. 19.
That they might fear the Name of the Lord from the West, and his glory from
the Sunne-rising; when with a blast of his breath, he should suddenly turn
the Tide again, and the Spirit of the Lord should drive back, yea and carry
away the enemy, that brake in like a fl^d, had surrounded a great part, and
was like to ouer-flow and ouer-whelme all. That Psalm. 76. 10. 6.
ma^s fury, as the Psalmist speaks, might turn to Gods glory, when by his
bare rebuke with a word of his mouth, both horse and chariot are cast into a
dead sleep, and Psalm. 68. 30. Increpa catervam armidiferam: i. sagittis
armatam, ut Iun. eoetum hastatum, post D. Kimchi Leo Iud. lancearios vel
jaculat^res. Calvin*
the troops of archers are utterly discomfited, and the remnant of their rage
is contrary to expectation restrained. That Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10
he may be known and magnified for a mighty God, and a powerful Protector;
when, though the Nations rage, and the kingdoms are in such a commotion, that
the earth seems to shake withal, and the very mountains to be removed, and
swallowed up in the sea; yet he suddenly stilleth all; breaks their bows,
knappeth their spears a sunder, and burns up their chariots, and by a
general desolation, and destruction of his enemies, setleth such peace the
whole world over, (for the behoof of his Church, and the freer passage of his
truth) as was Cuncta atque continua totius generi^ humani aut pax fuit aut
pactio. Flor. hist. lib. 4. cap. 12.
in Augustus time, when Esai. 9. 6.
the Prince of Peace came into the world.

Fourthly, Let us learn in these cases to examine Use 4.
our selves where we find such things to befall us, whether we have not been
or grown careless in endeavoring to retain the favor of God with us, and to
maintain the work of his Spirit in us: and strive therein to be more fervent,
wherein formerly we have been slack. For that is one cause why God is wont
so to estrange himself from his children, to fetch them home to him, that are
too Ierem. 2. 31. Nihil est in nobis cord fugacius, quod a nobis (a Deo etiam)
toties recedit, quoties per pravas cogitationes defluit. Greg. pastor. cur.
part. 3. ^* ^. ^. 15.
prone to stray from him, when he deals kindly with them; and to make them
more earnest and fervent in those things, that they had waxed remiss and
retchlesse in before, when they were free from such afflictions; that as (...).
Greg. Naz. orat. 31. (...). Chrysostom. contra Anomaeos 5. Humana men's, aquae more,
and circumclusa ad superiora colligitur, quia illud repetit unde descendit; and
relaxata deperitqula se per insima inutiliter spargit. Greg. ubi sup.
water pent up in a pipe, shoots up higher than it would otherwise, had it
scope and space to disperse it self; so our thoughts and desires that would
otherwise be straying abroad and wandering in the ends of the world, being by
affliction and anguish straightened and restrained, might be carried higher to
heauenward, as Aqua (...) arc^ ad sublimiora sustulit. Aug. de temp. 181.
Noah's Arc was with the waters of the Deluge, and confined unto him, whom they
were wandering from before, as Pulli a ma^re liber^s divagantur, donec milvi
(...) impetum formident.
the Chicken from her damme, till she be frighted with the Kite.

And this is the use therefore that we should make of such desertions, that we
be thereby incited to strive Apoc. 3. 2, 3.
to hold that the faster, that we seem in danger to lose; that Esai. 64. 7.
we stir up our selves to take faster hold on God, as those that look down
from some steep place, when they feel their heads begin to swim, or find
themselves in danger of falling, are wont to take better hold of the rail that
may stay them; cling closer about him, Fingit matter se filium quem ^lnis
gestat, in terram, de^eoturam, ut ipse tenacius haereat. Simon. Cass. in Euang.
l. 14.
as the nurse child hangs on the nurse or the mother, when she seems
about to leave it, or threatens to throw it down; and as the Rota ab unda
rejecta in (...) revolvitur.
wheel of the water-mill, the more violently the flood drives it away from
it, the more violently does it still turn again upon the stream: So the more
violently God with both hands seems to thrust and shooue us away from him,
the more instantly and eagerly should we enforce our selves to press upon
him. Since for that end he does it, Non deserit, ut deseratur. Simon Cass. in
Euang. lib. 8. cap. 37. Deserit potius, ne deseratur. Ideo videtur deserere,
quia non vult deseri.
not that he desires to be rid of us, but that he may not lose us, that we
may come nearer home to him, abide firmer with him, and sit closer by him than
formerly we have done: like the father, that when his son has some way
displeased him, bids him away, out of his sight, (though he would be loath
he should so do,) not to drive him away indeed, but to make him draw nearer
to him, and by humble submission more earnestly endeavor to pacify and appease
his fathers wrath, and seek to regaine his favor and good will again: or
like as he did with Moses, when Exodus 32. 10.
he bade him let him alone, Difsimulat Domin^ exaudire rogantem and feriendi
licentia^ quaerit a Mose, qui fecit Mosem. Bern. de temp. 83. Quid est servo,
Dimitte me, dicere, nisi deprecandi ansa^ praebere? Greg. Mor. lib. 9. cap. 12.
Sine me, inquit, and dispergam eos, ut ille postulando and semetipsum offerend^
non sineret. Tertull. contra Marc. lib. 2.
that he might destroy that rebellious and idolatrous people; not that Moses
should so let him alone indeed, but rather that he might not leave him, but be
the more earnest in suit with him on his peoples behalf, and not give over
till he had obtained his suit for them.

And in like manner should we be affected also in regard of Gods Church, when
we shall see it to be in such estate as was formerly observed. We should make
her case our own; and take occasion thereby, to be the more instant with God,
that his face may be turned to it, that seems to be turned from it, and that
in mercy and goodness he will remember and think upon her as his Spouse,
whom now, when Lament. 1. 1, 2.
like a widow for lorne and desolate, she sits weeping and wailing, he
seems to have forgotten, and not at all to regard.

Thus may we observe that DAVID concludes diverse of his Psalms made when he
was in such estate himself, with suit and supplication for the Church of God
in general. Psalm. 51. 18.
Oh be favorable, Quid sibi volunt excitationes illae, quas canitis matutini,
collatis ad tibiam vocibus? obdormiscunt enim superi, remeare ut ad vigilias
debeant. Quid domitiones illae, quibus been ut valiant auspicabili salutatione
mandatis? Somni enim quiet solvuatur, occupatique ut hoc possint, lenes
audiendae sunt naeni^. Arnob. contrgent. l. 5. Sic Homer-Iliad. (...). Et
Iliad. (...) clamore bellico.
for thy good pleasures sake, to Sion; and build up the walls of Jerusalem. And,
Psalm. 25. 22.
Deliver Israel, O Lord, out of all his troubles. His own present condition
was a mean to put him in mind of the afflicted and distressed estate of other
of Gods servants. And the like use should we all make, either of Gods hand on
our selves, or of his dealings in this kind with his Church and children
abroad, albeit we our selves remain free: Esai 62. 7, 8.
You that are mindful of the Lord, says the Prophet, what ever you be, be not
silent; be importunate with him, and give him no rest, till he repair Sions
breaches, and set up Jerusalem again to be the glory of the world.

For to this very end does God often as it were wink, and withdraw himself from
his people, that we may with strong cries on all hands awake and fetch him
again. True it is indeed that God is not as Baal, of whom Elias sometime said
to his Priests, 1 King. 18. 27.
Cry aloud; peradventure he sleeps, and you must wake him. No* Psalm. 121. 4.
To (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 21.
he that has the charge of Israel neither slumbereth nor sleeps. And yet he
winketh, if I may so say, and seems sometime to sleep, as Matthew. 8. 24.
our Savior slept in the ship, when his Disciples were like to have been cast
away the whilst; and he does thus sleep to make us awake; he seems to
sleep, Vt excitetur, quae dormit, fides nostra. Aug. de ^emp. 245. (...).
Basil. Sell. ^omil. 21.
to make us awake out of our sleep, and cry the louder to wake him out of his
seeming sleep. Psalm. 44. 23, 24.
Up, Lord, say they, why sleep thou? Awake, we beseech thee; and stand not
aloof off for ever. Why do thou hide thy face away from us? and forgettest
what misery and affliction we are in? As the Disciples to our Savior, when
they awoke him out of sleep; Matthew. 8. 25.
Save us, Master: Mark. 4. 38.
Carest thou not that we perish? And again, Psalm. 78. 65.
The Lord awaked, as one that had been asleep. Thus at this very present does
God seem to be asleep, while the enemies of his Church daily prevail and get
ground of her, and triumph over her. He seems, I say, to sleep, and he
would by our outcries be awaked. And sure it is to be doubted that we have not
yet cried long enough or loud enough, that he seems to sleep still, and does
not yet rouse and raise up himself for the deliverance of his distressed ones.

Fifthly, Is this often the estate of Gods children, Use 5.
that not in the sight of others only, but to their own sense and feeling too,
God seems to have left them, and to have cast them clean off? And may it
therefore, for ought we know, prove the estate of each of us? For Cuivis potest
accidere, quod cuiqua^ potest. P. Syrus apud Sen. ad Marc. c. 9. and de
tranquil. c. 11.
nothing in this kind befalls one, but what may befall any: whose estate may
not that be, that was (...); Greg. Naz. ad Naz. perich^.
DAVID'S once? yea rather that was DAVID'S often? The consideration hereof then
should stir us up every one to labor before hand to get good assurance of
Gods favor while we are free yet from such afflictions, from such spiritual
desertions. As Xenophon says (and it was a good speech though of a mere
natural man,) That (...). etc. Xenoph. Cyripaed. l. 1. Ad quem locum
respiciens Plut. de tranquil. (...). Et Menand. (...). Huc illud Ben-Syrae,
Honora medicum dum non indiges ejus, i. juxta Schol. Ebr. Cole and precare Deu^
priusquam ejus auxilio tibi op* sit. Na^ Iure venit cultos ad sibi quisque
Deos. Ovid. Pont. 1. 3. Honora medicum dum sanus es, ut in (...) tibi libentius
adsit. Sirac. 38. 1. (...). Dru^s. in (...). and in B^n* S^. (...).
it stood rich men upon to make God their friend in prosperity, that ^ they
might be sure to find a friend of him in adversity. So it stands us upon to
get good assurance of Gods favor and love toward us, while we are free from
afflictions, that when they shall befall us, we may have comfort of that
assurance which formerly we have gotten. For it is with Gods children commonly
in this case, as it is with one that has received such a blow or wound on the
head, as that though it be not deadly, nor depriueth him wholly of life, yet so
astonisheth him for the time, that albeit he have life in him with Acts 20. 10.
Eutychus, yet he has no sense of it: or as with one in a swoune; that
discerns not the light of the Sun, though it shine full upon him, nor can
see ought, or take notice of those that stand about him and take pains with
him. Or as it is with (...). Greg. Naz. de P^e* 3. (...). Idem ^per. (...).
Idem in Heron.
those that have been seasick, and are giddy when they come first ashore, al
seems to turn round with them, and the earth it self to reele and roll up
and down as the ship did. And even so is it usually with them at such times,
though they have spiritual life of grace in them, yet Accidit interdum ut
Christum in nobis sentiamus, qui sensus illico nullus sit, Residet tamen in
nobis, ut anima in corpore dormientis, licet nec ipsa, nec ulla ejus operatio
sentiatur. Spin. de justit. Christ.
they feel it not; ( Psalm. 51. 10.
Create in me, says DAVID, O Lord, a new heart, as if all were to be begun
again:) though they be in Gods favor, yet they see it not; they are not able
to discern (there is such a mist over their eyes) the beams of Gods love and
favor toward them, though it shine out brightly even then full in their face,
nor his provident eye over them, and care of them, though even then also it be
working about them for their benefit, as effectually as ever. (...). Greg. Naz.
de cathed. Constant.
All seems to be shaken with them, even Gods eternal love it self toward
them, though more firm than the pillars of heaven and earth it self are. It
is no time therefore then for a man to take trial of his own estate, when his
thoughts and affections are so disturbed and distracted, as Psalm. 13. 2. and
77. 2, 3.
DAVID confesses that it was with him at this time. But it is a ^it*time for
him to make use then of his former trial. For that man that has before*time
taken sound trial of himself, and upon due and diligent search, has found
himself to be in the estate of grace, and consequently in favor with God; he
may then yet take notice therefore, and reap comfort thereby, Non reputatione
praesentium, sed recordatione praeteritorum.
not regarding what then for the present he feels, but remembering what upon
such inquiry he has formerly found; and assuring himself, since that Romans
11. 29.
the gifts and graces of God are without repentance; and that Semel electus,
semper dilectus.
once elected and ever beloved; for John 13. 1.
Whom God loves once, he loves for ever; Malach 3. 6.
he is no changeling in his love; that therefore the grace that once he had is
not utterly gone, though he cannot now discern it; nor the grace that he once
was in with God is not utterly lost, though it be so concealed, that for the
present he cannot now descrie it. And Mulier foetum conceptum non semper
molitantem sentit* ubi tamen semel and iterum sens^ praegnantem se esse non
ambigit. Spin. de Iustit. Christ. and Taffin. Marks of Gods Children. cap. 4
as women that go with child, when they have sometime felt the child stir in
the womb, do thereby know that they have quickened, and have truly conceived,
though they do not always so feel it. So if once we have found upon due and
sound trial good assurance of Gods grace and favor by the effectual and
powerful work of his good Spirit upon our souls, and by the comfortable
motions thereof in our hearts, though we have not the like always, (as He^,
Domine Deus, rarahora, and bre^is mora. Bern. in Cant. 23. Tenuis magis
exhalatio, quam pinguis conspersio. Ibid. 14. Sapit quidem suavissime, sed
gustatur rarissime. Ib. 8.
Alas, says religious Bernard, they come but seldom with many a one, and when
they do come, they are soon gone again) yet we may be assured that we have
conceived and are quickened, and that spiritual life is not gone again,
though we find it not so sensibly to work in us at all times, yea the rather
here may we build upon it, as having far better assurance, than women can in
such cases have of the life of that they go with; because that that is
conceived in them being bred (...). 1 Pet. 1. 23.
of mortal and corruptible seed, though it have been quickened, yet Aliquis
intra viscera Materna (...) pracocis fati tulit. Sen. The^. Job 3. 16. Psalm.
58. 8.
may die and miscary, ere they be delivered of it; whereas that that is by Gods
word and his Spirit bred and conceived in us, being bred (...) 1 P^. 1. 23.
of immortal and incorruptible seed, by the word of God that lives and
lasts for ever, if it be once there conceived, Renatus non denascitur. Si de
Deo conceperis, certus erit partus tuus, non erit aborsus. Aug. de verb. Dom.
20.
can never die nor decay again, but 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25. (...). Cle^. Alex.
protrept. Quod de virtute Is^ ad Demon. (...), etc.
endures to eternity, as he himself does, by whose Spirit it is begotten and
bred in us. Or as one that has at leisure times cast up and balanced his
accounts, and brought all to one entire sum, is at any time ready, if on a
sudden he be called to a reckoning, though he have not time or leisure then
amids many distractions otherwise to run over his reckonings, or to cast up
the particulars, yet to tell how things stand with him; (...).
it requires no more but the bare reading, he need not stand to recount it,
being sure that it was well and truly cast up before: So he that has
before-time truly tried his own estate, and made his reckonings up concerning
the same with God and his word, may thereby know then how it stands with him
in regard of God, by calling to mind only the issue of his former examination,
when by reason of disturbance and distraction through the violence of
temptation, he shall have little leisure or liberty to take any exact trial
or proof of it at the present.

Exceeding injurious therefore are they herein to themselves, that defer and
put off the trial of their estate till such times; and by reason that then
either their Nec litant, nec laetantur; qui non tempore suo sacrificant. Vise
Drus. proverb. class. 1.
sacrifice affords no good signs, or they light on an evil Interpreter,
that turns all to the worst, by such their delay they miss then of much
comfort, that otherwise they might have had, if they had taken trial of
themselves and their estates in due time, but by means of their neglect thereof
they are then deprived of, when they have most need of it. And surely did men
know beforehand what need they should have, and what want they may find of
comfort in such cases, and how unfit and unapt they are like then to find
themselves for such employments, they would be questionless more careful to
sift and examine themselves before such times of trial, and by good assurance
of Gods grace and favor gained beforehand, treasure up some store of comfort
that may then stand them in stead, when there shall be Exodus 16. 25, 26, 27.
no Manna found abroad in the fields, nor such sweet 1 King. 17. 1. Aiunt
cochleas, cum sitiunt aeris, atque illis de coelo nihil illiquitur, succo
proprio victit^re. Symmach. lib. 1. ep 27. Quasi cum caletur, cochleae in
occulto latent, Suo sibisucco vivunt, ros si non cadit. Plaut. Capt. 1. 1.
dewes dropping down upon their dry and thirsty souls, as there has done
formerly. It is a wise and a prudent course, Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8. * formicae
farris acervos Depopulant, hyemis memores, tectoque reponunt. Virg. Aen. l. 4.
Ore trahit, quodcunque potest, atque addit acervo, Quem struit haud ignara, ac
non incauta futuri. Tum simul inversum contristat aquarius annum, No^ usquam
prorepit, and illis utitur ante Quaesitis. Horat. sat. 1.
in Summer to lay up against Winter; Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13. (...). (...). (...).
(...). 3*
in time of peace to provide for war; and (...). Plut. de iracund. (...).
Socrat. apud Stob. c. 3. (...); Plut. ibid.
before storms come, for men to furnish themselves with such necessaries as
they may then stand in need of. And it will be our best wisdom to get and lay
up such matter of comfort beforehand, that whenever such times of trouble
and trial shall come, we may* have that at hand then, that may stand us in
stead, and not be driven to seek for it, when we should make use of it, and
shall find it hard to come by, if we were not furnished with it before.

Sixthly, If God in such our afflictions and desertions Use 6.
do not instantly answer us, if he send not comfort and deliverance so soon
as we call for it; if he shall hide himself from us, and seem not willing to
be found of us so soon as ever we seek him; (that which we do not yet often,
when we seem to do) let us take heed how we grow thereupon impatient. Let us
remember that God hears us, even when Ne surdum agas. Psalm. 83. 1.
he seems to be deaf toward us; Non exaudit ad voluntatem, ut exaudiat ad
salutem. Aug. in Psalm. 90. and in 1 Joan. 6*
He hears us to our profit, though not to our pleasure; and to our behoof,
though not according to our desire: Deus and cum differt adest; and id quod
differt, adest; and in eo quod differt, adest. I Would alibi.
He is present with us, even when he delayeth us; yea he is present with us,
in that he does delay us; and that is better then present with us, that for the
present is denied us. (...). Greg. Naz. adv. Eunom. 2*
It is a point of mercy in him, that he is not so forward to show mercy. There
is no cause therefore for us to be impatient, since that Hebr. 12. 10.
all is for our good; yea Patience it self is good for us; which hereby God
does not 1 Pet. 1. 7. Apoc. 14. 12.
try only and exercise, but Romans 5. 3. Iam. 1. 3.
work in us, and enure us unto. And Lament. 3. 27, 28, 29.
it is good for us to learn quietly to bear Gods yoke, to sit down by it,
yea to lie down under it, and thrust our mouth in the dust, assuring our
selves that so doing we shall have a good issue of it, and shall do well in
the end.

Luke 21. 19. Psalm. 74. 12. O ser^ illum beatum, (...) emendationi Dominus
instat, cui dignatur irasci, quo^ admonendi dissimulatione non decipit.
Tertull. de bon* patient.
Patience, I say, is for our good: But (...). Pindar. Pyth. 2. (...). Bion.
Laert. Malum non posse far, non leve est malum. Perdidisti tot mala, si
nondum misera esse didicisti. Sen. ad Helv. c. 3.
by impatiencie there is no good to be gotten. It will be but a means ^ to
make God lay harder and ^er things on us* when we begin to grow impatient under
his hand. As a discreet Father, when his son shall take pet at some small
matter that his father has crossed him in* may well thereupon take occasion,
yea and many times does, to give him some further and greater cause of
disconte^, ^o bring him thereby to know himself and his duty, and to teach
him to rest content with that that his father will have: (...). Eusebius. aepud
Stob. cap. 123. (...). Aesc^l. Prom^.
So when God sends small^r and lighter crosses, and men wax wa^pish and
waiwa^d under them, God is wont to second them with greater and weightier
afflictions, to work patience into them* and to enure them to the yoke* which
being V^on est ^mentum (...), (...), (...) sui^ obs^qui. Sen. de ira. lib. 3.
cap. 16. (...) sed (...) fi^ (...), Quicquid c^rrigere est ^fas. Horat* c^. 1.
24. Posse pati facile est, tibi ni patientia desit. Ovid. rem^d. lib. 2. Nam
Pati^ quisquis novit pati, pep^ vir^s, (...) mali. Sen. Her. Oct.
patiently borne, will become lighter unto us, and may the sooner in all
likelihood be removed from us, having taken (...) that lesson that God thereby
would learn us. Whereas ^
by impatience it will but grow more grievous unto us, as ^
the sh^e is to the foul, that by fluttring and straining makes the string
straiter, to her greater tor^, and yet is never the nearer getting out again;
as the yoke is to the beast, that (...) ut Theophyl. ep. 41. Nullum tam arctum
est jugum, quod non minus laedat ducentem quam repugnantem. Sen. de iro. lib.
3. cap. 16.
by striving and struggling with it, has galled her neck, and yet is compelled
to draw still in it, with more pain then from her own folly, than from the
weight of it, or of that that she draws in it: And we shall but thereby
procure to our selves the more evil; as Gravis quoque febrium vis tolerando
minuitur, (...) auge^r. idem ibid.
the sick-man in a burning fever, while by tossing and tumbling to and fro, he
seeks to find ease, does but exasperate the disease, and increase his own
grief.

Let us beware therefore of impatience; But let us take heed especially, how
any length of afflictions Use 7.
makes us once think of leaving God, or of seeking with Saul to Satan, by
putting our hands unto wickedness, or using indirect courses, for the saluing
and easing or releeuing of our selves. It was the Devils policy that he used,
but without success, with our Savior; Matthew. 4. 3, 4.
to bear him in hand that his Father had cast off all care of him, thereby to
persuade him to depend no longer upon his providence, who if he did love him or
regard him, would not so suffer him to starve. And it is one of the slights
that even to this day he uses often with Gods servants, thereby in time of
affliction to withdraw them from relying on God, who seems not to look after
them, as if they were sure to perish, if they shifted not for themselves, but
trusted still to him, that had no care at all of them. And howsoever by this
engine he prevailed not with our Savior, yet by it with many other, too many,
too often he preuailes, and makes them commit much folly. For while Esai. 28. 16.
through weakness of faith, and want of patience, Non praefes^inabit, i. ex
impatientia and infidelitate non ad res praesentes confugiet, nec festinatione
praepropera Deum antevertet. Iun.
they are loath to wait Gods good leisure, and desirous to be rid, in all haste,
of the present affliction, they put their hand often to such courses as produce
fearful effects, and use such sorry shifts for the releeuing of themselves* as
do but plunge them further and deeper into such a labyrinth of evils, as they
are many times never able to get out of again. So that it fares with them, as
with Natare nescij, ubi demerg^ sesentiunt, temere quicquid occurrit, vitae
cupidi retinendae arripiunt. Cyrill. Alex. epist. 29.
persons unskillful in swimming, that having ventured past their depth, and
being in danger now of drowning, while hastily and inconsiderately they catch
at what comes next hand, to save themselves with, lay hold often on weeds, that
do but entangle them, and draw them deeper under water, and there keep them
down from ever getting up again, till they be (that which by such means they
^ought to prevent) indeed drowned. This subtle slight of Satan we must be
careful in these cases to discover, and say to our selves, when such things
shall be suggested unto us: Psalm. 77. 10.
This is but my weakness, or Satan's wickedness: Lament. 3. 31, 32. Non
deserit, etiamsi deserere videatur. Aug. in Psalm. 44. and Greg. Mor. l. 5. c. 5.
God I know has not left me, though he may seem not to look after me. Deuteronomy.
8. 2. and 13. 3, 4.
He now tries me whether mine heart be upright with him or no; whether I will
cleave constantly to him, though he d^e nothing but cross me, and abide
still with him, though he seem wholly to neglect me; or whether I will leave
him, and give over adhering unto him, if he do not use me as I would that he
should. And therefore I will resolve, that I may not prove unsound, to keep
constantly with him and not hearken to Satan, nor yield to such indirect
courses, as by him shall be suggested, for the procuring either of ease or of
delivery, whatsoever shall come of it.

Such constancy shall seal up unto us our sincerity; and shall not want with
God a rich and a royal reward. For he that shall so continue depending upon
God, when all humane helps shall fail him, and all lawful means of relief;
choosing rather to endure grief and pain all his life long, and to live a
life more bitter than death it self, than to make trial of any unlawful
course to procure ease and relief; such a man so dying, says Chrysostom,
(...). Chrysostom. cont. Iud. ora^. 5 Male interpres, Proximo post martyrs loco
consistet.
shall have his place in heaven among the Martyrs; yea such a one is no other
then (...). Idem ibid. (...). Ibid. Non martyrium sola sanguinis effusio
consummat; nec sola dat palmam (...) illa flammarum. Aug. de Sanct. 46. Multi
ducunt martyrium in lecto, etc. Idem de diverse. 39. vise and Chrysoft. in 1 Thessalonians. homil. 3.
a Martyr indeed* he is as good a Martyr as he that leaves his head on the
block, or is burnt to ashes at a stake for the testimony of Gods truth, and
the keeping of a good conscience. All the difference between the one and the
other is this; that to the one it is said, Deny Christ, or thou shall die; to
the other it is said, Do evil, or thou shall live wretchedly, thou shall live
a life little better, if not worse, than death. He is once for all a Martyr,
that will rather endure the one; he is often, yea every day a Martyr, as Paul
says of himself, that 1 Cor. 15. 31. (...). Chrysoft. in Psalm. 95. and cont.
Iud. 5.
he died daily, that chooses rather to undergo the other. Too prone we are
Ier. 2. 31.
to stray from God, when he uses us well, when he deals lovingly with us:
but a most blessed thing it is, when our hearts are so linked to him, that we
will not stir an inch from him, though he seem to carry himself never so
harshly toward us.

Lastly, Would we have God in these cases to Use 8.
remember us? let us be careful then to remember him; yea let us then learn
to remember our selves. Let us take heed how we forget him, if we would not
have him to forget us: for Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 18. Hosh. 4. 6. and 8. 14. Zech. 12 7,
13.
our forgetfulness of him, and our duty to him, is for the most part the
cause that moves him to forget us. As indeed Quid est quod nos queramur de
Deo, cum Deus mogis queri de nobis omnibus possit? quae ratio est ut doleamus
nos non audiri a Deo, cum ipsi Deum non audiamus? and susurremus non respici a
Deo terras, cum ipsi non respiciamus ad coelum? and molestum sit despici a
Domino preces nostras, cum praecepta ejus despieiantur a nobis? quid dignius?
quid justius? non audivimus, non audimur: non respe^imus, non respicimur.
Salvian. de provid. lib. 3.
what can be more just, or what more equal, than for God to forget us, when we
forget him, and to neglect us, when we regard not him; to refuse to hear us,
when we refuse to hear him? Or how can we with any color complain of the
one, when we are guilty of the other? Yea when God seems to have forgotten
us, if we would have him again remember us, Psalm. 22. 27. Apoc. 2. 5, 4.
Ezech. 36. 31. Deuteronomy. 30. 1, 2.
Let not us then be backward to remember our selves: But let us apply our
selves to make a right use of the cross; help to further the effect of it,
do not cross or hinder the work of it. The more speedy success Gods hand
has with us, the sooner it is like to be removed away from us. Psalm. 32. 3, 4.
Desin^ dissimulare. Deus crudelius urit, Qi^s videt invitos succubuisse ^ibi.
Tibull. ^leg. 1. 8. Ceda^ aculeo, ne bi^ pung^r. Bern. de diverse. 20.
DAVID'S struggling with it, and hanging back, and refusing to yield to that
that God thereby required of him, was a mean to continue it the longer upon
him, and to put him to the more pain. And this undoubtedly is one maine cause
of the long continuance of many evils, that Multi (...) and (...) non su^ Bern^
Cant. 34.
men are humbled, as Bernard speaks, and yet are not humble; Plectimur a Deo,
nec ^ectimur tamen: corripimur, sed non corrigmur. Salvian. de provid. l. 5.
Non cessant vitia civi^m usque ad excidia civitatum. Prius est interire quam
corrigi: Prius ipsos quam in ipsos vitia non esse. Ibid. Multo facilius
fregeris, quam flexeris. Buchan. Bapt.
they will break in sunder, ere they will bow or bend under Gods hand. Let us
apply our selves therefore to that which by the cross God requires of us, if
we desire to have the cross removed again away from us.

Now this that we may do:

First, We must endeavor to enquire and Means 1.
find out the cause of the cross, and the ground of Gods auersion of his face
away from us. Languorum nullus inven^et medelas, nisi prius morborum cognoverit
causas. Origin. in Romans l. 1. Non potest scire quomod^ morbos curare conveniat,
qui unde ^i sint ignorant. Corn. Cells. de remed. l. 1. Absque causaru^
observatione morbos nec praecavere, nec curare licet. Fernel. patholog. l. 7.
c. 11.
A disease can never be well cured, till the cause of it be discovered: Nor can
we take any right course for the remouall of a cross, unless that that has
procured it be in some sort discovered. Mica 6. 9.
The voice of the Lord, says the Prophet Micah, cries unto the City. God by
his judgments preaches not verbal, but real Sermons unto us. (...). Basil.
Sell. homil. 5.
He preaches even without preaching, as Basil speaks. As he is said Psalm.
50. 21. Esai. 42. 14. Quid est, Tacui? non judicavi, non vindicavi. Non tacet
in verbo; tacet in vindicta, tacet in verbere. Aug. in Ps. 74. and 93. and 100.
and in Joan. tr. 4 and homil. 2.
to hold his peace, though he do speak, when he does not punish; so is he
said to preach, though he speak not, when he does punish. Esai. 26. 9. and 28.
19.
His very Judgments are real Sermons of reformation and repentance. They have
a voice, says the Prophet: But every one understands not this voice: Quomodo
Bern. in Cant. 79. Graece loquentem non intelligit, qui Graecam non norit, nec
Latin loquentem, qui Latinus non est. Sic lingua amoris ei qui non amat,
^arbara est, sicut aes sonans, aut cymbalum tinniens.
They speak in a strange language to many, to the most; as Act. 9. 7. cum 22.
9. Ita conciliat post Calvinum Piscator; melius, puto, quam Chrysoft. Theophyl.
Oecum. Lyra, Hugo, Beza, alij, qui ad Pauli vocem coactius referunt.
Paul's companions, when Christ spoke to him, they hear a noise and no more.

Psalm. 2. 6. (...). Heraclit. apud Clement in protrept. and Theodor. de curend.
Graec. l. 1.
The foolish, says the Psalmist, conceive it not, and the brutish understand
it not. But Mica 6. 9.
a man of wisdom, the wise man, says the Prophet, knows what it means.
And as the Psalm mist speaks of Gods works of mercy; Psalm. 107. 43.
Who so is wise to observe these things, such shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord: So of his works of Judgment says Jeremy, Ier. 9. 12.
Who so is wise to understand these things, to him the Mouth of God speaks,
and he is able to declare what this Voice of God says. And of both of them the
Prophet Hoshe, Hosh. 4. 10.
Who so is wise, will understand these things: and who so is of understanding,
will know that the Lords ways are Esai. 26. 7, 10. Ezech. 18. 25.
strait and even, and the just shall walk in them, but the wicked shall fall
in them. To use Chrysostomes comparison, yea and Augustines too; (...), etc.
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 7.
Lay you a book open before a child, or one that cannot read, he may gaze
and stare on it, but he can make no use of it, because he understands nothing
at all in it. But bring it to one that can read, and that understands the
language it is written in, and he can read you many stories or instructions
out of it. It is as dumb and silent to the one; it speaks to, and talks
with the other. In like manner is it with Dei opera admiranda qui non aspicit
tantum, sed. and intelligit, quasi legit. Aliter enim videtur pictura, aliter
videntur literae. Picturam cum videris, hoc est totum vidisse, laudasse. Liter
as cum videris, commoneris eas and legere: quod si forte non nosti, Quid
putamus, inquis, esse, quod hic scriptum est? Interrogas quid sit, cum jam
videas aliquid. Sed aliud tibi demonstratur us est, a quo quaeris agnoscere
quod vidisti. Alios ille oculos habet, alios tu. Apices similiter videtis; non
similiter signa cogn^vistis. Tu vides and laudas; ille videt and laudat, legit
and intelligit. Aug. in loan. 24.
Gods Judgments, as Augustine also well applies it: all sorts of men see
them, but few are able aright to read them, or to understand them what they
say.

But what is it that the wise man is by them admonished? Surely, Mica 6. 9.
to listen to the Rod, says Micah; and quis accersat. Iun.
who, or what it is that has procured it: to enquire, says Jeremy, what is
the cause, Ier. 9. 12.
why the Land is spoiled, and lies burnt up like a wild wilderness, that no
man passes through; that is, to search out the cause of the present cross. To
which purpose also Gods people in the time of their captivity, Lam. 3. 40.
Let us search, say they, and sift out our works and our ways. They had
before entered into some discourse and dispute with themselves, what might be
the cause of that their calamity. And first they lay down this for an
undoubted and undeniable position, That Amos 3. 6. Quicquid malorum poenarumve
perpetimur, censura est divinae manus. Salvian. de provid. l. 8. Quicquid
patimur venit ex al^o. Sen. Oed. 5. 2.
there is no evil that befalls any, either person or people, but the Lord
has his hand in it. Lam. 3. 37, 38.
Dare any man, say they, say, that Matthew. 10. 29.
ought comes to pass, and the Lord has not appointed it? Does not (...).
Homer. Odyss. 6.
both good and evil come out of his mouth? But what then? Does God as Hebr.
12. 10.
earthly fathers do, who in an idle humor sometime correct their children
without cause? Or Lam. 3. 34.
does God take pleasure in stamping upon his people, and in vexing and grieuing
of them? No: Lam. 3. 33.
he does not willingly, or from the heart punish, and afflict the sons of
men. Est placidus facilisque pater, veniaeque paratus; Et qui fulmineo saepe
sine igne tonat. Qui cum triste aliquid statuit, fit tristis and ipse: Cuiq,
fere poenam sumere poen^ sua est. Ovid. Pont. 2. 2. Est piger ad poenas Deus,
est ad praemia velox. Quique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox. Multa metu
poenae, poena qui pauca coercet: Et jacet i^vita fulmina rara manu. Ibid. 1. 3.
Torqueris ipse, cum tam lenis trasceris. Plin. epist. 21. l. 9.
It is a grief to him to be grievous unto us; it is a pain to him to be
punishing of us. It goes as much against the heart with him to afflict, as it
goes against the hair with us to be afflicted. Why but, what is the cause
then that he deals so harshly with us, that he carries himself so austerely
toward us? Lam. 3. 39.
Wherefore is the living Man afflicted? Man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3.
42. Victa tamen vitio est hujus clementia nostro: Et venit ad vires ira coacta
suas. Ovid. Pont. 2. 2. Ergo llum demens in me sevire coegi, Mitius imm^sus quo
nihil orbis habet. Idem trist. 4. 8. Nunc quoque nil fecit, nisi quod facere
ipse coegi. Nec min* infestus, quam fuit, esse potest. Ide^ de Pont. 1. 3.
Exacerbamus Deum impuritatibus nostris, and ad puniendos nos tra^imus invitum.
Salvian. de provid. l. 4. c. 5.
We have sinned and rebelled against him: and he has not spared us. Deus
bonus de suo, saevus de nostro. Tertull. de resurr. (...). Basil. Caes. homil.
8. (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 6.
God is good of himself; he has his harshnesse from us; it is our corruption
that requires it. Crudelein medicum intemperans aeger facit. P. Sir.
A disordered patient makes a cruel Physician. By our disordered courses,
Esai. 27. 4. Ier. 7. 19. Cum ejus nature sit men's Dei atque majestas ut nulla
iracundi^ passione moveatur; tenta tamen in nobis petcatoru^ exacerbatio est,
ut per nos cogatur irasci. Vim, ut ita dixerim, facimus pie ati suae, ac manus
quodaminodo afferimus misericordi^ suae. Cum ejus (...) sit, ut velit nobis
jugiter parcere, cogitur malis nostris scelera quae admittimus vindicare*
Salvia^. de provid lib. 4. cap. 5.
we enforce him to anger, in whom anger is not; and even wrest and wring that
from him, that in some sort is not in him. Ierem. 30. 14.
Therefore, says he, have I smitten thee with the wounds of an enemy, for
the multitude of thine iniquities, and because thy transgressions are grievous.
What these sins of theirs therefore were, do they desire and purpose to make
Lam. 3. 40.
Search, that so coming to understand the true cause of their calamity, they
may set upon some course for means of recovery. And in like manner ought we to
do upon the like occasions, say as Job does; Job 10. 2. Non sententiam
causatur, sed causam scrutatur, erud^ri flagellis petens non erai. Bern. in
Cant. 33. Percussionis verbera acceperat, and causas verberum nesciebat. Greg.
mor. l. 23. c. 17. Quamvis peccatorem se sentiat and fateatur* non cognoscit
tamen pro qua specialiter culpa percutitur. Ibid. l. 9. c. 34. Vise sis eundem
ibid. c. 30. and Isidor. de sum. bon. l. 3. c. 2.
Show me, O Lord, or make known to me, wherefore thou contendest with me: do
as DAVID did, when in Israel they had had a long time of dearth; 2 Samuel 21. 1.
He went to ask of God for what cause it might be: make a search into, take
surueigh of our hearts and our lives; labor, as Solomon speaks, 1 King. 8.
38.
to find out the plague, the cause of it at least, in our hearts, and in our
courses.

And for our better furtherance herein we may Consider at. 6.
consider,

1. What sins especially God has in his Consider. 1.
Word threatened such Judgments against, as are present on us, or any part of
his Church. For if such sins be now found rife or reigning among us, there
is just cause to suspect that Fide^ verbis verbera facuant. Greg. in Euang. 37.
God by such Judgments does make good his Word; Ioh 33. 16. Ezech. 12. 22, 24,
25, 28. and 5. 13. and 6. 10.
seals up the Truth of it; and thereby shows, that Deuteronomy. 32. 47. Non sunt
vane mine dominic^. Polan. in Malac. 1.
His menaces are not vain, or ineffectual; that Ierem. 5. 12, 13, 14.
his Prophets words, as the profane people sometime spoke, are not (...).
Plut. de and. Translatum ab ^vis irritis, ex quibus nihil gignitur, quae (...)
Graeci vocant. Plin. hist. not. l. 10. c. 58. quidam and vento ea putant
generari, qua de causa etiam (...) appellantur. Ibid. c. 60. Sed and (...).
Plato in Theaet.
windy. Consider. 2.


2. What sins God has formerly inflicted the like plagues for on others:
which if these times be found to imitate those in, it may well be deemed, that
Ier. 7. 14. Quid miramur, si paria perpetimur, qui paria perpetramus? Bern. de
consid. l. 2.
God in Justice, as he finds us like them in practice, so he makes us like
them in punishment; as he finds the like sins among us, so Consider. 3.
he powers the like plagues upon us; as he sindeth us sick of the same
sores, so he plieth us with the same plasters.

3. How we have abused those things, or our selves in those things, wherein or
whereby God does punish us. For there is often an Analogy and a proportion
between men's practices and Gods punishments, between their transgressions and
his Judgments. Look Wisd. 11. 13. In quibus peccamus, in eisdem plectimur.
(...). Dion Chrysoft. orat. 55.
wherein men offend, therein usually are they punished. And blessings abused
are turned often into curses, as Exodus 4. 3.
the staff sometime into a Serpent, (...). Greg. Naz. ^rat. 6.
that men may be crossed and plagued in those things, which they were not
thankful for, or used not well, when they were blessed in them. 1 King. 1. 6.
2 Samuel 18. 5.
DAVID was too indulgent a Father to his children, and he smarted shrewdly for
it in 2 Samuel 13. 14.
Ammons rape of Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 28, 29.
Absoloms murder of Ammon, and both 2 Samuel 15. 10, 12.
Absoloms, and afterward 1 King. 1. 5, 9, 11.
Adoniaes rebellion. Hosh. 2. 8, 9.
When Gods people abused those temporal blessings of gold and silver, corn
and wine, wool and flax, that he had bestowed on them, God threatens to
return, and take them again away from them. And in like manner he threatens
them, when they observed not his Sabbaths, that Levit. 26. 35.
their Land, during their captivity, should rest and lie waste untilled and
vntoiled, because it rested not on their Sabbaths, when they dwelt in it: As
also that because they set light by the word of God when they had it, he would
Amos 8. 5, 11.
send a famine of hearing it, when they should be constrained to seek far
and near for, and yet not find that, which they then refused when they might
have had it, or made no reckoning of, when in great plenty they had it: And
Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48.
because they did not serve the Lord their God with a good will, and with a
cheerful heart in the abundance of all things; they should therefore serve
their enemies, which he should send upon them, in hunger, and thirst, and
nakedness, and want of all things: And Ier. 5. 19.
as they had served strange gods in their own Land, so they should serve
strangers in a Land that was not their own. Consider. 4.


4. How we may have been faulty toward others, in those things that we now
suffer our selves. For Esai. 33. 1. Ier. 30. 16. Quod quisque fecit, patitur:
autorem scelus Repetit; suoque premitur exemplo nocens. Sen. Herc. fur. 3. 2.
Quae scelere parta est, scelere linquetur domus. Idem Med. 1. - ferox Theseus
qualem Minoidi luctu^ Obtulerat mente immemori, tale^ ipse recepit. Claud.
nupt. Pel. and Thet.
there is a just retaliation often in such cases with God. And Deuteronomy. 19. 19, 21.
Iam. 2. 13.
there is nothing more equal than such requitals. 2 Samuel 12. 10, 11.
DAVID abuses the wife of Vriah; and 2 Samuel 16. 22.
his own son abuses his in the same sort. 2 Samuel 12. 9, 10.
He slays Vriah* himself with the sword; and for the slaughter of Vriah the
sword haunteth his house. Judge. 1. 6, 7.
Adoni-bezeks cruelty on those that he had conquered, was requited with the
like, executed through Gods just judgment on him by those into whose hands he
fell: and even he himself acknowledges the equity Consider. 5.
of it. And Exodus 22. 22, 24. Tolerabilius est siquis patiatur quod fecerit.
Miramur sinos barba^i capiunt, cum fratres nostros nos fatiamus captivos? Diu
id oppressione plurimorum elaboravimus, ut captivando alios etiam ipsi
incipiamus esse captivi. Sentimus enim quae fecimus; ac labores manuum
nostrarum manducamus; and justo judice Deo solvimus quae debemus. Miserti
exulum non sumus; ecce ipsi sumus exules. Peregrinos fraud cepimus; ecce ipsi
peregrinamur. Praejudicijs alios circumvenimus; ipsi praejudicia nunc timemus.
Salvian. de provid. lib. 5.
God threatens such as oppress poor widows and orphans, That their wives
shall be (...). Pindar. Nem. 4. (...). Non est iniuria pati, quod prior feceris.
Sen. de ira, l. 2. c. 30. Qui praedo vult esse, merito fit praeda. Aug. in
Psalm. 38. - neque enim lex justior ulla, Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
Ovid. art. 1. (...). Pythagor. an Rhadamanth. Aristot. Ethie. l. 5. c. 5.
widows, and their children orphans.

5. What neglects or evil acts being faulty in them, we have been admonished
of, or checked for, either publicly in the Ministry of the Word* or privately
by good offices of friends or others, yea or inwardly by the voice of our own
heart, or the motions and suggestions of Gods Spirit, and yet we have not
regarded to amend and reform. For it is an usual thing with God, when his
Word taken not place, nor prevails with us, A verbis ad verbera progreditur.
Esai. 50. 1, 2. Ier. 26. 3, 4, 5.
to second it with the Rod, as thereby Ut fidem verbis verbera faciant, du^
corporis plagae testes sunt veritatis and culpae. Greg. in Euang. 37.
to seal up and confirm the truth of it; so Esai. 28. 19. Vexatio intellectum
dat ^uditui; quia tunc peccator intelligit quod audivit, cum se jam pro
contemptu vexari d^luerit. Greg. mor. l. 15. c. 22.
to make us the more attentive unto it. He does as Absalom did with Ioab, 2 Samuel 14. 30, 31.
when he would not come at him, having sent once or twice for him, he caused
his servants to set his corn on fire, and then comes Ioab to him without
further sending for, to know what he would with him, and why he had so served
him. And so, says Elihu, does God; Job 33. 14-22.
he calls upon men many times to break off their bad courses, either by
outward admonitions, or by inward suggestions; (...). Basil Caes homil. 12.
which when Consider. 6.
men regard not, he lays some affliction upon them, that continues with
them, and sticks by them, till it have Aures p^na aperit, qua^ voluptas
clauserat.
opened their ears that were stopped before, and pulled down their pride, or
taken down their stomach, and made them to say with Saul stricken down to the
ground, Domine, quid vis faciam* Act. 9. 6.
Lord, what is it that thou would have me to do?

6. How we have abused, as well Gods Judgments, as his Mercies; how we have
either refused or neglected to hearken as well to the sound of Gods R^d as to
the Voice of his Word; what afflictions have formerly been inflicted on us,
whereof little or no use at all has been made by us. For that is also usually
Gods manner, when men profit not by such crosses as he has formerly exercised
them with, Ier. 5. 3, 6. Esai. 9. 17-20. Hosh. 5. 12, 13, 14. Amos 4. 6-12.
to proceed from shorter to some of longer continuance, from milder to sharper
courses. He deals with the sons of men, as the Physician does with his
patient; Si malum morbi fortius cr^erit, majora remedia quaeruntur, and
prosalute hominis (...) fortius se medicina opponit: ^speri ^ibi, potus
ingeruntur amari: Et si conv^luerit malum, and ignis (...) and ferrum. Firmi^.
de error. Gentil.
who when he finds that the potion which he has given his patient will not
work with him, he secondeth it with some stronger purge; when he perceives
the disease to be so settled, that sudden courses will not serve, he
prescribes him a course of some longer continuance. So our Savior (...).
Greg. Naz. orat. 6. (...). Ibid.
forewarned the poor man, whom he had healed, That John 5. 14.
if he sinned again, some worse matter would befall him: his not profiting by
the former, would procure unto him some further, some far heavier cross. And
Levit. 26. 18, 27, 28, etc.
God threatens his People, that if lighter matters would not amend them, he
would lay harsher and heavier things on them, till they were even in a manner
wasted and consumed with all.

Secondly, what we find our selves thus faulty Means 2.
in, we should endeavor to reform. As we must labor to find out the cause
of the evil, and what has turned Gods face from us; so should we withal
labor to remove the same, (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 22. Ut sublata caussa
^llatur effectus.
that the Cause being taken away, the effect also may cease; and that Gods face
that is now turned from us may be turned again toward (...)* For this should
be the end of our search, to discover what is amiss* and this the end of our
discovery, to amend and remove the evil discovered, either in our hearts or
in our lives. Dolos^ quaerit, qui ti^t invenire quod qu^rit. Sunt enim qui
iniquitate^ suam quasi ^antur quaerere and timent invenire. Qui quia dolose
agebant ut invenirent, ubi invenerint, non aderunt. Si enim non dolose sed
sincere agerent, quod invenerunt ^dissent. Aug. in Psalm. 35.
Otherwise our search is but vain and frivolous, and our inquiry insincere.
Yea, better were it for us never to have been so forward to search, if we be
not as forward to redress, what upon search we have found to be otherwise
than well with us. It must needs aggrauate wrath, when we are showed, or see
what is amiss, and are not careful to amend.

Lam. 3. 40.
Let us search and try our ways, say they, and return unto the Lord: (as
DAVID of himself, Psalm. 119. 59.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet* unto thy paths, whereupon such
consideration, I found that I had swarued from them:) And then Lam. 3. 41.
Explorandum, Deplorandum, Implorandum. A^sted. System. Theol.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto the Lord our God in heaven. A^
if it were to no end for them to seek unto God* by prayer, till they had
pulled down Esai. 59. 2. Peccata sola separant inter hoies and Deu^. Aug. de
pecc. m^r. l. 1. c. 20. T^llatur ergo de m^dio quod interest, and pax est.
Bern. in Cant. 4.
the partition wall that (...) between them and him; and hindered their suits
from getting access to him, or obtaining success with him: until they had,
as searched out* so reformed and removed such evils, as upon their search had
presented themselves to their fight, and as came to view upon this their
suru^igh. And indeed till this course be taken, Orans and non operans, iram
non placat, sed provecat. Greg. mor. l. 18. c. 3.
it i^ ^o small purpose to pray. It is (...) ^llum proficit medicamentu^, si
adhuc serrum in (...) ^it; ita ni^il proficit (...) illius, cu^ (...) in (...),
vel (...) in pectore. (...). desum. (...). l. 3. c. 7.
as if the person pricked or wounded should cry and call upon the Surgion to
have some case of his pain, but would not endure to have the splinter or the
arrow-head pulled out that sticks fast in his flesh, and causes his grief:
or as if people should pray to God to stay the rage and fury of the burning,
when an house or town is on fire, and themselves the mean while power on
oil, or throw on fuel to the fire. This God himself notes, as the maine
cause of the continuance of his heavy hand upon his people, Ierem. 3. 4, 5.
Thou criedst, says he, unto me; O my Father, and the Guide of my youth, Non
sic abibunt odia? vivaces aget Violentus ira^ animus? and savus dolor Aeterna
bella pace sublata geret? Sen. Here. fur. 1. 1.
Will thou retain thy wrath always? will thou be angry for ever? This thou
sayedst; but thou did evil more and more still. And, Hosh. 7. 14.
They houle to me on their beds for their corn and their wine; but they
rebel against me still. And again; Esal. 9. 12, 13.
Therefore is not the wrath of God yet turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still; because the people turn not to him that smites them; nor are
turned away from their sins. And surely so long indeed there is no hope of
prevailing with God; Psalm. 66. 18.
If I see iniquity in mine heart, says DAVID, (and Job 20. 12, 13.
be loath to leave it;) or, If with my heart Aspicitur in cord iniquitas, cum
mentis oculis placet. Quae enim diligimus, libenter aspicere solemus. Ruffin.
in Psalm. 65. Quid est videre, nist indesinenter (...) videre per (...), sed
videre per appetitum. Greg. mor. l. 22. c. 3. Conspicere ut acceptetur, quod
despici dignum est ut (...). Aug. in Psalm. 65.
I look after it, (as we are wont to look after such things as we love and
delight in, and are not willing to forgo;) the Lord will never hear any
prayer of mine that I make to him. As Oli^* offensum sentimus, nec placamus
Deam; nec ^mputam' causas morbi, ut morbus pariter auferatur. Hieron. epit.
Nep^t. Medicus quando agritudinem discutit, si curet quod per aliquam causam
factum est, and ipsam causam per quam factum est non curet, ad tempus videtur
mederi, sed causa manente morbus repetitur. Aug. in Joan. 25. Purget humorem,
detrahat causam, and non erunt ulcera. Ibid.
the cause therefore of the disease must be removed, (and it can be dealt with
til it be discovered) ere there can be any sound cure of the disease, or such
as shall constantly continue: So our sins (...) be r^oued that (...) Gods
face and favor from ^s* and withdraw* his regard of us, ere we can hope to
have his carriage toward us altered for the better* or any end of our present
evils. Poenas peccatoru^ suorum pl^rimi perferunt; and intelligere causas
poenaru^ nemo dig^atur. Causa est, quia and si jam aliqua patiamur, n^dum tamen
patimur, qua^ia^ meremur. Agnoscere nos Deus peccata nostra mavult quam
sustinere, and o^tendere potius quid (...)* mur* quam (...) quod meremur. Ille
invitat ad (...): nos (...) offensa^. Vim Deo f^cimus (...): ira^ i^ nos (...)
armam^: N^lentem (...) cogimus* part (...). de (...)*
We enforce him to continue his hard dealing with ^s while we do otherwise,
we restrain him from doing that, that of himself otherwise he would do, and
is of himself in his own nature most ready and willing unto, did not we
ourselves with hold him from it. So that while we continue still in our (...)
and excesses, our own practice crosses and hinders the effect and fruit of
our prayers; and we are like those Heathen, of whom the Cy^icke observed, that
(...) ^ ap^d (...)* 6. Q^d (...). ap^d (...). cap. 18. (...) d^ (...) (...).
they prayed indeed to their Gods for health; but at the very (...) when they
so did, they used such excess ^s could not but greatly impair health, and so
wilfully deprived themselves of that that they prayed for*

Thirdly, that we may (...) (...). ^.
because (...) heart i^ not i^ our (...)* Ier^. ^. 23.
nor is it (...) Means 3.
power to direct his own paths* Psalm. 90. 11. Ier. 5. 3. and ^. ^0.
no^ are (...) able of themselves to effec^ (...) in us* o^ to work good on us
without the aid of Gods Spirit working together with them ^ (...) should (...)
earnest with God by prayer, that ^e (...) be ^sed, Psalm. 25* 4, 5. and ^6. 11.
(...)* 1^.
as he does correct us, so (...) to (...) us; Psalm. 90. 7, 8, 9, 12.
as he sends (...), (...) that he (...) vouchsafe grace, whereby we may
make a good use of them, and Esai. 48. 17.
learn to profit by them; as Io^ 10. 2. Ier. 31. 19.
to show and make known to us what he aims at in them, so to enable us in
some measure to do that which he requires of us; Ier. 31. 18.
to turn us unto him, that he may return unto us.

And lastly, when we have thus done, then Means 4.
may we with the more comfort and confidence Psalm. 25. 4, 5, 7, 11, 16, 18, 20*
^1. and 39. 8, 10. ^ 41. 4, 10.
deal with the Lord for the remouall of the evil it self, be it outward or
inward. (...). ^9. 12, 13, 14.
Then may we seek to him with good assurance of success, because we seek him
as we should; (...). ^. 9.
we may then praying hope indeed to be heard, those (...). 3. 44.
clouds of our iniquities being dispersed and dispelled, that before hindered
the passage of our prayers. In a word, thus we (...). 1^. 8.
repenting of, and (...). 3. 10.
turning from our sins, that have turned God away from us, and (...). ^. 1.
22.
returning to him that has hid his face from us, he will (...). ^6. 16.
turn again in mercy and goodness unto us, and (...). ^0. 19.
make the light of his countenance again to shine forth upon us; we Psalm. 22.
27.
remembering our selves, Psalm. ^. 18.
he will cease longer to forget us; Yea, he will begin Psalm. 25. 7.
in mercy again to remember us, who Esai. 54. 8. L^m. 5. 20.
in wrath seemed to have forgotten us; and show that he so does to our
comfort, and the confusion of our foes, by (...). ^1. 10.
raising of us, and Psalm. 3. 3.
lifting up our heads again, and Psalm. 41. 11.
not suffering them to triumph over us, as formerly they have done.

NOAH His OBEDIENCE, WITH THE GROUND OF IT:

Or His Faith, Fear, and Care.

A MEDITATION On HEBREWS 11. 7.

Delivered in a Sermon at Lincolnes- Inn:

By THOMAS GATAKER, Batcheler of Divinity; sometime Preacher there:

And now Pastor of ROTHERHITH.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND.

1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir JOHN HOBART Knight, Eldest Son and Heir to
the Right Honorable Sir HENRY HOBART, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleaes.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
HAVING upon some enducements (how weighty I leave to the censure of others;
but such as to methen seemed not altogether insufficient) conceived a purpose
of publishing the former Discourse, I thought it not amiss to annex this
ensuing unto it, as meetly well suting with the Argument therein handled, and
not unfit therefore to second it. And remembering withal, that among other of
those, whom I owe duty and respect unto, I had not hitherto* remembered your
self in this kind, I checked my self for it, and resolved with my self not
to rest longer guilty of such neglect. I know I shall not need in many words
to entreat your Worships kind acceptance of it, either for mine own sake, or
for it self. The one I am bold to presume of upon experience of your wonted
courteous usage and professed respect of me far above my desert. The other
the subject Matter of it makes me confident of: Which what it is, either the
bare Title, or Text it self will soon acquaint you withal: And both jointly
together will (I hope) help sufficiently either to cover or to counteruaile,
the rawnesse and rudeness, or what ever other defects in my weak and unworthy
Manner of handling so singular a Subject, may seem any way to blemish the
Work. I was never furnished with any store of Rhetorical lights: And am
willing therefore the rather to embelish my writings with such borrowed helps
as my poor reading affords either out of holy or humane Writers: whose
Speeches and Observations also, either as Exodus 12. 35. Philosophi siqua vera
and fidei nostrae accommoda dixerunt, non solum formida^da no^ sum, sed ab eis
etiam tanquam iniustis possessoribus in usu^ nostrum vendicanda. Sicut enim
Aegyptij non solum idola habebant quae populus Israeliticus detestaretur, sed
and vasa, ornamenta and vestimenta, quae pepulus ille Aegypto exiens non
autoritate propria sed Dei praecepto tanquam ad usum meliorem sibi clanculum
vendicavit, ipsis Aegyptijs nescienter commodantibus ea quibus non been
utebantur. Sic doctrinae Gentiliam non simulata solum and superstitiosa
figmenta habent, quae fugere and detestari debemus, sed and liberales
disciplinas veritatis usui aptiores, and quaedam morum praecepta utilissima
continent, quae tanquam aurum and argentum, quod non ipsi instituerunt, sed de
quibusdam veritatis divinae metallis quae ubique infusa est, eruerunt, and quo
perverse abutuntur, ad usum justum praedicandi Deum auferre ab eis Christianus
debet. Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 40.
Egyptian Spoils, or as Deuteronomy. 21. 10-13. Typus sapientiae secularis. Quando
Philosophos legimus, and veniunt in manus nostras libri sapientiae secularis,
siquid in eis utile reperimus, ad nostrum dogma convertimus. Si quid super
fluum de idolis, amore, cura secularium, radimus, calvitium inducimus, in
unguium morem ferro acutissimo desecamus. Hieron. ad Damas. Vide and Sidon* ad
Faustum, ep. 9. lib. 9.
Canaanitish Captives, either Number. 31. 22, 23.
having past the fire, and been purged of their Heathenish dross, or being
trimmed and pared from their Paganish super fluities, may well and warrantably
upon good ground even from Sic Paulus Arae epigraphen usurpavit and Arati
testimonium Act. 17. 23, 28. Sed and Menandri 1 Cor. 15. 33. Et Callimachi, an
Epimenidis Tit. 1. 12. Extat and Epos Hexametron Jacob. 1. 17. Et Iambicum
geminum 2 Pet. 2. 22. quod and poeticum spirat.
the practice of Gods Spirit, be not only admitted into the Commonwealth of
Israel, but applied also Exodus 35. 5.
to the use of the Sanctuary and of Gods service therein. He that furnished
Esai. 45. 3, 4. Ezra 1. 2.
Cyrus with treasure for the building of his Temple, did no doubt furnish them
also with much light of knowledge and literature, even for the benefit of his
Church and Children. In this Discourse especially I have studied to be plain,
and to apply the things therein delivered to the present times, Matthew. 24. 37,
38, 39. Luke 17. 36, 37.
which our Savior himself seems to parallel with those that NOA lived in.
The badnesse and looseness of them, all generally complain of, Quomodo Sen.
de benef. l. 3. c. 1. De ingratis etiam ingrati queruntur; cum interim hoc
omnibus haereat, quod omnibus displicet.
even those that help to make them so bad as they are. And it were greatly to
be wished, that men were on all hands as forward to put their helping hand to
the furthering and effecting of a general reformation, as (...). Greg. Naz. ad
cives periclit.
they are prone to complain of the badnesse of them, and to murmr rather
against others (those especially above) by whose means they deem that they
become so bad, when themselves are the whilst, it may be, therein as faulty as
any, than to mourn for, and repent of their own excesses. The whole City,
we say, would soon be fair, if every one would but sweep before his own
door. And the whole estate would be soon reformed, if each one would but do
his part, (...). Aedibus in proprijs quae prava aut recta gerantur. Hemer.
Odyss. d'. Et ex Homere Socrates test Gellio noct. Attic. l. 14. c. 7. Diogen.
test Laert. and Plut. de Valet. tuend. Domum redeamus. Cic, de clar. orat.
look home to himself, and set seriously upon the amendment of that one, whom
it concerns him most to look after. This it nearely concerns us all to
do, that if the City remain foul still, while others do not the like, yet
the filth that is the cause of it, be not found before our doors: But those
more specially, whose good example may help to draw many others on, as being
more eminent than ordinary, either for place or parentage. In this rank it
has pleased God to range your Worship; whose religious carriage therefore shall
not only benefit your self, but may pricke*on and encourage others, both at
home and abroad: And for the furtherance of you therein, has he vouch safed to
furnish you with sundry singular helps above many others. To omit all other,
your Honorable Fathers (...). Greg. Naz. de Basil.
Example may go for all, whose Life and Actions generally approved and
admired, may be a lively Precedent for your direction and imitation herein,
especially living constantly and continually ( Plus tibi and viva vox, and
convictus, quam oration proderit, In rem praesente^ venias oportet. Primum quia
homines amplius oculis quam auribus credimus. Deinde quia longu^ est iter per
praecepta; breve and efficax per exempla. Zenonem Cleanthes non expressisset,
si eum tantummodo audisset: Vitae ejus interfuit, secreta perspexit, observavit
illum, utrum ex formula sua viveret. Plus Plato ex moribus, quam ex verbis
Socratis traxit. Et magnos viros non schola Epicuri, sed contubernium fecit.
Sen. epist. 60.
a matter of no small consequence) with him, and so having it daily in your
eye. Go on therefore, Worthy Sir, I beseech you, having so rare a Pattern
before you, to imitate him that goes in and out before you, as you do before
others ( the Archer gives not over shooting and leuelling at the mark, though
he never come, it may be, to hit the white; and it shall be Demosthene^
imitemur, quid. n. aliud n^s agimus? aut quid aliud optainus? at non
assequimur. Cic. de clar. orat. (...). Greg. Naz. de Basil.
your Honor there to imitate, where it is A quo vinci etia^ laus est, haud
probrum: uti Accius.
no disgrace to come short:) in fashioning your life and courses to the Rules
of Gods will and word, and in helping to support the practice and profession of
piety, which through the iniquity of times surrounded with a maine flood of
profaneness, like enough to bring in, if it hold on, some second Deluge,
seems in a manner to be clean over set, and in danger to be borne down. I
am not ignorant, what privy nips, yea and open pointings at (as the times are;
and it is no new thing neither; it was even so also Iam illud quale, quam
sanctu^, quod si quis ex nobilibus ad Deum converti ceperit, statim honore^
nobilitatis amittit? aut quantus in Christiano populo honor Christie^, ubi
religio ignobilem facit? Statim enim ut quis melior esse tentaverit, deterioris
abjectione calcatur: ac per hoc mali esse coguntur, ne viles habea^tur. Itaque
si honoratior quispiam religioni se applicuerit, illico honoratus esse
desistit; ubi mutaverit vestem, mutat protinus dignitatem; si fuerit sublimis,
fit despicabilis: si fuerit splendidissimus, fit vilissimus: si fuerit totus
honoris, fit totus iniuria. Perversa sunt enim, and in diversum cuncta mutata.
Si bonus est quispiam, quasimalus spernitur; si est malus, quasi bom^
honeratur. Salvian. de provid. l. 4. c. 4.
long since) men of your rank especially, must make account to expose
themselves unto, if they will show themselves religious, and favorers of that
which yet we all generally profess. But herein shall you show your Christian
courage with NOA, whose Example this weak Work represents unto you, if you
shall for Gods sake contemn and set light by those things that make many, no
doubt, forbear to countenance that which inwardly they cannot but like and
allow of; and the greater reward shall you for the same receive at his hands.
Now the same our gracious God strengthen and confirm you in all goodness,
increase in you his graces, (...). Theophylact. epist. 26.
preserve you from all evil ones, protect you against (...). Idem epist. 7.
and 10.
all evils, as well corporal as spiritual, and bring both you and yours Romans
6. 22. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Apoc. 20. 6.
by true holiness and sincere sanctification in his due time to full
happiness and eternal salvation. Amen.

Your Worships in all Christian service, THOMAS GATAKER.

NOAES OBEDIENCE.
HEBREWS* 11. 7. By Faith NOA being warned of God of things as yet not seen,
moved with Fear, prepared an Arc for the saving of his Household, etc.
THis parcel of Scripture contains Matter.
a brief Sum of a Story related more at large by Moses in his Genes. 6.
first Book and sixth Chapter, concerning the Patriarch NOA, Genes. 5. 28, 29.
Tertius ab Enoch, qui septimus ab Adam inclusive. Iud. 14.
the tenth from Adam, and as Basil of Seleucia well terms him, (...). Basil.
Sell. ho^. 6. (...). Gre. Naz. epitaph. patr.
a second Adam, the Father of all mankind since the Flood, of all that are at
this day in the world, or that shall be to the worlds end.

The effect and substance whereof is this, An Sum.
act of NOAES obedience, together with the Distribut. 1.
grounds and the fruits or effects of it. Parts 3. Part 1. Act of obedience.
Part 2. Grounds 3. Part 3. Effects 3.


1. His act of obedience, the building of the Arc. 2. The grounds of his so
doing:
Without, Gods warning;
Within, his Faith, and his fear.
3. The fruits and effects thereof, good or bad; Good, in regard of him and
his; the saving of them temporally, of himself also eternally: Bad, in regard
of others; the condemning of the wicked world.
Or thus: Distribut. 2. Part 1. Gods warning Part 2. Fruits 3. Part 3. Effects
3.


1. Gods warning, NOA being warned of God, etc. 2. The fruit of it in NOA; and
that threefold; Faith, Fear, and Care. 3. The effect of this his faithful,
awful, and careful carriage; and that also threefold; thereby, He saved his
Household: He condemned the World: He became inheritor of the righteousness
that is by Faith.
For the first of them, Gods warning: NOA Part 1.
being warned of God.

How this was done is not expressed. And it is in vain therefore for us to
enquire. For Quid enim opus est, ut hujusmodi cu^ discrimine definiantur,
quando sine crimine nesciuntur? Aug. enchirid. c. 59.
to what end should such things be with danger determined, as without danger of
sin we may well be ignorant of? says Augustine.

Only thus much we find, that when the whole world was ouer-growne with
wickedness; ( Genesis 6. 12.
All flesh had corrupted their ways:) And the Church of God it self was
grown to a general Apostasy, by Genesis 6. 2, 4.
the falling away of the Sons of God; not the (...). Sept. Filij Deorum.
Aquila.
Angels, (as Tertull. de habit. mul. and de cult. foem. ex prophetia Enochi:
cujus fragmentum extat in notis Ios. Scalig. ad Eusebij Chronol. Quoru^
commentum refellunt Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 22. Basil. Sell. hom. 6. August. de
civit. l. 15. c. 22, 23. and in Genesis quaest. 3. Theod. q. l. 1. q. 47.
Tertullian out of the forged Enoch, and Philo de gigant. Joseph. antiq. l. 1.
c. 4. Justin. in apolog. utraque. Iren. l. 4. c. 70. Athenag. legate. Clem.
Alex. strom. l. 3. and 5. and paedag. l. 3. c. 2. Eusebius. praepar. l. 5. c. 4.
and l. 7. c. 8. Method. de resurr. Sulpit. hist. sacr. l. 1. Lactat. instit. l.
2. c. 15. Ambr. de Noe c. 5. and de Virgin. l. 1.
some others, though the Job 1. 6. and 2. 1. and 38. 7. Contra quam Chrysostom.
hom. 22. in Genesis (...); and Basil. Sell. hom. 6. (...).
Angels also be in some places so termed) and much less Devils (as Fr. Georg.
probl. tom. 1. and Paul. Burg. addit. ad l. yr.
some other have absurdly conceited;) nor Chald. Par. and Mercer.
the Sons of Gods, that is, Princes and Potentates (though in Scripture Psalm.
82. 6.
sometime so called;) but Basil. Sell. Chrysostom. Theodoret. and alij.
the posterity of Seth, matching with the daughters Hominum, i. secundum
hominem viventium. Aug. de civit. l. 15. c. 8.
of Men, and so contracting affinity with Caines cursed race, which proved the
ruin of the whole world: Genesis 6. 6.
It repented God that he had made man, that is, Genesis 6. 7.
he purposed to destroy man, whom before he had made; for such is Gods
repentance, a Mutatio rei, non Dei; effectus, non affectus; facti, non
consilij. Aug. confess. l. 1. c. 4. and civit. l. 15* c. 25. and ad Simplic. l.
2. q. 2.
change not of his will, but of his work; Aliud est mutare voluntatem; aliud
velle mutationem. Aquin. Sum. p. 1. q. 19. a. 7.
repentance with Man is a change of the will; repentance with God is the
willing of a change.

Now this his purpose and resolution did Genesis 6. 13.
God impart unto NOA, to wit, that Genesis 6. 3.
at the end of one hundred and twenty years, (that was the utmost stint and
limit set (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 5. Anni illi ad poenitentiam dati, non vitae
mortalium constituti. Hieron. quaest. in Genesis
for man's repentance and 1 Petr. 3. 20. Patientia Dei 120 annos duraevit, in
quibus arca confiebat. Ex Zohar Brought concent.
Gods patience; not the list or sise of man's life for future times, as Joseph.
antiq. l. 1. c. 4. Lactant. instit. l. 2. c. 14. Diodor. Tars. Rupert. and
Tostat. in Genesis Iac. de Vorag. de Sanct. 283. and alij.
some vainly have imagined, contrary Ut docent ex Genesis 11. 13, 15, 17, 19.
Aug. de civit. l. 15. c. 24. Et Hieron. quaest. in Genesis
to the evident truth of story) he would bring in a deluge, that should drown
up and destroy the whole world. And therefore Genesis 6. 14.
willed NOA in the mean space to make such a Vessel, according to the
pattern then prescribed him, as for bulk and bigness was never the like
seen or heard of before or since, not for the saving of him and his alone,
(which a far lesser would have done) but Hinc site Basil. Sell. hom. 6. de
Arca. (...). Et Noam idem appellat, (...). homil. 5. (...). Greg Naz. s^elit.
1. Sed and Aug. Arcam appellat, Reliquiarum humani generis promptuarium. de
Civit. l. 15. c. 26. Et Greg. Naz. epitaph. Basil. (...).
for the preserving of the seed of all living creatures.

And this was the warning that the Apostle speaks of in this place.

Out of which Gods dealing with NOA, and Point 1.
the World that then was, observe we this point, that

God seldom sends any extraordinary great or general judgment on Person or
People, but he gives usually some warning of it before.

Amos 3. 6, 7.
There is Lam. 3. 37, 38.
no evil in the City, says the Prophet Amos, that God has not done. And the
Lord will do nothing* but he will reveal it to his servants the Prophets. He
Hosh. 6. 5. Mortem per prophetas comminando. Hieron. in Hosh. Ierem. 18. 7.
Admovendo propheticae comminationis secures. Ruffin. ibid.
cutteth men down first commonly by the mouth of his Messengers, the Ministers
of his Word, ere he cut them off by the hand of the Ministers, and executioners
of his wrath.

There were two famous destructions of Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation; the
former by the Chaldeans, the latter by the Romans; and warning was given
before of both; by 2 Chronicles. 36. 12, 15. Ier. 24. 8, 9, 10. and 25. 10, 11
Jeremy, and other the Prophets of God of the one; and (to omit all other
warnings reported by Joseph. belli Iud. l. 7. c. 12. Et Eusebius. hist. eccles. l.
3. c. 8.
Josephus the Jew, that then lived,) by our Savior Luc. 19. 43, 44. and 21. 6,
20, 24. and 23. 28, 29.
Christ the Son of God himself, of the other.

And there are two general Destructions of the whole World; the one past by
Water, the other future by Fire. Aqua propter ardorem libidinis. Ignis propter
teporem charitatis. Ludolf. de vita Christ. l. 2. c. 87. Et Petr. Reginald.
specul. fin. retrib. part. 1. poen. 5.
Water, say some, for the heat of lust Genes. 6. 2.
that then was, and Fire, for the coldness of Charity Matthew. 24. 12.
that shall be (though that may seem somewhat too curious:) And good warning
has been given of both. For of the former, Genesis 6. 12.
God, you see here, gave warning to NOA, and by NOA to the World; For NOA,
says S. Peter, was Praeco justitiae. 2 Pet. 2. 5.
a Preacher of Righteousness: Yea the very building of the Arc, such a piece
as it was, was (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 5.
a proclaiming of the Flood, and a preaching of repentance: NOA in making of
the Arc did, as Basil speaks, (...). Ibid.
preach without preaching. Every stroke that was struck, every nail that was
driven in the framing of it, was a foretelling of the Flood, and (...). Greg.
Naz. in Basil. (...). Idem in Maccab.
a real Sermon of repentance. And of the latter both Matthew. 24. 27, 30. and
25. 31, 46.
Christ himself, and his Apostles 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.
Saint Paul and 2 Pet. 3. 10.
Saint Peter have in their Sermons and writings given warning.

Now this God does, partly in regard of those that are in mercy to be saved,
and partly in regard Reasons 2.
of those that do deservedly perish. Reason 1.


In regard of those that are to be saved, Non vult populu^ suum inopin^tu
opprin^e.
that they may not be surprised unawares; because he 2 Pet. 3. 9. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
would not have them to perish, but to repent and be saved. And therefore
(...). Basil. Sell. homil. 5.
he threatens before Redire mavult qua^ perire. Guil. Malmesb. gest. Ang. l.
2. cap. 10. Redire nos sibi, non perire desiderat. Petr. Chrysol. sermon. 167.
Errantes mavult eme^dare quam perdere. Ruffin. hist. l. 2. c. 22. (...). Basil.
Sell. homil. 21. Suffundere mavult sanguinem quam effundere. Tertul. apolog.
he smites: yea Minatur ne caedat; cedit, ne occidat, etc. Aug. Conf. l. 2. c.
2. (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 22.
he threatens, says Augustine, that he may not smite; and he smites that
he may not slay; and he slays some sometime temporally, Vt poena paucorum
salus sit omniu^. Salv. de Provid. l. 2.
that others may not be destroyed eternally; that 1 Cor. 11. 32.
being chastened in the world, they may not be condemned with the world.

In regard of those that perish, the obstinate wicked, to make them the more
inexcusable: Ne dicant non praedictum sibi.
that they may not say, but that they had fair warning given them before, if
they would have taken it. Matthew. 24. 14.
This Gospel, says our Savior, shall before the worlds end be preached to
all Nations throughout the world, to be a witness against them.

And the use of this point (to omit all others) may be twofold unto us; Reason
2.


To commend unto us Gods patience: Uses.

To provoke us to repentance.
First, to commend unto us Gods patience, yea Use 1.
(...). Basil. Sell. hom. 11.
his mercy and his goodness. Who though he Commendation.
might smite justly without more ado, so soon as men sin, (the general
warnings that the light of Nature, and the very letter of the Law afford are
sufficient) yet he does not proceed ordinarily to any extraordinary judgment,
but he gives many fair warnings of it beforehand. A sign that (...);
Basil. Sell. hom. 11. Ei (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 22.
he desires not to do that that he threatens, if he were not by man's
obstinacy urged thereunto.

For Professa perdunt odia vindictae locu^. Sen. Med. act. 2.
Professed hatred, we say, takes away opportunity of revenge. Datum* est
negotium peragendae necis Cl. Pompeiano, qui ingressus ad Co^modu^ districto
gladio in haec verba prorumpens, Hunc tibi pugionem Senatus mit^it; detexit
facinus fa^uus, nec implevit. Ael. Lamprid. in Commod.
A conspiracy against Commodus was frustrate by the folly of one that should
have executed it, but would needs tell him what he was to do ere he did it.
(...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 7.
Those that mind mischief therefore are not wont to give warning. 2 Samuel 13.
22, 28.
Absalom spoke neither good nor bad to his brother Ammon, but watched his time
only, and then took it. Clamaret*tantum ferituru^ se, sivellet ferire? Aug. in
Psalm. 44.
Nor would God, says Augustine, proclaim thus what he is about to do, if he
were desirous to do it. But Ezekiel. 3. 18. (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. sermon. 87.
(...). Idem in Psalm. 7. (...). Ibid. Ineffabilis Dei clementi. ^ poenas
minatur, ne poenas inferat. Theodoret. in Ezech. 7. Tristia minatur, ne in nos
tristia invehat. Idem in Ion. 3.
he threatens destruction, that he may not destroy; as by the Prophet Ezekiel
himself implies: And as in the Ninevites it is apparent, who by (...). Basil.
Sell. hom. 11. (...). Greg. Naz* apolog.
being threatened with destruction, were saved from being indeed destroyed.

It is not therefore for want either of evil desert on our part, or of good
cause and just ground, yea or power on Gods part, that he holds his hand from
smiting so soon as we sin, and in this manner gives warning before he
smite, Esai. 59. 1. Number. 11. 23.
His hand is not weakened, that he cannot strike us, nor his arm shortened,
that he cannot reach us. Non ille potentia^ perdidit, sed patientiam exercet.
Aug. de verb. Ap. 35.
He has not lost his power; but he exercises his patience: says Augustine.
Patientiam exercet suam, dum poenitentiam expectat ^uam. Ibid.
He exercises his patience, while he expects our repentance.

And so pass we to the second use.

Where to pass by, only pointing at it in a Use 2. Imitation.
word, that use that might be made hereof for Imitation, that as God deals
with us, so should we also deal with others; we should not be, as too many
are, A word, we say, and a blow; or, No word, and a stab. For Matthew. 18. 21,
22, 26-33.
shall God be so patient; and man so impatient? shall God bear with us, and
not we bear with our brethren? No: Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. Luke 13. 7, 8, 9.
and 17. 3, 4.
If thy brother wrong thee, says our Savior, go and tell him of it between
him and thee; and if he hear thee not so, take two or three with thee; if he
will not hear them neither, then acquaint the Church with it: and if he
refuse to hear the voice of the Church too, then may thou, and not before,
carry thy self toward him, and take such course with him* as* with an Heathen
or a Publican, such as they Use 3. Exhortation.
then were, thou might.

But to keep to that that we principally now intend. As this commends unto
us Gods patience, so it should provoke us to repentance; since that by it Act.
17. 29, 30.
God calls us thereunto. Romans 2. 4.
The patience, goodness, and long-suffering of God, leads thee to
repentance, says the Apostle. That is 2 Pet. 3. 9. Ad hoc parcitur homini ut
convertatur, and no^ sit qui damnetur. Aug. de verb. Dom. 1. Venturum se
praedicat, ut cum venerit, quos damnet non inveniat. Greg. in Euang. 37.
the end that God aims at in it: and that is 2 Pet. 3. 13.
the use that we should make of it.

Does God give warning of any general Judgment? And who sees not that he so
does at the present? To say nothing of ought at home, decay of trade,
likelihood of dearth, and the like: Cast we our eyes abroad into foraine parts
almost on every side of us, and see if the fire of Gods wrath be not gone out
already, and has taken hold of our neighbors houses, yea and burnt diverse,
and not a few of them, down to the ground: And Tune tua res agitur, paries cum
proximus ardet. (...). Chrysostom. (...). 6. sermon. 77.
it concerns us, as we say, not them alone, to look to it, when our
neighbors houses are on fire. These are real warnings, and very sensible
ones, if we be not stupid and senseless.

Does God then give warning? Let us take it when he gives it. Amos 4. 12.
Therefore I will do Quid sit factur*, tacet, ut dum ad singula poenarum
genera pendent incerti, poenitentiam agant, ne inferat quae minatur. Hieron.
this unto thee, says the Lord by Amos. And because I will do this unto thee;
therefore prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Let us prepare to meet him, that
is coming toward us, before he come at us. Let us, according to Luke 14. 32.
our Saviors counsel, dispatch Messengers ( Mittamus preces and lachrymas
cordis legatos. Cyprian. lib. 4. ep. 4.
our prayers and tears, says Cyprian) to meet him on the way, while he is yet
afar off, and make an atonement with him, ere his wrath break in upon us.
Let us Currat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia. Petr. Chrysolog. sermon. 167.
make all haste by speedy and unfeigned repentance to prevent the heavy doom
and sentence of death.

Otherwise, let us assure our selves, that though Exodus 34. 6, 7. Patientiae
Deus longae, non aeternae.
Gods patience last long, yet it will not be everlasting. Though 2 Chronicles. 36.
15, 16, 17. Ierem. 44. 22.
he bear with us for a long time, yet he will not always forbear us. Yea,
Furor sit laesa saepius patientia. P. Sir. (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 18.
Patience overmuch provoked is wont to turn, not into wrath, but into rage.
And it is Subito tollitur, qui diu toleratur. Greg. m^r. l. 35. c. 3. Psalm. 50.
22.
a just thing with God to take those away without further warning, that would
not take warning when it was given.

NOA* took warning here, and was saved; the World would not take warning, and
was suddenly destroyed.

And so we come to consider the fruit of this warning in regard of NOA; what
effect it had with him*

This divine warning therefore wrought in Part 2. Effects 3.
NOA, Faith, Fear* and Care; or Gods warning wrought Faith, Faith Fear, Fear
Care.

Gods warning, I say, wrought Faith in NOA; Effect 1. Faith.
( by Faith, says the Apostle* NOA fore*warned of God, etc.) not the habit of
Faith* which he had before, but a renewed act of it* NOA believed this, when
no body but himself would believe it; yea when he was counted* no doubt,
generally a doting fool for his labor.

And this his Faith is commended by a circumstance Object.
of the warning given* or the thing forewarned. Of things as yet unseen* All
warnings are generally of things not seen* For what need any be warned of that
that themselves see? But this was of a thing an hundred and twenty years off;
such as there was no sign or show at all to be seen of, such as no print or
footstep of was at all yet; such as neither by outward sense, nor natural
reason could be apprehended or coniectured; a thing most unlikely, improbable,
incredible, yea (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 23. (...) Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 47.
in nature impossible. Point 2.


Where observe we the nature and property of true Faith to apprehend things
unseen, to believe upon Gods bare word, things not unlikely only and
improbable, but even incredible, yea and in some sort also impossible.

Hebr. 11. 1.
Faith, says this our Apostle, is the evidence of things not seen, and the
ground of things hoped for. And to Thomas, says our Savior, John 20. 29.
Thomas, thou beleeuest, because thou have seen. But, Blessed are those 1 Pet.
1. 8.
that believe and see not. And yet Thomas he believed also more than he saw:
(for Non hoc credidit, quod vidit: sed al^ud vidit, aliud credidit. Vidit enim
hominem, and credidit Deum. Aug. in Joan. 79. Et Greg. in Euang. hom. 26.
he saw one thing, says Augustine, and he believed another thing:) but
blessed are they that believe, though they see nothing at all. For, as Romans 8.
24.
the hope that is seen, says the Apostle, is no hope: so that Faith ( Hebr.
11. 1.
the ground of Hope) that is seen (that is, the object whereof is seen) is
(to speak properly) Quod videtur, sciri potius quam credi dicitur. Greg. in
Euang. 32. Qu^ etenim apparent, ja^ fidem non habent, sed agnitione^. Ibid. 26.
no faith. Ibi fides non habet meritum, ubi ratio humana praebet experimentum.
Greg. in Euang. 26. Et Bern. de bon. deser. Sed tunc fides esse dignoscitur,
quando id creditur, quod non videtur. Bern. in Cant. 76.
Faith is of no use or force, says Gregory, there, where outward sense* yea
or natural reason, is able to inform us of ought. Quae virtus fidei nisi
lateret quod credimus? merces autem fidei videre quod credidimus antequam
videremus. Aug. in Psalm. 109. Ideo credere debemus quae non videmus, ut videre
mereamur quae credimus. Hugo Victor. de fid. invis. c. 1.
It is the efficacy of faith to believe what we see not; the reward of faith
it shall be, to see what we believe: when we shall come to walk, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 7. 1 Cor. 13. 12, 13. 1 John 3. 2.
not by faith, but by sight.

Who almost would believe, that the fire of Mr Bradshaw on this place.
Gods wrath should be kindled already, and yet not break forth till an hundred
and twenty years after? who would believe that the whole world should be
drowned, and (...). Basil. Sell. homil. 6.
return again to that Chaos wherein it lay buried Genesis 1. 2.
at the first, before Genesis 1. 9.
sea and land were distinguished and severed either from other? If God should
have sent NOA but into England, supposing it to have been then as now it is,
to foretell the Inhabitants of this Island, that within a few years their whole
Country should be swallowed up of the sea, would not most men have deemed it a
thing altogether impossible? yet did NOA believe it upon Gods bare word, not
concerning some one Island, a little patch of the world, no more to the maine
Continent, than a small pond or poole to the maine Ocean, but concerning the
whole world; and accordingly it came to pass.

Somewhat the like we may observe in the King of Nineueh and his people. There
comes Jonas a Jew, (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 11.
a mere stranger among them, and tells them, that not within an hundred
years, but Ion. 3. 4.
within Ita veritas Hebr. Ita etiam Aquila, Theodot. Symmach. Hieron. and Vulg.
Origin. item in Ier. hom. 5. Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. homil. 80. si interpreti
fides, Sept. tamen, Adhuc tres dies. Atque ita etiam Basil. Sell. homil. 11.
Chrysostom. in Genesis homil. 24. in Psalm. 7. in 1 Cor. bo^. 15. in Ephesians. hom. 10.
tom. 6. hom. 43. and 78. and 87. and Aug. homil. 2. Justin. dissert. cum Tryph.
habet 43. Origin. in Number. hom. 16. Tres, ^ive ut Hebraei, 40 dies. Frustra
conciliare conantur Aug. in Genesis q. 169. and de Civit. l. 18. c. 44. Leo Castr.
de translat. c. 24. Et Canus. loc. commun. l. 11. c. 5. Graeca versio
proculdubio vitiosa est.
forty days Nineveh the greatest, the strongest, the chief, the head City
of the whole world, a great part whereof the King thereof then commanded,
should be utterly destroyed. Had Jonas come to London, and there preached the
like some fortnight or three weeks before that Powder Plot was to have been
executed, who would have believed it? or thought it a thing credible, yea or
possible almost? And yet we know well how near we were to an utter
subversion, if God in mercy had not prevented man's malice. But Ion. 3. 5, 6.
the Nineuites, as well Prince as People, though they saw no preparation
toward, no enemy at hand, no likelihood of any sudden invasion, or of
subversion by other means, taking Jonas, as he was indeed, for a Prophet of
God, believed him on his word, and Itaque s^ite Aug. de civit. l. 21. c. 24.
and in Psalm. 50. Nineven and eversam esse, quia conversa cepit esse quod ante
non erat, nec subversam tamen, quia non per. it.
by their repentance and humiliation, prevented that which otherwise had been.

Add we but one Example more; and that shall be of the Prophet Ieremies
confident carriage in this kind: He had foretold that Ierem. 34, 2.
Jerusalem should be sacked by the Chaldeans. And the Chaldeans accordingly
came and begirt it. But the Jews thus besieged send to Egypt for succor. And
the King of Egypt comes with a great force, raises the siege, and releeueth
the City. Hereupon began the false Prophets to triumph and insult over
Jeremy, as if he were taken now with the manner, and detected of falsehood, as
one that had foretold that that was not like to be effected. But the Prophet
tells them confidently, relying on Gods word, That Ierem. 37. 10.
though they had smitten the Chaldeans, and left not one of them alive, yet
should those very slain men rise up out of their tents, and set fire upon that
City.

And the Reason hereof is, because Faith rests Reason. Props 2.
and relieth upon two immouable Props, Gods ability, and his fidelity, his
might, and his truth.

First, upon his ability, might and power; (that Prop 1.
was the ground of Romans 4. 21. Hebr. 11. 19.
Abraham's Faith, Romans 4. 11, 12.
the Father of the faithful) able to bring the most unlikely things that are
to pass in an instant. For Matthew. 19. 26. Mark. 10. 27.
many things are impossible with man: but Mark. 9. 23. and 14. 36. Luke 1. 37.
nothing is impossible, yea Ierem. 32. 17, 27. Plane nihil Deo difficile.
Tertull. ad Prax.
nothing* difficult with him: nothing but he can do, and do with ease, Cui
voluisse fecisse est. Ambr. de bon. mort. cap. 12. Psalm. 115. 3. and 135. 6.
(...). Clem. Alex. protrept. Simul. n. ac cogitavit, perficit quod cogitavit,
and simul ac voluit, and cogitat hoc quod voluit, and tunc volens cum cogitat.
Iren. l. ^. 6.
whose word is his will, and his will his work; who as Qui dixit and facta
(...). Psalm* 148. 5. and 33. 6. Deu^ (...) totus (...), quod cogitat hoc
loquitur, and quod (...). (...). l. 2. c. 48. (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 1.
with a word of his mouth he made all things of nothing, so Psalm. 104. 29.
with a blast of his breath is able to bring all things again unto nothing*
Prop 2.


For Omne verbum. Luc. 1. 37. quin quam facile possunt homines loqui quod
volunt, etiam quad (...) possunt, (...) fac^, (...) incomparabiliter facilius
valet Deus opere implere, quicquid illi verbo valent expri^re (...). de temp.
11.
work is as easy as word with him; who can do any thing more easily than any
can say it. There is Multum interest inter loqui and facere, sed apud homines,
(...) apud Deum. Ibid.
much difference between saying and doing, says Bernard; but with man; not
with God.

Secondly, upon his (...), his truth* his veracitie, (the maine prop of Hebr.
11. 11.
Saraes Faith.) Romans 3. 4.
Let God be true, says the Apostle* and all men liers; Non est homo verax,
nisi in quo loquitur Deus, Aug. in Psalm. 108.
all that speak without him, or not from him* says Augustine: God therefore
is true: yea, he is a God of truth. And not only (...) Psalm. 31. 5.
Deus veritatis, a God of Truth; but (...) Ier^. 10. 10.
Deus veritas, God Truth, John 14. 6.
Truth it self: And being Truth it self, Tit. ^. ^*
he cannot lie, 2 (...). 2. 13.
nor deny himself* ^ cap. 7.
It were a want of ability to be able to do so. Matthew. 5. 18.
Though heaven and earth should pass away, (says our Savior) yet shall no
one jot or tittle of his word pass away, until it be all out, every whit of
it fulfilled.

Now this then should admonish us to imitate Use 1. Admonition.
faithful NOA our father herein, if we desire to be his children, as well after
the Faith, as we are after the Flesh: to take warning when God gives it; give
credit to Gods threatenings, though we see them not seconded with any outward
effect yet.

And surely, if we ought to take notice with NOA, of such Judgments as Gods
word alone gives warning of, though Nec vola, nec vestigium apparet. Varro
taphe Menip.
no print or foot-step of them be to be seen otherwise; how much more when we
have such evident and apparent Prove. (...). 3. and 27. 12.
signs, even to outward sense of some storm coming toward us, as we cannot
but see, unless we be of those of whom Bernard says, That Festuca^ qu^runt,
unde oculis sibi eruant. (...). deser.
they seake strawes to put out their eyes withal; or of whom Iustine Martyr
says* That C^sis oculis (...) (...). Justin. Mart.
they wink wilfully, that they may not see what is coming toward them, when
some unsavory potion is ministered to them, which they are content, though it
go against the stomach with them, to take.

Yea hereby may we try the efficacy of our Use ^. Examination.
Faith, if we can believe God on his bare word, when we see no likelihood of
performance.

As for his promises, when we dare trust him Promises.
on his word for the performance of them: not trust him, as we say, only so
far as we see him; trust him no further than we can see our selves; that is,
not to trust him at all; it is Quid magni est credere quod vide^, and (...)
^gare oculu fide^* quid (...) ^eretur? Bern. in Cant. 76.
to trust our eyes, and not him: nor to trust him only when we have (...).
Theophylact. epist. 26.
his pledge or his pawn: that is, not to trust him neither; it is Quod mihi
non credi^, - Credis cauliculis ar^erihusque meis. Martial. l. 12. ep. 25.
(...) his (...), and not him: But to trust him on his word, even then when
Act. 7. 5.
he seems to go from, or (...); Chrysostom. in Genesis 47.
against his Word; as when Genesis 22. 1, 2.
he bade Abraham stay Isaak, by whom he looked Genesis 12. 2. and 15. 5. and ^1.
12. and 22. 17.
to have issue for number, a^ the stars of the ski^, and as the sands by the
seashore* to believe that Io^. 13. 15, 16.
God will save us, when he seems about to slay us; that Hebr. 12. 5, 6.
he loves us, when he (...) on us, and makes little show of love to us; that
John* 16. 3^. Matthew. 27. 46.
he stays and bideth by us, when he seems to have forsaken v^* that he
(...). (...). 14, 15, 16.
remembers us then, when he seems to forget us; that Psalm. 31. 22. and 40.
17. (...). Greg. Naz. in Cy^. (...). Caeserius ap^d (...) epist. 59.
he regards us and looks after us, when he seems to neglect us; that he
will bring us up, Mica 7. 20.
yea he is even then bringing us on to heaven, when he seems to thr^st us
down to hell; that Ezekiel. 18. 5.
he will make good all his gracious promises made to his (...) and servants for
their safety and deliverance* though we see not how he should: this is the
strength and efficacy of Faith indeed*

So for his (...), God has*(...) ^ly Threatenings.
said, that, ^ The Soul that ^neth shall ^e the Death. And, Psalm. 6^. 21.
God will (...) the head of his Enemies, and the hairie scalpe of every one
that goes on obstinately in his s^tine* But because we see not this oft-times
instantly effected (many wicked ones Psalm. 73. 5, 4.
live merrily, and (...) easily; and so seem to escape the scourge here; for
Prove. 14. 13, 10. quod proxima nesciat uxor. Pers. 3.
what they feel inwardly, none is aware but themselves.) Therefore many
imagine that God will be better than his word: they think these things are
spoken only In terrore^ emissa: and sperandum magis de clementia, quam
timendum de justitia. Girald. Cambr. topogr. Hibern. part. 3. c. 31.
to fright men, and to keep them in awe: they cannot believe that God will
ever do, what they see him not now do. Eccles. 8. 11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not out of hand executed: therefore
is the heart of the sons of men (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 5. Sic enim legend^,
contra quam in Vulgatis nullo sensu.
wholly bent to do evil, says Solomon. Here is the work of faith then, to
believe that, that there is no likelihood of by ought that can be discerned for
the present. But, Eccles. 8. 12, 13.
though the wicked, says Solomon, live an hundredth years, and pass them all
over in pleasure, (though it be as many years almost to it, as it was here to
the Flood, and as little likelihood to see to of the one as of the other,) yet
I know that it shall not go well with the wicked.

It is one point of man's misery, says the Heathen man, above other of the
creatures, that Hom^ futuri solus torquetur metu. Sen. epist.
Man alone is vexed with care, and grief, and thought, and fear for the
future. But it is a maine point of man's eminency, say I, Mutum animal sensu
comprehendit praesentia, etc. Tempus futurum ad muta non pertinet. Sen. ep. 124.
above other creatures, and of Christian men above other men, that they are not
(...). Greg. Naz. stelit. 1. Mancipi^ praesentium.
all for the present, but Eccles. 2. 14.
they have their eyes in their forehead, to foresee future evils. And as the
Description of the world, cap. of China and Cathaia.
Chinese use to say of themselves, that all other Nations in the world see but
with one eye, they only with two: So natural men have but one eye, the
carnal eye of natural reason; that can pierce no further than the light of
nature reaches: but Christian men have two, the (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 23.
(...). Idem homil. 31.
spiritual eye of faith also, (for the one puts not out the other) whereby
they are enabled to foresee future evils, even such also as no sense or reason
is able to apprehend.

And hereby may we try the efficacy of our faith, if even then we believe
these things, when there is no sight or show at all of them; which it is better
for us to believe now, when it may be for our benefit, than by woeful
experience to be taught the truth of them hereafter, when it shall be too late
for us to believe that which we shall not then hear from others, or see in
others, but feel and sustain sensibly our selves.

But because all will say they believe thus; Effect 2. Fear.
come we to the touchstone, to the trial. How did NOAES faith appear? or
wherein was it showed? His Faith bred Fear. By faith-moued with fear. As he
believed the thing told him by God to be true; so he feared the issue, he
expected the event of it with fear. And by this his disposition he teaches us
what the nature of true faith is, that in such cases as this was, Fides facit
formidinem. Tertull. ad Marc. Qua^do incipit quis credere, incipit timere. Si
cepit credere, cepit and timere. Bern. mod. viv. c. 4.
Faith breeds Fear. Point 3.


There are two ordinary attendants of faith, faith of future things I mean,
and those such as may concern us either directly or indirectly, Hope and
Fear. And true faith has ever one of these twain attending on it, according
to the nature of the thing apprehended by it. If it be a good thing that faith
apprehends, it expects it with hope; if an evil thing, with fear. If it
be a promise that Faith lays hold on, it breeds hope: if it be a threatening
that Faith fastneth on, it works Fear.

Yea these two affections, Credulity and Timiditie, Faith and Fear, do
mutually and enterchangeably succeed either other, produce either other. Faith
breeds Fear, and Fear breeds Faith. Credulity makes men timorous: and
Timiditie makes men credulous. Credula res timor est, quod de amore Ovid*
epist. 6.
Fear is very credulous, and suspicious, Pessimus in dubiss augur timor. Stat.
Theb* l. 3. Sed malus interpres rerum metus omne trahebat Augurium pejore via.
- Claud. bell. Gild. Ad triste^ partem strenua est suspicio. P. Sir. Prona est
timori semper in pejus fides. Sen. Herc. sur. 2.
ready to incline to the worse side, and to fasten upon every shadow and least
show of that that it surmiseth. And as Timiditie is credulous, so Credulity is
as timorous, enforcing the mind to hang in continual suspense and expectation
of those evils that it apprehends as imminent. Upon Michaes Prophecy Ierem.
26. 19.
Ezechias believed, and he feared. And upon Ionaes preaching Ion. 3. 5.
the Nineuites believed God and feared.

Nor indeed can it be otherwise: For what is (...). Aristot. ethic. l. 3. c. 6.
(...). Idem rhet. l. 2. c. 5. Perturbatis five aegritudo ex opinione and
expectatione mali impendentis. Cic. Tuscul. l. 3.
Fear, but an expectation of some evil impendent. As hope an expectation of
good, so fear of evil. But that man that believes the truth of Gods
threatenings, cannot but expect the evils threatened in them; and so fear
consequently before Gods face, proportionably in some sort to the evil
expected. Which if (...). Aristot. ibid.
the anger or enmity of a mortal man of any might work in those that know or
apprehend him to be such: how much more must the wrath of God revealed needs
work the same in a far greater measure in those that believe his power to be
such as it is?

Again, a mere natural man cannot but fear Reason 2.
that evil that he apprehends (...). Aristot. rhet. l. 2. c. 5. (...). Ibid.
to be near at hand, yea that he sees full before his face. But 2 Cor. 4. 18.
Fides vides. Habet enim and fides oculos suos, quibus and ea videt, quae nondum
videntur. Aug. epist. 222. Etsi no^ vidisti eum; sed vidisti eum, quia
credidisti ei: vidisti eu^oculis interioribus. Ambr. ep. 9.
true Faith has an eye; And this eye of Faith makes things unseen, seen; (
Hebr. (...). 27.
Moses saw him by Faith, that cannot be seen: And Me^ videtur quae non
videntur, quam quae videtur. Ambrde sacr. l. 1* c. 2.
Better, says Ambrose, are those things seen that are not seen, but believed
only, than those things that are seen:) Quia rerum absentium praesens est
fides. Aug. de Trin. l. 13. c. 1.
things absent present, (as is Act. 3. 21. Quomodo tenebo absentem? Quomodo in
coelu^ manu^ mittam, ut ibi sedente^ tenea^? Fide^ mitte, and tenuisti.
Parents tui tenuerunt carne: tu tene cord. Habes Christ^ in praesenti per
fide^, etc. Aug. in Joan. 50. Quomodo tangeret, cum ad Patrem ascendisse^t,
nisi fidei profectu, and mentis ascensu. Idem ep. 89.
Christ's body to our Faith, though it be now in heaven, and as far from us, as
heaven and earth are distant either from other:) and (...). Basil. Sell. homil.
23.
things a far off near at hand: John 8. 56. Abr. quomodo dominicum vidisse
diem nisi credendo credendus est? Ipsum credere quodammodo jam videre est.
Bern. de temp. 17.
Abraham above a thousand (yea two thousand) years before with this eye of
Faith saw Christ's day, as present, and rejoiced: and NOA in like manner by the
same eye of Faith saw the Worlds destruction as present, above an hundred
years before the Flood, that caused it, came, and feared.

The reason is in a word: Faith has it from God, to whom all things are
present; for there is no Prius and posterius.
former and latter, first or last Omnia semel and simul videt, quorum nullum
est quod non semper videt. Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 14. Deo in conspectu praesto
simul sunt universa, praesentia, praetenta, futura. Ibid. cap. 7.
with him. And having them from him, Fides enim velut quoddam aeternitatis
exemplar, praeterita simul, ac praesentia, ac futura sinu quodam vastissimo
comprehendit, ut nihil ei praetereat, nihil pereat, nihil praeeat. Bern. de
temp. 17.
she apprehends them in some sort as they are with him, on whose word alone,
or principally at least, she believes them.

The use of which point may be, First of all to Use 1. Information.
inform us, what the reason is why there is so little fear in the world, of
God, and of his Judgments. Never more wickedness abroad in the world: never
iuster cause to expect some general judgment. And yet never more security;
never less fear; Quasi securos esse sola esset securitas.
as if it were the only means of security or of safety for men to be secure.
Whereas says that worthy Bishop Grosthed well in one of his Epistles yet
unprinted, Sola istic securitas est nunquam esse securum. R^b. Grosthed. epist.
65. Non cito ruina perit is, qui ruinam praetimet. P. Sir. Prove. 28. 14.
It is our best and surest security, for us never to be secure.

But what is the reason hereof? Surely therefore so little fear, because so
little Quod non credit quis, non movet eum ad sperandum vel timendu^. Beda in
axiom.
Faith. The general want of fear argues a general want of Faith. Therefore
never more security, because never less faith. Our Savior himself
intimates as much. He tells of Math. 24. 6, 7, 8.
a world of troubles, over and beside a Matthew. 24. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 1-5.
world of wickedness, that should be toward the worlds end. And yet withal
that Math. 24. 37, 38, 39.
it should then be, as before the Flood it had been, when men (...). Quod plus
est, quam comedebant and bibebant. Matthew. 24. 38.
gave themselves wholly to eating and drinking, building and planting, making
merry and marrying: and as they did nothing else, so (...). Matthew. 24. 39.
they minded naught else, till the Flood came in suddenly and swept them all
away at once. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
They shall cry, Peace, Peace, and all is well; says the Apostle, until
sudden destruction surprise them, as pains and pangs do a woman with child,
taken before her reckoning be out. And the reason hereof our Savior secretly
does elsewhere imply, when he says, Luke 18. 8.
The Son of Man when he comes, shall he find Faith upon earth? As if
scarce any Faith should be found in the world at the worlds end: and the most
therefore should make but a mock of the last Judgment, as 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
Jude 18.
Saint Peter also fore-telleth.

Yea this general security and want of fear, Use 2. Conviction.
shows that even the greatest part of those that profess themselves
Christians, have not so much Faith as many damned ones, 1 King. 21. 27.
Ahab, Matthew. 27. 3, 5.
Judas and others, have had; nay, not so much Faith as the Devils themselves
have; For Iam. 2. 19.
the Devils, says Saint James, believe and tremble: which they would also do,
if they believed but as they did. If they had no more but even the Historical
faith, it could not but work in them the servile Fear. And how can they look
to escape hell, that come short herein of those that be already in hell: that
are worse in this regard than Ahab, though an hypocrite, though a reprobate,
worse than Judas himself, though John 6. 70.
a Devil incarnate; yea worse herein than those damned Spirits, than the
Devils themselves. And Quanta damnatio a damnatis damnari? Author de fingul.
cleric.
what a fearful estate is it to be condemned of those, that either are or
shall themselves be damned?

Secondly, This may serve to show a difference Use 3. Distinction.
between Gods Children and worldly men, together with the ground of it.

When warning is given of Gods Judgments, as here there was, Malach. 3. 16, 17.
They fear least, whom they most concern; and they fear most, whom they
least concern. They fear most, that have least cause to fear; and they fear
least, that have most cause to fear. He feared here that was to be saved; when
they feared not that were to be destroyed. Gods children oft-times fear for
them, when they fear not for themselves. As for matter of grief, DAVID says
of himself, Psalm. 119. 148.
I beheld the transgressors and was grieved, to see how they brake thy Law:
And, Psalm. 119. 136.
Mine eyes run down with streams of water, because men keep not thy
Statutes. He was grieved for them, when they were not grieved for themselves;
yea he sorrowed, with 2 Cor. 12. 21.
Paul, for them and their sins, because they sorrowed not for them
themselves. Si doles, condoleo; si non doles, doleo tamen: and boc doleo magis,
quo tu minus doles. Bern. de consid l. 1.
If you be sorry, says Bernard, I am sorry with you; if you be not, I am sorry
for you: and the more sorry for you, the less sorry you are your self. And
indeed, Gemend* est valde qui non gemit. Greg. in Euang. ho^. 36.
He is most to be bewailed, says Gregory, that bewaileth himself least. 1
Cor. 12. 26. Membro dolenti membra reliqua condolent.
In the natural Body the pain of one limb causes pain to all his fellow
limbs: but in the spiritual Body politic, not the pain only of a limb,
but De non dolente caetera grauius dolent.
the want of pain in a limb, is a means of pain to the fellow members. So
for matter of fear; Psalm. 119. 53. Timeo, ne non timeas, vel parum timeas.
Bern. ep. 87.
Fear, says he, is fallen upon me, for the wicked, because they forsake thy
Law. And, when Ps. 119. 119, 120.
Thou take away the wicked of the earth like dross: My flesh - acta securae
quoque Horrenda menti. - Sen. Herc. fur. 3. 2.
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. DAVID fears
for them, when they fear not themselves: their very security makes him
fearful.

But what might be the cause hereof? may Reason. ^
some say. The Aristot. ethic. Nicom. l. 3. c. 8.
Heathen man himself pointed at it of old. There are, says he, two kinds
(...).
of Bastardly Fortitude, of Counterfeit Courage, and those arising from two
contrary causes; the one (...).
from Skill and Knowledge, the other (...). Greg. Naz. de eutax.
from Ignorance. The former is, when men seem forward, where others apprehend
danger and are fearful, because they know there is no such danger in the
matter as others deem, or if there be any, they can tell how by some slight
to avoid it. The latter is, when men are forward and foole-hardie, and free
from all fear, because they are not apprehensiue of the danger that they are
in: (...). Aristot. ibid.
like men drunk, that dread naught, because they want wit to discern ought,
or like (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. sermon. 43.
children, that fear not the fire or the candleflame, till they have been
senged with it, and feel the smart of it; or like the savage Huld. Smidel. in
itinerar.
Americans, that would press upon the mouth of the Musket, because they knew
not the use and the force of it. Of this latter is the security and the
hardiness of the worldly wicked in these cases. It is with them, as with
Matthew. 24. 19.
children in a siege; Their parents fear for them, when they fear nothing
themselves; yea the parents fear for them more than for themselves: they could
shift well enough, it may be, for themselves, but they know not how to save
them, or how to escape with them, which without them, it may be, they might.
The sucking child lies in the cradle, not once dreaming of any danger; and
the parents fear and care is all for it.

Thirdly, hereby may we examine our Faith, Use 4.
whether it be sound and sincere or no. Examination. Trial 1.


First, If it work upon the affections. If it work in us, love or hatred, joy
or grief, hope or fear, according to the nature of the object, the quality
of the thing apprehended. For that faith or knowledge that swimmeth only in the
brain, but sinketh not down into the heart, that consists only in
speculation, and proceeds no further, does not at all pierce into, or work
upon the affections, it is no sound knowledge, no true faith; it is but as the
glittring of a glow-worme, a light without heat.

Why, says Bernard, does Solomon say, That Prove. 1. 7. and 9. 10.
the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom; when as Knowledge and Faith go
both before Fear? Because, says he, there is Instructio doctos reddit;
affectio sapientes. Ibi instruimur; sed hic afficimur. Ibi in auditorio
docentem Magistram Sapientiam audimus; hic and suscipimus. Bern. in Cant. 23.
no true wisdom in either, unless they do work in a man this Fear. Sol non
omnes quibus lucet, etiam calefacit: Sic fapientia multos quos docet quid sit
faciendum, non continuo accendit ad faciendum. Ibid.
The Sun, says he, affords light to many, whom it imparteth no heat to.
And it is not the light of it, but the heat, that quickens, and makes
fertile and fruitful. Aliud est multas divitias scire, aliud and possidere;
nec notitia divitem facit sed possessio: sic aliud est nosse Deu^, aliud
timere; nec cognitio sapientem, sed timor facit, quia and afficit. Ibid. Vera
demum ea est scientia, quae afficit. Greg. mor. l. 23. c. 17.
It is one thing to know wherein wealth consists, and another thing to have
it; and it is not the knowing of it, but the having of it that makes a man
rich and wealthy: So it is one thing to know God, and another thing to fear
God; and it is not the knowledge of him, but the fear of him; and the
knowledge of him so far forth, as it brings us to the fear of him, as a
man's skill so far forth as it is a means to bring wealth to him, that makes
a man wise and happy. And that knowledge or faith therefore, that works not
in this manner upon the affections, is but Umbra and larua fidei, non fides.
a liuelesse shadow, a dead counterfeit of Faith.

Secondly, if it make us stand in awe of God Trial 2.
and his Judgments; which he inflicteth often upon others, even to keep us in
awe. So 2 Samuel 6. 7, 9.
when God smote Vzza in DAVID'S sight, DAVID (it is said) feared God exceedingly
that day. He feared him before, but exceedingly then: that roused up, renewed,
and made his fear more fresh. And Act. 5. 5, 10, 11.
when Ananias and Sapphira were so suddenly slain, fear came upon the whole
Church, and upon all those, not that saw it only, but that heard of it.

This is the nature of true Faith, to work in men's hearts, not a presumptuous
security, and a regardlesnesse of God, but an awful fear, a reverent dread,
a trembling at his Majesty, when he gives but warning of Judgments to come;
and much more then Esai. 26. 9.
when his Judgments are already abroad in the world. Psalm. 119. 120.
My flesh trembles, says DAVID, for fear of thee, and I am (even heartily)
afraid of thy Judgments. And surely if it be the property of the child of God
Esai. 66. 2. Habb. 3. 16.
to tremble at his word: 2 King. 22. 19.
Josias heart melted again for fear at the hearing of the Law: how much more
at his work, at his rod, at his scourge, at the shaking of his sword? What
awefull child will not tremble to see his father take the rod in hand, and it
be but to correct some servant therewith? much more if it be to scourge one of
his brethren. To fear any evil is natural: to be afraid of Gods anger is a
work even of grace too. And (...). Naz. in Nyssen.
Nothing more fearful, says Nazianzen, than not to fear it.

Neither let any here object unto me that of Objection.
the Psalmist, Psalm. 112. 7.
He shall not be afraid of any evil tidings: for his heart is fixed, and
believes in the Lord.

For the very first words of that selfsame Exception.
Psalm are, Psalm. 112. 1.
Blessed is the man that fears God. So that He that is not afraid so, yet
does fear. Some (...). Basil. Sell. homil. 21. Degeneres animos timor arguit.
Virg. Aeneid. l. 4.
fear argues a want of faith: and a want of faith appears by the want of
some fear.

There is great difference between a distrustful Matthew. 8. 26.
fear and an awefull dread. John 14. 1. Esai. 7. 4, 9.
Faith quelleth Fides famem non formidat. Hieron. ad Hell. od.
and kills, and expels the one: it breeds, feeds, fostereth, and
cherishes the other. Matthew. 6. 30.


And we shall do well to observe how the Solution. Distinction.
Holy Ghost therefore often joins these two together: Psalm. 33. 18.
The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and that hope or trust (for
hope and trust are in effect here, as often Ierem. 17. 7. Psalm. 146. 5.
elsewhere; the same) in his mercy. And again, Psalm. 147. 11.
The Lords delight is in them that fear him, and that hope* or trust in his
mercy.

In which places, as it is well observed by Augustine, that the Psalmist Cum
dixisset, Timentes, adjecit, Sperantes.
having said, that fear him, he adds withal, and that trust or hope in him;
to exclude the former fear. For, says he, Nunquid enim sic timetur Deus, quo
modo and latro? nam and latro timetur, and bestia timetur, etc. Si times
latronem, ab alio speras auxilium, and non ab eo quem times: qui sic timet,
poscit auxilium ab eo quem non timet, adversus eum quem timet, etc. Aug. in
Psalm. 146.
Men fear a thief, or a wild beast, in one manner; and children fear their
parents in another manner. Men fear the one, so as they fly from them; good
children the other, so as they seek to them. And in the latter manner, not in
the former, ought men to fear God. Wicked men and damned spirits fear him so,
as Mark. 1. 24.
they fly from him: Gods children so fear him, as that yet they sue and seek
to him: If they seem to fly from him, it is but to fly to him; they fly but
from his Justice to his Mercy: as he that appealed sometime Machetas quida^
Macedo. Plut. in apophth.
from Philip to Philip, from Philip sleeping to Philip awaked: So do Vis ab
illo fugere? ad ipsum fuge. Vis fugere ab irato? fuge ad placatum. Aug. ibid.
and in Ps. 30. and in 1. Joan. 6.
they fly from God to God, from God in justice angry with them, to the same
God in mercy pacified and appeased toward them.

So again on the other side does Bernard well observe, that Dicturus,
Sperantes, praemisit, Timentes. Bern. in Ps. Qui habitat, sermon. 1.
being to say, that hope in him, he says first, that fear him. For, says he
well, there are foure^ sorts of men: Sunt qui non sperant: sunt qui desperant:
sunt qui frustra and maniter; sunt qui been and utiliter sperant. Ib.
some hope not, some despair, some hope in vain, and some hope aright.

The first sort is of those that Neque timent, neque sperant.
neither hope Sort 1.
nor fear; neither hope for Gods mercy, nor fear Gods wrath; it is all one to
them, whether God be angry or not angry, whether he be pleased or displeased
with them.

The second sort is of those that Timent, sed non sperant. Qui sperat and non
timet, negligens est: qui timet, and non sperat, depressus est. Aug. ad fratr.
erem. 10.
fear, but hope Sort 2.
not; they fear Gods wrath, but they hope not in his mercy: they have both
their eyes fixed on the wrath and justice of God, neither eye on his mercy or
goodness, and so come to be swallowed up with despair.

The third sort is of those Sperant, sed non timent.
that hope, but fear Sort 3.
not; they hope in his mercy, but they fear not his wrath; they have both
eyes fixed on Gods mercy, neither of them on his wrath; and Ita de Dei
misericordia sibi blandiuntur, ut a peccatis suis non emendentur. Bern. ibid.
so presuming on his mercy, but having no regard to his wrath, they take
liberty to themselves to lie and live in sin, without any remorse of
conscience or repentance for the same. But they hope in vain, their faith is
no faith, but a fancy, a presuming without promise, having no warrant from
Gods word. A faith not in God, but in such Spectru^ Dei loco substitutum.
Calvin. instit. l. 1. c. 14.
an I doll as they have framed to themselves, molded out of their own fancy,
and set in Gods stead, a God made all of mercy, having no anger at all; a
far other manner of God, than Gods word has described to us, or rather than
the true God Exodus 20. 5, 6. and 34. 6, 7.
has described himself to us in his word. And if their Faith be so bad, their
Hope can be no better; that being of necessity the foundation of this. Sort 4.


The fourth sort is of those that both Et timent, and sperant. Perseverent in
te pariter timer and fiducia; spes and metus. Bern. mod. viv. c. 4. Et idem
epist. 87. Timere volo te and no^ timere; praesumere, and non praesumere:
timere ut poeniteas, non timere ut praesumas: porro praesumere ne diffid^s, non
praesumere ne orpescas.
hope and fear: So hope in Gods mercy, as that they stand in awe yet of his
wrath: as they cast the one eye on the one, so they fix the other eye upon the
other. And these are those that hope well and profitably, that trust to good
purpose in Gods mercy.

The first of them neither hope nor fear; the second fear, but hope not; the
third hope, but fear not; the fourth hope and fear.

The first regard neither Gods wrath, nor his mercy; the second regard his
wrath, and not his mercy; the third regard his mercy, and not his wrath; the
fourth regard both his mercy, and his wrath. Yea their very faith that reposeth
it self on his mercy, makes them regardful also of his wrath. And hereby
therefore may we try our faith, whether it be sound and sincere or no, if it
make us stand in awe of him whom we seem to believe and to trust in,
especially then, when either he executes, or (...). Aristot. rhet. l. 2. c. 5.
gives warning of Judgment. Which if it do not, it is not true Faith, nor
such Faith as NOA here had. They are Soli fil^j irae ira^ non sentiunt. Bern.
epist. 256.
(...) Children of God, no other than Children of wrath, faith Bernard, that
fear not Gods wrath, that stand not in awe of his Judgments.

Yea lastly, Let this admonish us, to labor to have this Fear wrought in us:
whereby we may fear with NOA, and other of the faithful, when God gives
warning of his Judgments, that we may not feel them when they come: Habb. 3.
16.
When I heard it, says Habbakuk, my belly shook, and my lips Use 5.
Admonition.
quaked; rottenness seized upon my bones, and I trembled at my very heart;
that I might rest in the day of trouble. (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. sermon. 87.
Tanto minus eam (sententiam divinam) sentietis in examine, quanto nunc auditis
formidolosius in praedicatione. Greg. in E^mg. hom. 36. But they that tremble
not in hearing, shall be crushed to pieces in feeling. Bradford of repent.
The fearing of them now, is the only means to prevent the feeling of them
then. And the more now we fear them, the less shall we need then to fear
them. He that fears Gods word, shall not feel his Rod. He that fears
before it come, shall the less need to fear when it comes. Fear Timere
debemus, ut non timeamus-Timendum ad auditum, ne timeamus ad aspectian.
Venturu^ timeamus, ut cum venerit, non timidi sed securi videam^s. Timendus est
enim, ne timeatur. Greg. in Euang. 26. Timeat qui ducit modo vit^ ^n fine, quo
possit in illa die habere securitatem sine fine. Aug. de verb. Dom. 1. Discat
timere, qui timere non vult. Discat ad tempus esse solicitus, qui vult semper
esse securus. Idem de temp. 214.
we must therefore, says Gregory well, that we may not fear: fear when we
hear it, that we may not fear when we see it: Fear with an awefull and
childe-like fear now, that we may not fear with a distrustful and servile
fear then. For ^runt tune securi, qui modo non sunt securi: Etiteram tunc
timebunt, qui modo timere nolunt. Aug. de verb. Dom. 39
those that fear most now shall have least cause to fear then, because they
shall then be safe; and Hocipsum vehementer timere debes, quia nihil times.
Aug. de temp. 214.
those that fear least now, shall fear most then; as (...) Arist. eth. l. 3.
c 8. ^.
those become most fearful, that out of ignorance were most forward, when
they come to see and know the danger that they are in, which they apprehended
not before.

NOA feared the Flood before it came; and The wicked fear not before
affliction, and then they fear too much: the godly fear before it comes,
and then their fear cease* For impiety triumphs in prosperity, trembles
in adversity: Piety trembles in prosperity, triumphs in adversity.
when it came, was in the Arc safe and secure, free from fear of any danger
to him or his by it. The wicked World feared it not, because they believed it
not, till they saw it, and then were their hearts drowned and overwhelmed with
fear and despair, (...). Greg. Naz. stelit. 2. Si quod ab homine timetur
malum, eo perinde dum expectatur, quasi venisset urgetur: and quicquid ne
patiatur timet, jam metu patitur. Sen. epist. 7 4. Perit ante vulnus pavore
confusus, cui spiritumrapuit timor. Sen. Herc. fur. 4.
before their bodies were overwhelmed and destroyed with the Flood.

But, fear God! may some say. Why? who does not fear him? We might rather say
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 25. 12. and 90. 11.
Who is he that does fear him? Implying the number of those to be very small
that indeed sincerely so do. Greenham part 2. c. 27.. 5.


But since that the fear of God seems so common, and every one will lay
claim to it, come we again to the trial. Wherein appeared NOAES Fear, but
in his careful obedience, in his diligent endeavor to prevent the peril,
though not yet approaching, not yet apparent? Moved with fear, says the
Apostle, he prepared the Arc Effect 3.
for the saving of him and his.

In which Act of his observe we, both his Obedience Act.
to Gods will and word, and his Care to Obedience.
prevent the peril.

First his Obedience to Gods will and word. God bids NOA go and make such a
Vessel to save him and his from a Flood, that should drown up the whole World.
Alas, if he should do it, every one would but (...). Basil. Sell. homil. 5.
laugh at him for his labor: as no doubt of it full many did. They would
think him no wiser than Holinsheds Chro^. in Henry 8. anno 1524.
the Prior of Saint Bartholomewes here among us, who upon a vain prediction of
an idle and addle-headed Astrologer, went and built him an house at Harow on
the Hill, to secure himself from a supposed Flood, that that Astrologer had
foretold. As Lots sons in law, when their wives Father told them of a shower
of fire and brimstone that should come and destroy all Sodom, Genes. 19. 14.
they thought that either he mocked but and dalied; or else that he doated and
was strangely deluded. So says Basil of NOA, when he told the World of a Flood
that should swallow up the whole World, and set himself thereupon about the
building of an Arc, of such strange form and bulk, a work of so great toil
and charge, to save himself and his household in, (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 5.
they thought the poor old man doated, he had dreamed, not, as we say, of a
dry Summer, but of a wet Winter, he was drowned in a deep melancholy, and
would be soused and drowned in his own sweat with moiling and toiling about
such a building, before they should be ouer-flowen with, or drowned in any
deluge. But all this NOA contemned, and notwithstanding all this, he went not
about only, but through with that that God had enjoined.

From which Carriage of NOA we may learn this instruction, that

True Faith and Fear will make a man contemn Point 4.
worldly men's scoffs; and notwithstanding them, do any thing that God shall
enjoin.

We might for the further proof of this point, muster up a multitude of
Examples: Genesis 12. 1, 4. Hebr. 11. 8.
Abraham's leaving his own Country and Kindred, to wander up and down he
knew not whither himself, in hope of an inheritance that Act. 7. 5. Hebr. 11.
9.
he never had as long as he lived: and Genesis 17. 23, 24.
the causing of himself to be Circumcised, when he was almost an hundred
year old, together with his young son, and the rest of his family, a thing
that was never heard of before, and such as would of any natural conceit be
deemed not Hinc Verpi, and Apellae (ut quida^ volunt) etiam per irrisionem
Iudaei dicti.
ridiculous only, but most indecent: King 2 Samuel 6. 16, 20.
DAVID'S dancing before the Arc, for which Micol derided him: The Prophet Esai.
20. 2.
Esaies going naked (though not so naked as many imagine,) Absque cilicio, i.
tegumento villos^, quo Prophetae fere utebantur. Iun. ex Zech. 13. 4. Visantur
Drus. observe. l. 14. c. 14. and Fuller. miscell. l. 2. c. 11.
without his upper garment, his prophetical habit, and without shoes on his
feet: Ier. 19. ^, 10, 11.
Ieremies breaking of a bottle for the confirmation of his Prophecy: his Ier.
27. 2. and 28. 10.
wearing of a wooden yoke, and going up and down with it about his neck: And
Ier. 27. 2, 3, 4.
his making of yoakes and fetters, and sending them with such strange messages
to foraine Princes, and those Infidels, by the hands of their own
Ambassadors: Ezekiel. 4. 1, 2, 3.
Ezekiels laying siege-to a model of the City, upon a tyle or a table, and
making battery against it, and placing an iron pan between him and it: Ezekiel.
4. 4, 5.
His lying and sleeping upon his left side alone, for a long time together:
Ezekiel. 4. 9, 10.
His making and eating bread of corn and pulse of all sorts mingled together,
(meat fitter for beasts, than for any man to feed on,) and Ezekiel. 4. 12, 15.
baking it with cow-sherds in the open and public view of his people; even of
those that desired nothing more than matter to laugh and leere at him: Ezekiel. 5.
1, 2, 3, 4.
The cutting of his hair, dividing it by weight, burning in the fire a third
part, smiting with a knife another third, and scattering another third abroad
into the wind; then taking a few of them and binding them up, and yet of them
again, pulling some out again and throwing them into the fire: Ezekiel. 12. 3-7.
The carrying out of his housholdstuffe on his shoulders, through a hole dug
in the wall, by daylight, and removing it himself from place to place, while
a multitude of all sorts should stand by and look on. And, to pass by all
others, Hoshe as Hosh. 1. 2, 3. Liveleus videatur in not. ad Hosh.
marrying first of a light houswife, a common harlot; and after Hosh. 3. 1, 2.
one that had been false to her former husband; Hosh. 1. 4, 6, 9.
imposing strange names on the children that he had by them: these, I say, and
many other beside these might be alleged: but I hasten; and this of NOA may
well counteruaile them all; a work of so great difficulty, that would take up
so much time, be so long a doing, require so much travail, and so infinite
expense, and all done for the preventing of so unlikely a danger: Many, no
doubt, would flock about him out of all quarters to see it: many would be
continually gazing upon him, when he should be at work about it: many a broad
jest, many a bitter scoff would be broken upon him. No man would be thought
ever to have taken more pains to beggar himself, or to have been at more
cost, out of a vain fear of misery, to make himself miserable. But all
these difficulties, and all the disgrace it might bring with it, NOAES Faith
and his Fear overcame.

And no marvel.

For first, true Faith it is of Romans 5. 1, 5. and 8. 37. 1 John 4. 4. and 5. 4.
a courageous, of Reason 1.
an undaunted, of an unconquerable Nature. That which has made men contemn
fire and faggot; no marvel if it make them contemn the blasts of men's breath;
which are no more able "Dan. 7. 2. Una Eurusque, Notusque ruunt, creberque
procellis Africus* Virg. Aeneid. 1.
Psalm. 125. 1, 2. and 78. 69.
to shake a well grounded Faith, than S. Ward of Conscience.
the winds are able to stir the earth, though they should all at once blow
upon it, and assault it from all points. Reason 2.


And again, Timor timori cedit majori minor.
the greater Fear ever expels the less. Timor timore, ut clavus clavo
pellitur. Quomodo Cic. Tusc. l. 4. and ex Cic. Hiero^. ad Rust. Solent amorem
veterem amore novo, quasi clavum clavo, pellere. (...). Pollux l. 9. c. 7. Sed
and Antiphanes pari modo, (...) - Athen. dipnosoph. l. 2. Et Alcaeus ibid. l.
10. (...).
One Fear frighteth away another, as one nail is wont to drive out another.
Matthew. 10. 28. Luke 12. 4, 5.
Fear not them, that is, men; but fear him, that is, God, says our Savior:
as if the Fear of the one would chase away all Fear of the other. And, Esai.
8. 12, 13. Sirac. 34. 16.
Fear not their fear, but let the Lord of hosts be your fear, says the
Prophet. Prove. 28. 1. Qui timet Deum, nihil timet praeter eum. Origin. in
Levit. 16. Qui Deum timet, seculi potestates non timet. Idem in Romans l. 3.
Repleat vos spiritus timoris Dei, and timor alienus in vobis locum non habebit.
Bern. in Psalm. 90. (...). Synes. epist. 2.
He that fears him, says Origin, fears nothing but him. That fear will
soon displace and dispossess all other fears. Esai. 51. 7, 8, 12, 13. (...).
Chrysostom. tom* 6. sermon. 43. Quod and aptissima e re nata sunilitudine co^firmat
Ibid.
He that fears the wrath of the almighty and everliving God, will set light
by the reproach or the rebuke of any mortal man, yea of a whole world of them,
as we see NOA here did.

In like manner ought it to be with every one of us. We must be content to
do as God bids us, and not refuse to yield to Use 1. Admonition.
ought that he shall enjoin us, though we shall be but befooled and laughed
at for our labor.

The Casuists say, that Non peccat, qui legem bumana^ non servat, ut pro stulto
non habeatur. Martin. Navarr. enchir. c. 27. sect. 283.
a man may lawfully break an humane Constitution concerning a matter otherwise
merely indifferent, when for observing of it he shall bebut counted a fool
and derided for his labor. But no such pretense will excuse us from the doing
of ought that God requires of us. Mark. 8. 38.
He that is ashamed of me and my word, (that is, of what I enjoin him) faith
our Savior, before this wicked and (...).
bastardy generation, him will the Son of Man be ashamed of, when he comes
in his glory, and his holy Angels with him. We must not think much therefore
to be Psalm. 69. 7. 2 Samuel 6. 21, 22.
derided and counted fools for his sake: we should esteem it rather, as the
Apostles sometimes did, even a grace to be disgraced for him. Act. 5. 41.
(...). elegantissimum oxymorum. Casaub. not. in N. T. O quantis obedientiae
viribus nitun^ur, qui gaudent pro Christo ad Conciliu^ trabi, dignitatem ducunt
pro eo caedi, gloriam reputant pro eo mori? quibus vilitas sublimitas,
contumelia gloria, patientia victoria, mirabili mirabilitate videntur. Bern. de
grad. obed. Ita Hier. ad Helvid. Gloriae mihi futura convicia tua etc.
They went away from the Council, says the Holy Ghost, rejoicing, that they
were vouchsafed the dignity to be dishonored for Christ's sake.

Nor is this admonition and exhortation needless in our times, wherein the
careful going about the building of the spiritual Arc, exposes men, if not
so much and so openly as the making of the material Arc did NOA, yet too
freely and too frequently, to the mockes and scoffs of profane people.

Noli erubescere Christianum profiteri te etc. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
Be not ashamed, says Augustine, of thy Christian profession. Be not ashamed
of it? will some say. It seems a needless admonition. Tam pauci non
Christiani remanserunt, ut eis magis objiciatur quia Christiani no^ sunt, quam
ipsi audeant aliquibus objicere, quia Christiani sunt.
There are so few now that are not Christians, that if a man be not one, he
shall rather be noted and pointed at. But for all that, says he, Tamen dico
vobis, incipe, quicunque me audis, vivere quomodo Christianus, and vide si non
tibi objiciatur and a Christianis, sed nomine, non vita, non moribus. Aug.
ibid. Non deerunt and Christiani, qui prohibeant Christian vivere. Idem de
tem. 52. Turba ipsa quae cum Domino est, clamantes prohibet. Matthew. 20. 31. i.
Bonos Christianos, vere studiesos, volentes facere in Euangelio scripta Dei
praecepta, Christiani mali and tepidi prohibent. Idem de verb. Dom. 18.
try it when thou will, and thou shall find my words true. Do but strive to
live according to the rules of Christianity; and see if thou be not derided
and scoffed at for it by those, that are Christians in Name, but not in deed.
And the like may be said truly of these times of ours, wherein Psalm. 14. 6.
Non modo pietatis virtutem amisimus, sed nec speciem retinemus. Bern. apolog.
ad Gu^elm. Abb. Ipsa religio in opprobrium venit. Idem Bern. epist. 117.
Religion is grown to be, as Bernard sometime complained, not a matter of
form, but a matter of scorn: (...). Luke 6. 15. qui and (...) Matthew. 10. 4.
and Marc. 3. 18. non a patria, sed ab Hebr. radice (...) quod (...) significat.
Ang. Canin. de Voc. N. T.
Simon Zelotes is become an odious Name; profession of Piety is accounted
Pharisaisme, scrupulositie, and hypocrisy; Timor Domini simplicitas reputatur,
^e dicam, fatuitas. Bern. de consid. l. 4.
the fear of God esteemed folly; and (...) religious carriage made commonly
matter of reproach. Dica^ quod multi mecu^ experti sunt. Cum Christianus quis
ceperit been vivere, fervere bonis operibus, ^undum contemnere, reprehensores
patitur and contradictores frigidos Christianos. Quid insanis? aiunt. Nimius
es. Nunquid alij non sunt Christiani? Ista stultitia est, dementia e^, etc.
Aug. de verb. Dom. 18.
If a man live somewhat more strictly than the looser sort x A nostris omnia
ferme religiosa ridentur. Salvian. de provid. l. 7.
do, though not so strictly neither as his Christian profession requires of
him, (for even the best and the forwardest have their failings, and come far
short of what they should) 1 Pet. 4. 4. Viru^ circumspectum, and amicu^
propriae conscientiae calumniantur hypocrita^. Bern. de consid. l. 4.
he shall not escape to have those opprobrious rearmes and titles fastened on
him, of a Precisian, a Puritan, and the like, by those that affect looseness,
and Wisd. 2. 12-16. (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 72.
account the strictness of others a real controlling of their carriage. If he
be conversant in Gods word, and diligent in frequenting the ministry of it; he
is a Bible-bearer, and a gadder up and down after Sermons. If he Eccl. 9. 2.
make conscience of an oath, and will reprove others when they swear; he is a
superstitious fellow, too straitlaced, more nice than wise. If he will not
swill and swagger, drink healths and play the goodfellow, go for company to a
Brothel-house, or Non vult ire spectatu^: frenat concupiscentiam sua^, ne
pergat ad theatru^, etc. Aug* de verb. Dom. 18.
to a Playhouse, Theatru^ proprie sacrarium Veneris est, arx omnium
turpitudinum, disciplina libidinum, impudicitiae consistorium; ubi nihil
probatur, quam quod alibi non probatut; ita summa gratia ejus de spurcitia
plurimum concinnata est, quod si nobis omnis impudicitia execranda est, cur
liceat audire quae loqui non licet? cur liceat videre, quae facere flagitium
est? cur quae ore prolata communicant hominem, ea per oculos and aures admissa
non videantur homine^ communicare, cum spiritui appareant aures and oculi, nec
possit mundus praestari, cujus apparitores inquinantur? Tertull. de spectac.
Spectacula vel cruenta vel turpia. Ubi exempla ^iunt, quae jam esse facinora
destiterunt; and adulterium discitur dum videtur. Qui potest esse qui spectat
vel pudicus, vel integer? Cyprian. ad Donat. Nihil tam damnosum est bonis
moribus quam in spectaculo aliquo desidere. Sen. ep. 7. (...) semina praebent
Nequitiae. Ovid. trist. l. 2.
little better, the very seminaries and nurseries of all filthiness and
profaneness; he is a man altogether unsociable, of a melancholy disposition,
little better than a lunaticke, as Matthew. 11. 18.
they said sometime of John the Baptist. If he will bear an evil word, and put
up a supposed wrong, not stab or challenge at least any one that shall give him
the lie, nor be ready to right himself by private revenge; he is a coward, a
meacock, baseminded, a man of no courage, one of God Almighties fools, at the
least and the best. (...). Plut. de audiend.
These and the like censures must a man make account to undergo, even among
Christians, if he be careful of upholding and maintaining his Christian
profession, and of making good what in his Baptism he bound himself unto.

But as the Heathen man, Socrates, sometime said, That Stultus videri, quo
beatus sis, velis. Socrates apud Sen. ep. 71.
a man must be content to be accounted a Fool, that he may be happy; so we
must make account and be content to bear this, and much more than this, if
ever we hope or look to be happy, and to come unto heaven.

Yea if we believe and fear, (which hereby Use 2. Examination.
also we may try whether we do or no, as we would seem and profess all to
do) our very Faith and Dicat Martyr ininatori stans homo ante hominem, Non
timeo, quia timeo, etc. Aug. de Sanct. 14.
Fear will make us set light by such paper-shot, and carry us on through the
pikes, not of evil tongues, but of the eagerest opposition that either Satan
himself, or any limb of his shall be able to make against us to turn us out
of the good ways of God; we will never a whit fear or regard the one, if we
do thoroughly fear the other.

Timeamus, ut non timeamus. Timeamus prudenter, ne timeamus inaniter. Aug. de
sanct. 14.
Let us fear, says Augustine, that we may not fear. Let us fear wisely,
that we may not fear foolishly: That we may not fear Man, with Martyrs
timendo non timuerunt: quia Deum timendo homines contempserunt. Ibid.
the blessed Martyrs of Christ, let us fear God. Yea* Ne timeamus ut non
timeamus.
let us not fear, say I, that we may not fear. Illud vide, ne timendo magis
timere cogare. Cic. epist. fam. l. 11. ep. 20.
Let us not fear now, lest we fear much more hereafter. Let us not fear the
scoffs of men now, lest we feel the wrath of God hereafter. Better it is for
us to be mocked for doing good, than to be damned for not doing it. Let us not
be (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. sermon. 43. Pueri lucernam non timent, laruam timent.
like Children therefore, that fear an ugly vizard, that cannot hurt them, but
fear not the fire, that may scorch them: fear the blasts of man's breath, and
not fear the fire of Gods wrath. (...). Greg. Naz. in Nyss.
Let us only fear this, how we fear man or ought more than God. For (...).
Idem in Maccab.
there is nothing indeed fearful but that; (...). Idem de pace 1.
nothing at least so fearful as it. Our not fearing the one now, may prevent
the terror of the other; as on the other side, the fearing of the one, though
not worthy our fear, if we give way to it, Prove. 29. 25.
will assuredly procure the other. He that Psalm. 53. 5.
fears now, where there is no cause to fear, Prove. 10. 24.
shall another day have just cause to fear, when his vain fear shall have
betrayed him to things truly fearful.

Pinner of Catechis.
He is a fool, we say, that will be laughed out of his coat: but he were a
double fool, that would be laughed out of his skin; that would hazard the
loss of his soul, and of his eternal salvation, because he is loath to be
laughed at, to quit himself of the mockes and scoffs of profane persons. Yea
undoubtedly if we do in deed and truth believe the truth of Gods word, and
stand with holy NOA here in awe of his wrath: Praesentia spernis, qui futura
metuit. Minut. Octav. Praesentia speruit opprebria, qui futura ^tuit supplicia.
we will never give over our godly courses for such windy stuff as this is;
our very fear it self will not suffer us, though we would.

And so pass we to the second thing that Care.
we observed in this Act of NOA, to wit, his Care to prevent the evil
imminent; together with that point of Instruction which thence may be gathered,
that

Tim^r (...) and solli^itum facit. Bern. n^od. viv. c. 4.
Fear breeds Care.

As Fides facit formidinem: formido facit solicitudinem. Tertull. ad Marc.
Faith breeds Fear, so Fear breeds Point 5.
Care. NOA, as he believed and feared, so he was careful with all speed to
use all good means for the preventing of the peril that otherwise would have
been. So Jacob, when Genes. 32. 6.
he heard of his brother Esaus coming against him with four hundred men after
him, Genes. 32. 7, 8, 9, 22, 23.
being sore afraid of him, was careful of using all means, either for the
pacifying of his wrath, or the saving of his family, some part of them at
least, from his fury. So the Egyptians, when Exodus 9. 18, 19.
Moses had given warning of such a storm to come as would destroy all that
were found abroad in the fields, Exodus 9. 20.
so many of them as believed and feared the word of God took warning, and
caused both their servants and their cattle to take and keep house for the
preventing of that peril.

Nor can it in reason be otherwise. Where Reason 1.
Faith has wrought Fear, Fear cannot but work Care. Where the head has
wrought upon the heart* there the heart cannot but work upon the hand* And
Corpus, sive Corpor, ut olim loquebantur, quasi Cordis por, i. puer, sive
(...); (...) forma, qua Marcipor, Quintipor, etc. Camer. problem.
the hand is ever at the hearts command, ready to its utmost ability to execute
whatsoever the heart exacteth of it.

Again, where there is a fear of evil, Reason 2.
there is a desire also to escape evil; (for (...)* Aristot. ethic Nicom l. 1.
c. 1. and pol. l. 1. c. 1. Omne animal se diligit. Natura sua quisque sibi car*
est. Ab interitu natura abhorret. Hinc ingenita cuique curasui; metus mortis,
fuga mali, etc. Cic. de fin. l. 5. Cura* fui ^nte omnia cunctis inest
animalibus: nec inseritur, sed innascitir. Simul autem conciliatur saluti suae
quidque, and quae juvant, illa petit, l^sara formidans refugit. Sen. ep. 124.
every thing naturally affects it own good) and a desire proportionable to
the fear: and where a desire* to escape evil, an endeavor to use all means
of escape: and z an endeavor likewise proportionable to that desire. Where
there is a strong persuasion then, and apprehension of some great evil
impendent, there cannot but be a great measure of fear: and where so great
fear* no less vehement a desire of escape; and where such vehement desire,
Qui sic timet, nihil negligit. Bern. in Cant. 47. (...). Aristot. rhet. l. 2.
6. 5.
a most earnest and careful endeavor of preventing, if by any means it may
be, that evil.

Add we hereunto that Faith, as it makes things absent present, and things
far off as at hand; and so makes men to be Reason 3.
affected with evils, as are by God, or from God, revealed to them, though yet
absent, or far off, yet as if they were present, and at hand: So it makes
them as careful instantly, without longer delay, to betake them to such
courses, as for the preventing and avoiding of those evils are deemed
requisite, which to the eye of their faith are as imminent, or as present.

And lastly, That no affection is more Timore nihil validius, nihil
vehementius. Bern. de diverse. 12. Metus cum venit, rarum habet somnus locu^. P.
Sir. Rapit enim somnos pavor. Sen. Herc.
vigilant, Reason 4.
more violent, more forcible than fear, either to curb and restrain men of
what otherwise they would, or to urge and constrain them to what otherwise
they are unwilling unto.

Genesis 32. 7, 23.
Jacob could not rest all night long, when he feared Esaus approach: nor Judge.
16. 19, 20.
Sampson longer repose himself on Dalilaes lap, when he heard once that the
Philistines were upon him. Temptations of Fear are esteemed the most Res est
imperios^ timor. Martial. l. 11. ep. 59.
violent. And Contracta per metum irrita obligatio est. Althus. dicaeolog. l.
1. c. 118.. 15.
in humane laws there is a nullitie therefore held of actions extorted and
wrung from men by fear: because in such case a man is held not to be a free
man, to have no power or command in some sort of himself. The fear of Gods
wrath therefore in these cases, where it is fresh in the soul, cannot but
Omnem formido somnolentiam excutit.
shake off all security, cut off all carelessness, banish and abandon all
slothful and retchlesse delay, and Cave^is s^ pav^bis. Romans 1^. 21.
urge and enforce to all speedy and diligent usage of those means, whereby it
may be pacified, and the evil prevented that may accrue from it.

Now hereby try we our Faith again, yea Use 1. Examination Application.
and our Fear too. Compare we NOA and our selves together; and see how
contrary he and we are either to other: yea see how like we are in these
days (...) to the world that then was, than to him, as Matthew. 24. 37, 38, 39.
our S^iour himself also fore^old that it would be.

Consider his carfulness. God speaks Compar. 1.
thus to NOA; Genesis 6. 3, 13, 14.
An hundred and twenty years hence will I bring in a Flood that shall drown
the whole world: and therefore if then wilt be then saved, go thy way out of
hand, and build thee such an Arc as I shall show thee. And this God told NOA,
when he was about some five hundred year old; for O^nes. 7. 6.
six hundred year old he was when the Flood came. So that NOA might well have
thought thus with himself; I am five hundred year old already, and it will be
yet an hundred and upward before the Flood come; Why? I may well be either dead
and r^tten in my grave before that time, or at leastwise very near the end of
my days. And who would go t^ile and ^ile so about building of a vessel of
such bulk and bigness, to prolong his life so short a time? Or else, It was
an hundred and twenty year yet to it; and what need he then go^ in all haste
about it? he might go and take his pleasure for this hundredth year, and then
set upon it some twenty (...) ten year before, and get more help then and
disp^th it the sooner. But NOA did not, he could not, he durst not defer the
doing of it, but Genes. 6. 22. and 7. 5.
went instantly in hand with it.

On the other side see our carelessness. God foret^eth us that a second
general destruction shall come* not by water* but 2 Pet. 3. 7. Adam pradixit
geminum, (...). Joseph. antiq. l. 1. 6. 3. Ab isto No^ Deu^ (...), (...) ill^
(...) ^jusde^ (...). Brough*
by fire, the (...) element of the twain; (...). Sybill. ^rac. l. 4. Et ibid.
(...). Justin. apolog. Et cataclysmum factum, and deflagrationem futuram
Sibylla vaticinata est. Lactant. de ira Dei, cap. 23. (...). Sybill. in
airostich. apud Eusebius. in vita Constant. Decidet e coelis ignisque and
sulphuris amnis. Exuret terras (...) ^polumque. Apud Aug. de civit. Dei l. 18.
c. 23. Stoici omnia inflammanda, iterumque futura asseruerunt. Athenag. de
resurr. Hinc annus ille maximus, cujus hyems summa est Calaclysmus sive
diluvio, aestas Ecpyrosts, i. mundi incendium: (unde and (...) dicta. Ex
Menipp. conviv. Athen. dipnoseph. l. 14 Nam his alternis temporibus mundus tum
exignescere, tum exaquescere videtur. Censorin. de not. die c. 18. (...).
Tragicus apud Clem. strom. l. 5. and Eusebius. praepar. lib. 13. cap. 13. Esse
quoque in satis reminiscitur affore tempus, Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque
regia coeli Ardeat, and mundi moles operos^ laboret. Ovid. met. l. 1. Communis
mundo superest rogus, olsibus astra Mixturus etc. Lucan. bell. Phars. l. 1.
Aqua and ignis terrenis dominantur. Ex his ortus and interitus est.
Quandocunque placuere res novae mundo, sic in nos mare emittitur, ut desuper
fervor ignis, cum aliud genus exitij placuit. Cum enim fatalis dies dil^vij
venerit, aestus solutus legibus fine modo strtur, ratione eadem qua
conflagratio futura est. Alterutrum fit, cum Deo visam ordiri meliora, vetera
finire. Sen. quaest. not. l. 3. c. 27, 28. Cum tempus advenerit, quo se mundus
renovaturus extinguat, ignibus vastis torrebit, incendetque mortalia etc. Idem
ad Marc. c. 26. Euenturum putant S^i, ut ad extremum mundus omnis ignescat.
Cic. de not. De^r. l. 2. and ardore deflagret. Idem Acad. lib. 4. De Stoicis
idem Numenius apud Eusebius. Sed and de Epicareit Minutius in Octavio.
which even Heathen also have taken notice of: and that none then shall be
saved but those that have 1 Petr. 2. 5.
a spiritual Temple or Sanctuary built in their souls, Ephesians. 2. 22.
an house for his Spirit to inhabit, as hard and difficult a piece of work,
as ever the making of the Arc was. As NOA before he could go about that
building, he must first fell his wood, saw out his planckes, hew out his
timber, etc. So before we can raise this spiritual building, we must pull
down 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
an old frame, an erection 1 John 3. 8.
of the Devils rearing, that stands where it must stand, and rid the place of
the rubbish and remainders of it: Now this requires much toil and labor, and
will take us up much time: And yet we defer and put off all, and think we
shall have time enough for it hereafter, though Psalm. 90. 9.
none of us are like to live near (...) hundred* years, none sure to live
half an hundred hours to an end. And what would we do, or how would we live,
if we were sure that we should not die, ere an hundred years were expired
and had past over our heads, when we have no care to provide for the
preventing of this peril, being Nihil ne in totu^ quidem diem certi est* Sen.
ad Polyb. c. 29. Nihil in diem, nihil in horam promittitur. Idem ad Marc. c. 10.
not sure of a day, not of an hour?

Again, God gave NOA warning by word Compar. 2.
only of (...) evils, whereof no print or foot-step was to be seen at the
present. And NOA is stricken with fear, and prepares presently to prevent it.
God gives us warning not by word only, but by deed, by evident arguments of
his wrath already broke forth, and burning up our brethren almost on every
side of us. And yet Psalm. 90. 11.
who lays it to heart, or prepares to prevent the evil that so evidently
appears to approach?

Now what is the reason of such difference both in the one kind and in the
other? (NOA so careful, and we so careless:) but that he believed and feared;
and we do not? What else was it, that made Lots Sons* in law stay still in
Sodom, though they were told what would become of it? What else, that made
some of those Egyptians so careless, as to leave men and beasts abroad, when
Moses had given warning of the storm that should come? But that Genes. 19. 9.
the one believed not Lots word; Exodus 9. 21.
the other feared not the Lords word: the one believed not, and therefore
feared not; and the other feared not, because they believed not? neither of
both cared, because neither of both feared. And what else is it that makes men
stay still in their sin, and make no provision to prevent Gods wrath, both
revealed in his word, Use 2. Conviction.
Romans 1. 18.
and manifested in his work; but that they believe not the one, they dread not
the other?

And this may convince multitudes, even of professed Christians, to have
neither Faith nor Fear. Heu, vivunt homines, tanqua^ mors nulla sequatur; Et
velut infernus fabula vana foret.
They live so securely, so carelessly, as if there were neither heaven nor hell:
they prepare no more to meet God, when in wrath he seems to approach, then as
if Esai. 5. 18, 19.
they cared not whether he came or no*

Yet should we ask any of these, whether they believed the word of God or no,
whether they feared the wrath of God or no? they would answer, they did; and be
angry that any man should make doubt of it: they should be Qui pudore^ amisit;
bestia par est, qui timorein, bestia pejor est. Bern. de diverse. 12.
worse than beasts* no better than flat Atheists, if they did not. But, Psalm.
36. 1. (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 1. c. 9. Timor enim Domini expellit
peccatu^. Sirac. 1. 26. sive quod jam admissu^ est, sive quodtentat intrare;
illud poenitendo, hoc resiste^do. Bern* de diverse. 8.
the wickedness of the wicked man assures me, says the Psalmist, that there
is no fear of God before his eyes. And the loose and dissolute, the secure and
careless courses of such evidently show, whatsoever* they may say, that there
is neither Faith, nor fear of God in them, that they neither believe his Word,
nor stand in awe of his wrath, they durst not for their lives do so as they
do, if they did. Si timetis, quare non cavetis? Aug. de discipl. Christ. c. 2.
Cur Sodomam incolitis ruituri jam ruituram? Cur cito non fugitis perituri rem
peritura^? Misocosin. contempt. mund.
If you fear, says Augustine, how is it that you take no more care? Genesis 32.
23.
Could Jacob sleep quietly, when he understood of Esaus approach? Or Judge.
16. 20.
durst Sampson for all his strength and stontnesse lie still, when he heard
that the Philistines were upon him? Much less durst any man, or could any man,
that feared Gods wrath, lie sleeping in sin, when warning were given of Gods
wrath, or while (it is the state of every impenitent person, had he a
spiritual eye to discern it) the black clouds of his vengeance ready to
seize on him, hung continually over his head. Say what thou will therefore,
whosoever thou art that so live, did thou fear God* as thou pretendest
and professest to do, Vigilabis, si time^is. Aug. de (...). Ap. ^8. Et tu
vigilares, si timores.
thou could not live so securely, thou durst not live so loosely; thou durst
as well eat thy nails off, as we say, as do many things that daily thou
do; Timor torporem excussit and nolentibus. Nec tutu^ patitur esse securum
pav^r.
thy very fear would not let thee, it would not suffer thee to rest: it would
be as a thorn at thy heart, and a spur at thy side, to rouse thee and awake
thee, and to keep thee from rest, till thou had procured thine own safety*
and to urge and enforce thee to all speedy, careful, and industrious
endeavor, whereby the same might be effected.

Well, to wind up all in a word: Let us all be Conclusion.
like NOA; take warning when God gives it; Believe what he (...); fear
before his face, especially when we see signs of his wrath, as we do pregnant
ones at this present; use all care and endeavor to ^uert his* wrath, and to
prevent the peril, when* we perceive i^ to approach. That can no way be done
but by repentance of our sins, reformation of our lives, and alteration of
our sinful and secure courses. This course therefore let every one of us take
without further delay; and pray that others also may do the like. It may be
that God hearing the prayers, seeing the tears, and regarding the repentance
of some few, may be moved to show mercy on the whole, though the generality
remain still unreformed. Act. 27. 24.
All his fellow passengers their lives were bestowed upon Paul. Genesis 18. 32.
Sodom had been saved, if but ten only had so done in it; Ierem. 5. 1.
Jerusalem, if but one alone. Or if the Lord be so peremptorily bent to
destroy, and to bring in some general judgment, that Ierem. 15. 1.
though Moses and Samuel should sue for a people, they should not prevail with
him, Ezech. 14. 14, 16, 20.
though NOA, Daniel and Job were among them, they should not save son nor
daughter, (not so much as was saved in the Flood,) but themselves single only:
yet shall we, by so doing, with NOA build an Arc, at least, for our selves,
and our own souls. We shall be marked out for salvation, as Ezech. 9. 4.
those were that the Prophet speaks of, in the general destruction. And one
of these three shall undoubtedly befall us: Either we shall be Esai. 57. 1.
taken away, with 2 King. 22. 20.
Josias, before the evil come, and depart hence, to be laid up with our
Fathers, in peace. Or, with Ierem. 15. 21. and 40. 4.
Jeremy, Ierem. 45. 5.
Baruch, and Ier. 39. 18.
Ebed-melech, we shall have our lives given us for a prey: for 2 Pet. 2. 9.
the Lord knows even in general judgments how to save his: Or our
afflictions, shall be seasoned, sweetened, and sanctified unto us; and Tametsi
non bonum, tamen in bonum* Aug. de temp.
though of themselves not good, yet shall they be turned to our good; and our
decease, if we do perish in them, shall be but a means of translating us,
from (...). Euripid.
a wretched and a miserable life here; (where Quid est diu vivere, nisi diu
torqueri. Aug. de temp. 113.
to live long, is but to be long in pain, and where (...), etc. Greg. Naz.
epitaph. Caesar. Diu vivendo multa quae non visvides. P. Sir.
by living long, we are constrained not to hear and see only, but to suffer;
nor to endure only, but to do many things that willingly we would not;) to a
more happy, comfortable, and blessed life elsewhere; wherein Apoc. 7. 17. and
21. 4. (...). Sophocl. (...). Euripid.
we shall never so much as see or hear of misery any more.

FINIS.

