The Glass of Government. A tragical Comedy so entitled, because therein
are handled as well the rewards for Virtues, as also the punishment for Vices.
Done by George Gascoigne Esquier. 1575.

Blessed are they that fear the Lord, their children shall be as the branches
of Olive trees round about their table.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queens majesty's
Injunctions.

IMPRINTED at London for C. Barker

The names of the Actors.
Phylopaes and Two parents being nigh neighbors. Philocalus Two parents being
nigh neighbors. Gnomaticus a Scholemaster. Phylautus Sons to Phylopaes.
Phylomusus Sons to Phylopaes. Phylosarchus Sons to Phylocalus. Phylotimus
Sons to Phylocalus. Seuerus the Markgraue. Echo the Parasyte. Lamia the
Harlot. Pandarina Aunt to Lamia. Dick Drum the Royster. Nuntij two
Messengers. Onaticus servant to the Schoolmaster. Fidus servant to Phylopaes.
Ambidexter servant to Phylocalus. Chorus (...) grave Burghers.
The Comedy to be presented as it were in Antvverpe.

The Argument.
Two rich Citizens of Andvverpe (being nighe neighbors, and having each of
them two sons of like age) do place them together with one godly teacher.
The scholemaster does briefly instruct them their duty toward God, their
Prince, their Parents, their cuntrie, and all magistrates in the same. The
eldest being young men of quick capacity, do (Parrotte like) very quickly
learn the rules without book: the younger being somevvhat more dull of
understanding, do yet engraue the same within their memories. The elder by
allurement of Parasites and lewd company, begin to incline themselves to
concupiscence. The parents (to prevent it) send them all together to the
University of Dowaye, whereas the younger in short space be (by painful
study) preferred, that one to be Secretary unto the Palsegraue, that other
becomes a famous preacher in Geneua. The eldest (turning to their vomit) take
their carriage with them, and travail the world. That one is apprehended and
executed for a robbery (even in sight of his brother) in the Palsgraues court:
that othervvhipped and banished Geneua for fornication: notvvithstanding the
earnest suit of his brother for his pardon.

The whole Comedi^ a figure of the rewards and punishments of virtues and
vices.

The Prologue.
WHat man has mind to hear a worthy Jest,
Or seeks to feed his eye with vain delight:
That man is much unmeet to be a guest,
At such a feast as I prepare t^is night.
Who list lay out some pence in such a Mart,
Bellsauage fair were fittest for his purse,
I list not so to misbestowe mine art,
I have best wares, what need I then show worse?
An Interlude may make you laugh your fill,
Italian toys are full of pleasant sport:
Plain speech to use, if wanton be your will,
You may be gone, wide open stands the port.
But if you can contented be to hear,
In true discourse how high the virtuous clyme,
How low they fall which live withouten f^are
Of God or man, and much mispende their time:
What right rewards a trusty servant earnes,
What subtle snares these Sycophantes can use,
How soon the wise such crooked guyles discernes,
Then stay a while: give ear unto my Muse.
A Comedy, I mean for to present,
No Terence phrase: his time and mine are twain:
The verse that pleased a Roman rash intent,
Might well offend the godly Preachers vain.
Deformed shows were then esteemed much,
Reformed speech does now become us best,
Men's words must weye and tried be by touch
Of Gods own word, wherein the truth does rest.
Content you then (my Lords) with good intent,
Grave Citizens, you people great and small,
To see your selves in Glass of Government:
Behold rash youth, which daungerously does fall
On craggy rocks of sorrows nothing soft,
When sober wits by Virtue clymes alofte.
This work is compiled upon these sentences following, set down by me C. B.

1
Fear God, for he is just.
Love God, for he is merciful.
Trust in God, for he is faithful.
2
Obey the King, for his a^cthoritie is from above.
Honor the King, for he is in earth the liuetenant of the most high God.
Love the King, for he is thy protector.
3
Adventure thy life in defense and honor of thy cuntrie, for the quarrel is
good.
Be not unthankful to the soil that has nurished thee, for it is a damnable
thing.
Study to profit the common wealth, for it is commendable with God and man.
4
Reverence the minister of God, for his office sake.
Love the minister that preaches the Gospel, for it is the power of God to
save thee.
Speak good of the minister, for the Gospelles sake.
5
Think well of the magistrates, for it pleases god well.
Be not disobedient to the magistrates, for they are the ^ies of the King.
Love the magistrates, for they are the bones and s^nowes of the Common wealth.
6
Honor thy parents, for God has commanded it.
Love thy parents, for they have care over thee.
Be assisting unto thy parents with any benefit that God has endued thee,
for it is thy duty.
7
Give place to thine elder, for it is thy praise.
Let not a gray head pass by thee without a salutation.
Take counsel of an elder, for his experience sake.
8
Be holy, for thou art the Temple of God.
It is an horrible sin to pollute Gods Temple.
The buyers and sellers were driven out of the Temple with violence.
In Comoediam Gascoigni, carmen B. C.
Haec noua, non vetus est, Angli comoedia Vatis,
Christus adest, sanctos nil nisi sancta decent.
Graecia vaniloquos genuit, turpesque Poetas,
Vix qui sincere scriberet vnus erat.
Id vereor nostro ne possitdicier aeuo,
Vanaprecor valiant, vera precor placeant.


The Glass of Government.
Actus primi
Scaena prima.
PHYLO PAES and PHYLOCALVS Parents, FIDVS servant to PHILOPAES. they come in
talkinge. Phylopaes. SUrely Phylocalus I think my self indebted unto you for
this freendly discourse, and I do not only agree with you in opinion, but I
most earnestly de sire, that we may with one assente devise which way the same
may be put in execution, for I delight in your loving neighborhood, and I take
singular comfort in your grave advise.


Phylocalus. It were not reason Phylopaes that having so many years contineued
so near neighbors, having traffiqued (in manner) one self same trade, having
sustained like adventures, and being blessed with like successes, we should now
in the end of our time become any less then entiere friends: and as it is the
nature and property of frendshippe to seek always for perpetuity, so let us
seek to bring up our Children in such mutual society in their youth, that in
age they may no less delight in their former fellowship, then we their
parents have taken comfort in our continual cohabitation. It has pleased
Almighty God to bless us both with competent wealth, and though we have
atteyned thereunto by continual payns and tra^ayle, rising (as it were) from
mean ^state, unto dignity, yet d^e I thi^e t^t it were not a^isse to bring ^p
our children with such ^tion as (...) ^ay excel in knowledge of liberal
(...), f^r if we ^g vn^ed have by industry heaped up sufficient store, not
only to serve our own use, but further to provide for our posterity, then may
they by learning aspire unto greater promotion, and build greater matters
upon a better foundation. Neither yet would I have you conceive hereby that I
am ambicious. But if I be not deceived, Al desire of promotion (by virtue) is
godly and Lawful, where as ambition is commonly nestled in the breasts of the
envious.


Phylopaes. I am of your opi^n Phylocalus, and since we have each of us two
Sons of equal age and stature, I would we could be so happy as to find
some honest and careful schoolemaister, who might enstruct them together: I
say honest, because in the house of the virtuous there is seldom any vice
permitted, and careful, because the care of the teacher is of no less
consideration then his skill: the^ do I wish him both honest and careful,
because the conjunction of two such qua^ities, may both cause the
accomplishment of his duty, and the contentations of our desires. Our eldest
Sons are near the age of xxi. years, and our younger Sons not much more
then one year behind them. So that as they have hitherto been thought toward
enough at such common schools as they have frequented, and therefore will
shortly be ready for the university, yet would I think convenient that they
spent some time together, with some such honest and careful Schoolemaister, who
might before their departure lay a sure foundation to their understanding.


Fidus. Although it becomes not a servant to come unto his masters counsel
before he be called, yet for that I am no way ignorant of your tender cares,
which both of you have always had over your children, and also for that I do
now perc^iue the continuance of the same by this your fatherly conference, I
presume to put my self forward upon a dutiful desire to further so godly an
enterprise I am a servant, and shall sometimes hear of things before my
Master, the which I speak, because I can presently (...) you of such a
schoolemaister as you both do desire to find.


Phylocalus. And who is that, gentle fellow Fidus?


Fidus. Sir his name is Gnomaticus, he dwells in Saint Antlines, a man famous
f^r his learning, of wonderful temperance, and highly esteemed for the
diligence and careful pain which he takes with his Schoolers.


Phylopaes. Then can he not be long without entertainment, since now a days
the good wine needs none Iuye garland, and more parents there are that lack
such Schoolemaisters for their children, then there are to be found such
Schoolemaysters which seek and lack entertainment.


Fidus. Sir you have reason, and therefore (if I were worthy to counsel you, I
would entertain him with speed, since he came but this other day from the Lord
of Barlemontes house, whose children he has in small time made excellent
Scholars, and now has dispatched them to the University of Doway.


Phylocalus. Do thou know him Fidus? or can thou tell where to find him?


Fidus. Yea Sir, and if it so please my Master and you, I doubt not but to
bring him hither immediately.


Phylocalus. Surely Phylopaes you shall do well to send for him.


Phylopaes. There is no man more desirous then I, and since it so lyketh you I
am ready to dispatch it, go thy ways Fidus, and tell Master Gnomaticus, that
my neighbor Phylocalus and I desire to speak with him, and make as much have
as thou can.


Fidus. It shall be done Sir.

Fidus departs.
Phylopaes. I am not the worst furnished of a servant with this good fellow,
for though his capacity be not great, yet do I find him trusty, and toward
my children he is both loving and careful.


Philocalus. Then have you a jewel of him, for I hau^ one in whom I find
contrary conditions, I am seldom out of the doors but at my return I find
him playing with my Sons at some vain pastimes.


Phylopaes. Beware of him then, for such a servant were better paid double
wages in your traffic abroad, then allowed barley bread in your shop at
home, since nothing is more perilous to seduce children or young men, then the
consorte and council of a lewd seruannt. But is not this my Fidus which
returns so quickly? It is, and he brings with him a grave personage, I
hope he has found Gnomaticus by the way.

Fidus comes in with Gnomaticus and his servant.
Actus primi,
Scena secunda.
FIDVS, PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS, GNOMATICVS, and ONATICVS his Servant. Fidus.
SIr it is to be thought (...) Almighty God does love you, and means to help
your (...) ^sire in the good education of your children, for it (...) (...)
chance to meet Master Gnomaticus by the way, (...) ^as going toward the
Bowrce to harken of entertainment, and it is not like that he should have
returned from thence vnplaced, wherefore I would wish that you let not slip
this happy occasion.

They adresse their talk to the School^ister.
Phylopaes. Sir we have been so bold as to (...) this bearer for you, the cause
has proceeded of an (...) desire which this worthy man my neighbor and I have
to see our children placed with a virtuous enstructer, and hearing great fame
as well of your integrity, as also of the diligence you have used with the Lord
of Barlemontes Children, we are desirous to entreat you that you will take the
like pains with ours, all which shall be recompensed according to our own
demand: For as there is no jewel so dear unto man, as the offspring wherewith
it pleases God to bless him, so is there no money so well spent as that which
is given to a good Schoolemaister.


Phylocalus. You shall understand sir that my neighbor here and I have four
Sons, of equal age and stature, the eldest exceeds not twenty years, and
the youngest is about nineteen years old, they have been already entered in
grammar at such schools as we have here in the City, and if, we be not abused
by reports they have shew^ themselves forward enough to take enstructions: so
that we are partly persuaded to send them unto some university, and mine
opinion is (as I lately declared unto my neighbor here) that we should do very
well yet to retain them a while longer, until they may be perfectly en^ructed
by some godly teacher, the sum of their duty first toward God, then to
their Prince, next to their parents, and consequently as well toward the
benefit of their country, as also how to behave themselves to all
magistrates, and officers in the same. In conclusion whereof they may also
learn what they are of themselves, and how they may be most acceptable both to
God and man, and for that we have hard very good report of your skill and also
of your (...), we thought good to require that (if you be not otherwise already
entertained) you would take some pa^nes to ^ructe them in these points, and
the same shall be (...) and deserved by measure of your own contentation, as my
neighbor Phylopaes has before proffered.


Gnomaticus. Worthy Gentlemen I yield you (...) humble thanks for your
courteous profers, and I render in^nite thanks unto almighty God that my name
has been so reported unto you, truly I would be loathe to deserre any less,
then the name of a faithful and diligent teacher, so far forth as it has
pleased GOD to endue me with knowledge. Touching your proffer and request, I do
most willingly embrace the same, confessing even simply, that it was mine
errand to seek such entertainment, having of late dispatched out of my
hands, the sons of the Lord of Barlemont toward ^he Uniuersiti^ ^f Doway
and if the touch of your zeal be not contrary to the fame which is s^ed of
your estates, I shall think my self well occupied, in teaching or reading to
the children of such worthy men as you are.


Phylopaes. Well then s^r, we will be bold to send for the youngmen, to the end
that no time be lost or deferred in bestowing of them. Fidus, go your ways to
our houses, and bring hither our Sons.


Fidus. Most willingly sir I shall accomplish your commandment.


Gnomati. If it please you sir, my servant shall asist him.


Phylocalus. It will not be amiss to acquaint him with them.


Gnomaticus. Sirrah, go with this gentleman's servant, and help him to conduct
their children hither.


Onaticus. Well Sir it shall be done.


Actus primi
Scaena tertia.
PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS, GNOMATICVS, PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOMVSVS, PHYLOSARCVS,
PHYLOTIMVS, FIDVS, and ONATICVS. Phylopaes. IT shall now be our parts to
understand what stipend may content you for your pains


Gnomaticus. Sir in that respect take you no care, but let me pray unto
almighty God, that he give me grace so to enstruct your children, as you may
hereafter take comfort in my travail, that done, I can no ways doubt of your
benevolence, since your inward desire does already manyfestly appear: and
furthermore, I would be loathe to make bargains in this respect, as men do at
the market or in other places, for grasing of Oxen or feeding of Cattle,
especially since I have to deal with such worthy personages as you seem and
are reported to be.


Phylocalus. Well, yet Sir we would be glad to recompense you according to your
own demand, but in token of our ready will to please you, we shall desire you
to take at my hands these twenty angels as an earnest or pledge of our further
meaning, and as I am the first that presume to open my purse in this occasion,
so I beseech the Father of Heaven that I may not be the last which may rejoice
to see his children prosper, thou know (O Lord) I mean not hereby my
neighbors detriment, but alas, the shadow of a man's self is ever nearest to
him, and as I desire to be the first that may hear of their well doing, so
yet if they hearken not diligently unto your enstruction, but obstinately
reject your precepts, then I desire you, and on Gods behalf I charge you, that
I may yet be the first that shall thereof be advertised: but behold where they
come, these two (I thank the Father of Heaven,) are the tokens of his
merciful blessing toward me, the Eldest is named Phylosarchus, and this
younger Phylotimus.


Phylopaes. And these too sir are mine only children, and God for his mercy
grant that they may be mine only comfort, the Eldest is called Phylautus, and
the younger Phylomusus.


Phyl^utus. Sir according to your commandment expressed by Fidus I am come
hither to know your pleasure, and have by warrant of the same commission
brought with me my Brother Phylomusus.


Phylosarchus. And I in like manner Sir have brought with me my Brother
Phylotimus destring to know your pleasure, and being ready to obey your
commandment.


Gnomatic^s. Surely these young men give none evil hope of their ^wardnes, and
declare by their seemly gesture and modest boldness to be both of good
capacity, and to have been well enstructed hither (...) in humanity.

The Fathers adresse their talk to their children.
Phylocalus. The cause that we have sent for you is to commit you unto the
government of this godly man, whom we have entreated to take pains with you
and to enstruct you in some principal points of necessary doctrine, to the
end that after you have ripely disgested the same, you may be the more able to
go boldly into some Uniuersity, and I for my part do here commit you unto him,
charging you in Gods name (and by the authority which he has given me over
you,) to hearken unto him with all attentiuenosse, and to obey him with all
humillity.


Phyl^paes. The same charge that my neighbor Phylocalus has here given to his
children, the same I do pronounce unto you, and furthermore do charge you that
you become gentle and curteouse to each other, humble to your betters, and
affable to your inferiors in all respects.


Phylautus. Sir I trust we shall deserve your fatherly favor.


Phylosarchus. And I trust to deserve the continuance of your goodness.


Phyl^tus, and Phylomusus. We hope also to immitate the good in all moral
examples of virtuous behavior.


Ph^lopaes. The Father of Heaven bless you with the blessing which it pleased
him to pronounce unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.


Phylocalus. Amen, and now let us depart, leaving here in your custody the
choice lambs of our flock, defend them then (for Gods love) from the
ravening, and raging lus^es of the flesh, and vanities of the world.


Gnomaticus. Sir by Gods power I shall do my best diligence.


Fidus. My lovely Gentlemen, GOD guide you by his grace, and though I be
somewhat romoued from your daily company, yet spare not to command my service,
if at any time it may stand you in steed to use it.


Phylotus. Gr^mercy gentle Fidus.


Actus primi
Scena quarta.
GNOMATICVS, PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOSARCVS, PHYLOMVSVS, PHYLOTIMVS, and ONATICVS.
Gnomaticus MY dearly beloved scholars, since it has pleased your Parents
(as you have heard) to put me in trust with you for a time, it shall not be
amiss before I enter further in enstruction, to know how far you have
already proceeded in learning, that there upon I may the better determine what
trade or Method shall be most convenient to use in teaching of you: tell me
therefore what you have read, and in what manner the same has been delivered
unto you?


Phylautus. Sir, my Brother here, and I have been taught first the rules of the
grammar, after that we had read unto us the familiar comunications called the
Colloquia of Erasmus, and next to that the offices of Cicero, that was our last
exercise.


Gnomaticus. It has been well done, and have you not also ben taught to ver^y?


Phylautus Yes truly sir, we have therein been (in manner) daily enstructed.


Gnomaticus. And you Phylosarchus how have you passed your time?


Phylosarcus. Sir: my Brother and I have also been taught our grammar and to
make a verse, we have read certain Comedies of Terence; certain Epistles of
Tully, and some part of Uirgill, we were also entered into our greek grammar,


Gnomaticus. Surely it seems you have not hitherto lost your time, and the
order of your enstruction has been such, that you might presently be able to
take further proceedinges in an Uniuersiry, so that it should be (unto me) but
labor lost to stand still upon those points, since it seems that you have
bin therein perfectly grounded: nevertheless we will continue the exercise of
the same, and we will thereunto join such wholesome precepts, as may become a
rule and Squire, whereby the rest of your life and actions may be guyded. For
alchough Tully in his book of dewtyes does teach sundry virtuous precepts,
and out of Terence may also be gathered many moral enstructions amongst the
rest of his wanton discourses, yet the true christian must direct his steps
by the infallible rule of Gods word, from whence as from the hedde spring, he
is to draw the whole course of his life. I would not have you think hereby
that I do hold in contempt the books which you have read heretofore but we
will (by Gods grace) take in assistance suc^nt so many of them as may seem
consonant to the holy scriptures, and so joining the one with the other, we
shall be the better able to bring our work unto perfection. Sirrah go you to my
lodging, and cause He speaks, to his servant
(in the mean time) both bedding, and diet to be provided for these young men,
that I may see them used according to my charge in every respect.


Onaticus. Well Sir it shall be done with diligence.


Gnomaticus. Now let us in the holy name of God begin, and he for his mercy
give me grace to utter, and you to digest such wholesome lessons as may be for
the salvation of your souls, the comfort of your life, and the prositte of
your Country.

You shall well understand my well beloved scholars, that as God is the author
of all goodness, so is it requisite that in all traditions and Moral
precepts we begin first to consider of him, to regard his majesty, and
search the sovereign points of his Godhead. The Heathen Philosophers
(although they had not the light to understand perfect truth) were yet all of
them astonyed at the incomprehensible majesty and power of God, some of them
thought the air to be God, some other the earth, some the infiniteness of
things, some one thing, some another, whose opinions I shall pass over as
things unmeet to be much thought of, but by the way, the opinion of Plato is
not unworthy here to be recited unto you, who taught plainly that god was
omnipotent, by whom the world was made, and al things therein created and
brought unto such perfection as they be in. Xenophon affirmed that the true God
was invisible, and that therefore we ought not enquire what or what manner of
thing God is. Aristo the Stoicke, affirmed likewise that God was
incomprehensible. To conclude, Simonides being demanded what God was, required
one days respect to answer, and then being again demanded the same question,
he required two days respet, at the third apointment of his answer, he came
and required three days, and being demanded wherefore he did so break his
apointments, and require always further time, he answered, that the more
deeply that he did consider the matter, the more infinite he found it, and
therefore remained always astonyed what to answer, and always craved further
time. Truly to leave y^ heathen opinion^ and to come unto the very touchestone
I think it not amiss if we content our selves to think that God is
omni^otent, and yet his power unsearchable, and his goodness unspeakable. And to
be brief, I will deliver unto you the sum of your duties in four Chapters,
the first chapter shall be of God and his ministers, the second of the King and
his Officers, the third shall conteyne the duties that you owe unto your
Country and the Elders thereof, and lastly you shall be put in remembrance of
your duties toward your Parents, and what you ought to be of your selves. In
these sour chapters I trust (by Gods help) to enclud^ as much as shall be
necessary for the perfect government of a true Christian.


Phylo^us. Sir we beseech you that for as much as this order of teaching is
both very compendious, and also much different from the lectures which have
been read unto us, you will therefore vouchsafe to stand somewhat the more
upon every point, to the end, that as well your meaning may be perspicuous, as
also that we may the better bear away the same, and not only learn it
without the book, but also engraue it in our minds.


Gnomaticus. Your request is reasonable, and it shall be by me as readyly
granted, as it has been by you necessarily required. Your first chapter and
lesson shall then be, that in all your actions you have an especial eye and
regard to almighty God, and in that consideration I commend unto your memory,
first God himself, and secondarily his ministers. As touching your duties unto
God him self, although they be infinite, yet shall we sufficiently contain
them in three especial points to be performed: that is to say, Fear, Love,
and Trust. And first to begin with fear, it shall be necessary and above all
things your bounden duty, to ^eare God and his omnipoten power. Linus that
ancient Poet writes, that with God all things are easy to be accomplished,
and nothing is impossible. Tully in his Oration Pro Roscio amerino says, that
the commodityes which we use, the light which we enjoy, and the breath which
we have and draw, are given and bestowed upon us by God: then if with God all
things be possible (according to Linus) he is to be feared, since the least
part of his displeasure being provoked, the greatest part of his will is to him
right easy to accomplish: and if we have our light, our life, and all
commodities of his gift (as Cicero affirms) then is he to be feared, least
with the facillity of his omnipotency he take away as fast as he gave, or turn
light into darkness, life into death, and commodities into disco^modities. I
might recite you many heathen authorities, but it is most needless, since y^
very word of God himself, is most plain in this behalf, and yet I have here
set down these few, because they are not repugnant to holy Scriptures. We
find written in the xx. chapter of Exodus, that God is a Ielous God, and does
visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation. Fear him then for he is most mighty. Again: who shall defend me
(says the Psalmist) until thine anger be past? Fear God then, since against
his power no defense preuayleth. Again, both the heavens and the earth obey the
voice of his mouth. Fear him then for althinges are subject unto his mighty
power.

And yet with this fear you must also join love, for it is not with God as it
is with Princes of the world, which to make themselves feared do become
Tyrants, but the Love God.
goodness of almighty God is such, that he desires no less to be loved, then
he deserves to be feared, and though his might and power be universal, and
there withal his Jealousy great, and his displeasure soon provoked, yet
delights he not in the destruction of mankind, but rather that a sinner
should turn from his wickedness and live. Tully in his second book de legibus
says, that God being Lord of al things does deserve best of mankind, because
he b^holdeth what every man is, and with what devotion he worshippeth the Gods,
and keeps an account as well of the good as the badde: whereby appears that
the heathen confessed yet that the Gods were to be loved, because they cared
for mankind, and truly that opinion is neither contrary to Gods word, nor
dissonant to natural reason. For we see by common experience that we love
them best of whom we are most favored, and have received greatest benefits. I
mean hereby those that rule their doings by reason, for other^se we see
daily wicked men, which (forgetting their duty) do least love where they have
most cause. When I my self was a scholar in the Uniuersity, I remember that I
did often times defend in Schools this proposition. Ingratitudo (tam versus.
'Deos immortales quam apud homines) peccatum maximum. Ingratitude is the
greatest fault that may be either toward god or man. Let us consider the good
^ies of almighty God, who first created us to his own Image and similitude,
endued us with reason and knowledge, preserved us from innumerable perilles,
and provided things necessary for our sustentation, and to consider more
inwardly the exceeding love which he bare toward mankind, he spared not his
only begotten Son, but gave him (^uen unto the death of the cross) for our
redemption. Oh what mind were able to conceive* or what tongue able to utter
the love and goodness of almighty God toward mankind? And since his love
toward us, has been and yet does continue infinite, our love should also be
infinite, to r^nder him thanks for his goodness. But though the causes be
infinite which might bind us to love GOD, yet is there no cause gr^ater then
the manifold mercyes which he has she (...) ways to mankind. In the first
age when iniquity kindled his wrath to destroy the whole world, he yet
vouchsafed to preserve Noe and his family, Love him then since he preserves
the good, though it be but for his mercyes sake* When the people of Israel
provoked him at sundry times, he did yet at every submission stay his hand from
punishment, Love God then since he is ready to forgive, and though he
pronounces his Jealousy in the twentieth of Exodus saying, that he visits the
sins of the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation,
yet there withal he adds, that he shows mercy unto thousands in them that
love him and keep his commandments. Love him then since his mercy is over
all his works. To conclude, when his unsearchable Majesty by his divine
foresight did perceive, that by the very sentence of the Law we stood all in
state of condemnation, he sent down his own and only Son, to be slaundered,
buffeted, and cruci^d for our sins, to the end that all which believe in
him, should not perish but have lfie everlasting. Love God then since mercy is
abundant with him, and he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

And here unto this fear and love you must join a sure Trust in God.
trust and confidence. The promises of mortal men are often times uncertain,
and d^ fail, but the promises of the Almighty are infallible. For the words
of his mouth return not void and without effect. Tully in his offices does use
great art in declaration what sorts of promises are to be observed, and which
may be broken. But the divine providence and foresight does promise nothing but
that which Genesis 17
he will most assuredly perform. When he promised unto Abraham that S^ra his
wife should bear him a child, Sara laughed because she was then four score
and ten years o^e, but the almighty remembered his covenant. Trust in him then
for his words shall never fail. When he promised Moses to conduct his people
through the deserts, they began to doubt and murmr, saying: would God that
we Number. 14.
had dyed in the land of Egypt or in this wilderness etc. and the lord was
angry, but yet remembering his promise, at the humble petition of Moses he
performed it. Trust in God therefore, since no displeasure can make him alter
his determination, he performed his holy promise in Ismaell, Genesis 31.
although we read not that he prayed unto God therefore. I would not have you
think hereby that I condemn or contemn prayer, since it is the very mean to
talk with God, but I mean thereby to prove, that God is most just and
faithful in all his promises, and by repeticion I say, Fear God for he is
mighty, love God for he is merciful, and trust in God for he is faithful and
just. Herewith all you must also learn to perform duty toward the servant
and Ministers
ministers of God. For as you shall only be saved by him, and by cleaving to
him in all your actions, so yet are his ministers the mean and instruments of
your salvation, and d^ (as it were) lead you by the hand through the waves of
this world un to ^ernall ^elicity, unto whom you shall owe ^hree several
duties, that is to say, Audience, Reverence, and Love. The Children of Israel
by harkening to Moses, and Aaron, were not only enstructed and taught their
duties, but were (as it were) made at one with God when they had at any time
purchased his heavy displeasure. By Acts. 8.
harkning unto Phyllip the Apostle, the Enuch was converted. By harkning unto
Peter, Cornelius y^ captain was confirmed and strengthened in the faith. By
harkning unto Paul and Sylas, Lidia, and the gaylour of Phylippos were
baptized, Acts. 16.
the holy scriptures are full of examples to prove this proposition. Harken you
therefore unto the ministers of God, for Harken to Gods Minist^rs
they are sent to enstruct you, so shall it also become you to do the^
reverence in all places, re me^bring that as he which sent them is in all
things to be honored, so are they to be had in reverence for their office
sake. Such was the zeal of Co^elius the Captain, that he fell down prostrate
at Acts. 10.
Peter's feet when he entered into his house, the which though Peter refused
saying that he was also mortal, yet did it signify unto us, that the
ministers of God cannot be too much reverenced. The Priests in the old
Testament were exempt from tributes and impositions, they were not constrained
to go into the battle, they were provided for sustenance and all things
convenient, and the people Reverence gods ministers.
were commanded to do them reverence. Do you likewise reverence unto Gods
ministers in all places, for it shall become you well. So shall you also love
them because they preach the gospel of him which has power to save you. If the
sensual apetite of man be such as enge^dreth affection toward thehandmaide
because she is of familiar conversation with the Mistress: or breeds love
toward them which are in office with Princes, because they may also procure us
favor: how much more ought the minds of men to be kindled with love toward
the ministers of God, which enstructs us diligently, minister unto us
painfully, and pray for us faithfully? yea how much are we bound to love them,
which Love the ministers
by their hol some precepts do make us worthy (through Gods mercy) of his holy
love and favor. To conclude this chapter, you shall fear God for his might,
love him for his mercyes, and trust in him for he is faithful. You shall also
harken unto his ministers because they are sent of God, you shall do them
reverence because it becomes you, and for their office sake, and you shall love
them by cause they feed you with the bread of life. And this I think
sufficient for explanation of this first chapter at this time.


Onaticus. Sir I have done as you commanded, and there is meat ready for your
dinner, if it please you that it be set on the table.


Gnomaticus. Well we will then defer the rest of our labor until dinner be
past, go we together, for I think it time.


Phylosarcus. We follow when it pleases you.

They depart.
Actus primi
Scoena quinta.
LAMIA, ECHO, PANDARINA, and DICK DROOM. Lamia. COme on my good friends, for
were not your friendly help, I could rather content my self to be buried in my
flowing years, then to live in such a miserable and precise world as this is,
Oh what Superfinesse are we now grown unto? a gentlewoman may not now adays
seem to speak to her friend at the door passing by, she may not look at him
in the window, she may not kiss him if she meet him as a stranger, nor
receive his letters or presents, but every prattling minister will record it in
the pulpit.


Echo. In deed fair Lady Lamia, they are both too curious and too much
suspicious, for if they do but see two in bed together, they will say that it
was for to commit some wickedness, fie fie upon such tongues.


Lamia. Ha ha, by my troth Echo well said, but by your leave, let master
minister tattle what he will, for I will take my friends present when it
comes, and shall I tell you? if I could have been contented to be so shut
up from ^ight and speech of such as like me, I might have lived gallantly and
well provided with my mother, who (though I say it) is a good old Lady in
Ualentia, but when I saw that I must wear my good apparel always within
doors, and that I must pass over my meals without company, I trussed up my
Jewelles in a casket, and (being accompanied with my good Aunte here) I bad
Ualentia ^arewell, for I had rather make hard shifte to live at lyberty, then
e^ioy great riches in such a kind of emprisonment.


Echo. A good Aunt in deed, I would I had such an Uncle.


Pand^ina. Content your self niece, it were now but folly to spend time in
bootelesse complaints, nor to lament the thing which may not be remedied, you
must rather learn the way that may maintain your estate, ^or beauty will not
always last, and if you provide not in youth, you may be assured to beg in
age, take example at me, I tell you I thought my halfepeny good silver within
these few years past, and now no man esteems me unless it be for counsel.


Dicke. Counsel quoth you? mary sir and good counsel is much worth now adays.


Lamia. I pray you Aunt since you are so good a counselor, give me some
advise how to behave my self.


Pandarina. As for that another time shall serve between you and me.


Echo. Why, and shall I be cast up for a hobler then? I am sure I was never
yet untrusty to any of you both.


Dicke. Well Ladies, and if you look well upon the matter, I think that I am
as worthy as one to be of counsel, well I wot if any gentleman offer you the
least part of injury, then Dicke must be sent for to swear out the matter,
Dicke must bide all brontes, and therefore it were not amiss that he were of
counsel in all your conferences.


Lamia. By mine honesty Aunt to confess a troth, both these are our very
approved friends, and therefore you may be bold to speak your mind before
them.


Pandarina. Well content then, I will tell you mine opinion, you take not the
way to live, you are too much subject to your passion, for if you chance to be
acquainted with a gentleman that is in deed courtlike and of good deserts, you
become straight way more destrous of him, then he is of you, and so ^arre you
dote upon him, that you do not only sequester your self from all other
company, but also you become so frank hearted, that you suffer him not to
bestow upon you any more then is necessary for present use, yea (...), I pray
you learn these three points of me to govern your steps by. First Trust
noman how fair so ever he speak, next (...) no ^an (that has ought) how evil
favored so ever he be. And lastely Love no man longer then he gives, since
lyberall gyfts are the glewe of euerduring love.


Echo. O noble Dame, why were not you mother of the maids unto the Queen^ of
Hungary? by the faith of a true B^gondyan you had wrong, for you well descrued
the place.


Dyck. I warrant you if the King our master had store of daughters, such a
matrone could not live unknown, but was it not therefore (think you) that
ambassadors were sent this other day to the old Duchess?


Lami^ Well Aunt, I were worthy of great reprehension, if I would reject the
good documents of such a friend, and if I have heretofore done contrary, impute
it to my youth, but be you sure that hereafter I will endeavor my self to
follow your precepts.


Echo. And I fair Lady will stand you in some stead, to drive birds to the
Net. If I be not much deceived, I saw a frosty bearded scholemaster iustructing
of four lusty young men erewhyle as we came in, but if my judgment do not
fail me, I may chance to read some of them another lecture.


Dyck. Lush, what needs such open talk here in the streate? let us go to the
Lady Pandarinaes house, and there we may devise at better commodity upon these
causes.


Lamia. He speaks reason, let us go Aunt, for it is not meele that every
dancer hear our music before the maskers be ready.


Pandarina. Well, I said so at the first, but when you will, let us depart.

They depart to their howses.
The first Chorus.
WHen God ordeynd the restless life of man,
And made him thrall to sundry greenous cares:
The first borne grief or Sorrow that began,
To show it self, was this: to save from snares
The pleasant pledge, which God for us prepares.
I mean the seed, and offspring that he gives,
To any wight which in this world here lives.
Few see themselves, but each man sees his child,
Such care for them, as care not for themself,
We care for them, in youth when wit is wild,
We care for them, in age to gather pelf:
We care for them, to keep them from the shelf
Of such quick sands, as we our selves first found,
When headdy will, did set our ships on ground.
The care which Christ did take to save his sheep,
Has been compard, to fathers care on child,
And as the hen, her harmles chicks can keep
From cruel kyte: so must the father shylde
His youthful Sons, that they be not beguylde.
By wicked world, by fleshly foul desire,
Which serve the devil, with Fuel for his fire.
First parents care, to bring their children forth,
To breed them then, to bring them up in youth,
To match them eke, with wightes of greatest worth,
To see them taught, the trusty tracks of truth:
To bar excess, from whence all s^ ensues.
And yet to give, enough for common need,
Least loathsome lack make vise for virtue breed.
Let shame of sin, thy Childrens bridle be,
And spur them forth, with bounty wisely used:
That difference, each man may plainly see,
Tweene parents care, and masters bodes abused:
So Terence taught, whose lore is not refused.
But yet where youth is prone to follow ill,
There spare the spur, and use the brydell still.
Thus infinite, the cares of Parents are.
Some care to save their children from myshappe,
Some care for wealth, and some for honors care,
Whereby their Sons may sit in fortunes lap:
Yet they which cram them so with worldly pappe,
And never care, to give them heavenly crommes,
Shall sce them sterue, when hap of hunger comes.
Said Socrates: that man which cares more
To leave his child, much good and rych of rent:
Then he for sees, to furnish him with store
Of virtues wealth, which never can be spent:
Shall make him like, the steed that still is pent
In stable close: which may be fair in sight.
But seldom serves, such horse in field to fight.
So Xenophon, his friend Dan Tully told,
And so do here, Phylopaes and his pheare
Phylocalus, that self same lesson hold:
They rather love to leave their sons in fear
Of God above: then wealth to wallow hear.
Which godly care, (O God) so deigne to bliss,
That men may see how great thy glory is.
Finis, Actus primus.
Actus Secundi*
Scoena prima.
GNOMATICVS, PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOMVSVS, PHYLOSARCVS, and PHYLOTIMVS. Gnomaticus. MY
well beloved, as time is the greatest treasure which man may here on earth
receive, so let us not le^se time, but rather seek so to bestow the same,
that profitte may thereof be gathered. I will now return to enstruct you what
duties you owe unto the King, whose place is next unto Gods place in
consideration of your duty. And as I have taught you three principal points
in service of God almighty, so will I also convey into three points, as much
as shall be necessary for this tradition: for I fear least I have been over
long in my first division, but I was drawn thereunto by the request which you
made of your selves, and therefore bear with me.


Phylotus. Sir our desire is such, to bear away perfectly your enstruction,
that your prolixity seems unto us very compendious.


Gnomaticus. Well then to return unto the matter, you shall perform unto the
King three especial duties, that is to say: Honor, Obediencae, and Love.
Hypodamus in his book of a commonwealth, says that a kingdom is a thing
compared to the imitation of gods power. Diotogenes the scholar of Pytagoras
in his book of government, says that a king represents the figure of God
amongst men. Likewise he says, that as god excels the most perfect things
of nature, so the king excels amongst men and worldly matters: so that he is
to be honored as the lieutenant of God here upon earth, both because he has
power of commandment, and chiefly because he represents that heavenly King,
who is king of kings, and above all Kings to be honored: Even so is he also
to be obayed in all seculer constitutions and pollitike provisions. This
obedience does consequently follow hono^re, as the shadow solowes the body, for
whatsoever he be that gives unto his king that honor which to him
apperteineth, will (no doubt) likewise obey him with all humility. Erasmus
teaches in his Apothegmes, that obedience expels al sedition and
maynteyneth concord: the which may also appear by natural reason and common
experience, neither shall they ever become able to bear rule them selves,
which cannot be content to obey the authority of others. Wherefore it shall
be most convenient that you obey the King, since his authority is from god,
and as this obedience depends upon the honor wherewith ye shall reverence
the King as Gods lieutenant, so must you also join thereunto an unfeigned love,
for as almightye God is to be loved because he is merciful: so the King
being appointed by God must be loved because he is thy pretector here on
earth. Salamon says, that the kings indignation is the messenger of death,
whereby I would frame mine argument from the contrary, that he is to be
loved, least his indignation being justly kindled, thou be not able to bear
it. Next unto the king we are to consider the Magistrates which are appointed
for administration of justice, and pollityke government: these Magistrates must
also be honored, obeyed, and loved: honored because they are y^ substituts of
y^ king unto whom all honor (on earth) apperteyneth, obeyed because their
office is appointed by the Kings authority, and loved because they are the
grave and expert personages, which devise laws and constitutions for
continuance of peace and tranquillity. The apostle Paul in his xiii. chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans, teaches plainly, that Rulers bear not the
sword in vain, saying: Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers,
for there is no power but of God. Again, the ruler (says he) does not bear
the sword in vain. Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for
fear, but also for conscience* And Sanct Peter in his first Epistle and the
second chapter, does sufficientli^ teach us this point, saying* Submit your
self unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the king as having the pre-eminence, or unto the rulers as unto them that
are sent of him for the punishment of evil dooers, but for the laud of them
that do well. Whereby appears, that the magistrates are not only to be
feared, because they punysh offenders, but also to be loved because they
cherish the verteous: and for conclusion of this point, if you desire to be
good men, then learn to perform duty toward all magistrates. As Sophocles,
well said, it becomes a good man to have due respect unto all magistrates. I
might now take your Parents in hand, for the next point of your enstruction
but I will first touch the duty which you owe unto your country, and that is
contained also in three especial points: that is to say, in Thankfulness,
Defense, and Proffit. And as ingratitude is the most heinous offense against
God, so have I taught you that it is the greatest fault in humayne actions,
amongst the which it shows it self no way more intolerable, then if you
should happen to be unthankful unto your country. Tully in his offices
says, that we are not borne only for our own particular cause or profit,
but part (says he) our country challenges, part our Parents think due unto
them, and our friends ought likewise to enjoy some part of our travails.
There are diverse Philosophers, which maynteyne in argument that all cuntryes
are free for a noble mind, and I agree thereunto, but yet thereby they
conclude not, that a noble mind by choosing a new country to enhabit, may
lawfully forgett the country wherein he was native. Zopirus is condemned in
all histories, for the unthankfulness he used in betraying his country. The
truth of the Troyan history accuses Aeneas, Antenor, and certain others, as
most unthankful traitors to their country. Cillicon for betraying of Miletus,
Lasthenes for delivering of Oli^thus, Nilo for selling of Epirus, and
Apollonius for neglecting of his charge in Samos, are generally noted with the
names of unthankful and untrusty traitors to their cuntreyes: so that you
must always remember to become thankful to your country, and myndefull to
maynteyne the honor of the same, least neglecting your duties in that behalf,
you deserve the oprobrious names of traitors, which are odius to God and man.
You must also spare no peril or travail to defend the same, for your
country challenges not only that you be thankful unto the soil which has
bredde you, but further also, that you defend the state, wherein you have been
nourished. Tully, in his Tusculanes questions recyteth one Lascaena, who when
he received tidings of his sounes death, whom he had sent into the wars in
defense of his country, answered: therefore did I beget him (quoth he) that
he might be such an one, as would not doubt to dye for his country. In his
book entytuled the dream of Sipio, he affirms that there is a certain
place appointed and ordained in heaueu, for all such as defend their country.
Euripides warns that we should never be wearye in those travails, which
tend to the restitution or defense of our country. Platoes opinion was, that
we are more bound to defend our country, then our own Parents* Like
arguments have been defended by many Phylo^ophers, saying, that although thy
Parents and proper family b^ overthrown, yet (the commonwealth of thy country
standing) thou may florishe and ryfe again: but the state of thy country
being overthrown, both thou and thy Parents must likewise come to utter
subuertion. Then as thou shall find it thy bounden duty to honor thy country
with all gratitude, and to defend it with all thy power, ^o must thou likewise
endeavor thy self to be profitable to the same: whereof many notable examples
might be rehearsed. Lycurgus,, when he had by extreme diligence and travail
reduced the Spartanes unto cyuillytie, by sundry wholesome laws and pollityke
constitutions, and that they began to murmr, saying: that his laws were
intolerable, he feyned that he would go to Delphos, to consulte with the God
Apollo, whether his laws were to be observed or not promising to abide his
sentence, and requiring no more of the Lacedemonianes, but to swear y^ they
would observe those laws until his return: which when they had solemly
sworn, took his iurney without entente to return home again, and ordained
before his death, to be enclosed in a great chee^ of Lead, and so to be thrown
into the sea, to the end that he never retourning, the Laucedemonians might
be bound by their oath to continue the exercise of his profitable laws, such
care he had to become profitable unto his country. Curtius the Romayne, when
there apeared a great gulf in the market place, which could by no means be
stopped, and answer was geeuen from the Oracle, that it was only to be
stopped by that which was of most worth unto the city of Room, he deeming
that the city had nothing so precious, as stout and valyant men, armed him
self, and leapte into the Gulf, which stopped immediately: declaring thereby,
how light men ought to esteem their life, when as the same may yield
profitte or commodity to their country. Menecius, the Son of Craeon,
refused not voluntary death, when he understood that the same might redeem
the city of Thebes from utter subversion. I might trouble you with infinite
stories to prove this proposition, but let these few suffice, and in your
country have allways especial respect to the elders, to whom you must also
perform three several deuties: that is, Reverence, Love, and Defense.
Lycurgus, ordained, that no young man should pass by an elder without
reverence first done unto him, namely if he were set, he rose to do
reverence unto the elders, and if they were alone, he was bound to proffer them
the comfort of his company. Plato, in his nynth dyalogue of laws and
constitucions does thus propound: al men must grant (says he) that age is much
to be preferred before youth, as well in the sight of God, as also in the sight
of men, which will live orderly: for it is abominable (says he) that an old
man should give place unto an young man, and the Gods them selves do hate it,
since youth ought with paciente mind to bear even the strypes of their
elders. You shall also love them, because of them you may learn good precepts,
and of them you may be bold to ask council: for as Euripides, in his tragedy
called Phaenissae, does teach, prudence will not be gotten with few days
seeking for, and the apostles teach us our deuty dyrectly in that behalf, who
ordained amongst them elders in every congregation, to decyde all matters in
controversy, of whom they were resolved of all doubts in conscience. It shall
also become you to defend the elders from al vyolence and outrage, since it is a
thing as comely and comendable to defend the weak, as it is glorious and
tryumphant to overcome the mighty: whereof I might recite many famous examples
out of the Romain histories, but I will partly include the same in the duties
which you owe unto your Parents, which are also, Honor, Love, and Relief. And
of the first part, although I might bring in sundry worthy examples, yet
because the case is of it self familiar, I will be brief, and use no other
persuation then the express commandment of God, who bids you to honor
your Father and Mother, that your* days may be long in the land which the
Lord your god has given you. And Sain^t Paul in the sixth chapter of his
Epistle to the Ephesians, says. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for
that is right and wellpleasing to the Lord. As he testifies in the third
chapter to the Colossianes, you shall love them also because you are engendered
of their own flesh and blood, as also you may not forget your Mothers pains
in bearing of you, you must always meditate in your mind, first the cares
which they have had to preserve you from bodily perils in the cradell, from
danger of dampnation by Godly education, from need and hunger by administering
things necessary, and from utter destruction by vigilant foresight and Godly
care: all these with infinite other things considered, you shall find your
selves bounden by manyfolde occasions to love your Parents, and to be
assistant unto them in the necessities of their age. For well said that Poet,
which affirmed that children were tenderly swadled in their cradels, to the
end they might sustain their aged Parents and supply their wantes.
Marvelous is the nature of the Storke, which feeds the damme in age, of whom
it self received nouriture being young in the neast. Tully in his book of
the answers of sothsayers says, that nature in the beginning has made an
accord between us and our Parents, so that it were damnable not to cherish
them. And to conclude, there is nothing that can worse become a common wealth,
then to see y^ youth flourish in prosperity which suffer their parents to perish
for lack of any commodity. Now that I have rehearsed unto you as much as I
think requisite, for the enstruction of your duties, first toward god, and
his ministers, next to the King and his Magistrates, thirdely to your country
and the Elders thereof and lastly toward your Parents: it shall not be
amiss that you remenber of your self how you are the Temple of God, keep
your selves holy therefore in your conversation, and undefiled, for if our
savior Christ did rigorously rebuke and expel the buyers and sellers out of
the outward Temple, how much more will he punish them which pollute and
de^le the inward Temple of their bodies, and give over their delight to
concupiscence and van^es? thus may you for brevity remember that you.

1 Fear God because he is mig^le, God.

2 Love God because he is merciful,
3 Trust in God because he is just.
1 Hear his ministers hecause they are sent to enstrust you,
2 Do reverence unto them because of their office,
3 Love them because they feed you with heavenly bread*
1 Honor the King because he is Gods lieutenant* King.

2 Obey him because his power is from above,
3 Love him because he is thy protector.
1 Honor his Magistrates because they represent his person,
2 Obey them because they have their authority from him,
3 Love them because they ^inteine peace.
1 Be thankful to thy country that has bredde thee*
2 Defend it because thou art borne to that end, and
3 Profytte it because thou shall thereby gain honor.
1 Reverence thy elders for their gray hears,
2 Love them because they council thee and Country.

3 Defend them because they are feeble.
1 Honor your Parents beca^se God commands so*
2 Love them bycanse they tendered you, and
3 Relieve them because it is your duty.
Lastly forget not your selves* neither make any le^ account of your selves
then to be the Temple of God, which you ought to keep holy and undefiled. I
might stand in dilatacion hereof with many more examples and aucthorities, but
I trust these (being well remembered) shall suffyce, and now I will leave you
for a time, beseeching allmyghty God to guide and keep you now and ever. So be
it.

Gnomaticus goes out
Actus secundi,
Scaena secunda.
PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOMVSVS, PHYLOSARCVS, PHYLOTIMVS, and ONATICVS. Phyl^. AH sirrah,
I see well the old proverb is true, which says: so many men so many minds,
this order of teaching is far contrary to all other y^ ever I have heard, and
shall I tell you? it has in it neither head nor foot.


Phyl^. Truly brother it has in it great reason and virtue, and though it be
at y^ first unpleasant in comparison to T^es Commedies and (...) like, yet
ought we to h^e good regard thereunto, since it teaches in effect (...) (...)
of our (...).


Phylotimus. Yea, and that very compendiously.


Phylosarchus. Surely I am of ^ylautus opinion, for who is ignorant that* God
is to be feared above all things* or who knows not that the King is (...) of
God to rule here on earth*


Phylautus. Is there any (...) (...) (...) of (...), that he knows not that
in all (...) (...) must or will) be reverenced? and see we not daily, that all
parents challenge obedience and love?


Phylosarchus. Yes, and more to, for some parents (...) never ^ented what
duty soever the child performs, they ^et what they once were themselves:
But to the purpose. I l^ked for some excellent matter at this new
Schoolemasters hands, if this be all that he can say to us, I would for my
part that we were in some University, for here we shall but loose our time, I
have (in e^ect) all the gear without book already.


Phylautus. And I lack not much of it.

Onaticus comes in.
Onaticus. Well said young gentlemen, it is a good hearing when young men are
so toward, and much ease is it for the teacher when he finds scollers of
quick capacity.


Philotimus. Surely I am not yet so forward, neither can I vaunt that either I
have it without book, or do ^usficiently bear away the same in such order as
I would.


Phylomusus. For my part, I beseech God that I may with all my whole
understanding be able to bear away that which our Master has delivered unto
us, and that I may so emprinte the same in my memory, that in all my life I
may make it a glass wherein I may behold my duty*: wherefore Phylotimus,
(if you so think good, you and I will go aparte, and medytate the same to our
selves, to the end we man be the perfecter therein when our enstructor shall
examine us.


Phylotimus. Contented, let us go where you will.

They go apart.
Phylosarchus. Let them go like a couple of blockheads, I would we two were at
some University, and then let them do what they list.


Phylautus. Even so would I, for at the University we should hear^ other ma^er
of teaching: There be lectures daily read of all the liberal sciences, of all
languages, and of all moral discourses. Furthermore, at the University we
should have choice company of gallant young gentlemen, with whom we might
acquaint our selves, and pass some times in recreation: yea, shall I tell you?
if a man list to play the good fellow and* be merry sometimes, he shall not
want there (as I have heard) that will accompany him.


Phylosarchus. And what University (do you suppose) we shall be sent unto.


Phyl^tus. I think unto Doway, for that is nearest.


Phylosarchus. Have you been in Doway at any time?


Phylautus. No surely, but I have hard it praised for a pr^per city, and well
replenished with courteous people and fair women.


Phylosarchus. Marr^ Sir there would I be then. Oh what a pleasure it is to
behold a fair woman? surely they were created of God for the comfort of man,
but behold, I see a passing fair woman come down the street, and if I be
not much deceived, Echo is her gentleman usher: it is so in deed.


Phylautus. What is that Echo?


Philosarchus. Know you not Echo? why the^ you know no man, the best fellow in
all this town, and ready to do for all men: I will bring you acquaynted with
him.


Actus secundi
Scaena tertia.
PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOSARCHVS, ECHO, LAMIA, DICK DROM, and PANDARINA. Echo. YOu
shall see (Lady Lamia,) how I will work this gear like wax, but is not this
Phylosarchus? it is even he, in good time I have espied him, keep your
countenance in any wise.


Pandarina. Echo does give you good council, keep your co^ntenance.


Lamia. As though I were to learn that at these years.


Echo. Master Phylosarchus, God save you.


Phylosarchus. And thee also gentle fellow Echo. whether walk thou?


Echo. Hereby Sir with this gentlewoman.


Phylosarchus. Abide I pray thee, here is a young gentleman a friend of mine,
which desires to be acquaynted with thee.


Echo. Sir I am at your comm^dement and his also, I will be so bold as to
kiss his hands, Dyck go thou on with these gentlewomen before, I will overtake
you immediately.

The Ladies pass by, with a reverence to the gentlemen.
Phylosarchus. And I pray thee tell me Echo, what gentlewoman is this?


Echo. Sir she is of Valentia, and has presently some business in this city
with her Aunt which accompanies her.


Phylosarchus. Ha, ha, business in deed, tell me Echo, here are none but
God and good friends, is she of the right stamp?


Echo. Sir, believe me I know no such thing by her, I have not been long
acquaynted with her, and (to tell you what likely hoodes I have hitherto seen)
she is very demure and modest, neither is there any company resorteth to her
lodging, but what for that? all things have a beginning, she is a woman, and
nothing is impossible.


Phylosarchus. Trust me truly she is a gallant wench, and but young, that
Friar which would not cast off his cowle to catch such a soul, shall never be
my co^fessor, but I pray thee deal plainly with me: might not a man entreat
master Echo to carry her a present if need were?


Echo. Sir there is never a gentleman in this city, shall make Echo stretch
a stringe sooner then your self, but of a very truth, hitherto I have seen no
such likelihood, but Sir, you are a gallant young man, me thinks you might ^o
well to walk sometimes by her lodging, and give her the Albade, or the Bezo las
manos, and by that mean you may acquaint your self with her: afterward if
any thing may be furthered by Echo, command him.


Philosarchus. Gramercie gentle Echo, but where aboutes is she lodged?


Echo. Not far from S. Myghels Sir, at a red houseI will take leave of you
for this time, least she think me very slack in attendance.


Philosarchus. Fare well friend Echo. Did I not tell you what he was? there is
not such a fellow in a world again, surely it shall go hard but I will have a
sling at this damsel: but let us go in, for our companions are departed long
since, and we shall perchance give some cause of suspecte, if we tarry long
here*


Philautus. Go we.


Actus secundi
Scaena quarta.
GNOMATICVS, ONATICVS, ECHO. Gnomaticus. SUrely these young men are not
hitherto to be mislyked, and I trust in God they will prove toward scholars.


Onaticus. Yea sir out of dout, and especially the two elder, but the other two
are nothing so quick sprited, I came by them earewhile, soon after ye had
done reading unto the^, and the two. eldest could even then (in manner) record
without book as much as you had taught them.


Gnomaticus. Yea but what is that to the purpose? the quickest wits prove not
always best, for as they are ready to conceive, so do they quickly forget,
and therewithal, the finenesse of their capacity does carry such oftentimes
to delight in vanities, since man's nature is such, that with ease it inclyneth
to pleasure, and unwilling it is to endure pain or travel, without the which
no virtue is obtained.

Echo comes in.
Echo. This gear goes well, for whereas I was casting with my self how to
entrap this yonker, he is fallen into the net of his own accord, and
desires that of me which I was careful how to profer cleanely unto him. But
is not this the old scholemaster? eue^ the same, well, we must find some device
to bleare his eye for a while: let me alone, I know how to bring it to pass.


Gnomaticus. Does this fellow come to me think thou?


Onaticus. It may be sir, but I know him not.


Echo. I will salute him. God save you master scholemaister.


Gnomaticus. Welcome gentle brother.


Echo. Sir, I am sent unto you by the Markgraue, who understanding that two
of his kinsemen are lately placed under your government, has a desire to see
them, and therefore sent me to entreat you that you would give them liberty
this afternoon, to the end that he may common with them.


Gnomaticus. Surely I did not know that they were the Markgraues kinsemen, and
they have yet been but very small time with me, but since it so pleases him,
I am content to grant them liberty, and I will ^end them out unto you
presently to go where it likes him.

Gnomaticus goes in.
Echo. So so, they are as much a kynne to the Markegraue, as Robyn Fletcher
and the sweet Roode of Chester, but yet this was a cleanely shifte upon the
sodeyne, for by this means shall I take occasion to bring this yonker and the
Lady Lami^ better acquainted, and much good do it him, for out of doubt she
shall be his, as long as his purse may be mine. But behold where they come
altogether, now let me bestirre me and use my best wits.


Actus secundi
Scaena, quinta.
PHILAVTVS, PHILOSARCHVS, PHILOMVSVS, PHILOTIMVS, and ECHO* Philautus. I Am
glad that we have liberty this afternoon to take recreation, not for that I
lacked time to meditate that which has been read unto us, but because I take
pleasure in walking abroad.


Philosarchus. And I hope by this means to have further communication with my
friend Echo, and behold where (...) is.


Philomusus. Amongst all that our instructor has rehearsed unto us, there is
nothing sticks better in my remembrance, than that which he said of time:
for surely as it is the greatest treasure which God has given unto man, so
ought he to be very curious and wary how he bestows the same, wherefore
Philotimus I think we can not better do, than to spend some time by the way
in meditating and rehearsing these wholesome precepts, which our instructor has
to us delivered, for I assure you, although he has been therein very
compendious and sentencious, yet in my judgment every sentence is suchas
requires a ripe deliberation, and weighty consideration of the same.


Philotimus. Surely Philomusus I am of your opinion, and therefore let us
bestow the time therein, although percase our brethren here will use this
afternoon in some other exercise.


Philosarchus beckneth Echo, Philomusus and Philotimus go t^gether. Echo. Sir
it is unto you that I address my self, for although I be not the rediest man
on live to deal in such affairs, yet such is the great good liking which I
have always had in you, that since I spoke with you earewhile, I have not been
unmindful of you, and surely I suppose that God does favor your desires, for
even now when I departed from you, and as soon as I ouertooke the gentlewoman,
I cast in my brains how to pleasure you, and meaning to have devised some
subtilty whereby the thing might be brought into communication, the gentlewoman
of her* self proffred the occasion, for she demanded of me what young
gentlemen those were with whom I stayed, I told her that ye were Sons to two
of the welthiest burghers in this city, and be you sure I left out no
commendation which might advance you, whereat she seemed to bite on the
bridle, and commended you for your courtesies* in that ye saluted her so gently
as she passed by, but especially she marked you by sundry things and
gestures, and could describe you unto me by your apparel. Short tale to make,
I never saw her show so much lykelyhoode of affection, since I first saw her,
as she bewrayed presently, and shall I tell you in your ear? if Echo be any
better then a fool, she has a months mind unto Phylosarchus, wherefore play
you now the wise man, and strike the Iron whiles it is hot, she returns this
way presently, and thereupon I have adventured to come unto your Scoolemaster,
to crave you a liberty in the name of the Markegraue, saying that you were his
kynsemen, and this have I done, to the end that you might take occasion to
salute her e^nes as she returns: and if you use the matter wisely (as I know
you can) you may take opportunity also to talk with her, yea and to conduct her
to her lodging.


Phylosarchus. Surely Echo thou show playnlie what good will thou bear
me, but what shall we do with the Markgraue?


Echo. Tush, follow you your bu^nes now that you hau^ liberty, and let me
alone with that matter, if ever hereafter the thing come in question, lay all
upon me, and I will say, that I mistook both the Scoolemaster and the
Skollers unto whom I was sent.


Phylosarchus. Well friend Echo I know not how to deserve thy gentleness, but
in token of grateful mind, hold, receive these twenty gildres until I have
greater abillity, and be sure that if ever I live to enherit Phylocalus, then
Echo shall not be unprovided for.


Echo. What mean you sir? stay your purse until another time, well if you
will needs enforce me, I will never refuse the courtesy of a gentleman, but
behold where the Lady Lamia comes, Sir me recomandez, I will not be seen to
talk with you, for I stale from her to* pleasure you privily.

Echo departs.
Actus primi
Scoena sexta.
PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOSARCHVS, ECHO, LAMIA, DYC^ DROM, and PANDARINA. Phylosarchus.
OH my friend Phylautus, behold here a peerless piece, does it not delight
your eyes to gaze upon such a shyning star? on my^e honor she has a sweet
face, and by all likelihood she is much to young to have been hitherto commonly
abused, but wherefore am I abashed? I will go and salute her. Fair lady God save
you, and send you that your heart most desires.


Lamia. Worthy gentleman, I thank you most heartely for your good will, and if
God hear (...) prayer, he shall do more than he did for me a good while, but it
is no (...), (...) (...) has taken his pleasure of punishing, he will at last
have pity on the poor.


Philosarchus. Surely mystresse, it were great pity that such a one as you,
should endure any punishment without great cause, and hardly can I think that
any heart is so hard as to see you sorrowful, if remedy may be therefore
obtained.


(...). Sir, I could be content that all men were of your mind, but I find
courtesy very cold now adays, and many there be which would rather depryue
a poor gentlewoman of her right, then ^ue upon her pi^eous plyght: the good
king Amadis is dead long sythens, whose Knights undertook always the defense
of Dames and Damselles.

She whyneth.
Phylautus. Alas what ayleth the young gentlewoman to complain?


Pandarina. Sir and not without cause, since she is by great wrong dispossessed
of rich Signiories which belong to her by right and inheritance, and
complaining here unto the magistrates, she receives small comfort, but is
rather hindered by malice and detraction.

Philosarchus takes her by the hand to comfort her.
Phylosarchus. Fair gentlewoman: although I have hitherto had no great
acquaintance with you, yet if I might crave but to know the cause of your
grief, be you sure I would use my best indeuer to redress it, and therefore
I conjure you by your courtesy, that you change your opinion, for all Amadis
Knights are not (...) dead, only bewray your grief, and praise thereafter
as you find.

She begins to tell a tale.
Lamia. Sir I have not power to reiecte your courtesy, you shall understand
then, that being etc.

Pandarina interrupteth her.
Pandarina. Neyce it seems that you have not your honor in such comendation
as I would wish you should, I pray you let us begone homewardes.


Phylosarchus. Why Mistres, are you offended that ^hee should harken unto such,
as seek to relieve her estate.


Pandarina. Sir you are a gentleman well nurtured, and you know this is no
place to talk in, without discredyt.


Phylosarchus. Well Mistres, if it please you we will wait upon you unto your
lodging, and there you shall see what desire I have to comfort this fair Lady.


Pandarina. As for that sir at your pleasure, I pray God send her good
friends in her right, for God knows she has need of such at this present.

They follow the L^dies.
The second Chorus.
BEhold behold, O mortal men behold,
Behold and see, how soon deceit is wrought:
How s^ne men's minds, of harmefull things take hold,
How soon the g^d, corrupted is with naught.
Behold the cares whereof our savior spoke,
(...) Matthew tells, in thirteenth chapter plain,
Such wicked means, malicious men can make,
The frutfull seed, with worthles weeds to stayne.
Behold the devil, whose ministers are pressed:
To stir an ore, in every forward boat:
Behold blind youth, which holds pleasure best,
And (...) the pain, which might their state promo^e.
Great is the care, which grauest men endure,
To see their Sons, brought up in Godly wise:
And great the pains, which teachers put in ure,
To trade then still, in verteous qualities:
But oh how great, is greedy lust in youth?
How much mischief, it swalloweth up unseen?
With reckles mind, it castes aside all truth,
And feeds still, on that which is vncleene.
These parasites, and bawdes have quickly caught,
The careless byrds, who see not their deceyptes:
with such vile wares, the world so full is fraught,
As few can escape, their subtilties and sleights:
Yet mighty God, vouchsafe to guide the rest,
That they may sh^n the bad, and sew the best.
Finis, Actus secundi.
Actus tertij
Scoena prima.
DICK DROOM alone. THere there there, this gear goes round as it should go,
these young gallants are caught without a net, and shall I tell you one thing?
no man gladder then I, for as long as that chimney smoketh, I am sure I shall
not go hungry to bed. An Inheritrix quoth you? marie that she is a Meritrix I
warrant her, of great burdens, birthrightes I would say, no doubt of it, he
that marieth her shall be sure of great ecclamation, and that good old
gentlewoman her Aunte. Why though the young woman had never a groat in the
world, yet a man might be glad that could match his Son in such an
abominable (honorable) stock: these are Auntes of Antwerpe, which can make
twenty marriages in one week sor their kinswoman, O noble old gyrles, I like
them yet when they be wise, for it is an old saying, one shrew is worth two
sheep. Well, let me look about me how I prate, and let me epsy what is become
of their brothers according to their commandment, but are not these two they
which come debating of the matter in such earnest? it is even they, and wot you
what? their brethren are otherwise occupied, but yet surely they argue as fa^t
as they, when God knows a small entreatye might serve, but I will step aside
and harken to these yonkers.

Actus tertij
Scaena secunda.
PHYLOMVSVS, PHYLOTIMVS, DICK. Phylomusus SUrely Phylotimus, I wonder what is
become of our brethren, I pray god they be not entised to some vanity by some
lewd company.


Dick. You might have gessed twice and have gessed worse, I beshrew your
brains for your busy conjecture.


Phylotimus. Truly it may be, but I trust they will bear in mind the last
precept which your Master gave us, at y^ least I would we had their company,
that we might meditat the matter together.


Dyck. I perceive it is time to call them, I will be gone.


Phylotimus. If our enstructor should examine us, and find them to seek, it
would grieve me as much for my brother as if the fault were mine own.


Phylomusus. Surely and I would also be very sorry if my brother should be found
slack in his duty, but in my judgment we need not to cast these doubts,
for our brethren seemed unto me to be very perfect and ready in the especial
points of our enstruction, and could (in manner) make rehersall thereof
immediately after we had received the same.


Phylotimus. Yea marie, but I will tell you one thing I know by experience in my
brother, he will as soon conceive or bear away a thing as any that ever I
saw, and surely to confess a truth, he has an excelent ready wit, but
doubtless he will sometimes forget as fast, as he learneth redily, and yet for
mine own part, I would to God that my memory were as capable as his is, for
then I would not doubt but to reteyne sufficiently.


Phylomusus. It may be that his mind is much given to other plesures and
delights, which do so continually possess his brayns, as they suffer not any
other conception to be emprinted in his memory: for my brother Phylautus does
in a manner meditat nothing else but setting forth of him self, and in what
soever he be occupied or conuersaunt, yet shall you perceive him to have a
singular regard to his own praise, the which does sometimes carry him as
far beyond all reason, as his deserts might seem to advance him.


Phylotimus. To be opinionate of h^ self is vicious, but surely I am of
opinnion, that it is commendable for a young man in all his actions to regard
his own advancement, and with all to have (resonably) a good opinion of him
self, in exempting of such things as he undertakes, for if he which coueteth
in the latyne tung to be eloquent, should so far embase his thoughts as to
conceive that he spoke or wrote like old Duns or Scotus, surely (in my
judgment) it would be very hard for him to excel or to become a perfect
Rethoritian, or if he which employeth his time in the exercise of ryding,
should imagine with himself that he sat not comely on his horse back, it
would be long before he should become a gallant horseman: for in all human
actions we delight so much the more, and sooner attain unto their perfections,
whenas we think in our minds that in deed the exercise thereof does become
us: but behold now where our brethren do come.


Actus tertij
Scaena tertia.
PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOSARCVS, PHYLOMVSVS, PHVLOTIMVS and GNOMATI^S. Phy^us. THis was
a proper messanger in deed, he might have mocked others though he mocked not
us.


Philosarchus. O sir you do him wrong, for it seems unto me that the poor
fellow is as sorry for it as we are miscontented, and that he rather faulted
through ignorance, than of any set purpose, but look where our brethren are*
Brother where have you bin whilst we were at the Markgraues house?


Phylotimus. Truly brother I walked on with my companion here, hoping that we
should have followed you to the Markgraues house and we were so earnest in
meditating such matter as our instructor delivered unto us, that mistaking the
way, and not marking which way you went, we were constreyned to return hither,
and to attend your return, to the end we might go altogether.


Phylomusus. And you (brother) where have you been?


Phylautus. Where have we been quoth you? why we have been with that good old
gentleman the Markgraue, unto whom we were as welcome as water into the ship,
the old ^roward ^rowner would scarce vouchsafe to speak unto us, or to look
upon us, but he shall sit until his heels ache before I come at him again.


Phylomusus. O brother, use reverent speech of him, principally because he is a
Magistrate, and therwithal for his greye hairs, for that is one especial
point of our masters traditions.


Phylautus. Tushe what tell you me of our masters traditions? if a Magistrate,
or an elder would challendge reverence of a young gentleman, it were good reason
also that they should render affability, and cheerful countenance to all
such as present them selves before them with good will. When we came to him he
knew us not, neither would he know us by any means, but with a grim
countenance turned his back, and desired us to go ere we drank: a Markgraue
quoth you?


Phylotimus. That is strange, that having sent for us, he would seem to use
such enterteynment when we came.


Phylosarchus. I will tell you brother, it seems unto me that it was rather
the fault of the messanger, and yet he A fine ex cuse
did but ignorantly mistake it neither: For he was (as it should seem) sent by
the Markgraue, but he did oyther mistake the scholemaister. or the scholars, or
both, and thereupon I think that the Markgraue was partly offended.


Phylotimus. Truly and not without cause, but behold^ where our master
comes.


Phy^. Let us say then that we were together* least he be offended.


(...). Now my well-beloved, and what says the honorable and reverend
Markgraue unto you? or how does he like the manner of your enstruction? have
you recyted or declared any part thereof unto him since your going?


Phylosarchus. Sir no* for it seems that the messanger did mistake his
errande, and was sent to some other scholars, and not unto us.


Gnom^cus. Is it even so? well then let us not altogether lose the golden
treasure of the time: but tell me, have you perfectly disgested and committed
unto memory the articles which I delivered unto you, for especial
consideration of your duty?


Phylosarchus. Sir I think that I ca^ perfectly rehearse them.


Phylautus. And I sir do hope also that I shall not greatly ^ayle.


Philomusus and Philotimus. Sir this young man and I do partly bear them in
mind, although not so perfectly and readily as we desire.


Gnomaticus. Well, to the end that you shall the better imprint them in your
memory, behold, I have put them briefly in writing as a memorial, and here I
deliver the same unto you, to be put in verse every one by himself and in
sundry device, that you may therein take the greater delight, for of all other
Arts Poetry gives greatest assistaunce unto memory, since the very
terminations and ceasures do (as it were) serve for places of memory, and
help the mind with delight to carry burdens, which else would seem more
grievous: and though it might percase seem unto you, that I do in manner
ouerlode you with lessons and enterprises, yet shall you herein rather find
comfort or recreation, than any ^comberance: let me now see who can show
himself the pleasant^ ^et, in handeling thereof, (...) yet you must also
therein (...) d^rum, for ^ing allegories or pleasant (...) in serious causes
are not most comely. God guide you (...) and ever.

Gnomaticus goes out.
Actus tertij
Scaena quarta.
PYLOSARCVS, PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOTIMVS, PHYLOMVSVS, AMBIDEXTER Philosarchus. OH
that I had now the ^ayne which Uirgill had in writing of a delectable verse.


Philomusus. God is good and bountiful, yelding unto every man that is
industrious the open way to knowledge and s^ience, and though at first it seem
difficile, yet with travel every thing is obtained* we see the hardest stones
are pierced with soft drops of water, whereby the mind of man may be
encouraged to trust, that unto a willing heart* nothing is impossible, but to
perform the charge which is given us, we must withdraw our selves from each
other* since we are enjoined every of us to devise it in (...) ^ortes of
poemes, wherefore I will leave you for a time.


Phylotimus. And I will also assay what I can do.


Phylosarchus. God be with them, shall I tell you Phylautus, wherefore I desired
the excellency of Ui^gil, in compounding of a verse? not as they think God
knows, to convert our tedious traditions there into: for a small grace in a
verse will serve for such unpleasant matter, but it was to furnish me with
eloquence* for the better obteyning of this heavenly dame, whose remembrance is
sweet unto me, neither yet am I able to express such praises as she does
deserve. Oh how it delights me to behold in mine imagination the counterfeyt
of her excellent face, me thinks the glimsing of her eyes have in it a
reflection, far more vehement than the beams of the Sun it self, and the
sweetness of her heavenly breath, surpasses the spiceries of Arabia. Oh that
I ha^ skill to write some worthy matter in commendation of her rare
perfections, surely I will tell you Phila^us, I do both rejoice in your doings,
and much wonder at your inclination. I wonder because I can not per^ that you
are any thing moved with affection of mind toward her, and yet I rejoice
therein least the same might have become an hinderance to my desires, oh, how
only love will admit no companion.


(...). Phylo^us, you may happily be deceived in me, and therefore I would not
wish you hereafter to (...) your self in any man at the first acquaintance,
but in deed to confess a truth unto you, although this gentlewom^n be
beautiful, yet, have I refreyned hitherto to become affectionate on her, as
well because I would therein give place unto your desire, as also because I
have not perceived that ever she lent any glaunce or liking look toward me,
and as I can be content to love where I find my self esteemed, so be you sure
that I think my halfepeny as good silver as another does, and she that seems
not with greedy eye to behold me, it is veri^ likely that I will not be
ouerhastie to gaze at her. But to return unto the purpose, as you do now
earnestly desire to get victory over her affection: so do I every day
beseech of God, that our parents may at last determine to send us unto some
University, that there the variety of all delights may yield unto each of
us his contentation.


Phylosarchus. Alas, and I am of another mind, for though I desire no less
than you to be at some university, yet to lose the sight of my Lamia seems
no less grief unto me, than if my heart were torn out of my body. But
behold where Ambidexter comes, my mind gives me that I shall hear some
news by him. How now Ambidexter? what news?


Ambidexter. Good sir, and such as I dare say you will be glad of.


Phylosarchus. And what are those? tell me quickly I pray thee.


Ambidexter. Sir I will tell you, there came a tatling fellow to your father
erewhile, and told him a tale in his ear which seemed to like him but a
little, what so ever it was, where upon your Father mumbled a while as the Cade
which cheweth the Cudde, and in the ^de with a great sigh he said. Well, then
(quoth he) there is no remedy but send them with speed to the University:
which words when I ouerheard, I smyled to my self and thought, (by God, and so
you may dress them) for I dare well say, they will be the most joyful news
that they heard this half year, and to gratify you with the same, I came
immediately to seek you out, but where (...) (...) brother?


Phylosarchus. He is gone that way walking, ^ pray thee follow him, and make
him pertaker of these news.

Ambidexter goes out. Oh how much is Ambidexter deceived in me at this
present? No no, I can not so content my self to forget the sweet face of that
worthy Lady Lamia, neither can I ever hope to rejoice, unless I might be so
happy, as to enjoy the continual sight of her heavenly countenance, the
university is in deed the place where I have of long time been desirous to be
placed, especially for the variety of delights and pleasures which there are
daily exercised: but alas, what needs the rich man to become a these? or
what need I to wander unto the university for to seek pastime and pleasurs,
when I may even here in Antwerp without further travel, enjoy the daily comfort
of such consolation? and if I be not also much deceived, she loves and lyketh
me no less than I desire her, I pray you tell me Phylautus, do you not
plainly perceive that she has an affection toward me?


Phylautus. Surely Phylosarchus, I dare not swear it, although in deed the
franknesse of her entertaynement was much, but when I consider that it was at
the very first sight, it makes me think that her courtesy is common, and may
be quickly obtained.


Phylosarchus. Why did she not then make as fayr^ semblant unto you?


Phylautus. Marie, because she perceived you to adresse your self most
directly unto her, and there is no woman so kind, that she can deal with mo
than one at once, but be you sure if I had been there alone, she would have
lent me as favorable regard as she seemed now to give you, it is the trick
of them all, and therefore never set your mind so much thereon, I warrant you,
when we come to the Uniuersiti, we shall have store of such there, and I am
glad to understand that your father determines to send^ you thither, for I am
sure that my brother and I shall accompany you, since our fathers have always
been destrous that we should spend our youths together. But behold where our
fathers come both together, let us go in, least they epsy us, and think that
we loyter here.


Actus tertij
Scaena, quinta.
PHILOPAES, PHYLOCALVS, FIDVS, GNOMATICVS Phylopas. SUrely neyghbor Phylocalus,
I can not blame you though you be moved at these tidings, but in things which
come contrary to expectation or desire, the wisdom of men is best seen, and
therefore I would advise you to forecast in time how you may prevent such a
mischief, for greatest wounds are at the first more easily cured, than if they
continue until some abundance of humor or other accident do hinder the
benefit of nature, and surely it grieueth me in manner as much, as if the like
had been found in mine own son.


Phylocalus. So have you great reason to say, for your son Phylautus was
there with him also, and though the Harlot seemed not to lend liking unto any
but my son, yet be you out of doubt that being in such company, he shall
hardly escape the snares of temptation.


Phylopaes. Well, how so ever it be, we shall best do to consult with their
teacher hereupon, and behold where he ^mmeth. Sir we were about to send for
you, being ad^tised that my neighbors son Phylosarchus does haunt a very
dishonest house in this town, and my son Phylautus has also ben there in
company with him, the which gives us just occasion to lament, and most glad we
would be to devise some comfort in time, since the thing has (as yet) been of
no long continuance. Wherefore we beseech you to deal faithfully with us, and
to declare if you have s^ne any such behavior, or likelihood in them, and
furthermore to advise us, which way we might best redress this mishappe
betimes.


Gnomaticus. Sir to declare of your sons behavior, trewly I have never seen
any thing to misselyke of them, neither could I ever perceine that they were
slow in apprehending mine enstructions, but rather more forward then their
brethren, true it is that here came one to me in name of the Markgraue, saying
that he was their kinseman and very desirous to see them, whereupon I did
willingly give them leave, and when they came there they say that the messenger
miss took the matter, and should have gone to some other scholars. But
doubtless my mind gives me, that if they have been allured to any evil
company, it has been by that same fellow which came to me on that message.


Phylopaes. Do you not know him, or what his name is?


Gnomaticus. I do not know him, but he said that his name was Echo.


Phylocalus. Echo? Nay then you have not judged amiss, for it is one of the
lewdest fellows in this town, a common Parasite and a seducer of youth.


Gnomaticus. Surely my heart did not greatly like him at the first sight, but
since things done cannot be undone, I like well that you should (according to
your own devise) provide in time before they wade deeper in such enterprises,
and to speak mine opinion, you may do well to send them unto some Uniuersity,
before they have further acquaintance or haunt in such company, for whether it
be love, or lust that has infected them, there can be no presenter remedy then
to absent them from the things which they desire, and therewithal I promise
you (not to flatter) they are already very sufficiently able for the
Uniuersity, and the en^ructions which I have given them, may serve rather for
precepts of their perfect duty to God and man, then for any exercise of the
liberal sciences, wherein they are so well entered, and have been so thoroughly
traded, as there lacks nothing but convenient place where they might proceed
in Logike and such like.


Phylopaes. And me thinks we might better do to enfourme the Markgraue. Who
upon such means as we shall make, may banish the harlot with her train out
of the City, and may also punish the parasite for so entysing the young men.


Gnomaticus. I grant you that all this may be done ^ery well but then you are
to consider, that the hearts of young men, are oftentimes so stout, that they
can not abid publicly to hear of a fault, the which (being priuatlie and
gentlely admonished) they would peradventure willingly amend: and great
difference there is between children and young men, for in childhoode all
punishment is terrible, but in flourishing youth every punishment may not be
used, but discretion must foresee what kind of punishment will most prevail
and best gain reformation in the mind of the offender. Wherefore mine advice
shoud be that you send them to some University, and as near as you can forsee
to place them with such a Lutor as may always have an eye to their exercises,
and may have especial care how they shall bestow their vacant times. For
idleness is the cause of many e^ils in youth, whereas being occupied or
exercised in any thing that is verteous or commendable, they shall not have so
great occasion to think of vanities.


Phylocalus. All that is true, but what University do you think meetest?


Gnomaticus. For mine own opinion I like Doway very well, both for that it is
near, and from thence you may always within short time be advertised, and
also because I do know very learned and faithful men there, and herewithall
it is but a little Town, and the Uniuersytie but lately erected, whereby the
root of evil has hitherto had least skope, and exercise has been (and is)
the more straightly observed.


Phylopaes. And could you dyrect us unto any such faithful Tutor, that we
might be bold to think our selves sure of their well doing? and that they
should not be susfred to run at large about wanton toys and lewdnes?


Gnomaticus. Truly I can tell you of two or three which are both faithful and
careful of their charge, but to assure you in such sort as you require were
very hard to do, sythens no Tutor can use such vygilant industry, but that
sometimes he may be deceived, nevertheless I know them to be careful.


Phylocalus. Well for my part I can be content to follow your advise, and what
think you neighbor Phylopaes.


Phylopaes. I do lykwise agree to as much as has been said.


Gnomaticus. Well then mark yet a little further mine intent, I would think
good that the young men themselves should not know thereof until the Journey
were prepared and they redye to depart, and my meaning is this, in so doing you
shall antyeypate all occasions that they might have to confer with lewd
company, who paraduenture would not spare to follow and accompany them
wheresoever they go.


Phylocalus. Surely that is well considered, and therefore neighbor. I pray
you give straight charge unto your servant least he do bewray our intent herein.


Phylopaes. Sirrah do you hear not one word for your life of that which we
have here communed together.


Fidus. Sir I trust you have never hitherto found me ^acke to do that which I
have been commanded, nor rash to dysclose any thing which I thought might
dysplease you.


Phylocalus. Well I pray you let us go together unto my house, and there let us
more at large debate this matter.


Phylopaes. Go we where best likes you.


Actus tertij
Scaena Sexta.
PHYLOMVSVS, PHYLOTIMVS, Phylomusus. WOuld God now that I could mete with
Phylotimus that unto him I might recount what I have done in the theme which
our Master gave us earwhile, for conference is comfortable unto scholars, were
it no more but to use each others advise and opinion in such things as they
shall undertake: and though in compiling of verses, all company is combersome,
yet when the same are made and finished, then is it a singular comfort to have
acompanion with whom (as with thy self, (thou may be bold to confer for
judgment. And behold where Phylotimus comes in good time.


Phylotymus. Phylomusus I have finished the charge which our enstructer gave us
in verse, and I would be glad to have your opinion therein.


Phylomusus. He tells the tale that I should have told.


Phylotimus. I pray you give ear a while, and I will read unto you what I
have done therein.


Phylomusus. With right good will Phylotimus, read them I pray you.


Phylomusus. Give ear then, but first I must thus much declare unto you. I
have no more but conveyed in to verse the very brief which our Master
delivered us in prose, adding neither dilatations, allegories, nor examples:
and thus it is.

Fear God alwais whose might is most, and ioyn thy fear with love
Since over all his worthy works, his mercy stands above:
In him thou may likewise be bold, to put thy trust alwaie,
Since he is just and promise keeps, his truth cannot decay.
Give ear unto his Ministers, which do his word profess,
Disdain them not due reverence, their place deserves no less.
And love them eke with hearty love, because they feed thee still,
With heavenly food, whereon thy soul, his hungry heart may fill.
Then next to God true honor give, to Gods anointed king,
For he is Gods lieutenant here, in every earthly thing:
his power comes from heaven above, the which thou must obey,
And love him since he does protect, thy life in peace always.
To Magistrates in their degrees, thou must like duties bear,
Love, honor, and obedience, since they betoken hear,
The majesty: and represent the king him self in place,
And bear his sword, and maintayn peace, and deem each doutfull case.
Be thankful to the country soil, wherein thou have been bred,
Defend it always to the death, therefore thy life is led:
And seek by all thy skill and power, to do such deeds therein,
As may thereto some profit yield, so shall thou honor win.
To elders for their hoarie hears, thou shall do reverence,
And love them since they council thee, in every good pretense:
Defend them eke because they be, as feeble (for their might)
As stout and strong in good advice, against the flesh to fight.
Thy father and thy mother both, with other parents (...),
Thou shall in honor still esteem, for God commands so:
And love them as they tendered thee, in cradle and in kind,
Releive their age (if it have need) for duty so does bind.
Thus shall thou bear thy self always, if y^ wilt prosper well
And from thy self if thou desire, all mischief to expel:
The^ keep thy self both chaste and cleen, in deed and eke in thought,
Embrace the good, and leave y^ bad, for thou art dearly bought.
Thou art the Temple of the Lord, which must be vnde^de,
More dear to him the^ Temples are, which mortal me^ do build.
And since he cast from Temple once, which was but lime and stone
The biers and the sellers both, and bad them thence be gone,
How much more the^ will he require, y^ y^ shuldst keep thy self
Both clean and pure from fylthy sin, much worse the^ worldly
Be holy the^, and keep thesewords, in mind both night and day (pel^
For so be sure that god himself, thy stagring steps will stay.
Finis quoth Philotimus. Thus have you now seen Philomusus, my simple skill in
poetry, and I pray you tell me your opinion therein.


Phylomusus. Surely Phylotimus. I like your verses very well, for they are
compendious: and to be plain with you, I have likewise framed a verse or poem
upon y^ same matter, marie I have some what more dilated and enlarged every
point, but such as it is, I will likewise crave your opinion therein.


Phylotimus. With right good will: I pray you read them.


Phylomusus. THe man that means, by grace him self to guide,
And so to live, as God may least offend:
These lessons learn, and let them never slide,
from out his mind, what ever he pretend.
Since God is great, and so omnipotent, God.

as nothing can withstand his mighty power,
he must be fearde, least if his wrath be bent:
we perish all, and wither like a flower.
Yet with such fear, we must him love likewise, Love*

Since he has store, of mercyes in his hand:
And more delights, that Sinners should arise,
then still to fall, and neuermore to stand.
In him also, we may be bold to trust, Trust* (...)

In him we may, put all our confidence:
For he is true, and of his promise just,
He never fayles, the pyth of his pretense.
His Ministers, and such as prech his word, Minister.

Because they be, from him (to teach us) sent*
We should to them, give ear with one accord* Audience.

And learn their lore, which leads us to repent.
All reverence, to them shall be but due, Reverence

As well because, their office so requires:
As there with all, because there does ensue,
A just reward, to humble men's desires.
And love them eke, with fast and faithful love, Love*

Because they feed, thy soul with heavenly bread:
Which cannot moulde, nor from thy mouth remove,
Until thou have, thy fill there on ysed.
Next God the king, does challeng second place, King*

And him we must, both honor and obey:
^ause he has, (from God above) ^is grace, Obedience

And is (...), on earth to bear the sway. Honor.

Yet as with heart, we shall him honor yield,
And must obey, what he commands with feare^ Love*

So love him eke* because he is our shield,
And does protect, our life in quiet here. Magis^es.

Like duties do, to Magistrates belong,
Because they bear, the sword, and represent Ob^

The king him self, and righten every wrong, Honor.

And maintain peace, with all their whole intent. Love.

Unto the soil, wherein we fostred were, Country.

We must always, be thankeful children found: Thankefulnes.

And in defense thereof we must not fear, Defense.

To venture life, as we by birth ^e bound.
For to that end, our life to us was lent,
And therewith all, we ought the same t'aduaunce. Profit.

And do such deeds, as may be pertment.
To profit it, and eke our selves enhance. Elders.

The silver hears, of Elders every where, Reverence

Claim reverence, as due thereto by right:
Their grave advise, and precepts which we leare* Love.

Does challeng love, the same for to requit. Defense*

Their weak estate, when force is gone and past,
Does crave defense, of such as yet be strong:
Since they defend, the force of fortunes blast,
From weakest wytts, which harken to their song. Parents.

The parents they, which brought us up in youth, Honor.

Must honored be, since God commands so:
And since thereby, a gracious gift ensewth,
Even long to live, in earth whereon we go.
They ought likewise, our hearty loves to have,
As they loved us, in cradle when we lay: Love.

And b^ake their sleeps, our sely life to save,
When of our selves, we had no kind of stay.
And if they need, in age when strength is gone, Releife.

We ought r^ue, the same with all our power:
We should be greeud, when as we hear them groan,
And w^yle their wantes, and help them every hour.
And he that thus, can well direct his ways, Our self

And (...) himsefe, in chaste and holy life:
Shall please the Lord, and shall prolong his (...),
In quiet state, protected still from stry^e.
Be holy thus, and live in good accord, Gods Temple.

Since men one earth, are Temples to the Lord
Thus may you see Phylotimus, that one self same thing may be handled sundry
ways, and now I pray you tell me your opinion, as I have told you mine.


Phylotimus. Surely Phylomusus your verses do please me much better then mine
own, and very glad I am that we have each of us so well accomplished our
duties, nothing doubting but that our enstructer will also like the same
accordingly: and now if you think good, let us go in and present the same,
when soever he shall think good ^o demand it.


Phylomusus. With right good will, go you on and I will follow*


The third Chorus.
THe Shed is great, and greater then the show,
Which seems to be, between the good and bad:
For even as weeds, which fast by flowers do grow^,
(Although they be with comely collors clad:)
Yet are they found, but seldom sweet of smell,
^o vices brag, but virtue bears the Bell.
The prauncing steed, can seldom hold his flesh,
The hottest greyhound leaves the course at length:
The finest Silks, do seeld continue fresh,
The fattest men, may fail sometimes of strength:
Such deep deceiptes, in fair pretense are found,
That vices lurk, where virtue seems t'abound.
A Spanish trick, it has been counted often,
To seem a thing, yet not desire to be:
Like humble bees, which fly all days aloft,
And taste the flowers, that fairest are to see:
But yet at even, when all things go to rest,
A foul cow sharde, shall then content them best.
Well yet such bees, because they make great noise,
And are withal, of sundry pleasant hewes:
Be most esteemd, always by common voice,
And honored more, then Bees of better thewes:
So men likewise, which bear the brauest Show,
Are held for best, and crowched to full low.
But virtue she, which dwelles in secret thought,
Makes good the seed, what ever be the smell:
Though outward gloss, sometimes do seem but naught,
Yet inward stuff, (of virtue) does excel:
For like a stone, most worthy to esteem,
It loves to be, much better then to seem*
Phylautus here, and Phylosarchus eke,
Did seem at first, more forward then the rest:
But come to proof, and now they be to seek,
Their brethren no we, perform their duty best*
Thus good from badde, appears as day from night,
That one takes pain, that other loves delight.
Finis, Actus Tertij.
Actus quarti
Scaena prima.
PHYLOPAES. PHYLOCALVS, GNOMATICVS. Phylopaes. I Have for my part set al
things in redynesse for my Sons departure, and if my neighbor have done the
like, they shall depart immediately: but behold where he comes, how now sir?
What have you done or dispatched?


Phylocalus. Al things necessary for my Sons are in readynesse, and you,
what have you done?


Phylopaes. Doubt you not of my diligence, I am ready were it within this
hour, but I would be glad to talk with Master Gnomaticus, as well to use his
advise, as also to have his letters of commendation unto some faithful Tutor
at the Uniuersity: and look where he comes in haste.


Gnomaticus. Gentlemen I have found you both in good hour, and I would wish
you to dispatch the young men your sons with all convenient speed, for the
thing which you suspected is doubtless too true.


Phylocalus. And how know you?


G^omaticus. I will tell you sir, care while as soon as I departed from you, I
examined the^ al concerning a task which I had given them, and that was to put
in verse a b^iefe memorial of the chief points wherein I did enstruct them,
and I found that Phylomusus and Phylotimus

(whom I thought not so quick of capacity as the other) had done the same very
well: on that other side, I found Phyl^us and Phylosarchus to have done there
in nothing of all, and marueyling at their strange and unaccustomed
slackenesse, I searched them upon such suspicion as I had conceived, and
found that Phylosarchus had spent the time in writing of loving sonets, and
Phylautus had also made verses in praise of Marshiall feats and pollycies.


Phylocalus. O God, and have you not punished them accordingly?


Gnomaticus. As for that sir be you contented, there is time for all things,
and presently in my judgment you could devise no punishment which would so
much grieve them as to depart from this City, hereafter I doubt not but to
devise the means that both they shall be rebuked as appertains (though they be
out of my hands) and the causers of these mischieues may also chance to hear
thereof when they think it quite forgotten, but at this point we will hold no
longer discourse therein, only prepare for your Sons departure to the
Uniuersity.


Phylopaes. The chief thing whereupon we ^tay, has been both to use your
advise, and to desire you that you will take pains to write your letters unto
some faithful Tutor there, who may both rebuke them for that which is past, and
have care to govern them better in time to come.


Gnomaticus. Mine advise you have heard already, and touching the letters which
you require, they are in manner ready, for I had so determined before you
required me, and now if it please you to walk unto my lodging, we will from
thence dispatch them before they hear any further news of the matter.


Phylocalus. Go we with good will.


Actus quarti
Scaena secunda.
ECHO alone. IT is a wondrous matter to see the force of love, saving your
reverence. I dare say the Lady Lamia since she saw this young gentleman, could
never sleep until her eyes were shut, and there withal she takes such
thought, that as soon as ever she is laid she falls on snorting: and God
knows, her cheeks are become as lean as a pestill of porke, and her face as
pale as a carnation gilofloure. Fie (...), what means she? Will she cast
away her self on this fashion for his sake? She bears but evil in
remembrance the good documentes of that virtuous old Lady her Aunte. I
warrant you it would be long before that (...) would dye for love. Tush tush
shall I tell you? It is folly to stand meditating of these matters, every man
for him self and I for one, these yonkers shall pay for the roast, and Echo by
your leave will take part of the cost, but behold where comes doughty Dicke.
How now Richard what news?

Dicke Drom comes in. Actus quarti
Scaena tertia.
DICKE, DROM, ECHO. WHat news? mary Phylosarchus has sent a fat breast of
veale, a capon, a dosen of pigeons, a couple of rabets, and a stoop of wine
unto the lady Pandarinaes house, and promises to be there at supper to talk
more of the matter which you wot of.

Echo. And has he sent no more?


Dicke. Why is not that well for a footeman? By our lady sir, it does me good
to think what cheer I will make with the leauinges, and wotte you what? Be you
sure he shall lack no clean trenchers, for as soon as he has laid a good
morsel before him, Dicke will be at an inche with a clean plate to pro^er him.


Echo. Well said Dicke, and I trow that I will skinke in his cups as fast
on the other side, but hear me Dicke, as for these matters neither of us both
will be to seek, but there are other things to be remembered which are of
more weighty con^eration.


Dicke. And what I pray thee?


Echo. Marie thou must mark whenever he casts a glaunce at the Lady
Lamta, and round him in the ear, saying: beware sir how you look, least her
Aunt epsy you. And again, if he speak a word wherein he seems himself to
take pleasure, extol him straight with praise, and say tha^ (...) has to
(...) (...) (...) as he. Likewise (...) to whet (...) forward, as (...) she
showed not (...) (...) enough. These and a thousand such other (...) must be
(...) and practiced, to make him come off, and whatsoever he gives thee let us
share between us, for I promise thee Dicke by the faith of a true
B^rgondyance, I will be as true to thee as thy coat is to thy back.


Dick^. By the mass Echo and that is true enough, for it has (...) so long
to my shoulders, that a lowse can not well clyme the clyffes thereof without a
pitchforke in her hand. But I trust master (...) fees will be suf^ient to set
both thee and me a floate, and make us as brave as the best.


Echo. (...), as for that matter, if he do not another shall: he were w^se
enough that would lean altogether unto one (...) these days, no no Dicke; be
ruled by Echo, and ^ warrant thee we two will ^iue how soever the world
wag^e, have thou not often heard, that change of pasture makes fat ealues?


Di^ke. Ha ha ha, by God and well said, but who comes (...)?


Echo, Ha? mary it is the old Phylopaes and his neighbor Phylocalus, what is
the matter tro^ (...) us stand aside and hear their talk a while.


Dycke. Best of all stand close.


Actus quarti
Scaena quarta.
PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS, PHYLAVTVS, PHYLOM^SVS, PHYLOSARCVS, PHYLOTIMVS,
GNOMATICVS, AMBIDEXTER. Phylopaes. SInce time is the greatest treasure which
God lends us, and yet he does but lend us the same to the end that we should
well employe it, it shall be therefore the bounden duty of every man so to
bestow the same, as may return to most commodity and profitte. And since your
enstructer here does commend your towardnes much more, (I fear) then you
deserve, it seems that we should have lost time in longer deteyning you from
the Uniuersity, and therefore we have prepared (as you see) to send you thither,
trusting that you will there use such diligence, as may be to the profit of
your Country and for your own aduancementes. The which to perform, I beseech
the Father of Heaven that he will always give you the spirit of wisdom, and
power his grace upon you continually.


Phylautus. Sir it shall become us to obey whatsoever you command, although
in very deed the sudden of our departure seems somewhat strange unto me,
but it becomes me not to be enquisitiue thereof, and in deed for mine own
part, there is nothing which could better content me then to go unto the
Uniuersity.


Phylocalus. Phylosarchus, you and your Brother shall also accompany my
neighbors Sons here to Doway, for since you have hitherto been brought up
together, I think not meet now to part you. Wherefore I charge you that you
so behave your self, as I may always hear that you be diligent and studious,
since that is the mean to bring you unto estimation.


Phylosarchus. As touching my diligence, I trust that I Murmurers disobe dient
seldom prove well.
have never yet been behind any of my companions, but this sudden of our
departure seems to proceed of some alteration in your mind, the which I
have not deserved. It had been a small matter to have had three or four days
respitte and leisure to prepare our selves, and to have bidden our friends
farewell, I think no men's children are thus set out.


Phylocalus. As for your preparation, all things are made ready for you, and
your friends shall be gladder to see your retourn home again learned, then they
would have been pensive to depart with you.


Gnomaticus. My well-beloved, since it pleases your parents thus to dispose
your journey, I cannot otherwise do but commend you to the tuition of almighty
GOD, whom I beseech now and ever to guide you by his grace, and I exhort you
for Gods sake, that you bear well in mind the precepts which I have given
you, assuring my self that ruling your actions by that measure, you shall be
acceptable to GOD, pleasing to the world, profitable to your selves, and
comfortable to your parents.


Phylomusus, and Phylotimus. Sir it is no small grief unto us to depart from
such a loving enstructer, but since it becomes us to obey our parents, we
contend not contrary to their commandments, hoping by Gods grace so to
employ our time, and so to continue in the trac^e which you have trodden unto
us, that you shall always commend our diligence and good will.


Phylocalus. Sirrah? are the wagons ready? And is their carriage therein placed
with all things convenient?


Ambidexter. Yea sir all things are dispatched.


Phylocalus: Then go your ways with them, and the Father of Heaven be their
guide and yours now and ever.


Gnomaticus: Fellow mine, you must deliver me this letter when you come to
Doway according to the superscription thereof.


Ambidexter. It shall be done sir God willing.

The youngmen kneel down.
Phylopaes. The God of peace vouchsafe to bless you now and ever.


Phylocalus. And give you grace to become his faith^ull servants. Amen.


Gnomaticus. My well beloved, I beseech the Heavenly Father to grant you a
prosperous journey, and well to bestow your time now and ever.

Phylautus, Phylomusus, Phylosarchus, Phylotimus and Fidus depart. Did you not
perceive that only the two elder seemed to grudge and repugne? it is a
meruelouse matter, they two are of an excellent capacity, and able to bear
away (in manner) more then can be laid to their charge, but an old saying has
been Chi tropo abraccia niente tiene. Well now, it shall not be amiss if we
consult of our affayrs here at home, for as for them take you no doubt, they
shall understand at Dowaye, wherefore they were sent so soon from Antwerpe, and
because in all things Secrecy is a great furderaunce, it shall be best that we
draw our selves apart unto one of your houses, where we may more commodiously
confer upon that which is to be done here.


Phylocalus. I like your counsel well, and when it pleases you let us go to
my house.


Phylopaes. With good will, I will accompany you.

They depart.
Actus quarti
Scaena quinta.
ECHO and DYCK DROOM. Echo. FEllow Rychard, how like you this gear?


Dick. Marie friend Echo, I lykeit but a little.


Echo. And why I pray you?


Dyck. Why quoth you? marie because I am sorry that such a sweet morsel is
plucked out of my mouth.


Echo. And I am glad that I shall feed my fill on such a sweet morsel, for
since there is now no remedy, but these younkers must needs be gone, God be
with them. Dyck and Echo, with the Ladies will eat and drink as freely for
their sake, as if they were here present, and hear me Dyck, if they had been
here, we should have been feign to wait on the table, and to be contented
with their leauings after supper, whereas now we will be so bold as to sit down
with the rest, since we be (as thou well know) of household with that good
gentlewoman, and by our Lady, I was never so deintyly brought up but I could
eat a hot Cap^n, as well and as sauorly as a cold mess of porage, especially
where the bread and drink is good.


Dyck. All this I confess also to be good and sound doctrine, but yet it
gr^ueth me to think that we have lost so good customers which might have
continued such banquits often times.


Echo. Tush Dyck hold thy peace, if we have not them, we shall have others as
good as they, thou may be sure that as long as Lamia continues bewtifull,
she shall never be without Suitors, and when the Crows f^te grows under her
eye, why then no more ado but ensineuate thy self with such another. Yea and
in the mean time also, it should be no bad council, if a man had four or
five such hauntes in store, that evermore when one house is on sw^eping,
another spytte may cry creake at the fire: store is no store as the proverb
says, and now adays the broker which has but one bargain in hand, may
chance to wear a thread bare coat.


Dyck. Say thou so Echo? and I promise thee I had such a lyking to this
young man, that I was partly in mind to have followed him to Doway.


Echo. To Doway? nay get me further from Antwarpe, then I may see the smoke of
the chymnies, and they have good luck. Tush tush, Doway is a pelting town
packed full of poor Skollers, who think a pair of cast hosen a great
reward, but Antwarp for my money. I tell ye truth, there are not many towns
in Europe that mainteyne more iollytie then Antwarpe, but behold where the
Markgraue and his officers come. I will be gone, I like not the smell of them.


Dick. By the mass neither I, they are going to cast off some bloodhound to
seek a vagabond or some like chase, and let them hunt till their hearts ache,
so I be once out of their sight first.

They run a side.
Actus quarti
Scaena sexta.
SEVERUS the MARKGRAVE, with the officers. MUch is the mind of man deceived,
which thinks that rulers and officers have the meriest lives, for although it
seem unto some men a sweet thing to command, yet whosoever co^pareth the
burden of such cares as are inside^t unto his (...), unto the lightness of the
pleasure which comes by com^undement, he shall find, that much greater is the
pain of that ^ne, then the profit of that other. For what pleasure redoundeth
unto an honest mind, to pronounce sentence of death upon an offender? or what
profit arises by punishing of malefactors? but on that other side, what grief
wants where a quiet mind is encembred with government? what hour of the day
is exempt from toil? in the morning the prease of Suitors at the chamber door
do break the sweetest sleep, the rest of the forenoone is little enough for
the ordynarie hours of courts and decydyng of contentions, at diner you shall
hardly dysgest your meat without some sauce of complaynts or informations,
wherein likewise the rest of the day most be occupied: and the night suffyzeth
not to forecast what polityke constitucions are needful to be devised or
renewed, for to meet with the daily practices and inuention^s of lewd
versones: So that in fine thine office will neither suffer thee to sleep, nor
yield thee contentme^t when thou art awake, neither give thee leave to eat in
quiet, nor permit thee to follow thine own profitte when thou art fasting. I
set a side to declare what trade of other private gaynes a man must omit when he
is in aucthority: but well said the philosopher, which concluded that we are
not borne only for our selves, but part our country also does challenge. Well
goodfellowes, one of you shall go to Saint Mighells, and there at a house with
a red lattyce you shall find an old ba^de called Pandarina, and a young damsel
called Lamia, take them both and carry them to the coupe, giving charge that
they be safely kept until my further dyrection be known, and another of you
shall s^ek out Echo the parasite, al men know him well enough, take him and
bring him to me.

He departs, as the Skoolemaster comes in. Actus quarti
Scaena septima.
GNOMATICVS, NVNTIVS. Gnomaticus. IF none other thing were required in a
faithful ^tor but only that he should teach his s^hollers grammar or such
other sciences, then with lesser travail might we attain unto perfection,
sythens Gammer and all the liberal Sciences are by traditions left unto us in
such sort, that without any great difficulty the doubt thereof may be
resolved: but the School M^ster which cares ^or none other thing but only to
make his scholars learned, ^y in some respect be compared to the horsecourser,
which one lie cares to feed his horse fat, and never delights to ride him,
manage him, or make him handsome: and when such palfryes come to iorneyng, they
are commonly so ^der proud, that they praunce at the first exceedingly, but
being put to a long journey or service, they melt their own grease and are not
able to endure traua^le. E^n so y^ minds of young men being only trained in
knowledge of arts, and never persuaded in points of moral reformation, become
often times so proud and so headie* that they are carried rather away with a
vain imagination of their own excellency, then settled in y^ resolutions which
might promoote them unto dignity: and wandering so in a vain glorious oppinion
of their own wit, they do (as it were) fou^der and cast them selves in their
own halter. Such hawe (...) philosophers bin in time past, who have so far gone
on pilgri^age in their own pee^ish concei^s, y^ they have not shamed, by a
vain show of learning to defend such propositions, as seem most rediculous
and ^stranged from reason. Anaxagoras def^ded that snow was black and yet was
accounted a philosopher of great gravity and judgment. Pherecydes,
prog^icated y^ an earthquake was at hand, because he saw the water drawn out
of a fountain, and yet was he the Master of Pythagoras, and accompsed a
pro^ound philosopher. Protagoras, also affirmed that me^ might well affirm all
that to be true, which unto them seemed true. And infinite others might be
rehearsed, whose opinionate judgments did eclipse the rest of their comendable
capacity: w^rupon also has sprung the damnable opinion of Atheysts. For the
mind of man is so heavenly a thing and of such care excellency, that it
always works and can not be idle. And if with the quicknes of conceyt it be
tempred by a modest moderation, to have regard unto virtue, and morality, then
proves it both goodly and godly: whereas if it run on hedlong, only led by
natural considerations of causes, it may prove admirable for some passing
quallitie, but it seldom is seen commendable or allowed for perfection* The
consideration whereof has often moved me rather to enstruct youth by a
pr^scribed order out of gods own w^rd, the^ to nuzzle the^ over deeply in
philosophical opinions. And yet is the mind of young men so prone and prompt
to vanity and delight, that all proves not as I would have it. For example
behold my late scholars, who forgetting their duty and neclecting my
precepts, are fallen into the snares which I least of al (...): But surely to
confess a truth, I judge that it rather proceeded by the entisements of
others, then by their own default. Oh how perilous is lewd company unto
youngmen? Well, I have devised yet a mean whereby both the Parasites here may
be punished, and the youngmen may also be rebuked at 'Doway: In such sort,
that their sudden separation may prevent all means to escape it, and yet that
one being ignorant of that others punishment, shall never grudge or snuff at
the same. And Phylopaes with his neighb^ur Phylocalus promised me ear while to
put my devise in execution, I long to hear what may be done therein, for still
I fear me least the crafty Parasite should get knowledge thereof, and so both
escape himself and further enfect some other with new devises. But who is this
that comes here in such haste?


Nuntius. Good lord what a world is this? Justice quoth he? mary this is
Justice in deed of the new fashion.


Gnomaticus. And what Justice good fellow I pray thee.


Nuntius Nay none at all Sir, but rather open wrong, an honest old
gentlewoman with her kinswoman are commanded to the coupe, only because they
suffered an honest youngman (and Son to a welthy Burgher) to suppe with them
yesternight, and a good fellow which is well known here in the City, and has
dwelt here these seven years past, is also cast in prison because he served
them at supper, I have seldom heard of such rigor used, especially since they
prosfer good suretyes to be always forth coming until their behavior be
tried.


Gnomaticus. Well good fellow speak reverently of the Magistrates,
peradventure there was some further matter therein then thou art aware of, but
when was it done?


Nuntius. Even now sir, I do but come from thence.


Gnomaticus. This gear has been pollitiquely used, and I will go see how it
is come to pass, for these are even those lewd companions which seduced my
scholars. Good fellow gramercy for thy tydinges.

exit.
Nuntius. Why? Do they like him so well? I hold a grote the parties are not
half so well pleased therewyth, but I will go further until I may declare them
unto some pitiful mind, which moved with compassion, may speak unto the
Markgraue in their behalf.

Finis Actus Quarti.
The fourth Chorus.
THe toiling man which tilles, his ground with greatest pain,
Has not always such crops thereon, as yield him greatest gain.
Nor he the fairest house, which lays thereon most cost,
Since many chips of chance may fall, to prove such labors lost.
In vain men build their fortes, with stone with lyme and sand*
Unless the same be founded first, with Gods own mighty hand.
Though Paul himself did plant, whose trauelles did not cease,
And then Apollo watered eake, yet God did give increase:
The grace of God it is, whereon good gifts must grow,
And lack of God his grace it is, which makes them lie full low.
How often have been seen, both watch and ward well kept,
And yet into the strongest holds, has treason lightly lept?
The heediest hen that is, the puttocke often beguiles,
Such wolves do walk in wethers felles, y^ Lambs mistrust no wiles*
The for can preach sometimes, but then beware the geese,
For seldom fails a theeuish hand, but that it takes a fleese.
The devil has many men, to gather in his rentes,
And every man has sundry means, to bring us to their bents.
Some puff us up with pride, and some set men aloft,
Whereby the most by princely pomp, forget themselves full off.
Some give us worldly good, and some give beauties grace,
That one breeds care, y^ other lust, which train us to their trace.
In fine and to conclude, what mind of man desires,
That same the devil can set to sale, which still maintains his fires
Behold Gnomaticus, which learnedly had taught:
His scholars here such good precepts, as were with wisdom
And therewithal did care, to see them spend their time, fraught:
In exercise that might be good, and clean deuoide of crime.
But then behold self love, and sparks of filthy lust,
Which made them straight despi^ his words, and cast the^ down in dust.
And now behold he cares, to cure it if he might,
But all too late the water comes, when house is burned quite.
Wherefore who list to learn: Obstaprincipijs.
Since virtue seldom can prevail, where vice so rooted is.
Finis Chori and Actus quarti.
Actus quinti
Scaena prima.
DICKE DROOM alone. NAy if you play such play fare well altogyther, of all
weapons I can not abide these silver daggers, I, with a mace quoth you? I will
not stand one blow with a mace, they have caught my fellow Echo, but I
promise them they shall have good luck if they catch me, you will say that I
ought not so to leave Echo in the briars, in deed we were sworn brethren, but
what for that? I know not now how I was advised when I took that oath, but
surely as I am now advised my Brother shall dance alone in prison, it is no
biding here for me, but to be plain I will trudge after these yenkers to
Doway, and try how the ale tastes in those Coasts, for I like not the
drink in Antwerpe, now a days it is vengeable bitter, this was a supper in
deed, no marvel though Echo and I were so glad of it, but we triumphed before
the victory, for whiles we were preparing the banquet, came in an officer and
laid hold of the women and Echo all at once: that saw I, and to go. Whether
now sirrah quod one of the sargeantes to me? To buy olives for my M^stres quod
I. The knave catchpole replied nothing but l^ughed, as who should say, the
Supper might be ^ten without sause well enough, but how mad am I to stand
prating here so long? I will be gone, to Dow^y, to Doway, on mine honesty
beheld where the old men come, I mean the Fathers of these yankers, adue my
masters, and say yo^ saw not me.

Actus quinti
Scaena secunda.
PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS, NVNTIVS, FIDVS. Even now neighbor Phylocalus I find
what it is to be a Father, a Father? Nay a careful father, for I must confess
unto you, that since the departure of my Sons I have found no quiet in my
thoughts: one while I seem to doubt least they have been distressed by the
way, another while I seem to doubt least they be eftsoons entised unto
vanities by evil company, and how much the more I think here^, so much the
more I am perplexed with dout. God for his mercy send us comfortable news, to
^fort my sorrowful and doubtful heart.

Phylocalus. Truly neighbor, and I am not altogether free from such
imaginations, but whiles I recomfort my self by the hope which I have in those
letters that master Gnomaticus did write, I am straight ways tormented again
with another doubt, the which is such, that I may be ashamed to utter it
considering mine own solly.


Phylopaes. O neighbor keep nothing from me for Gods sake.


Phylocalus. I will tell you then, I condemn my self of exceeding ^lly, in
that I have (...) the carriage of those letters to my servant Ambidexter, whose
doubleness I have often tried, and therefore my simpl^city was the greater:
and because he is not (long since) (...)* my mind (...) some doubt of his
^dellity.


Phylopaes. Tr^ly and not without cause, for he mig^t have retourn^d long
(...). O what a dolte was I that I sent not Fidus (here) with them also? Surely
Phylocalus my mind gives me t^t he has (...) us.


Nuntius. Letters, letters, letters.


Phylocalus. What cries this good fellow?


Nuntius. Letters from Doway letters from Doway. Hey


Phylopaes. Mary this seems to be some Carier which comes from Doway.
Come thou from Doway good fellow?


Nuntius. Yea sir doutlesse.


Phylopaes. And what letters have thou?


Nuntius. Nay that can not I tell, there are to many strange names for me to
remember, but here is my register, and so may you know better then I what
letters I have in my pack.


Phylopaes. Is that the fashion to write in a role a note of their names to
whom thy letters are directed?


Nuntius. Yea Sir that is a custom which I and such ignorantfellowes must use,
for I cannot read my self. and to show all my letters were folly, but I do
always bear such a role in my hand, wherein are written the names of those
unto whom my letters (for that time) are directed, and then when I show it,
every man can soon tell whether I be for him or not.


Phylocalus. A good order surely, and I pray thee let us see thy role of names.


Nuntius. Here it is Sir.


Phylocalus. To begin with all here is a letter for you neighbor, I trust I
shall also find another for my self.


Phylopaes. Oh how this comfort my heart, this letter comes from my younger
Son, I will break it up.

He goes a side with it.
Phylocalus. Lo now I have likewise found one that is directed to me, and it is
also ye orthographie of my Son Phylotimus, let us see what it conteyneth in
Gods name.

He reads also.
Nuntius. Who shall pay me for the bringing of them?


Fidus. Stay a while good fellow, thy pains shall be considered well I warrant
thee.


Nuntius. Yea but I may not long tarry, for I must go about and deliver the rest
of these letters this night.


Fidus. All that may thou do well enough, they will not be long before they
have done, but I pray thee tell me, do thou not know my Masters Sons?


Nuntius. What should I call them by their names?


Fidus. The eldest is named Phylautus, and the younger called Phylomusus.


Nuntius. I think I know master Flautus, a tall young gentleman, small in the
middle, is he not?


Fidus. Yes surely he is but slender.


Nuntius. Mary and I saw him in deed at Doway, brave (by the mass) and lusty,
there was another gaye young gentleman in his company, and a serving man, wotte
you who? old Ambidexter the best fellow in all Antwerpe, I promise you they
are merry and well.


Phylopaes. What news neighbor?


Phylocalus. Good and badde.


Phylopaes. Even so have I in my letter, hold good fellow there is a reward for
bringing of these letters, and gramer^y.


Nuntius. I thank you sir, I return to Doway with in these two days, and if
it please you to command me any thing thither I will repair to your house.


Phylopaes. I pray thee do, for peradventure I will write by thee.

Nuntius exit. O God neighbor, how unhappy were we to send your lewd
servant Ambidexter with our Sons? My Son writes unto me that his brother
Phyla^tus and your Son Phylosarchus are seldom from the Bordelles or
Tauerns, and that Ambidexter is their companion, and means to tarry there with
them and to retour^ no more.


Phylocalus. My Son writes so in effect, but he seems to do^t least they
prepare themselves to abandon the Uniuersity, and to go gadding about the world
a little, for he ^teth that they stay on hope that Echo and certain other of
his companions will shortly be with them, othermyse they had been gone long
since. Of himself I have (...) news, for he writes unto me that the
Palsegraue has written unto the chancellor of the uniuersity for a
secretary, and that he stands in clection.


Phylopaes. And my Son Phylomusus is entered into the ministry, and has
preached in the Uniuersity, and means thortly to go unto Geneua, such comfort
we have yet unto our calamity. But as every mischief is most casely cured and
redressed in the beginning, so if you will follow my counsel, we will
immediately dispatch Fidus vnfo them, who shall both aprehend Ambidexter and
cause him to be punnished, and shall also stay our two wandering Somes and
bring them home unto us.


Phylocalus. I like your council well, and for the l^ue of God let it be put
in execution immediately, for insuch cases nothing is so requisite as expedition.


Phylopaes. Hold Fidus take these twenty crowns, and get thee away with all
speed possible, take post horses from place to place, and if they should
chance to be gone from Doway before thou come, yet follow them, and never
cease until thou have found them, and bring them home unto us.


Phylocalus. Fidus spare for no cost, and hold thee there are twenty crowns
more if need require.


F^us. Well Sir you shall see that no diligence shall want in me to recover
them. Will it please you to command (...) any other service?


Phylop^s. No, but God send thee good success.

Fidus departs. In the m^ane time neighbor let us go see what is done for
the staying of E^cho, that we may yet prevent all mischief as much as in us
lies.


Phylocalus. I like you well, your wit is very good upon a so^aine, but
behold where master Gnomaticus comes, by him we shall partly understand
what is done.


Actus quinti,
Scaena tertia.
GNOMATICVS, PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS.

Gnomaticus. GEntlemen, I have sought you round about the Town, this gear is
in manner dispatched, Echo is apprehended with his train and all.


Phylopaes. Well, that is some comfort yet to our heavy hearts.


Gnomaticus. Why have you any cause of heaviness? Tell me I pray you Sir, what
mean you to stand thus amassed?


Phylocalus. My neighbor and I have received news which are both sorrowful and
comfortable. Our two elder Sons (by the lewd assistance of my servant whom
I sent with them) do bestow their time very wantonly in Doway, and do
determine (as seems) to be gone from thence very shortly.


Gnomaticus. To be gone? whether in Gods name?


Phylocalus. Nay that he knows, to seek aduenfures abroad in the world by
all lykelyhoode, and they stay but for the coming of Echo and his companyons.


Gnomaticus. Well as for their c^ming thanked be god it is preuen^ed well eneugh,
but I pray you Sir tell me how know you this to be certeynly so?


Phyloc^lus. Why w^ have received letters from our other two Sons, hold^ you
here is mine, you may read it.

He d^uereth him the letter. How now neighbor? what muse you? your wits were
good (erewhile) upon the sudden, pluck up your spirits, you shall see by Gods
grace Fidus will bring us good news.


Phylop^s. Oh neighbor I am not able to express the sorrows which my heart
conceiueth, alas the goods of the world (although they be gotten with great
travail, and kept with great care) yet the loss of them does never torment a
wise man* since the same device or brain that could contriue the gathering of
them, is able again to renew the like: but the misgouernme^t of a man's
children, or to see them cast away by lack of grace or for lack of vigilant
foresight, that only is unto the wysest mind an vnmedicinable wound. Oh that
my heart is not able to bear nor to abide the furious assaults of this
misfortune.

He sowneth.
Phylocalus. What man stand up and take a man's heart unto you.


Gnomati^s. What Sir for the love of God do not take the matter thus heavily,
by his grace you shall have no such cause, your neighbor here has cause of
comfort: for I perceive that his Son has so well spent his time, and so well
profited at his book, that ^e stands in election to be Secretary unto
Palsegraue.


Phylocalus. Yea and his Son Phylomusus is also become a famous preacher, and
means shortly to go unto Geneua.


Gnomatic^s. Well then each of you has some cause of comfort yet, and by the
grace of God you shall see that the rest will fall out better then you look
for, but if it should not, you must yet arm your self with patience, and give
god thanks in all things, since he can send tribulations and vexations when
pleases him, and can also send comfort when seems mete to his divine
majesty, but what have you done for the preventing hereof?


Philocalus. Mary we have dispatched my neighbors servant Fidus to stay both
them and Ambidexter, that the one may be punished in example of all others, and
that the other may also be brydled from their hedstrong race which they mean
to run.


Gnomaticus. Ambidexter? Why what has h^ done?


Phylocalus. Do you not mark the letter? it seems that his only leudenes
has ministered matter unto their misbehaui^ur, for he is their lodes mate and
c^mpanio^ in all places, and has settled himself with them, meaning never more
to turn unto me.


Gnomaticus. Surely Phylocalus you were not well advised to se^d such a fellow
with your Sons, I pray god he have delivered my letters faythfullie, for I
did yet never receive answer of them. By whom received you these letters?


Phylocalus. By a carrier which trauayleth weekly to Doway.


Gnomaticus. And had he no letters for me? Phylocalus. Surely I cannot tell,
for I was ^o glad when I found in his role, letters to me and my neighbor,
that I sought no further for any other, but you shall soon find him out if you
ask for the Carryer of Doway.


Gnomaticus. Well by your leave then I will go seek him, for I long sore to
have answer of my letters.


Philocalus. You shall do well, and in mean time my neighbor and I will go
unto his house, for I perceive he is not well.


Actus quinti
Scaena quarta.
SEVERUS the MARGRAVE with his officers, and ECHO. Seuerus. COme on sirrah,
what acquaintance have you with these Ladies?


Echo. Sir I have but small acquaintance with them.


Seuerns. No? What did you there then?


Echo. Sir I had waited upon them into the Town that day (as I do upon
diverse other for my living) and they prayed me to suppe with them in part of
recompense for my travail.


Seuerus. Mary sir your fare was good as I understand, and meet for much
better personages then either of you. Tell me who provided it? And who paid for
it?


Echo. I know not Sir, it was enough for me that I knew where it was, I never
asked from whence it came for conscience sake.


Seuerus. Well iested fellow Echo, but I must make you sing another note
before you and I part. Tell me how came you acquainted with Phylosarchus?


Echo. I have known him long since sir, as I know diverse other young
gentlemen in this Town.


Seuerus. Yea but how came it to pass that he should have been there at
supper that night?


Echo. That cannot I tell, neither do I know wheth^ he should have bin there
that night or no.


Seuerus. Yes that you can, did you never see him there before?


Echo. I saw him there once, in other honest company, but what is that to me?
Had I any thing to do with his being there? or does it follow of necessity
that because he was there once before, therefore he should have been there that
night also?


Seuerus. No, but you know well enough if you list that he should have been
there, and that the banquet was prepared for him. You were best to confess a
truth.


Echo. Sir I will not confess that which I know not, neither for you nor for
never a man on live. He might have been there for all me, and he might have
been away also if he list, for any thing that I know.


Seuerus. Well, it were but lost labor to talk any longer with you, go take
him, and carry him to the mill, and there let him be whipped every day
thryse, until he confess the cyrcu^stances of al these matters, we may not
suffer the Sons of honest and welthy Burghers to be seduced by such lewd
fellows, and they to skape skotfree.


Actus quinti
Scaena quinta.
GNOMATICVS* alone. O God how a man may be deceived (at the first) in a
youngman? the capacity of this Phylos^rcus and his yokefellow Phylautus was so
quick and so sufficient to receive any charge, that a man would have believed
them to have been two of the best and towardest youngmen in this city, and
yet behold how (...) and vain delight has carried them to run another race. I
have received letters here from my frind Master in Doway, who deelareth unto me
thereby, that they are sufficyently able to conceive any tradicion or Science,
but therwithall that they are so given over to pleasures and light pastimes, y^
it is in manner impossible to bridle their ^a^dring desires. On that other side
he prayseth the other two f^r the sobrest young men that ever came under his
charge, and confirms in effect as much as they had written for news unto
their parents, whereof I have greatly to rejoice, that (having passed through
my hands) they are so lykely to come unto promotion. And as I rejoice in them,
so an^ I most heartily sorry for the two elder, that their misgouernment may
become not only a great grief to their parents* but also a hinderance to such
commendation as I might else have gained by the others: but thus we may see,
that in every comfort there may grow some ^uiet, and no herb so clean but
may be hindered by stinking weeds that gro^ by it. Well I will go talk with
their parents, and if they will be ruled by my council, they shall give them
leave a little to see the world, and to follow any exercise that be not
repugnant unto virtue, for unto some wits neither correction, nor friendly
ad^tion, nor any other perswasi^n will serve, until their own rod have
beaten them, and then they prove oftentimes (though late) men of excellent
qualities. But behold where they come to discharge me of this travail.

Actus quinti
Scaena sexta.
PHYLOCALVS, GNOMATICVS, and PHYLOPAES. Phylocalus. HOw now master
Gnomaticus, have you received any letters from Doway?


Gnomaticus. Yea sir I have received letters from thence.


Phylocalus. And what news I pray you?


Gnom^us. Even the same in effect that you have received.


Phylocalus. Why then I perceive that our two younger sons have not deceived
us, nor boasted more in their letters then is true in effect.


Gnomaticus. No surely, for my friend aduertiseth me that they are two of the
towardest young men that ever came in that Uniuersity, and that he has great
hope to see them in the end become famous through all the low countries.


Phylocalus. Well that is some comfort yet, and what writes he of the two
^lder?


Gnomaticus. Surely he writes as much commendation as may be of their
capacity, mary there^al he says that they be marueilously bent unto
concupiscence, therefore I will tell you mine advise. As soon as they come
home, first rebuke them sharply for the miss bestowing of their excellent
wits, and it shall not be a^e if you add there unto also some correction,
that being done, I would wish you to put in their choice what kind of life
they will follow, so that it be virtuous, and not contrary to Gods word, and
let them see the world a while: for such fine wits have such an universal
desire commonly, that they never prove stayed until the black ox has trodden
on their toes.


Phylopaes. Yea mary but how are we sure to recover them again? When as I
fear much that they are gone from the Uniuersity already?


Gnomaticus. Why doubt you of that?


Phylopaes. Because my neighbors Son Phylotimus wrote unto him that he much
douted they would abandon the university, and that they tarried but only to
hear from Echo and his accomplices.


Gnomaticus. Yea, but Echo and the rest are safe enough for coming at them,
and behold where comes the honorable Markgraue with his Officers, you were
best to go unto him, and to give him thanks for his great care and diligence.


Actus quinti
Scaena septima.
PHYLOPAES, SEVERUS, PHYLOCALVS, GNOMATICVS. Phylopaes. RIght Honorable, we
are bound to yield you humble and hearty thanks, for that (as we understand)
you have ^sed great pain and diligence in apprehending of a lewds company, who
have (as we see now) seduced our children, and made them to neglecte the
wholesome precepts which their faithful enstructer had given them.


Seuerus. Surely I have done my best (in discharge of my duty) to apprehend
them, and I have examined them also, but truly I can not find hitherto any
proof against them, whereby they ought to be punished: and though I desire (as
much as you) to see them condingly corrected, yet with out proof of some
offense I should therein commit a wrong. True it is that Echo is known
commonly in this Town for a Parasite and a flattering fellow, and the young
woman also does not seem to be of the honestest, but yet there is no body
which will come in and say this or that I have seen or known by her. She
confesses that Phylosarchus and Phyl^us ^re there one night at a banquet, and
that Phylosarchus should have supped there the same night that they were taken,
and when I ask her to what end, she answers that he was a suter to her for
marriage, and for witness brings in her Aunt as good as her self, in the
mean time I have no proof of evil wherewith to burden her. And then master
Echo (on that other sid) he (...) as stiff as may be, and says that he
knows not whether Phylos^us should have supped there or not, and for lack of
proof I am able to go no further.


Phylocalus. Yea Sir but doubtless that Echo was the first cause of their
acquayntaunce, for the first time that my Son was there, was one afternoon,
at which time Echo came to their School Master in your name, and craved
liberty for them to come and speak with you.


Seuerus. With me?


Gnomaticus. Yea Sir doubtless, and when I gave them leave to come unto you,
they returned (after two or three hours respyte) and said that you knew them
not when they came there, and that Echo said he had mistaken the Scholemaster
and the scholars.


Seuerus. Said they thus of me?


Gnomaticus. Yea truly sir.


Seuerus. And said they that they had been with me?


Gnomaticus. Sir I would be loathe to say so if it were otherwise, and
furthermore they seemed angry.


Seuerus. And wherefore I pray you?


Gnomaticus. For that you gave them no better countenance.


Seuerus. Before God they never came at me, but this is somewhat yet, for by
this means I have good cause to punish Master Echo, and I pray you Master
Gnomaticus go with me unto him, and you shall ^are what answer he is able to
make unto these matters.


Gnomaticus. With right good will sir I will wait upon you. Worthy gentlemen,
you shall do well to consider in the mean time upon that which I last told you
as mine oppinion.


Actus quinti
Scoena octaua.
PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS. Phylopaes. THe advice which master Gnom^ticus has
given us, does not mislike me altogether, but still my mind is more and more
vexed with doubt, least in the mean time (and before Fidus can come at them)
they fall into some notable mishap by their misgouernment.


Phylocalus. You do well to doubt the worst, but if it were so, what remidie
but patience? and give god thanks that has sent to each of us such a Son as
may become the comfort of our age.


Phylopaes. Truly it is in deed a great comfort that either of us may take in
our younger Sons, but if we have lost the elder (as I fear it much) what a
corrosiue will that be unto us? Oh how I feel my fearful heart panting in my
restles breast? the Father of heaven vouchesafe to send me joyful news of
Phylautus. O wretched Phylopaes thou are like unto a covetous man, which having
abundance is yet never contented, thou art already sure of such offspring as
may give thee cause to rejoice, and yet thy mind is not satisfied, unless all
things might fall out unto thine own desire, and thou may be compared to
the patie^t which cries out before the Chirurgiens instrument do ^ouch him,
because thou conceiuest in thy imagynation, the dread which tormenteth all thy
thoughts. But alas why do I not prepare this wretched corpse of mine, to be a
present witness what is become of my Phylautus? I will surely, go provide all
things necessary for my journey, and never give rest unto these bones until
I may see him. I will do so.


Phylo^alus. What abide Phylopaes, I am a shamed to see you so impa^, what man,
I am as sorry to hear of my Sons l^wd behavior as you are of yours, and
(...) a truth. I think he will be f^wnde more fa^ltie then yours, b^t be it as
God pleases, I have one especial comfort, and that is, that I performed my
du^tie in carefulnes and in foresight (as much as in me lay) so guide him unto
promotion, it is comendable in a parent to have a care for his children, but
this womanlike tenderness in you deserves reprehention.


Phylopes Se how every man can give good council, and few can follow it,
well I pray you let us withdraw oureselues to our houses, to see if change of
place may also change my melancholic passion.


Phylocalus Go we, I will go to your house for company.


Actus quinti
Scaena nona.
SEVERUS, GNOMATICVS, FID^S. AMBIDEXTER. Seuerus. WEll since he is found
culpable of thus much, I would but talk with these neighbors of mine (I mean
Phylopaes and Phylocalus) and we will devise such punishment for the
malefactors, as may be a terror hereafter to all parasites how they abuse the
name of an officer, or entyse the children of any burghers.


Gnomaticus. Sir I dare say they will be pleased what soever you do therein,
and if it so please you I will go unto their houses and call them unto you, for
me t^inkes they are departed since we went. But what is he that comes here
in such haste?


Fidus. Oh that I could tell where to find my Master.


Gnomaticus. It is Fidus, God grant he bring good ^idings.


^idus. I would rather fy^d him in any place then at his house, that he might
have some company (yet) which might comfort him, for I dare say these tidings
will break his heart with Sorrow.


Gnomaticus. I will go to him. How now Fidus, what news?


Fidus. O master Gnomaticus I know no man whom I wuld rather have presently
then you, O Sir I am unhappy, for I am the messenger of the most woeful news
that ever my master received, for gods love accompany me unto him that you
might yet by your wisdom aswage the extremity of his grief.


Gnomaticus. I will willingly bear thee company gentle Fidus, and surely thou
deseruest great commendation and thanks, as well for thy fidelity, as also
for the exceeding great speed which thou have made, but I pray thee tell us
first (in the presence of the right honorable Markegraue) the whole
circumstance and effect of these thy news, which thou say are so s^rowfull.


Fidus Sir since you will needs have it, my master has lost his eldest Son,
and Master Phyl^calus has little better ^en lost his also.


Gnomaticus. Alas these are heavy news in deed, and must ne^des afflict the
poor parents with extreme grief, for they are unto me (almost) intolerable:
but since it becomes a christian to bear pa^ientely what soever God does
provide, I pray thee tell on the whole circumstance of every thing as it fell.


Fidus. I will tell you Sir, I used all the diligence possible on my way, and
yet before I could come at Doway, they were from thence departed.


Gnomaticus. What all togithers?


Fidus, No sir, but Phylomusus was sent by the whole consent of the university
unto the Palsgraue to be his secretary, whereas he yet remains in good
estimation, and Phylotimus was gone unto Geneua, moved with an earnest zeal
and spirit, and there he is in singular commendation and much followed.


Gnomaticus. and what was become (the mean while) of Phylautus and
Phylosarchus? They were still at Doway were they not?


Fidus. No sir they were gone also, but no man could tell me whether they were
gone, and they were gone somewhat before their brethren.


Gnomaticus Why then they tarried not for Echo, as the letters emported that
they would have done.


Fidus. O Sir they had advertisement that Echo was apprehended, and that
hastened their departure.


Gnomaticus. And by what means knew they of it?


Fidus. There was one Dicke Droom a companion of Echoes, which came unto them
and told them the whole discourse, whereupon they fled with him immediately.


Seuerus. Such a one was present in deed when Echo was taken, and because
mine officers knew him not, nor had any commission to search for him, therefore
they suffered him to depart.


Fidus. Out upon him, I would to God they had made him safe also, for he has
bin the casting away of Phylautus. Phylautus, Phylosarcus, Dick Droom with my
friend Ambidexter here, went out of Doway together, and because my masters
charge was that I should follow where so ever they went, I followed as fast as
I could by enquiry, and with in three or four days journey, I heard that
Phylosarcus by the help of this good companion Ambidexter had gotten a fair
minion for sooth, and stayed with her at Brusselles, fron^ whence Phylautus and
Dycke Droom departed, and took their wa^ together up toward Germany, now
Phylosarchus and his cari^ge held their way (as it was said) toward (...)
W^n I saw that they were so par^ed, and that I could not follow both
companies at once, I thought best to hold on my way toward the Palsgraues
Court, and hoped that by the way I might yet chance to hear of Phy^tus, and in
very deed I heard of such a one at sundry places, and at last I heard of him
expressedly, for the day before I came to the Palsgraues Court, he was there
e^ecuted for a robbery with Dicke Droom, yea even in sight of his Brother, and
notwithstanding the favor that he is in there, such severe execution of
justice is there administered.


S^erus. It is a happy common wealth where Iustic^ may be ministered with
severity, and where no mediacions or suits may wrest the sentence of the Law.


Fi^us. When I had there recoyued these heavy news, I took letters of
dispatch and advertisement from Philomusus to his Father, and crossed over the
Country toward Geneua. And long before I came thither Phylosarchus had bin
there (for fornication) whipped openly three several days in the market, and
was banished the Town with great infamy, notwithstanding that his Brother
Phylotimus was an earnest suter unto the congregation for him. When I perceived
that none other issue could be had of my travail, I took letters from
Phylotimus, and sought no further after Phylosarchus, but thought my duty first
to advertise my master of the certainty, and by my way homewardes I ouertooke
this good fellow Ambidexter in such array as you see, and have brought him with
me to abide such punishment as the worthy Markgraue here and other magistrates
shall think meet for him.


Ambidexter. Oh Sir be good unto me and pardon this offense.


Seu^. Pardon? Nay surely thou rather deseruest death, for it seems unto me,
that these young men had not so lightly gone astray, had it not bin through the
help of thee and such as thou art, such lewd servants as thou art, are the
casting away of many toward young personages, and therefore since thy good
hap has returned thee hither, thou shall with the rest serve as an example
to all servant. But thou can tell what is become of Phylosarchus?


Ambidexter. He was so sore whipped that I fear he be dead. I left him in a
village five leagues distant from Geneua, so sore that he was not able to stir
either hand or foot.


Seuerus. Well Master Gnomaticus, since onley this fellow is recovered, I think
meet to hold this course of justice, he together with Master Echo shall be
whyped about the Town three several market days, with papers declaring
their faults set upon their heds, and afterward they shall be banished the
City, upon pain of death never to return, and Mistress Lamia with her Aunt
shall likewise be set on the Cucking stool in public three market days, and
then to be banished the Town also.


Gnomaticus. Surely you have well devised, and I beseech you Sir vouchsafe to
assist me in comforting the woeful Parents Phylopaes and Phylocalus, who I
dare say will be so sorrowful for these tidinges, that it shall be hard to
persuade them to patience.


Seuerus. It is but a reasonable request, and I will most gladly accompany
you, go we togethers, and thou Fidus have well deserved thy freedom, with a
better turn for thy faithful service in this behalf, and I will be a mean
unto thy Master that thou may be considered accordingly.


Seuerus. I thank you Sir. My Masters, the common saying is clap your hands,
but the circumstance of this ^full tragical comedy considered, I may say
justly unto you wring your hands, nevertheless I leave it to your discretion.


Finis.
Epilogus.
WE live to learn, for so Saint Paul does teach, What soever is written is
written for our learning.

and all that is, is done for our avail:
Both good and bad, may be the wisemans leach,
The good may serve, to make him bear like sail,
The bad to shun, the faults wherein they fail.
Good wyndes and bad, may serve in sundry sort,
To bring our barks, into some pleasant port.
Who list to learn, what diligence may do,
what humble minds, by studies may attain,
Let him behold, these younger brethren two,
Whose wits at first, did seem to be but plain,
Yet as you see, at last they got with pain,
The golden fleese, of grace and cunning Skyll,
Before the rest which followed wanton will.
And such as brag, of quick capacity,
Or think the field, is woone withouten blows,
Let them behold, the youthful vanity:
O^ the elder twain, (...) ^ncies lightly chose,
To seek delight, in garish ground that grows.
Yet had by heart, their masters words in have:
But things sone got, are lost again as fast.
For proof whereof, behold how soon they fell,
From virtues path, to tread in vices tracks,
And therwithall, (I pray you mark it well)
Their falls were foul, they fell upon their backs.
Which gave their bones, so many brusing cracks:
That afterward, they never rose again^,
Till shameful death, did end their grievous pain.
Who falls on face, has elbowes hands and all,
To save himself, and therewith eke to rise:
To fall on back, betokens such a fall,
As cannot rise again in any wi^e*
For when he falls, his face wide open lies,
To every blow: and cannot fend the same,
Such falls found they, which brought them sone to shame
And in mean while, their Brethren rose as fast,
Much like the snaile, which clymes the Castle wall,
With easy steps* when soldiers do^ne be cast,
With furious force, and many a hedlong fall.
Assaults are hot, but yet if therewithal,
Some temperance, and pollyey be used,
They win those fortes, which hotter heads refused.
I mean but this: you see the younger twain,
(Because they did in virtue take delight)
They clombe at last (and that with pleasant pain,)
To honors Court, wherein their place was pight.
You see again, their Brethren (by delight,
In fi^thy lust, self love, and such like nio)
Did fall as fast, to shameful death and woe.
You see the bend, for faithfulness made free,
You see the free, for doubleness disdaind:
You see the whippe, the cucke stool, and the tree,
Are thought rewards, for such as vice has staind:
You s^e that right, which ever more has raignd,
And justice both: do keep their places still,
To cherish good, and eke to punish ill.
These things my muse, did mean to make you know.
By proof in act, of that which you have seen
These things my muse, thought meet to set in show,
But otherwise, then common wont has been.
This crystal glass I polisht fair and cleene,
For every man, that list his faults to mend,
This was my mind, and t^s I make an end.
Finis.
IMPRINTED* AT London in Fleetestreate at the sign of the Faulcon by Henry
Middleton, for Christopher Barker. Anno Domini. 1575.


