

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE VISITATION OF the Free-Schole at TVNBRIDGE in KENT,
by the Wardens of the Worshipful Company of SKINNERS; BY THOMAS GATAKER B. of
D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND MVCH HONORED, Sr THOMAS SMITH Knight, Governor of
the famous Company of Merchants trading to the EAST INDIES, etc.
Long life and health here, with eternal happiness els-where. *
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL;
Being requested lately by my kind Friends, the Wardens of the Worshipful
Company of Skinners, to assist them in their Visitation of the free Schole at
Tunbridge, founded long since by that worthy Knight, of blessed memory, Sir
Andrew Iudde, your Grandfather, and committed to the charge and ouer-sight of
that well-deseruing Society; I made choice of such a portion of Scripture there
to entreat of, as seemed not altogether unfitting an occasion of that kind.
After the handling whereof, being then presently solicited by some, and since
further importuned by others, to make these my weak labors more public, as
not unlikely (so they deemed) to do some further good; I was at length drawn,
regarding more their opinion, then mine own conceit thereof, as well knowing
it to be but a tumultuary work, amids many distractions hastily peiced
together; and to give them satisfaction therein, that seemed so desirous of it;
to let it go abroad, and make trial what benefit either Teacher, or Scholar,
or other might make of it. This resolved on, I began to bethink my self,
observing the usual manner of the times, whom I should make choice of for the
patronizing of it. In all respects none seemed so fit as your Self, whom I
have therefore made bold to address it unto. The Schole was first erected and
endowed by your Worships Ancestor. And you have worthily built upon his
foundation, and added liberally to his gift. So that through your munificence
it is very likely to flourish, and not to come behind some of those that be of
chief note. Your bounty herein, and in other works of the like nature, is the
rather to be regarded; for that you do not, (as the manner is of the most,
unwilling to part with ought, till they must needs leave all;) defer wholly your
well-doing to your deaths-bed, or your dying day; but bend your self
thereunto, while you may yet surviving your own donation, your self see
things settled in a due course, and receive comfort by view of the fruit and
benefit that may thereby redound both to Church and Commonweal. And certainly,
to omit, that Ben^ sicium nisi a v^lente non ^atur. Sen. de ben. l. 5 ^. 19
Beneficium est qu^d qui^ dedit, c^m p^sset and non dare. lb. l. 3. c. l 9.
the good that men do in their life time is a surer note of true bounty, then
that they do at their deceasse; as Legatur Ambr. exhort. ad p^nit and August.
homil. 41.
there is greater evidence of sincere repentance, in the abandoning of vice,
while men have liberty and ability to continue the practice of it, then in
leaving of sin then, when sin it self leaves them, and they can no longer
follow it: Howsoever the benefit to others may be equal in either, to the
Doner himself in the former is the comfort far greater, Good done at our end
is like a Lantern borne after us, that directs them that come after us, but
affords us little light; whereas the good done in our life time is like a
light borne before us, that both Beneficiu^ dando accepit, qui digno dedit. P.
Syrus.
benefiteth them and us also alike, imparting light equally unto either. Yea,
of such beneficence I may well say more: it benefiteth the giver in diverse
respects much more then the taker; it is a far greater pleasure to the
bestower, then it is to the receiver. Act. 20. 35.
It is a more blessed thing, says our Savior, to give then to take. Yea
(...). Epicurus. (...). Plut. de philoseph. apud dutes disser. Non honestius
tan. ^um, sed and tucundius est ben ficium dare quam accipere. (...) Itaque
Sen. de ben. l. 1 c. 1. Ma^m n^n recipere benefi^ia, quam non dare.
to give then to take, says the Heathen man, it is the pleasanter of the
twain: to bestow a benefit upon an other, then to receive a benefit from an
other, it is more delightsome to any man of a free and ingenuous disposition.
So that, to pass by the religious consideration, of the rich and royal reward
and recompense of well-doing from God and with God, which may be alike unto
either; the very light of Nature shows, that in true Beneficence there is
more pleasure and contentment, and consequently more comfort and benefit even
for the present, to the giver then to the taker: that which is a great part of
it, wanting unto those, that defer their well-doing, though they do never so
well then, till their deceasse. You, worthy Sir, do otherwise, and long may you
live so to do, to the increase of your joy and comfort here, and the
furtherance of your account and reckoning els-where. With which wish I seal
all up, that I be not ouer-tedious and troublesome to your Worship, amids your
other manifold more serious and weighty affairs; and requesting only your
favorable acceptance of this sorry trifle, rest,

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, Tho: Gataker.

DAVID'S INSTRVCTER.
PSALM. 34. 11. Come, Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of
the Lord.
ALL (...). 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Scripture, says the Apostle, is divinely inspired, and is profitable to
instruct. And Prove. 30. 5.
Every word of God, says Agur, is pure: even Psalm. 12. 6.
as pure as gold or silver that has past seven times through the fire in the
furnace.

But yet, as some gold and silver is finer then other; and some golden vessels
are more useful then others are: so between Scripture and Scripture (though
all pure, precious, and profitable) there is great difference: some is of
greater excellency, and of more ordinary use.

And Licit (...) Scriptura diuina Dei gratiam spiret, praecipue tamen dulcis
est Psalmoru^ liber. Ambr. praefat. in Psalm. (...). Basil. praefat. in Ps.
Psal^^ru^ liber quaeconque vtilia sunt ex omnibus continet. August.
no one Book of Scripture more excellent, or Psalmus omnibus and vbi^ prasto
est. Lege Ambros Aug. Ruffin. and Euthym. praefat. in Psalm.
of more frequent use both in public and private then this of the Psalms;
wherein the holy men of God, as they Psalm. 424. and 102 ut. 1. Sa^. 1.15.
power out their souls unto him, so they portrait and paint them out unto us.

Among the rest of the Psalms, some of them there are, about which the Holy
Ghosts pleasure was, that the penmen thereof, should take more pains then
usual, and more Art then ordinary should be showed, in the framing and
contriuing of them: And where he uses more Art, we may well expect more
excellence; where they have taken most pains in teaching us, there should we
use most diligence in learning that, that is taught us.

Of this kind are the 25. the 37. the 119. and this 34 Psalm; Psalmi (...)
Psalm. 118 in fi^e.
composed according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, the verses of them
beginning, as in Acrostichall Poems, with the letters thereof in their vulgar
and usual order: partly Vt memoriae consuleret. Muscul. in Psalm. 119.
to help memory; and partly, V^autmadm^di^ parvutorum inger^^ primis
literaru^ eleme^tis assu^scunt vsum dicendi assumer^; itanos etiam vsam vtuendi
discamus. Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
that even Children and learners, together with their first Elements of other
learning, might have an Alphabet of piety and godliness taught them.

This Psalm, one of those thus artificially framed, is a Psalm consisting
partly of Verse. 1, 2.
Celebration, of praise and thanksgiving to God; and partly of Verse. 3, 5, 7,
8.
Exhortation and instruction to us.

The words propounded for the subiect-matter of my present discourse, are
parcel of the latter part. For in Verse. 9, 10.
the verses next before-going, the Psalmist had encited men to the fear of
God: and in these words he undertakes to teach them this Fear.

In the words there are these four parts: Invitatio, Compellatio, Exhortatio,
and Pollicitatio.

1. An Invitation; Come.

2. A Compellation; Children.

3. An Exhortation; Hearken to me.

4. A pollicitation or a promise; and therein again these four particulars:

The Agent, the Act, the Object, the Subject.

1. The Agent; King David himself, the penman of this Psalm; I.

2. The Act; teaching or instructing: I will teach.

3. The Object, or persons to be taught; Children; whom before he called upon;
You.

4. The Subiect-matter of his teaching, that wherein he would instruct them;
the Fear of the Lord.

And of these parts and points in order, as briefly as conveniently I may.

In the first place then there is prompta Invitatio, Part 1.
a free Invitation: affording us this Lesson, (to omit all others) that

We had need of all invitements and incitements, Doctr. 1.
inticements and allurements to goodness and godliness. Hence so many mementoes
in the word of God: Eccles. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator: and, Deuteronomy 9. 7.
Remember, forget not: etc. so many Caveats; 1. Tim. 4. 16.
Cave tibi; Take heed to thy self: and, Deuteronomy. 4. 23.
Cavete vobis, Take ye heed to your selves: etc. so many Invitations; Esai.
2. 3.
Come, let us go up to Gods house: and, Esai. 2. 5.
Come, let let us walk in the light of the Lord: and in this place, Come,
Children; hearken to me: etc.

All needful, and all little enough:

1. Reason 1.
In regard of our natural auersenes to good things. Job. 11. 12.
Man by nature, says Zophar, is like a wild asses Colt: as an Asses foale,
for rudenes; a wild Asses, for unruliness: untamed and intractable, Ier. 2.
24.
as the wild Ass in the wilderness.

2. Reason 2.
In regard of the difficulty of the work. Prove. 15. 24.
The way of the wise, says wise Soloman, is upward. We are bred in Hell: (
(...). Ephesians. 2. 3.
by Nature vessels of wrath:) and we must climb up to Heaven: (...). Hesiod.
L^, Ardua virtutis via. Horat. carm. l. 3. ode 24. Sed and Ovid. de Pont. 3.
eleg. tendit in ardua virtus. Et S^^us b. l. Pun. l. 2. Ardua virtut^^ profert
via. ^Et, cilsum virus. petit ardua collem. Lege Se. nec. epist. 123.
a long way and a steep. We are Mens^^^ ad mel^^ra em^itur, quasi contra ictis
fl^minis con^tur. etc. Greg. Romans m^ral. l. 11. c. 28.
like those, that row against wind and tide; we strive against the stream and
current of corrupt nature, of evil custom; we struggle against the strong
counterblasts, of bitter scoffs, and bad counsel. We have need therefore of
all kind of encouragement.

3. Reason. 3.
In regard of our pronenes to grow slack. 2 Thessalonians 3. 13. Galat. 69.
And you, my brethren, says the Apostle, be not weary of well-doing. We are
too prone, even the best of us, to wax weary on this way, to grow slack at
this work. It is true of us, that Alphius foener^t^r, cuius m^minit Hora^^us
epod 2.
Alphius the Usurer sometime said of his Clients, Optima n^mina no appella^do
mala f^eri, Alphius (...) v^rissime f^rt^r. Colum. de re rust l. 1. c 7.
Even good Debtors will grow slack Pay-masters, if they be let alone, if they
be not now and than called upon.

The consideration whereof may serve, First, Use 1.
to admonish us of our duty one to an other. Hebr. 10. 24.
Let us observe either other, says the Apostle, (...).
to whet on, or to egg on, to love and good works. So the Holy Ghost
describes the manner of Gods Saints, quickening, calling on, and encouraging
either other. Esai. 2. 3.
And many people shall go, and say; Come, and let us go up to the Mountain
of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us his ways,
and we will walk in his paths* And, Esai. 2. 5.
Come, o ye house of Jacob, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. And
again; Zech. 8. 21.
The people of one City shall go to another, and say; Up, and let us pray
before the Lord, and seek the Lord of hosts: and I will go my self too.

Now this, Application.
as it is the duty of all, so more specially of those that converse familiarly
together; most especially of those that have care and charge of others,
Ministers and Magistrates in public, Parents, Scholemasters, and Masters of
Families in private, (...)
to whet up their inferiors, (it is the term that Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Si^ Prove. 27. 17.
Moses uses, and the Apostle imitateth him in) to be often calling upon those
that be under their charge, and enciting of them to those things that be good.
Remembering, that as the Heathen man says that those that correct but instruct
not, are (...). Plu. praecept. polit.
like those that snuff the light often, but put no oil into the lamp; so those
that instruct but incite not, are like those that put in oil enough, yea
enough it may be to drown the light, (that which may often soon be done,) but
are not careful or mindful to raise and pull up the week, which unless it
be in due time still done, the light will of it self soon decay and wax
dim, though there be no defect of liquor to feed it withal.

Secondly, Use 2.
as we must our selves call upon others; so we must be content to be called
upon by others. Inferiors especially and learners, children, servants, or
others, must not think much to be frequently called upon by their Superiors:
they must not account it any disgrace or disparagement unto them, that they are
often admonished, incited and called upon in this kind. 2. Pet. 1. 12.
I will not be negligent, says Peter, to put you in mind of these things,
though you have knowledge, though you know the truth already, and be
established in it. Yea, R^m. 15. 14, ^^.
Though I be persuaded of you, says the Apostle Paul, that you are full of
goodness, and of all knowledge, and able to admonish one an other: yet I am bold
by writing to put you in mind of these things. Yea, (...)
It is not tedious to me to go over the same things often with you; and it is
the safest course for you. So that (...)
even those that are best grounded, that have abundance of sound knowledge,
that are full of grace and goodness, that are the greatest proficients, and
forwardest Scholars in Christ's School, yet may stand often in need of being
whet up, and put on: much more such as are but rude and raw, as are but nouices
and dullards, as are scarce, it may be, yet of the first form in Christ's
School Plantas ne^^^^ ^^quemius adaq^^re pr^^erit. P^^m^s. in Pi^^ip. ^^ Greg.
Romans m^ral. l. 27. c. 14.
Tender plants and new planted have need often to be watered; they are in danger
else to windle and wither away. And Gods grace and good things in us are like a
dull sea-cole fire, which if it be not now and then blown or H^u^ (...)m^nemur
2. Timo. 1. 6.
stirred up, though there be no want of fuel, yet will of it self at length
dye and go out.

In the next place there is as prompt^ Part 2.
Inuitatio, so blanda Compellatio: as a free Inuitation, so a sweet and loving
Compellation: Children.

The Name of Children is a most sweet Name, sauouring strongly of Love; and
used therefore so often by (...). 13. 23. and 21. 7.
that Disciple of Love, and of Christ's love in that Epistle of his that
breaths nothing but Love: 1. John 3. 17. and 4. 7.
^ittle Children, let us love one another, not in word and tongue, but in deed
and truth: and, 1. Ioh 3. 7.
Little Children, let no man deceive you: And, 1 Iho. 5. 21.
Little Children keep your selves from Idols, etc. Dectr. 2.
And it shows what loving affection ought to be between teacher and taught:
even such as is between natural Parents and Children. That which the Apostle
Paul so often, and in so lively manner expresses in himself, when he compares
himself, sometime to a Father; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
I exhorted you and besought you, as a Father his Children: sometime to a
Mother; Galat. 4. 19.
My little Children, of whom I travail again, till Christ be formed in you:
sometime to a Nurse; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
We were gentle among you, as a Nurse cherishes her Children.

And great reason is there that so it should be: Reason. 1.


For first, Exodus 20. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. 16.
God has given the name of Parents unto them: he has comprehended all
Superiors under that head.

And surely, if other masters have the name of Father given them: as 2 King. 5.
13.
Naamans servants give it him: Schoolmasters much more. They are in some
kind, under God, (to use the Apostles term) Hebr. 12. 9.
patres spirituum, the Fathers of men's Spirits. Our Parents are instruments
under God, for the producing of our Bodies the baser part: they are instruments
under him, for the framing and moulding of our minds and souls, the better
and more principal part of us.

Yea, Reason. 2.
as the Apostle Paul says of the Corinthians, that 1. Cor. 4. 15.
he was their Father, because by his Ministry he had begotten them to God: so
such Schoolmasters as are careful and conscionable of their duty in that
kind, may well say of their Scholars that they are their children in Christ,
as the same Paul styles (...). 1 Timo. 1. 2. 1. Tit. 1. 4.
Timothy and l Titus elsewhere; since that many (no doubt) of them receive
the first seeds and grains, and beginnings of faith and fear of God, and
other saving and sanctifying grace from them.

Again, Reason. 3.
this the rather is as equal, so needful; because that where no love is,
there is little hope of learning. Little hope there is, that the master should
do his Scholars good, if he love not them: and as little hope is there, that
the Scholars should receive good from him or profit by him, unless they love
him.

That which serves in the First place to admonish all teachers and
instructors, Use. 1.
either public or private, how they ought to be affected toward those that are
committed to their charge. As one says of a good Prince, that Princeps pius
nunquam carebit l. b^ris: Totius est regni pater. Princeps abunda^ ergo
faelicissimus Tet liberis, quot subditis. Th. Morus in epigram.
he has as many Sons as he has subjects, and is therefore as a kind and
loving Father to them: so should the Schoolmasters make account that he has
in some sort, as many Children as Scholars that be under his charge; (...).
Homer de Vlysse Odyss. (...). Xenop^^ Cyripae. l. l. 8.
and therefore carry himself toward them in kind and loving manner, even as if
he were a natural Father unto them.

Which kind and loving carriage, Cantion.
or Fatherly affection, yet is not so to be interpreted, as if it were utterly
to exclude and cut of all just reproof and due correction, when occasions
shall require it. That was the fault of 1 Samuel 2. 2^. ^euis obi^^gatio (...)
satisfe^erat discipli^^. Salpit. hist. sacr. l. 1.
Eli, and 1 King. 1. 6.
David too, though worthy men of God otherwise; and it proved 1 Samuel 4 18.
a breake-necke to the one, and 2 Samuel 15. 12. 1 King. 1. 5.
an heart-sore to the other. Pro^. 29. 15.
The r^d and correction give instruction, says Solomon; but a child left to
himself is the confusion of her that bare him. And, Prove. 13. 24.
He that spares the rod, hates his Son; but he that loves him, chastneth
him betimes. Mango blanditur, vt corrumpat; Pater minatur, vt corrigat. Aug. in
1. Joan. tract. 7.
The seducer speaks the child fair to mar him; the Father handles him
roughly to amend him: Pius est f^riendo; crudelus esset parcendo, ldem de ^e^p.
94.
He is kind in correcting him; he were cruel in sparing him. (...). Aristotel.
ethic. Nicom. l 2.
Correction is a kind of cure. A fair hand, we say commonly, makes a foul
wound. Quid tam pium qua^ medicus ferens ferramentis? saeuit in vulnus vt homo
sauetur: quia (...) vult^us palpetur, homo perditur. Aug. de verb. Dom. 15.
The Surgion searches the wound to the quick, that he may save the man's life:
for he should endanger the one, if he dealt but superficially with the other.
(...), (1. Cor. 15. 55) (...). Basil. in ascet. q. 4.
He is not cruel that diggeth and gasheth the flesh, to get out a sting, or a
splinter, that will not out otherwise: he is cruel rather, that (out of a fond
pitifulness) lets it alone: Nor he cruel, that gives correction, when it
is requisite and needful, but he rather that then withholdeth it.

Reproof therefore, yea correction too, may well stand with Love. Apoc. 3. 19.
As many as I love, I rebuke, says our Savior. And, God, says Hebr. 12. 6.
the Apostle after Prove. 3. 12.
Solomon, whom he loves, he corrects; and he scourges every Son that he
receives. Molestus est and Medicus furenti phrene^ico, and Pater
indisciplinato filio, ille ligando, ille caedendo, sed ambo diligendo. Si autem
illos negligant, and perire permittant, ista poti^^ mansuetudo falsa, crudelis
est. Aug. epist. 50.
The Physician is troublesome to the frantic Patient, and the Father to the
unruly Child; the one in binding him, the other in beating him: and yet both
do what they do out of Love.

Yea severity and sharpnes may in some cases well agree with it. Tit. 1. 13.
Rebuke them (...). rigide Biza i^ not.
sharply, says Paul to Titus of some, that they may be found sound in the
Faith. And, to use an Hethen man's comparison;

(...). etc. Dion Chrys^st. orat 78.
A Surgion had he two persons to cut for the stone, the one his dear Friend,
the other a mere Stranger, would he be so foolish, think we, out of love and
favor to his friend, as to cut him with a blunter tool or razer then he would
cut the other with?

It is not meant therefore, when kind and loving carriage is required of
Instructors and Teachers, that they should not therefore either correct or
reprove: But that Srie tateas, dilectione taceas: sine cl^m^s, di^ectione clam
^^si^eparcas, d^iect^^n^ parecas: sine corrigas, dilect^^e corrigas. A^i
disciplinu^ si^ni (...) di^^ante ^h^ritate. Omnia de charitatis pro^d^nt
rad^^e. D^^ge, and quod^^s fat. Aug. in 1. Joan. tract. 7.
whither they teach, or instruct, or reprove, or correct, they 1. Cor. 16. 14.
do, according to the Apostles rule, all in Love, and in loving manner: That
they strive in the first place Veluti pueris dant crus^ula ^landi D^ctores el^m
n^^ velint vt discere trim^. Hor. sat. 1.
by all mild and gentle usage to win them, and by fair words and rewards to
entice and allure, as (...) A^ciet D^us la^etu^ Genesis 9. 27 E: H^sh 2 14.
Allicia^ ea^, and ^quar ad cor eius
God himself is wont to deal with us. And again, when they shall be
constrained to take rougher courses with them; yet that then also they L^
seuerita^e^ mansuetud^ condiat, (...) mansuetuaine^, ne disselu^a sit, di
striction^ seueritas ac^^ndat Greg. ^o. in Eua^g. bo^. 17. Ne aut districtio
sit rigida, aut ^^etas remissa. Idem de pastore part. 2. cap. 6. Remissio no
vitians, correptio no^ cruemans: and seueritas etiam te^peramenti, quae no^ sit
titra, (...) te^^ca. Sidou. epist. 9 lib. 4. and Radevic de gest. Frid. l. 2.
Quae sangnin^m effundat p^u tius g^m effund. 1. Tertull. ap^l^g
temper severity with lenity, and allay the sharpnes of the one with some
mild dash of the other: (...). Galat. 6. 1. tanquam membrum luxatum in lo. um
proprium, ad situm na^^vum reducrte. Sirigel. ad Gal.
Restore the offender, says the Apostle, with the spirit of lenity; as (...).
Paul. Aegin.
the Surgion sets and restores a limme dislocated to his proper place and
due site again, with as little pain, as needs must, to the party: Do as (...).
D^^n C^^risest. orat. 33. - v^luti pueris a^ sin^^ia tetra midentis Cum dare
conantur, prius oras p^^ula (...) dulci mellis sta^^que liquore, Vt puerorum
atas improuida ludificetur Labr^rum tenus; interea perpotet amarum Absinthi
laticem, deceptaque non capatur, Sed potius tali facto recereata val^^ it.
Lucret de r^r, not. l. 4.
those that give Children wormwood or aloes for the worms, they sweeten the
brims of the cup with honey, or mix it with wine or milk, or some other such
sweet thing to make them take it the more willingly, and give them a little
sugar after to sweeten their mouths with again: or as (...). Basil. and
Euthym. praefat. in Psalm. Sapientes mediei, siquando vsus popescerit, vt
austeriora medicamenta agris o^^erant mortalibus: ne aeger vtilitatem pr^
austeritate refugiat, ora ac sammitates poculi quo remediu^ perrigu^t, m^lle
^^cuml^nunt. Aug. ibid.
those that give bitter pills to queesie stomached patients, they wrap them up
in some conserve, or in the pap of an apple, that they may with as little
offense as may be take them in, and the better ^eepe and retain them when they
be down: So order and temper their reproof and their correction, that it may
appear not to proceed from spleen, or grudge, or choler, or some other such
peevish and sinister humor; but that even by the very manner of it, and the
affection showed in it, it may be seen to issue from a loving mind, and to
aim at nothing but the well-doing of the party either corrected or reproved.

In a word, let Teachers and Instructers remember what the Heathen man truly
says, that Null^^ est animal morosius homine, quodque art mai^re tract^ri
debeat. Se^. de clement. l. 1. c. 17.
there is no living creature more wayward naturally then Man, nor that need to
be managed with more discretion and skill.

Secondly, Use 2.
let Scholars learn hence how they are to esteem of their Teachers, and how
to carry themselves toward them; even to reverence them, and to affect them as
Parents. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
I beseech you, says the Apostle, that you would take notice of them, that
take pains with you, and that admonish you; and that you would have them in
singular love for their work sake.

The Heathen themselves could say, that Dijs, Paren^ibus, and Praeceptoribus
nihil pro merit^ posse rependie.
to God, a man's Parents, and his Teachers, sufficient requital could never be
made. And no marvel. For if the Teachers do as they ought, and the Scholars
likewise make that use of them that they should, they may well say of them as
Paul does to Philemon, Philem. 19.
Etiam animam mihi debes, that they owe them their very souls; as having bin a
means even Prove 23. 14. Iam. 5. 20.
to save their souls. And how ought they to love them from the heart, whom
they owe their very souls unto?

Far be it from any here then, to be like those wicked wretches, whom the
Prophet inveigheth against, Am^^ 5. 16.
that hate those that reprove them: to hate their Instructors, because they are
sometime also necessarily Reprouers or Correctors, to hate them for that, for
which they ought rather to love them. You must not, as Psalm 32. 9.
this our Psalmist speaks, be as Horse or Mule that are without
understanding. Horses and Mules can well endure and are wont Esai. 1. 3.
to take notice of those that feed them, and stroke them, and make much of
them; but Iumenta eos calce morsuque appetunt, a q^bus little cura^. da vul^^ra
contrectantur. Aug epist. ^0. and hemil. 24.
they cannot endure those that come about them to drench them, or bleed them,
or to meddle with their sores, though they entend nothing therein but their
good: because they have sense, whereby they perceive some present good in the
one; but they have no reason to apprehend any future good in the other.
Creatures endued with reason, must be wiser then they: and love their Teacher,
as well reproouing and correcting, when just occasion is, as speaking fair and
commending: as Medicum ^^vr^n em and secam^m (...) quem and a^ r^endum a^
s^^^nd ^mem^uci^us ^^^res. in Psalm.
men were wont to esteem themselves beholden to the Surgion, as well for
opening the ulcer, and letting out the corrupt matter, as for healing up the
wound again.

They must remember what the wise man says, that Prove. 12. 1.
he that hates Instruction and Correction, and so he that hates his
Instructors and Correctors, is a Fool: yea, Prove. 15 10.
he that hates either, shall die.

In the third place follows, Part 3.
Seria exhortatio, Doctr. 3.
a serious Exhortation: Hearken unto me. Wherein is expressed, the principal
duty of Children, Scholars and Learners, to hearken unto their Parents,
Instructors and Teachers. That for which Solomon so often calls upon those that
he deals with: Prove. 4. 1.
Hear, O ye Children, the instruction of a Father, and give ear to learn
understanding: and, Prove. 4. 20.
My Son; hearken unto my words, and incline thine ears to my sayings. and,
Prove. 5. 7.
Hear me now therefore, O Children, and hearken unto the words of my mouth,
etc.

And great reason they so should.

For first, Reason 1.
it is their wisdom so to do, Prove. 13. 1.
A wise Son, says Solomon, will hearken to his Fathers instruction. And,
Prove. 12. 15.
He that hearkneth to good advice is wise. Prove. 3. 7. and 26. 12. B^^d^sipi^,
quisibi sap^t.
No greater folly in young people, then to think themselves wise enough,
Corsilij satis est in (...) m^mi^i. Aracl^ne apud Ovid. met. l. 6.
able enough to advise and to guide themselves well enough, and to stand in no
need of direction or advice. You know well what the famous sentence so often
cited says: (...). Hesiod. oper. l. 1. and Arist. ^thi^. l. 1. c. 4. Paucis
animus sui rector optimus. Moeneri v^lle ac posse s^cunda virtus est. Senet. de
benefic. l. 5. c. 25.
He is the best man that can of himself discern, what is fit and meet to be
done. He is the next him, that can hearken to good advice given him by others:
But he that neither can see what is fit of himself, nor will follow the good
counsel that others shall give, such a one is as an unprofitable limme in the
body, (...). (...) invtile pondu^. Homer. Il^ad. 6. and Odyss. ^.
and a very burden to the earth that bears him. Children and young people,
since they cannot be in the first rank: (because (...). S^phccl. ^seru venit
vsu^ ab a^nis. Ovid. m^tam 1. 6. Quisquis sen^x ad sapientiam per venit, annis
p^rvenit. Sen. ep. 68.
age brings experience, and skill requires years:) they must be content to
be in the second; least they come within compass of the third.

Secondly, Reason 2.
it is impiety in some sort to do otherwise, Ezech 3. 7.
They will not hear thee; says God to the Prophet: for they will not hear
me. And surely (...). Philo de Decalog.
the fifth Commandment, (as Philo the Jew well observes, who therefore also
makes it a branch of the first Table, and so divides the Tables equally,
assigning five precepts to either:) it is a mixed Commandment, and differs
somewhat from the rest of those in the Second Table; they consider Man as our
neighbor, in nature like us, this as Gods Deputy, standing in his steed, by
him set over us, and in his name, and by his authority, performing offices
about us. And therefore when such instruct and admonish, 2. Cor. 13. 3.
God does it by them. Quicquid obedientiae exhibetur, et exhibetur, qui dicit:
Qui vos qudit, me audit. Bern. de grad. obed. Luke 10. 19.
When we hearken to them, we hearken to him in them: when we refuse to regard
them, we contemn him in them. Neither can such contempt be cleared from some
taint of impiety. Use.


Let this briefly then admonish Children, to hearken to, and take to heart the
good and wholesome admonitions of their Parents, Instructors, Tutors, and
Teachers, Aur^ prima mortis (...), prima ap^riatur saluto. Bern. a^i^ubi.
Let the Ear, says Bernard, that was once opened to let in death and
destruction, by harkening to evil counsel; be now set wide open to let in
life and Salvation, by giving ear to good advice. Let your ears with Homer.
Odyss. (...). Sapiens (...) aures quibus cer^m pari^ est obdere. spissament^
^pus est, qu^^ vsumin s^cijs Vlyxe^ ferunt. Sen. (...). 31.
Ulysses (to deal with you out of your own learning) be close shut against
the Sirens songs of such as shall Romans 16. 18.
by fair words and smooth language, go about to seduce you, and to with-drawe
you from that, wherein consists your special good; that shall seek to bring
you out of love with your Instructors, or with those courses that are by them
taken with you for your good. But let your ears be open, and your hearts
pliable to attend unto them, their instructions and admonitions, and Quia vtile
est i^ventuti regi, impositi sunt (...) quasi Magistratus d^mestici, sub quibus
contineretur. S^n. de ben. l. 3. c. 11.
yield your selves wholly unto them to be ruled, guided and directed by them.

There is a Blessing of God promised on those that so do: Prove. 8. 32, 33.
a Blessing of wisdom, a Blessing of long Life. Prove. 15. 31.
The ear, says Solomon, that hearkeneth to the instruction of life, shall
lodge among the wise. And, Ephesians 6. 2, 3.
It is the first Commandment, says the Apostle, in the Decalogue, that has a
special promise annexed to it; Exodus 20. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. 16. Math. 15. 4. and 19.
9.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother; (and Instructors, as we heard before, are as
Parents:) that it may go well with thee, and that thou may be (...).
long-liued.

As on the other side, there is a Curse of God denounced against those that do
otherwise, that Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
stop their ears, like the deaf Adder, against good admonition, and refuse to
hear the Charmers voice, charm he never so sweetly, to be ruled by their
Governors, deal they never so kindly and lovingly with them. Prove. 30. 6.
The eye that scorneth the Father, or sets light by the Mothers admonition,
Effosses oculos roret a^ro gutture corvus. Catull. in Comin.
let the ravens of the valley dig it out, and the young Eagles devour it. They
are cursed with a witness, whom the Holy Ghost thus curses, in such emphaticall
manner, in such exquisite terms, as may well make ones heart quake to hear.

Yea, to do otherwise it is made a note of a reprobate and a castaway, of one
that God is fully determined everlastingly to damn and destroy; 2 Chronicles. 25.
16.
I know, says the Prophet to Amaziah, that God is determined to destroy thee,
because thou do thus, and wilt not hearken to mine advice. And of Elies
Sons, says the Holy Ghost, 1. Sam. 2 25.
Notwithstanding they obeyed not the voice of their Father, because the Lord
was bent to slay them. We are wont to say of those that have Plague-spots, that
they have Gods tokens upon them, and such are seldom known to escape or
recover. Of such ungracious Children we may much better say, that they have
Gods tokens indeed on them; and such (observe it when you will) you shall
seldom see come to good.

In the fourth Part 4.
and last place comes benigna pollicitatio, a kind pollicitation or promise.

And in it consider we, according to our former Division;

First, Branch 1.
the Agent, or person teaching, King David himself. As Eccles. 1. 1, 12.
Solomon his Son, thought a King, scorned not the title of a Preacher; so
David his Father, though a worthy Prince, thought no scorn to play the part of
a Scholemaster, to be a Teacher of Children, Doctrine 4.
even of pety Scholars, of little ones.

Whence observe we, that Teaching even of Children is no base profession; it is
that, that may well beseem even the greatest Abraham, though a Genesis 23. 6.
Prince of God, or Sic Montes Dei. i. ingentes. Psalm. ^6. 6. (...). Arat. in
diosem. (...). T^^on. in schol.
a great Prince, yet was careful himself Genes. 18. 19.
to teach his sons and his servants (God himself testifies it of him, and
commends it in him) to keep Gods commandments. David, though Psalm. 78. 71.
the chief Governor of Gods people, and Psalm. 18. 43.
the Head of many Heathen, yet inviteth Children here to come to him, and
promises himself to instruct them: as also elsewhere, Psalm. 32. 9.
I will instruct and teach thee what way to take, I will guide thee with mine
eye. And Solomon, 1. King. 3. 12. 2. Chron. 2. 12.
the wisest mere man that was ever since Adam, thought it no disparagement
either to his place or his person Prove. 4. 1, 2.
to give instructions and directions to the Children that God gave him. Yea, as
our Savior says, Matthew. 12 42.
Behold one greater then either Math. 22. 43, 44*
David or Solomon. Our Savior himself, Math. 19. 13, 14, 15.
when Children were presented unto him, and his Disciples would have kept them
back from him, as supposing it too mean a business for him to be employed in,
was displeased with them for so doing, and called the Children unto him. And he
that was so forward to embrace them and bless them, was (no doubt of it) as
ready also to teach and instruct them, so often as opportunity was offered him.

Neither ought any to disdain or think meanly of this office. For

1. Reason 1.
It is an office that has bin formerly performed to them by others. We are all
naturally as wild trees, that by manuring and husbandry become fruitful and
useful. We brought neither Grace, nor Art into the world with us. If we have
ought of either, we have bin taught it by others. And we should not think much
to perform that office unto others, that by others has bin formerly performed
unto us. Solomon thinks no scorn to instruct his Son, Prove. 4. 3, 4.
because his Father instructed him in like manner before.

2. Reason 2.
It is an office most necessary and of singular use. Op^rum Fastigia
s^ectantur, latent Fandamenta. Qui. til. institut. prasat. Pius ^abet ^peris
(...). mostentatio^^. Ibid l. 1 c. 4.
It is the foundation, that lies lowest, under ground, out of sight, that
though it makes least show, yet Non sunt cont^nenda qua^si para^, fine quibus
magne constare (...) ssunt Hierom ad laetam Ad nullius res summem ni^ prae
edenti us intiijs pervenatur. M^n ra^sta si negligantur, n^n ^rit mat^ribus
^o^us. Q^^^til. (...). praefat. De^^le fundamentu^ fall. ^t opus. (...) de
^r^mm^^ca. Nec stqui^ di^cere satis no^ est, Quin^^^ ^^st^t. l. 1. c. 1.
bears up the whole building. As Kingdoms and States consist of Cities and
Towns, so these of private Families; the well-being whereof mainely depends
upon the careful education and training up of the youth in them.

The consideration whereof may serve first to take away the unjust and
frivolous aspersions, that either rude and ignorant, or profane and
irreligious persons do usually cast upon this profession. Where it is strange
to see, (and it argues the great corruption of man's nature,) how that those
Callings that God has most graced in the Word, are commonly most disgraced and
contemned in the World. How meanly do most men think of a Priest or a Pedant?
as in scorn they use to term them the one and the other. Use 1.
And yet Levit. 10. 3. N^m. 16 9.
who come nearer to God then the Ministers of his word? Or who come nearer to
Ministers then Schole-masters do? What is their Schole but a private Church? if
it be ordered as it ought. If 1. Cor. 16. 19.
Christian Families be so, Christian Schools much more. Or what are they
themselves, (if they be at least that they should be) but private Catechists,
but private Preachers? But as he says, Scientia non habet iuimicum nisi
ignorantem.
Skill has no foe of any, but such as are unskillful themselves: so none will
think basely of so worthy and honorable a Calling, but those that are
themselves either rude dolts or debauched rake-hels.

Secondly, it may serve to approve and commend the prudent and pious practice
of those, Use 2.
that are careful to give encouragement to those of this profession, and to
provide such means for the maintenance of them, that men of worth and good
parts may be employed in such places: As also, to incite others, whom God has
blessed with means and ability, to all due care and caution in this kind, as
being a business, whereupon the good both of Church and State mainely
depends. As Eccles. 5. 9. (...). Socrates. (...). Xenoph. ^^conom.
Solomon says, that the Throne (or the Chair of Estate) is vpheld by the
Plough: so we may truly say, that both Church and State are vpheld by the
Schole. For let private Schools be neglected, whence shall the Uniuersities be
supplied? whence shall the Ministry be provided? how shall they teach others,
that were themselves never taught? how shall the chief Offices be furnished
with men of ability either in Church or Commonweal? Both Religion and
Learning will soon dye and decay, if life be not kept and maintained in the
root.

And here can I not wholly pass by in silence, nor forbear to put you of this
place, in mind, Application.
of those two Honorable Knights, Sr Andrew Iudde.
the Grandfather, and Sr Thomas Smith.
the Grandchild, the one long since deceassed, the other yet living; whom God
has made Instruments of a great blessing, in this kind, to this place. The
former of them first founded a free Schole among you, for the training up of
your youth in virtue, religion, and good learning, and left land and means to
maintain it, with stipends (such as were in those times ordinary) for
Schole-master and Ushier. The latter of them has added liberally to his
Grandfathers gift, has increased the salaries of the Teachers, and beside
sundry yearly pensions to the poor both of this place, and of diverse others
near about you, to encourage Parents the rather to set their Children to
learning, and the Children to bend their minds and endeavors thereunto, has
given a Seventy pounds per annum.
large and liberal exhibition for the maintenance of seven Scholars in one
of the Uniuersities, to be chosen successively each year from your Schole. The
Lord reward this his bounty and liberality abundantly into the bosom o^ Him
and His; give you grace to make a good v^e of it; and stir up many more whom he
has b^essed with ability, Branch 2.
to show their thankfulness in like manner to him from whom they have it,
Doctrine 5.
by setting apart and consecrating some part of their means, to the
furtherance and advancement of religion and learning.

Hitherto of the Agent: the Act follows, and that is Teaching or Instruction:
I will teach. Reason 1.


Here is the Scholemasters work to teach, to instruct. Psalm 32. 9.
I will instruct thee, and teach thee, says our Psalmist els-where. And, Prove
4 3, 4.
when I was young and tender, my Father taught me, says Solomon. A work and
duty of great necessity.

For the soul of man is naturally instar tabulae abrasae, as a clean pair of
tables, that have nothing at all written in them. Nemo nase^tur art^sex. Non
dat natura virtutem. Ars est bonis s^^i. Virt^s no^ cont^ngil animo
nistinstituto and edocto, and ad summum assidua exercitatione perducto. Ad hoc
quidem, sed non cum ho: nascimur. Et in opti^^ etiam, an^equam erudias, virtutu
materia, no^ virtus est. Senec. epist. 8.
There is no grace or goodness, learning or art naturally written in it:
howsoever some grounds there are, whereby these things may through industry and
Gods blessing be attained.

Yea in regard of grace and goodness, Reason 2.
it is instar codicis depravati, as a book blurred and blotted, or depraved
and misprinted, that must have much rased and done out, ere it can be well
corrected, or that written into it, that it ought to have.

It is Vt og^r quam vi^ fertilis fine cal^^ra fructu^sus esse non p^test: sic
fine doctrina an^^^us. Cic. T^^cul. l. 2. Cult^t^ a^^mi plalos phia est, quae
ex^ra^ it v^tra radicif^^s; and praeparat anim^s ad satus accipend^^; eaque
mandat his and s^rit, quae adul^a fructus vberrimo^ ^erant. Ibid.
instar agri inculti, as an untilled ground, wherein lucultis vrenda filix
innascitur agris. Horat. sat. 2. Et iniussa viresc^^t Cra^^^^. Virg. Geog. l. 1.
weeds of all sorts come up of themselves naturally, but no good thing will
grow without mucking and manuring, without much travel and toil: it is a
mother, (as (...). Terra sponte nascentium matter, consitorum est neuerca.
Aesop. apud Planudem in vita ipsius.
he said of the Earth sometime) to the one, it is but a stepdame to the other.

And first, what a great mercy of God then is this to this Land, and more
specially to this place and many others, that vouchsafes such means, and
stirs up the hearts and minds of worthy men to establish such courses,
whereby instruction and learning may be conveyed to us and our Children, may
be wrought into us and them, that we may not be like savage people, no better
then brute beasts; yea in some regard worse; since (...). P^tus est comparati
^umento, quam nas^i i^mentum. Chrysostom. ^^mil. in Asc^us. Domini.
It is worse, as that Ancient Father well says, to be like unto a beast, then
to be a beast indeed. O learn, if you be wise, to know your own happiness
before many others, to acknowledge Gods goodness to you above many others, and
to show your selves thankful both to Him, and to Those, that he uses as
Instruments to provide such things for you.

Again, let this admonish Teachers of their Duty, and encite them unto the
diligent performance of it; as they bear the name, so to execute the Office;
as they receive the wages, Use 2.
so to do the work; as they have undertaken the charge of it, so to undergo
the burden of it, and discharge faithfully the trust of so great a weight, that
the Parents of their Children have entrusted them withal, even the souls of
those their Children, not their bodies only, as dear to them as themselves.

Otherwise, if they shall bear the name of Teachers, and not execute the
Office, they shall be but Idols; or, as the Prophet says, (...) 11.17.
Idol-shepherds, so Idol-Teachers: like Idols, that have (...). 5.
the name, but Galat. 4. 8.
not the nature of God; that have limbs and lineaments of a man, but no action
nor life; Psalm. 115. 5, 6, 7.
that have mouths, but speak not; hands but feel not; feet, but stir not. etc.

If they take the wages, and do not the work, they shall be no better then
Thieves. As he said sometime in Socrates, that (...). Socrat (...). Eccles. lib
4. c. p 23. Mon^^c^us ut ^^per^^us f^urtis prae^^^i ^ar cens^tur. Cassio^^^. i.
est. tr^part. l. ^^ 1.
the Monck that labored not with his hands for his living was a Theife: so the
Scholemaster that labors not with his tongue in instructing his Scholars;
yea though he labor with his hands otherwise never so much, yet if he tend not
his Schole, and the instruction of those under his charge in it, he is as very
a Theife, as he that takes a purse by the highway side; he might as well pick
their Parents purses or pockets.

Yea, if he be wholly careless of the discharge of his duty herein, he is
little better then a Murderer* he becomes guilty of soule-murther: as Bernard
truly says of Parents negligent in the education of their Children, that they
are Peremptores potius quam parents. Bern. in Epist. 111.
rather Paricides then Parents. For he is a murderer, not only that knocks
a man on the head, or cutteth his throat with a knife, or runs him through
with a Rapier; but he also that by detention or denial of due food starueth
him whom he stood bound to feed and relieve, and so suffers him to perish
through his default.

As therefore you are called Teachers, and are called to teach, so be you
careful to N^men tuum attend^. I^^o quod (...) Hieron. ad (...).
answer your Name, to be that, that you are termed. Apply your selves with all
alacrity, sedulitie and diligence, to this necessary, to this worthy work.
Neither let it discourage you, if you meet with some foolish and unthankful
persons or Parents, that shall either slenderly consider your travel, or con
you little thank for your labor. It is with you in this case, as with Tailors,
that make garments for Children: though the Children pay them not, yet their
Parents, they are sure, will. Do you your duty faithfully and constantly; and
as the Prophet said of himself, Isai 49. 5.
Your work shall be with God, and your wages with him: He will regard and
reward you, whither men do or no. For 1. Cor. 3. 8.
Every man shall receive his wages from him according to his work.

Nor again let it dishearten you, if you meet with some untoward ones, whom
notwithstanding all your pains and toil you can do no good upon. Curam
exigeris, n^n curationem. Bern de consid. l. 4.
It is the care, not the cure of them, that is required of you. Do your best
endeavor, and Securus labor, qu^m n^l^us valet eua^uare defectus. l^^d.
let the event be what it will, you shall have from God, whose work you do,
when you do conscionably what you do, (...). Secundum labore^, non secundum
proventum Bern. Ibid. 1. Cor. 3. 8.
according to your pains, not according to the issue or event of it.

But who are they, Branch 3.
that King David undertakes to teach? And so pass we on from the Act to the
Object, (the third particular in his promise;) the persons taught, You. They
are the Children, that before he called upon, and invited unto him. Doctrine 6.


Children are to be taught. Prove. 22. 6.
Teach a Child, says Solomon. And, Prove. 4. 3, 4.
When I was a Child, my Father taught me. And, 1. Io^. 2. 12, 14.
I write to you, Children; says the Apostle John, Reason 1.
among others.

And that not without good cause. For

1. We are then aptest to learn. Fingit eq^u^ doc^^em tenera c^ruice magister,
Ire v^om quam monstrat eques. Horat epist. 2. Vt corp^ra ad quosdam membroris
ste^us sormari nisi tener^ non possunt: sic animos qu^ qu: ad pleraque luriors
r^^ur ipsum facit. Quinisl. inst. l. 1. c 1. In cunctu fere rebus citius
assuescit o^e quod tenerum est. Novelles adhuc and vix firma radicis
arbuscules, dum ad emuem ductum sequaces sunt, in qua^libet partem slecti
facile est: quaetura plarumque curnatae cito ad arbitrium celentis corriguntur.
Tenerve adhuc and primae aetatis animalia fine labor domari solent; quantoque
citius a vagandi aetatis liberti ^ edissucta sunt, tanto facilius vel
collaiugo, vel (...) tunt. Pelag. ad Dem^^r.
The foale is easier broken and brought to a pace, Reason 2.
that is taken while it is yet young, then that is let alone till it have more
years. The plant is easily bowed and bent any way, while it is but a twig,
that will sooner break then bend, when it is grown a strong tree.

2. Altius praecepta descendunt, quae teneris imprimuntur ^tatibus. Sen. ad.
Hel^. c. 16. Natura tenacissimi sumus eorum quae rudibus annis percipimus. Vt
sapor, quo n^na (...) durat: nec lauarum colores, quibus simplex ille eand^r
mutatuss est, elui ^ossunt. Quintil. institut. l. 1. c. 1.
What we then learn, sticks best by us. Quo semel est imbuta recens,
scruabit odere^ Testa din. Horat. epist. 2. Difficulter eraditur, quod rudes
animi perhiborunt. Lanagum concliylia quis in pristinum condorem revocek?
Recens testa diu and soporem obtinet and oderem, quo primum imbut^ est. Hieron.
ad Laet.
Any vessel will retain long the savor of that liquor, that it was seasoned
first withal. And the cloth best keeps its color, that was died in the
wool, that it took in, ere it came to the wheel or the woofe. Prove. 22. 6.
Teach a child, says Solomon, in the trade of his way; and he will not depart
from it when he is old.

3. Reason 3.
We have much to go through with, and but little time to learn; (...). Ars
longa, vita brevis. Hippocr. aphor. 1.
a long task and a short time. Perge and proper^^ ne tibi accidat, vt senex
dis ca^: imo ideo magis properar, quontam id iuver^^ aggressus es, quod
perdiscere vi^^ ^enex po^^is Sen. ep. 77.
Though we set upon it while we are young, we can hardly attain to any
perfection in ought ere we be old: and therefore can never begin too soon, nor
soon enough neither.

4. Reason 4.
Turpis and ridicula res est elementarius senex. Ibid. 36. Quid rurpius qu^m
senex viuere (discere) incipiens? Ibid. 13.
It is a shame for an old man to be then learning his first elements, that,
that every Child may and should know. Not that they should not then learn,
that have not before learned. (...). Socrat. apud S^ob. ^om. 2. c. 29.
It is better to learn late then never. Stult^m est nolle discere, quia di^
no^ didiceris. Se^. ep. 36.
It is a folly for a man to refuse to learn at all, because a long time he
has not learned. And if it be a shame for a man not to have learned till then;
it is much more a shame for him not to learn then neither. But Sed propera,
ne^ it venturas differ in horas; Qui non est body, eras minus ap^us erit.
Ovid, remed, l. 1. Moc est discendi tempus, no^ quod aliquod sit, quo non sit
discendum: sed qu^madmodum omnibus anni^ studere hono^^um est, ita non omnibus
institui. Sen. ep. 36.
the longer we defer it, the more pain it will be to us, the more shame it
will be for us, not a shame, I say, so much that now we learn, as that before
we have not learned.

Lastly, Reason 5.
Children if they be taught no good thing, they will of themselves learn evil
things. Omni mobili mobili^^ consistere non potest, sed molendiui instar,
impigr^ voluitur. etc. Bern. medit. cap. 9.
The mind of man or child is like a restles Mill, that cannot stand still,
will never be without work. Nihil agend^ male agere homines discunt. Catonis
oraculum, quo nihil verius. colum. de re rust. lib. 11. cap. 1.
By doing nothing, says the Heathen Man, men soon learn to do evil things.
And Incultis vrenda fili^^ tunascitur (...). Horat. sat. 3.
evil weeds come up apace, Use 1.
and grow soon over rank in us, if some diligent husbandry be not constantly
used with us.

And here first Children are to be admonished to use their time and means
well, that Gods goodness, and the care and bounty of Friends and Parents
affords them, and (...)
to apply themselves to their learning, while their senses are lively, their
wit quick, their memory fresh and strong; take that in now that may stick by
them hereafter; (...)
lay that up now that they have comfort of, and benefit by hereafter: Do as
wise trauailers, that have a long days journey to make, that get them up
betimes, and take the day before them, and not (...)
like foolish, improuident, and unadvised persons, that with frivolous delays
trifle out the time, and burn daylight. You know what is said commonly, that
(...)
Time and Tide tarieth for no man. Neither is it possible to recall any one day
or hour, when it is once over, nay nor the least minute or moment of our life,
when it is once past and gone. It will be too late for you to say hereafter, O
mihi praeteritos ref^rat si Jupiter ann. 1. etc.
Oh were I as young again as once I was; or, Were I to begin again as
sometime I was, and had that time and those means that then I had, or might
have had, I would then do thus and thus. Prevent it now therefore, while you
may, by following good counsel, and taking your learning, that now seeks
you, and offreth it self unto you; Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13.
least you mourn hereafter in your latter days; when you have spent your time
and your strength in folly and vanity; and say, How have I hated instruction,
and in mine heart scorned correction; and have not obeyed the voice of them
that taught me, nor inclined mine ear unto them that instructed me: yea Job
20. 11.
when your bones, it may be, as he speaks in Job, are so filled with the
sins of your youth, with the fruits of those loose courses that then you
took, that they leave you not, till they lie down with you in the dust.

As also many Parents come here justly to be reproved, Use. 2.
that are too too careless in this kind; Let their children go on without
instruction and correction so long, that afterward when they would themselves,
they can do no good with them; but through the just judgment of God upon them
by their stubbornnes and untowardness, they become Genesis 26. 35. and 27 46.
such a corrosiue and an heart-sore unto them, that they make them even weary
of their lives, and often bring their gray heads with excessive grief for them
to the grave.

Let them alone, say they, yet a while; they are but young yet: there will be
time enough to teach them, and to nurture them hereafter. Yea, but for the body
of thy Child, thou would be wiser and more wary. Were any limme misshapen, or
did any part grow awry, thou would be sure to take it betimes, while the
nervs are gentle and pliable, the flesh soft and waxie, and the bones tender,
and gristly, so as they may be easily wrought and molded any way. Be no less
wise then for the soul of thy Child. Thou can not begin too soon. Ad
nemine^ ante bona men's venit quam mal^: omnes prae^ccupats sumus. Virt^tes
descere est vitia dediscere, Se^. epist 51. Ad virtutem cont^udimus inter vitia
distr^cti. Ibid. 75.
Forestalled we are all of us; the Heathen themselves saw and said as much. We
bring vice into the world with us, that must be wrought out of us; and the
sooner we are dealt with, ere it take deeper root with us, or grow to stronger
head in us, the more easily it will be done.

What shall we say of those, that all their whole time train them up in
idleness, in nothing but vanity and naughtiness? That which proves afterthe
very bane and utter overthrow of them. For having bin brought up to nothing,
and having no kind of employment to pass their time away with, they light
commonly into lewd company, whom they waste themselves and their means with,
and so come at length to confusion. What shall we say, I say, of such, but what
Bernard before said, that such are Peremptores potius quam parents. Bern.
epist. 111. V^inam liberorum nostrorum mores no^ ipsi p^^deremus. Infantiam,
statim delucijs solumus. Mol. lis illa educatio, quaem indulgentiam v^amus,
neruos ce^s and mentis and corporis frangit Quintil. ins^^. l. 1. c. 2.
rather Paricides then Parents? And the blood of their Children shall be one
day required at their hands, which though they perish deservedly through their
own voluntary default, yet by their diligent endeavor and care might have
done much better.

But what is it that David would have these little ones to learn? Branch 4.
And so come we at length to the fourth and last Branch; the Subiect-Matter of
his teaching; the Fear of the Lord.

The last point then that we observe hence is, Doctrine 7.
that, The Fear of God, religion, and godliness is to be taught Children, and
to be learned as well of young as of old. Genes. 18. 19.
Abraham, says God of him, will teach his Sons and his whole household, to
walk in Gods ways. Eccles. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator, to wit, to fear and serve him, says Solomon, in the
days of thy youth. And, Ephesians. 6 4.
Ye Fathers, says the Apostle Paul, bring up your Children in instruction and
information of the LORD.

And great reason for Parents so to train them up, if they desire or regard
their good.

For 1. Reason 1.
there is no true wisdom but in it. (...) Prove 9. 10. Virtutum omn^um
fandamentum (...). Cic. pro Planc.
Timor Domini principium sapientiae. The Fear of God is the Beginning of
Wisdom; says Solomon. Yea, Timor Domini caput, or praecipuum sapientiae;
(...) sicut Prove. 3. 9 and 4. 7.
The Fear of God is the chief and principal point of Wisdom; says both
Psalm 111. 10.
David, and the same Prove. 1. 7.
Solomon. And Job long before either of them, (...) Iib. 28. 28. Qu^d and ide^
fere Solomon Pro. 15. 33.
Timor Domini est sapientia ipsa: The Fear of God is wisdom, even wisdom
it self. No true wisdom without it, no true wisdom but in it. To be taught
our Children therefore, if we would have them wise, if we would not have them
fools and idiots, as they must needs be without it.

2. Reason 2.
There is no true happiness without it, no blessedness but by it. For it is
that, that Gods blessing is entailed unto; even all the good blessings both of
this life* and the next; and Blessedness it self, not temporal only, but
eternal. For, Psalm. 112. 1.
Blessed is the man that fears God: and, Psalm. 128. 1.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord; and, Prove. 28. 14.
He is a blessed man that stands always in awe. For, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
Godliness (that is, the Fear of God,) has the promises both of this life,
and of that that is to come. Of this life. For, Psalm. 34. 9, 10.
There shall be no want to those that fear him: they shall lack nothing that
is good for them. And of the life to come too. For, Psalm. 103. 17.
The loving kindness of the Lord is for ever and ever upon them that fear him;
and his Ita verto (...) pr^^t vsurpatur, Psalm. 112. 3, 9. and 2. Cor. 9. 9, 10.
bounty or mercy upon their Childrens Children. And therefore no marvel if
Solomon, as in the Entrance into his Proverbs he makes the Fear of God, the
Beginning of all; so in the Conclusion and shutting up of his Ecclesiastes, he
makes the same Fear of God, the very Sum and the End of all. Eccl^s. 12. 15.
Summa, or Finis rei. Will you hear, (says he) what is the Sum, or the End
of all: Fear God, and keep his Commandments: For that is the whole duty of
man: and that is the only means to make man truly happy, the maine matter that
Solomon there intended to teach.

Now this First may teach you that be Parents, Use 1.
Masters and Teachers, what to labor in, if you desire the true welfare and
happiness of those that be under your charge, or Gods blessing upon them, and
your labors and endeavors with them; even to teach them the fear of God. You
are not to think it enough, that you have taught them some trade, that you
have given them learning, (humane learning, I mean) that they may live by an
other day; but you must withal, or else you come far short of that you should
do, teach them also to fear God, and so to serve him here, as they may live
with him eternally, when they go hence.

To which purpose it is well observed, that the promise of a blessing to be
continued to posterity, though made to the observance of all Gods precepts,
yet is Exodus 2^. 6. Deuteronomy. 5. 10.
more specially annexed to the second Commandment in the Decalogue, which is
concerning the service and worship of God; God thereby intimating what Parents
and others should principally apply themselves to have planted in their
Families, if they would have Gods blessing entailed upon their issue. For as
for other things, even Heathen and Infidels, or mere Civil and natural men,
will be ordinarily teaching and instructing their Children, to forbear and
abhor lying, and stealing, and loosenes of life, and surfeting, and excess,
and the like; because such things may make them unfit for common and civil
society, or may be a means to waste them, and that, that they shall leave
them. But God would have us, (and those that be truly godly will regard it,) to
go a st^p further, and to teach them a lesson beyond all this, not civility
alone, but true piety too; that we may be blessed in them, and they inherit
Gods blessing with us.

And surely what difference will there be between a Christian Parent and an
Heathen, a Christian Schole-master and a Pagane; if the Parent or Schole-master
teach his Children and Scholars, matter of civility or humane learning alone?
Do not Heathen even the same? As the Apostle speaks in an other case, 1. Tim
5. 8.
He that provides not for his Family, is worse then an Infidel: So here,
that Parent that brings up his Child idly, is worse then many an Infidel:
he that traineth him up in some worldly trade only is no better then they.
That Schole-master that teaches them not at all that be committed unto him, is
worse then many an Infidel; he that gives them humane learning only, is
little better then they. That Parent or Teacher that does not teach them
Civility, comes far short of many Heathen ones; he that does teach Civility,
and not Piety withal, goes no further then they have gone.

Lastly, Use 2.
Children also must learn to fear and to serve God. If your Governors must
teach you it, then questionless you must learn it. Eccles. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator, says Solomon, in the days of thy youth. And, Psalm.
119. 9.
Whereby shall a boy, or a Child, says David, make his path pure, but by
taking heed to it according to Gods word?

It is an idle conceit of many, that Religion and Godliness is not for
Children, that such things concern them not. There is no age freed from it.
And therefore John writes unto, and directs, what he writes, unto all, 1.
Ioh. 2. 12, 13, 14.
not to old men, and young men, strong grown men only, but to Children and
little ones also. And surely most equal it is, Vt primiti^ reris, ita primitiae
dieris. Greg. in Evang.
that as the first fruits of other things, so the first fruits of our years
should go also to God.

It is but a Devilish Proverb, A young Saint, and an old Devil. The Holy
Ghost by Solomon assures us the contrary: Prove. 22. 6.
Teach a Child, says he, in the trade of his way, and he will not depart from
it, when he is old. It is true indeed, that those that have made most show of
piety, 2. Pet. 2 20. Math. 11. 45.
when they fall away again, prove usually most profane. But 1. Pet. 1. 23. 1.
Ioh. 3. 9. Sapientia no^ (...) non revolvitur. Se^. epist. 76.
where it has once truly taken root in the heart, there it will continue
constantly even to all eternity, and never dye or decay again.

Let this therefore, good Children, be your principal care and study: (For
what shall it avail you to be cunning in Tully, Virgil, Homer, and other
profane Writers, if you be unskillful in Gods book? to have learned Greek and
Latin, if you learn not withal Esai. 19. 18.
the language of Canaan? to have your speech agreeable to the rules of Priscian
or Lilie, if your lives and courses be not consonant to the rules and laws of
Christianity? to have knowledge of the Creatures, when you are ignorant of the
Creator? to have learned that whereby you may live a while here, and neglect
that whereby you may live eternally hereafter?) Learn to fear God, to serve
God; and then God will bless you. For Psalm. 115. 13.
He will bless those that fear him, be they great or small. Yea he will take
charge of you, and provide for you, if your Parents be taken from you. Psalm.
27. 10.
Though my Father and Mother, says David, should leave me, yet would God take
me up. Psalm. 68. 5.
He will be a Father unto you: Psalm. 23. 1.
he will see you shall not want. If your Parents have wrought the Fear of God
into you; Psalm. 37. 25, ^6.
they shall be sure to leave Gods blessing to you; they may boldly bequeath it
you; and you shall be sure to partake with them in it.

To end where we began; it is the commendation of Timothy, and of his Parents
withal, that 2. Tim. 3. 15. (...).
he had known the holy Scriptures from a Child; and had bin even 1. Tim. 4.
6. (...).
nursed up in the words of faith and good doctrine; (...). H^mer Sophista in
Monod. Ru^i^s.
sucking piety and godliness in, with his Mothers milk, and beginning to be
acquainted with it even at the breast. Let the like course be taken of, and
with others, and it will make them prove in time also like Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.
15, 17.
wise to salvation, and enabled to every good work.

FINIS.

