An Anniuersarie MEMORIAL OF ENGLANDS DELIVERY FROM The Spanish Invasion:
DELIVERED IN A Sermon on Psalm. 48.7.8. By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of
Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Philemon Stephens and Christopher
Meredith, at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1626.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL HIS VERY LOVING Friend M. Thomas Chapman, Son and Heir
to the Religious Founder of this Exercise.
Worthy Sir,
WHat your self, and others with your self have through your means formerly
by word of mouth heard from me, you shall now upon your second request receive
here in writing. I should not have deemed it worthy the reservation, but that
it pleased you (who have best right to it) to require it. In scatterd notes
only (like Absyrtus his limbs) I had the sum and heads of it; which I have
again here recollected, and cast (as near as I could) into that mould and
frame that it was delivered in at first. If much seem missing of that little
grace that it then had, it must be remembered, that the liuelesse letter for
viuacitie and efficacy comes far short of the living voice. As it is, you
have it, and no more then your own in it, from him, who for your pious
building on your worthy Fathers foundation in this kind, does deservedly
affect you, and shall always continue

Yours to be commanded in the Lord, THO. GATAKER.

TO THE READER.
BE pleased (good Reader) to understand in few words the occasion whereupon
this Sermon was preached, and thou will judge it to be a kind of necessity to
make that public to the common view, which was first intended for the ear
only of a private Auditory. There is, we see, too great and general a want
(in these our days) of monuments and memorials of that miraculous deliverance
which God wrought for this Land in 88. When Tongue and Pen, Pulpit and Press
are silent for that, we may expect the stones to cry out against us, and to
celebrate that praise to God whereof we are neglectiue. But man's memory being a
table book to register acts passed, and not able to comprehend all that is to
be recorded therein, when new things of note come to be imprinted in it, the
old are wiped out: so God affording us a daily supply of new preseruations,
those other which we have formerly received grow quite out of date, are rased
out, and buried in oblivion. Therefore to revive this blessing (which ought
never to be forgotten) amongst the rest in this Land, and for it to eternize
Gods praise amongst us, it has been religiously provided by Mr. Thomas
Chapman (sometimes a worthy Citizen) that yearly three Sermons shall be
preached in the Church of St. Pancrace in Soper-lane, where he lately lived a
well deserving parishioner: One of the Sermons to be preached Nouemb. 17. in
thankful remembrance of the coronation of that Virgin Queen ELIZABETH of
famous and neuer-dying memory, with whose gracious government accompanied much
happiness to our kingdom; but this as chief of all, (scil.) the
establishment of that truth of the Gospel and discipline of the Church which
we now enjoy under our dread Sovereign Lord King CHARLES (whom God long
preserve a religious Defender of this truth and peace amongst us.) Another
Sermon to be preached August 12. for our deliverance from that Spanish Armado
(in which course this Sermon was preached.) A third Nouemb. 5. for the
preservation of our King and State from that damnable powder plot as yet
unparalleled in any age since the world began. In each of these we may behold
Gods goodness: first in bringing us to the glorious light of the Gospel by
making that Queen a Mother over his Israel and a Nurse over his Church:
neither was it less goodness in him to preserve us in this happy state, then
to confer it upon us; and this he has done maugre the malice of our enemies,
who have not wanted both power and policy in these their attempts, yet when
they were strong and many, our God was mightier than they, and there were more
with us than against us: when they had laid their plots and trains, God
confounded the wicked imaginations of those Achitophels, and let them fall into
the pit they had dug for others. This good man, famous in his generation, in
thankful remembrance to God of these three blessings, in his life time
solemnly observed three Sermons, and has left large Legacies at his death for
their continuance unto posterity; that in succeeding ages fathers may declare
unto their children how great things God has done for us in the old times
before them. By this godly care of his, he has built himself a monument of
fame to remain longer than those Egyptian Pyramides, or that Pillar which
Absalom reared up in the Kings dale for the perpetuity of his name upon earth.
Thus they that honor God, God will honor them, in seeking the glory of Gods
name, God has made an honorable memorial of his name to redound upon his
own head. He was second to none, being the first Founder (of late) of this
pious act: but I hope he shall not stand alone, but that there will be many
found to second him hereafter in so good a work worthy the imitation. So now
(Reader) I commit this Sermon to thy perusal: whilst in it thou see Gods
wonderful works which he has done for our Nation, or what good soever thou
shall reap else in this Exercise, be thankful to God and pray for the Author.

PSALM 48.7, 8. 7. As with an East wind, thou breakest the Ships of Tarshish;
so were they destroyed.

8. As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hoasts, in
the City of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah.


AS in all well-gouerned States there are public (...) sieve (...) Ezr. 6.2. Et
(...) sieve (...) Ester 6.1. and Ezr. 4.15. (...). Hesych. Archiua; quae and
Tabularia Ciceroni pro Arch. and Virgilio Georg. l. 2. vbi actus publici
continentur. Seru.
Registers, and Records, that the memory of Judgments and Acts may not perish:
So has God in man's Soul erected a Register, to wit, the faculty of Memoria
est vis animae accepta retinens, praeterita repetens, elapsa re colligens. Aug.
nom. de sp. and an. c. 37. Omnium rerum thesaurus, and custos est memoria.
Ibid. c. 34. Memory is the storehouse of the Soul, and the Register of the
Mind. Morton threefold state of Man, l. 2. c. 4.. 1. The Memoratiue faculty
is the Guardian and Register of all species and images apprehended by the sense,
and reserved and sealed up by the Imagination. Charron of Wisdom, l. 1. c. 12.
Hoc est quod Scalig. de subtle. exerc. 307.. 2. Imaginationis Memoria seruatrix
est. Acceptas enim species ab imaginatione reponit, conditque in thesauris.
Remembrance, for the preservation of such occurrents, as are of weight, and
may be of use for the direction of man's life.

But this Register is very much abused by the greatest part of those that have
the custody of it. For if the Records that the most enter therein, and keep
there, were surueyed, See Bern. sermon. parv. 1. Morton ibid.. 2. and Marbury of
Repentance.
there would be found filed there large rolls fraught with frivolous and
froathie stuff, of little weight, and less use, yea (it may be) with much
filthy, and unsavory matter, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
not once to be mentioned, much less to be remembered: scarce any script, or
scroll of ought, that is ought worth, or worthy to be entered in so Archiuum
plane regium, imo etiam diuinum.
royal a Register.

Now if any thing deserve to be there carefully recorded, that it may by that
means be transmitted to posterity, it should be Psalm. 105.5. and 111.2, 3, 4.
Malac. 4.4.
Gods word, and his works, his extraordinary Acts especially either of
Judgment, or of Mercy. For the former, the Prophet Joel wills the people of
his time, both to record them themselves, and to cause their Children to record
them, and them also to relate them to their posterity. Joel 1.2.
Tell it you to your Children; and let them tell it to their children; and
their Children to those that rise in their room. Of the latter says the
Psalmist, (...) Asaphi Psalmus. Iun. A Psalm of Asaph. Reg. Bibl. for Asaph.
Genev.
Asaph, or who ever he were; Psalm. 78.5, 6.
He commanded our Fathers to teach it to their Children, that posterity might
know it, and the Children that are yet unborn might declare it to their
Children hereafter; that Gods works might not be forgotten.

In which kind the pious, and religious Act of Mr Thomas Chapman.
the Founder of this Exercise is very much to be commended, who having culled
out three principal Acts of Gods extraordinary Mercy exhibited to the Land
wherein we live, as great as any ever vouchsafed to any State whatsoever, has
established a (...).
solemn Anniuersarie Memorial of them to perpetuate them to all posterity.
Occasion.


To my Lot is fallen that Octogesimus octauus mirabilis annus Clade Papistorum;
faustus vbique p^js. Fulk. in Rhem.
admirable Deliverance in 88. from that The invincible Navy. See Hackluits
relation.
Invincible Armado, as it was then styled and termed.

For the remembrance whereof, and of Gods mercy in it, I have made choice to
entreat of some Psalm. 48.7, 8.
parcel of this Psalm, not unbefitting (as you may soon see) the present
occasion. Text.


The Psalm, is a Psalm (not so much Piscat.
(...), Sum of the Psalm.
as (...), and Iunius.
(...)) of Praise and of Triumph.

Of the praise of God, and his goodness to his Church. Parts 2.


Of triumph over Gods enemies, and the enemies of his Church. Part 1.


The Verse 1.-5.
Praise of God, Praise.
and his goodness to his Church, is laid down from the first verse to the
fifth. Part 2.


The special ground of this praise Verse 5.-10.
a victory through his assistance achieved against his enemies, Triumph.
and the enemies of his Church is, by way of triumph, related from the fifth
verse to the tenth. Relation.


And in the Relation hereof there is, 1. Attempt.


First Verse 4.
the enemies Attempt; and therein

1. Praeparatio; their preparation; 1. Preparation.
Conuenerunt pariter; they met together.

2. Expeditio; their expedition; 2. Expeditio^.
Progressi sunt pariter; they went on together.

Secondly, the issue, and event of it: 2. Event.
not like that of Casar, Sueton. Caes. c. 37. Sic de Pompeio Atheniens^s, (...).
Veni, vidi, vici; I came, I saw, I overcame: but, venerunt, viderunt, veriti
sunt, victi sunt: they came, they saw, they were overcome, with astonishment,
with fear, with defeature.

1. Verse 5.
Contemplati sunt; they but viewed the Land that they came to invade. Degree 1.


Degree 2.
2. Obstupuerunt, they wondered that they were able to make head against them.

3. Conturbati sunt; they were troubled, disaraied, disappointed. Degree 3.


Degree 4.
4. Festinauerunt; they made all the haste they could to be gone.

Degree 5.
5. Verse. 6.
Timor eos apprehendit; they were full of fear, and affrightment, when they
found not free passage.

Degree 6.
6. Et dolor, vt dolores parturientis; they were surprised with pains, being
thus cast into such streights and distresses; like a woman in her travel.

Degree 7.
Lastly, Verse 7.
Euro conteris naues Oceani, they were discomfited, and destroyed, as the Ships
of the (...) vnde Grae. (...), quasi (...), Brought. Oceanus, sed peculiariter
Mediterraneus, a regione Tarsis, i. Cilicia, quam alluit.
Leuant Seas are, when with a furious East Wind they are bruised, and battered,
and broken to pieces against the rocks.

Application.
If I should say no more, but add only the words following: Verse 8.
Prout audiuimus, and vidimus; What we have heard with them, we have seen done
for us; it were a very pregnant description of this our deliverance. But
somewhat more must be said, that we may learn what use to make of it.

Illustration.
The Relation of this Victory achieved for them by God (for Psalm. 44.2, 3. and
115.1.
to him alone it is ascribed) is here Verse 8.
further illustrated.

1. By a report of what was past: 1. Report.
the words seem to have reference not to the Ab adiuncta praedictione, and
promissione diuina. Piscat. Ita and R. Kimchi. Amb. Apollin. Aug. Ruffin.
Theodoret. Euthym. Lomb. Cassiod. Hug. Lyr. Bucer. Brent. Moller. Strigel.
Loss. etc. vnde Aug. O beata Ecclesia, quodam tempore audisti; quodam tempore
vidisti: audiuit in promissionibus, vidit in exhibitionibus. Verum isti
plaerique sensum mysticum sequuntur.
Ab exemplis antegressis. Chrysostom. Beza. Buchan. Hessec. Sic Psalm. 44.1.
vtrumque ponunt Calv. Muscul. Iun.
predictions of Gods Prophets, but to former examples rather of the like done
for Gods people: What we have heard done in our forefathers time for them, we
have seen done in our days for us.

2. By a promise of further future protection. God will establish it for ever.

And their thankfulness follows in Verse 9.
the next Verse: 2. Promise. Thankfulness.
(that which we through Gods mercy survive to do this day) We recount, or
meditate on thy mercy, o Lord, in the midst of thy Temple, that is, in the
midst of the Congregation there gathered together.

Thus you see briefly the Sum, Transition from Distribution to Instructions.
Instruction 1.
and the Substance, as of my Text, so of the former part of the whole Psalm.

I come now to some Instructions that out of it may be observed.

The first of them is this. (...). Hesiod. oper. l. 1. Prou. 11.27.
Quaerunt ruinam, qui ruinam cogitant. They bring destruction upon themselves,
that seek the ruin of Gods elect. Psalm. 37.12, 13.
The wicked (says the Psalmist) practices against the righteous; and seeks
occasion to slay him. But the Lord the whiles laugheth him to scorn: for he
sees that his day is coming. Ibid. 14, 15.
The wicked have drawn their sword and bent their bow, to overthrow, and
destroy those, that be of an upright conversation: But their sword shall be
sheathed in their own side; and their bow shall be knapt in two Isai. 41.11,
12.
All that provoke thee (says God by the Prophet Esaias to his people) shall be
confounded, and brought to naught; all that contend with thee, shall perish.
Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them. All that strive with thee
shall be as nothing: all that war upon thee, as a thing of naught. And Zech.
12.2.
I will make (says God by the Prophet Zachary) Jerusalem as a cup of rank
poison to all those that besiege her; which when a thirsty man lights upon,
and swalloweth down suddenly, he finds his bane in that, that he hoped to
quench his thirst with. Ibid. 3.
I will make Jerusalem an heavy stone to all people; such a one as Matthew.
21.44.
shall crush to pieces all that attempt to lift it, or to remove it: so shall
she tear to pieces all that attempt to stir her, though all the nations in
the world should join together against her. Zech. 12.6.
I will make the Princes of Judah like coals of fire among seare-wood, and like
a firebrand in a sheafe; and they shall devour, and destroy all the people
that beset them on the right hand, and on the left.

The Reason hereof:

Reason 1.
1. Dei qui Ecclesiam impetunt, Deum petunt. They that fight against Gods
Church, (...). Act. 5.39. and Tertull. ad Scapul.
fight against God himself. Non tam vos, quam Christum in vobis persequuntur.
Saluian. de prouid. lib. 8. cap. 4. Patitur enim in vobis Deus. Martial. epist.
2. c. 18.
They persecute not you so much, as Christ in you, says Saluian. Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul (says our Savior) why do thou persecute me. And in so doing,
they do but as one (says the Comic) Verberare nol^ lapidem n^ laedas manum.
Plaut. Curcul. 1.3.
that beats a stone, and spoileth his hand; or Acts 9.5. (...). Aeschyl.
Prometh. (...). Pindar. Pyth. 2. (...). Eurip. Bacch. Quae inscitia est,
adu^rsum stimulum calces ^ Ter. Ph^rm. 1.2.
as the beast that spurneth at the goade, that he was pricked with; (...).
Schol. Aeschyl. Si stimulos pugnis caedis, manibus plus dolet. Plaut. Trucul.
4.2. vide and Chrysostom. in Psalm. 11.
he maimeth but his foot by it, and gets a worse wound; or (...). Greg. Naz.
ad Eunom. 5.
as the Boar, that runs fiercely upon the Spear, and so receives into his
body the whole weapon that the Hunts-man holds. Psalm. 2.1, 2.
Why (says the Psalmist) do the Nations rage, and the people keep such a
coile to no end? The Kings of the earth band themselves together, and the
Princes assemble themselves together, against the Lord, and against his
Anointed? Therefore against the Lord himself, because against the Lords
Anointed. And as Qui insurgit in Christum Domini, insurgit in Dominu^ Christi.
Sic Psalm. 89.51.
he that rises against the Lords Anointed, rises against the Lord by whom he
is anointed: So they that rise against the Church of God, rise against God
himself, whose Church it is; Esai. 37.29.
Because thou ragest against me (says God to Senacherib) therefore I will put
my ring in thy nose, and my bit in thy jaws, and bring thee back the same way
thou came. Psalm. 17.8.
Keep me (says David) as the apple of thine eye: hide me under the shadow of
thy wings. They that deal with them, deal with those that are as dear unto
God, as the very apple of his eye, that that the eyesight consists in; And
therefore says God, Zach. 2.8.
I will be as a wall of fire about Jerusalem (he says Non saxeus, non
aheneus, sed igneus, qui and cominus arceat, and eminus terreat. Theo. in Zach.
not, says Theodoret, a wall of stone, or of brass, but of fire, that it may
both fray afar off, and keep off too at hand; that may not only protect them,
but destroy those that assault them) because Zach. 2.5.
he that medleth with you, medleth with me, even with Ad exprimendam
teneritudinem p^etatis suae, tenerrima^ (sed and charissima^) partem humani
corporis nominauit, etc. Saluian. de prouid. l. 8. c. 4.
the apple of mine eye.

2. (...). Pythag. an Radamanth. Aristot. ethic. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Lex talionis vere lex aequissima. Reason 2.
The Law of retaliation, or like-recompence, is most equal. (...). Pindar.
Nem* 4. Quod quisque fecit, patitur. Sen. Herc. fur. 3.2. Non est iniuria pati,
quod prior feceris. Sen. de ira, lib. 2. cap. 30. - neque enim lex iustior vlla
est, quam necis artifices art perire sua. Ovid. art. l. 1.
It is not evil, that they suffer evil, that have done evil to others. Iam.
2.13.
There shall be judgment (says S. James) without mercy to those that would
show no mercy. (...). Cleon apud Thucyd. l. 3.
It is no cruelty to use them cruelly, that have showed cruelty to others. For
Misericordiam qui non praestat alteri, tollit sibi. Petr. Chrysol. ser. 42.
he excludes himself from mercy (says Chrysologus) that denies it to
another. (...). Pythia Glauco apud Herodot. lib. 6.
But they stand guilty of destruction that have Decreuisti facere? iam
perfecisti. August. de verb. Dom. 43.
a purpose to destroy. For Voluntas faciendi reputatur pro opere facti: and
actionis crimine cogitatio condemnatur. Pel^g. ad Demetr.
the bare will alone goes with God for the work, and the very endeavor,
desire, yea or Nam scelus intra se tacit qui cogitat vllum, Facti crimen
habet. Iuuen. sat. 13.
thought, for the deed. Iosu. 24.9.
Balak rose, and fought with Israel, says Joshua. And yet the story says
nothing so. But Fieri dicitur, quod tentatur aut intenditur. Riber. in Amos 9.5.
that is said to be done, that is either intended, or attempted, says Ribera.
He did it not, only because he durst not: and the woman (says the Heathen man)
Quae quia non licuit, non facit, illa facit. Ovid. amor. lib. 3. el. 4. Non
dicam pudicam, quae aut legem, aut virum timuit: non immerito in numerum
peccantium refertur, quae pudicitiam timori praestitit, non sibi. Sen. de ben.
l. 4. c. 14.
that does not evil, because she dare not, when she would do it, if she
durst, though she do it not, yet she does it. Matthew. 5.28.
He that looks but on a woman to lust after her (says our Savior) (...).
Clem. Romans constit. Apost. l. 1. c. 1.
has already in his heart committed adultery with her. And, 1 John 3.5.
He that hates but his brother, (says S. John) Quantum ad te pertinet,
occidisti, quem odisti. Aug. homil. 42.
has already murdered him in his heart. Res mira: ille viuit, tu tamen
homicida (...); illa casta est, tu tamen adulter es. Aug. de verb. Dom. 46. and
de 10. chord. 3. and de temp. 237. and homil. 5. and 40. and 42. sed and
C^ncil. Tolet. 11. c. 4.
A strange matter (says S. Augustine) the man is alive still, and yet thou art
a murderer: the woman is honest, and yet art thou an adulterer. Latro est
etiam antequam manus inqu^net, qui ad occidendum armatus est, and habet
spoliandi, atque interficiendi voluntatem. Sen. de benef. l. 5. c. 13. Illo ^s
homicida venenum quo misces die. Idem de constan. c. 7.
The minding then of destruction, makes a destroyer. Potest aliquis nocens
fieri, quamuis non noc^at. Omnia scelera ante effectu^ operis, quantum culpae
satis est, perfecta sunt. Sen. ibid.
He is guilty of it that does but intend, or attempt to destroy: and deserves
himself to be destroyed. Deuteronomy. 19.19.
If a witness (says God) shall rise against a man to take his life away from
him, you shall even do unto him (not, as he did, but) as he would have done
unto his neighbor.

The second point of Instruction: Creaturae Deo dilectis militant.

Gods creatures fight for those that are Gods; for those that love him, and
whom he loves; Instruction 2.
against the enemies of his Church. Exodus 8. and 9. and 10.
The Frogs, Flies, Lice, Locusts, etc. fought for Gods servants against Pharao,
and his people. Judge. 5.20, 21.
The Stars from heaven fought in their courses against Sisera: and the river
Kishon swept his armies away, as the Red Sea had done Pharao's before. Joshua
10.13.
The Sun stood still to assist Joshua in the pursuit of the Canaanites: and
Joshua 10.11.
the haile-stones slew more of them than the sling or the sword did. Verse. 7.
And as here with the East Wind do thou dash to pieces the Ships of the
Mediterranean Sea; Exodus 14.27, 28. and 15.4.
So Milites nobis qui adera^t, retulerunt, extorta sibi esse de manibus
quaecunque iaculabantur, cum a Theodosit partibus in aduersarios vehemens
ventus iret; and non solum quaecunque in eos iaci^bantur concitatissime
raperet, verume^iam ipsorum tela in eorum corpora retorqueret. Aug. de ciuit.
l. 5. c. 26.
the winds fought for Theodosius in that famous battle against Maximus,
carrying the darts, and arrows of his companies full into the faces of their
enemies, and returning back those of their enemies upon their own bodies:
That which even A Christi nomine al^enus. Aug. ibid.
an Heathen Poet admiring, brake out into that speech; O nimium dilecte Deo,
cui militat Ether; Et coniurati veniunt ad classicaventi! Te propter gelidis
Aquilo de monte procellis Obruit aduersas acies, renolutaque tela Vertit in
autores and turbine reppulit hastas. Claudianus 3. Coss. Honor.
O how highly art thou beloved of God, whom the heavens fight for; and the
Winds as thy confederates come in to assist thee! To thine aid came the
boisterous North Wind down from the Hills, and bare down before thee the
troops that came against thee, with whirling blasts repelling their spears,
and retorting their arrows, and darts upon their owners.

The Reason hereof.

Reason 1.
1. The Saints are in league, and confederacy with God. Psalm. 50.5.
Gather me my Saints (says he) that have made a league with me. Now as Princes
that are in league of amity together, may have the (...). Eurip. Electr. and
Phaeniss. and Orest. Amicorum inter se communia sunt omnia. Ter. Adelph. 5.3.
free use of either others forces at need: 1 King. 22.4. 2 Chronicles. 18.3.
My horses (says Iehosaphat to Ahab) are as thy horses; and my people as thy
people: thou may use them as thine own. So the godly being in league with
God, may have all his forces, and armies for their help, and assistance,
whenever need shall be. And what are all the Creatures but Gods hoasts? He is
Dominus exercituum. Amos 4.13. verse 8.
the Lord of Hoasts: and (as Vide Dauidem Kimchi in Radic.
the Rabbines well observe) he has two general troops, as his horse, and
foot, (...)
the upper troop, and (...)
the lower troop, or Copiae tam inferiores, quam supernae. Mercer.
the creatures above, and the creatures beneath, all ready pressed to be
employed, in wars, either defensive, or offensive, for the safeguard of his
favorites, or the destruction of their opposites. Even Psalm. 34.7.
the Angels themselves (says the Psalmist) pitch their tents about those that
fear God, etc. Piis assident; impios obsident. Ambros. in Psalm.
they lie in garrison, about the godly, to defend and deliver them; they lie in
camp against their enemies to offend, and to destroy them.

Reason 2.
2. What are the Creatures, but Gods Sergeants at Arms to arrest, and attach
Rebels? Psalm. 119 91.
All the creatures (says the Psalmist) are at his service. Psalm. 104.4.
The winds are his messengers, and the fire and flame his ministers. And Psalm.
148.8.
the hail, and snow his officers, and the executioners of his word: they serve
him all, and they do his will, though Nec operis sunt consciae. Bern. de great.
and lib. arb.
they know not what they do. But they rebel against God himself (as we have
heard Point 1.
before) that are up in arms against any of those that be his: Reason 1.
whom he has undertaken the protection of; and concerning whom he has given
so express a charge by the Psalmist, Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine Anointed; that is, any one of mine holy ones. The place is
commonly misunderstood; not spoken of Kings directly (though 1 Samuel 24.7. and
26.9, 11.
concerning them also, as being in a more special manner Psalm. 89.20.
Gods Anointed;) but to Kings ( Psalm. 105.14.
He rebuked even Kings for their sakes) in the behalf of his Saints, by him 2
Cor. 1.21.
spiritually anointed to be Apoc. 1.6. and 5.10. and 20.6. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Kings, and Priests to him. These being in such manner his, the Creatures are
all as his Purseuants, and his Sergeants at Arms to apprehend, and attach them
all that make head against them, and Insectantur vos and in vobis Deum.
Saluian. de prouid. l. 8. c. 4.
against himself in them; and either to bring them in, or to make his charge
good upon them, by destroying them, as he did Esai. 37.36.
Senacheribs host, in the place.

The third Point of Instruction.

Est ciuitas Dei, Deus quam protegit. It is the City of God, that Esai. 37.35.
God thus protecteth. Instruction 3.
Verse 8.
In the City of the Lord of Hoasts; (says my Text) in the City of our God.
And before, Verse 1.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the City of our God: Verse 3.
In her Palaces it is that God is known for a sure retreat. It is Zech. 2.5.
Jerusalem, that God is a wall of fire about. And upon them it was that Apoc.
20.9.
fire fell down, and devoured them, that beset the beloved City.

The Reason hereof.

Reason 1.
1. It is the place of Gods residence, where he especially resideth, Psalm.
132.14.
This is my rest for ever (says he) Here will I dwell, for I take delight in
it. And Princes, though they have a general care of their whole kingdom, yet
2 Samuel 5.9.
a more special care of the places of their principal abode.

Reason 2.
2. It is Gods inheritance. Deuteronomy. 9.29.
They are thy people and thine inheritance, says Moses. And we know how loath
men are (witness 1 King. 21.3.
Naboth the Iisrelite) to lose, or to depart with their inheritance, or any
part of it.

Reason 3.
3. It is Gods Vineyard. Esai. 5.7.
Surely the Vineyard of the Lord of Hoasts is the house of Israel; and the men
of Judah his pleasant plantation. And his Vineyard he says Esai. 27.3.
he will keep, and watch continually night and day, without any moment of
intermission, that no enemy assail it, that none break into it, to make
spoil and havoc of it.

Reason 4.
4. It is Gods Garden. Cant. 4.12.
My Sister, my Spouse, is as a Garden enclosed. And we know how careful men
are of any place to fence and pale in their Gardens, whatsoever place else,
field, or Orchard, they suffer to lie open. Nor let us think that God has any
whit less care of his, which he delights so much in.

Objection.
But how comes it to pass then (may some say) that the Psalmist complains
in that manner? O Lord the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, they have
made Jerusalem an heap of stones, etc.

I answer. Solution 1.
1. The house of God. Genesis 28.19, 22.
Beth-el sometime becomes The house of vanity. Hosh. 5.8. and 10.5
Beth-auen. Esai. 1.2^.
The faithful City sometime turns Harlot. And it is just with God then
Esai. 50.1. Ier. 3.8.
to cast her off; Heb. 8.9.
She kept not covenants with me, and I cast her off, says the Lord.

2. Gods children sometime grow Hosh. 4.16. Tanquam indomita iuuenca. Quae
velut latis eq^a trima campis ludit exultim, metintque tangi. Horat. car. 3.11.
wanton, and provoke God to wrath. Solution 2.
In which case God uses the wicked as Vtitur Deus creatura rationali, sed
maleuola tanquam disciplinae virga. Bern. de lib. arb.
rods, and scourges to correct them with. Esai. 10.5.
Ashur (says God by the Prophet Esaias) is but the rod of my wrath. Eius
consiliis militant, etiam qui eius consiliis repugnant. Greg. mor. l. 6. c. 14.
Even they also (says Gregory) work for him, yea, and for them (though Esaias
10.7.
they are not aware of it) that in such case fight both against him and them.

3. Even in the deepest of their distresses God cease not to regard them:
Solution 3.
Deus suos no^ negligit cum negligit.
He neglects them not, when he seems most of all to neglect them. Though
Esai. 49.14.
Sion complain that God had forgotten her: yet God assures her that Ibid. 15.
he could no more forget her, than any Mother could her child. Ibid. 16.
He carried her picture about him engraven on the palms of his hands, and her
walls were ever in his eyes. And, Ezekiel. 11.16.
Albeit (says God) I have cast them far off among the Heathen, and have
scattered them into many countries, yet will I be as a little Esai. 8.14.
Sanctuary unto them in all places, wheresoever they shall become.

And so pass we to the fourth, and last point of Instruction.

Ecclesia Dei, nunquam dimouebitur. Gods Church maugre the Psalm. 25.19.
malice of all her Psa 3.1. and 69 4.
many, and Psalm. 18.17. and 69 4.
mighty adversaries, Instruction 4.
shall never be utterly rooted out, or destroyed. Psalm. 125.1.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, that stands fast, and
can never be removed. Matthew. 16.18.
Upon this Rock (says our Savior) will I build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall never prevail against it. The Apoc. 2.5.
Candlestick may be removed from place to place; but Esai. 60.19, 20.
the light it self can never be put out. The Apoc. 12.14.
Woman may be hunted, and chased into Heb. 11.38.
the Wilderness; but never driven utterly out of the World. In the very
Wilderness will Apoc. 12.14.
God provide a place for her, where she^ shall be safe; and find succor, till
it please him to bring her abroad again.

Reason 1.
The Reason hereof.

1. Verse 8.
God establishes it, (says my Text) and therefore stands it fast for ever.
Psalm. 46.5.
God is in the midst of it: and therefore shall it not stir. Yea Zach. 2.5.
he is not in the midst of it only, but round about it too. Psalm. 125.2.
As the Hills stand about Jerusalem, so stands God about his people from
henceforth and for evermore. He is about it to protect it; in the midst of it
to support it. He that vpholdeth the Heavens, vpholdeth it: for this is indeed
his Coeli sancti and iusti: sanctae animae omnes, in quibus habitat Deus, and
quae factae sunt seeds eius. Aug. in Psalm. 18. and ^9. and 67. and 96. and 122.
Esai. 57.15. and 66.1, 2. Coelum Ecclesia est. Tychon. in Apoc. 11.19. and 12.1.
Heaven upon earth. And as soon may men, or devils pull down Heaven itself,
as destroy it.

2. Matthew. 16.18.
Christ himself has built it, and he has founded it upon himself. Reason 2.
For 1 Cor. 10.4.
he is the Psalm. 18.31.
only true Rock, the Esai. 26 4.
Rock of eternity; the only Esai. 28.16. Q^od Bellarm. blaspheme Papa tribuit
in praefat. ad lib. de Pont. Romans
sure foundation, that his whole Church is built upon. And what he builds can
by no created power be pulled down again; 1 Cor. 3.11.
the house that is built upon that Rock cannot be overthrown. Matthew. 7.25.
Though the winds rose, and the rain fell, and the floods came, and beat all
together upon that house, yet the frame fell not, because it was founded upon
that Rock. It is Christ's Masterpeece; that that he would show his Deity, his
divine Power in. Would you have me (says Chrysostom speaking to the Jews)
prove unto you, that Christ Jesus is God? what needs it? Luke 21.^4. (...).
Chrysostom. quod Christus Deus. Ejus ipsius, cuius fuerunt negatores,
persecutores, interfectores, vbique sunt testes. Aug. epist. 59 and in Psalm.
39. and 56. and 58. and de temp 31. Nulla turpior seruitus grauiorque, quam
seruitus Iudaeorum, quam quocunque ierint post se trahunt, and vbique Dominos
offendunt suos. Bern. de consider. l. 1.
You your selves wander up and down, the whole world over, preaching, and
publishing his Deity to all those that consider in what sort you continue, and
yet continue too, ever since that impious act of yours, in the crucifying of
him. You go branded with deep and conspicuous marks of his wrath, and
vengeance wheresoever you abide. But would you yet see some other pregnant
proof of his Deity? Let this one serve for all. (...). Chrysostom. quod Christus
Deus.
What he razeth, none can rear again; what he reareth, none can raze again.
He pulled down your Temple, and it could never be built again. He has built
him a Church, and it could never be pulled down again. It is a memorable
story, and the more remarkable, because recorded (besides diverse others of
Greg. Naz. in Julian. orat. 2. Chrysostom. contr. Iud. orat. 2. and quod Christus
Deus, and in Matthew. hom. 4. Ambr. ad Theodos. epist. 29. Theodoret. hist.
eccles. l. 3. c. 20. Cassiod. hist. tripart. l 6. c. 43. and alij.
our own,) by Ammian. Marcellin. hist. l. 23.
an Heathen man also, one no friend to Christians, a traducer of Constantine,
and an admirer of Julian. Julian, that wretched Apostata, to spite the
Christians, whom he had professed himself formerly to be one of, but now hated
most extremely, Greg. Naz. Chrysostom. and Theodor.
called the Jews to him, and asked them, why they did not now sacrifice as in
times past they had wont to do. They made him answer, that by their Deuteronomy.
12.5, 6, 12, 13, 14.
Law they might not sacrifice any where but in the Temple at Jerusalem: which
since therefore it was ruined, they had ceased to sacrifice, and must so do
till it were reedified. Hereupon Julian told them that they should have their
Temple eft-soones built again, if they would; and to that purpose Templum
instaurare sumptibus cogitabat immodicis, negotiumque maturandum Alypio
dederat. Cum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret, iuuaretque prouinciae rector
etc. Ammian. l. 23.
he sent one Alypius into those parts furnished with much treasure for the
dispeeding of the work, and withal caused the Governor of that Province to
assist him all that might be therein. Nor were the Jews therein backward,
(...). Theodor. l. 3. c. 20. (...). Greg. Naz. stelit. 2.
who flocking together out of all quarters, raised a great mass of money, and
provided abundance of materials, for the setting forward of so much, and so
long desired a work. But (...). Chrysostom. contr. Iud. 2. (...). Esai. 14.27.
Ibid.
no might, or industry of man is able to prevail against God, or to effect
that, that he will not have done. When all things were prepared now, and they
began to fall to their business; First there arose (...). Theodor. l. 3. c.
20. Vis magna ventorum repent spirans, tempestatesque ac procellae subito
factae, quicquid congregatum fuerat, disperserunt. Cassiod. l. 6. c. 43.
strange storms, and whirle-winds, that dissipated, and spoiled their
materials. And after that, when yet they attempted to do something, (...).
Chrysostom. quod Christus Deus. (...). Ibid. Metuendi globi flammarum prope
fundamenta crebris assultibus erumpentes, fecere locum exustis aliquoties
operantibus inaccessum. Ammian. l. 23.
fearful balls of fire, not falling down from heaven, but bursting out of
the very ground beneath, and that so often as they assayed to go on with their
work, ripped up what they had wrought, and burnt up the workmen, in so much
that none durst any more approach the place, and so the very Ho^que modo
elemento destinatius repellente cessauit inceptum. Ibid.
elements (says that Heathen man) obstinately making head against them, they
were at length enforced wholly to give over their enterprise. Thus was no power
of man able to raise what he had ruined; nor shall any power ever be able to
ruin what he has raised. In stead of the Temple that he ruined has he
erected his Church; which unless the Rock may be removed that it is built
upon, shall no power of man, or devil be able ever to overthrow. Though all
the wicked in the world, and all the Devils in hell to them, conspire together
in one, yet as soon shall they be able to drive Christ himself out of heaven,
as to destroy utterly and root out his Church here upon earth.

Thus you see then these four Points of Instruction plainly, and evidently
proved unto you. Recapitulatio^. Points 4.


1. That they seek their own ruin, that seek the ruin of Gods children.
Point 1.
2. That Gods Creatures are ready pressed to assist those that be his. Point 2.
3. That it is the City of God, Point 3.
that God thus protecteth. 4. That this City, Point 4.
or Church of God shall never be utterly overthrown.
Let us now proceed to the Uses that of these Points may be made. Uses 4.


And first this Text may be to the enemies of Gods Church, Use 1. of Point 1.
as Dan. 5.5.
those knuckles of a man's hand were to Baltasar, to write them their destiny;
or as Ibid. 24, 25.
Daniel was to him, to read it unto them; to inform them, what the end and
issue shall be of all their plots and proiects against the Church of God. In
plotting, and proiecting the ruin of it, they Suo sibi iumento arcessunt
malum. Plaut. Amphitr.
plot and project but their own confusion: Nor shall their plots, and proiects
take (as they hope) against it, but they shall take (which they, it may be,
little deem, or once dream of) against themselves. Psalm. 9.16.
God will show himself to be God indeed by executing of Judgment, in causing
them to be (...). Apolinar. (...). Dolscius.
ensnared, and caught in the work of their own hands, Psalm. 9.15.
in a snare of their own setting, (...). Theodoret. dialog. 1. c. 24.
in a net of their own weauing: in causing Ester 7.9, 10. Prou. Ebr. Cippum
occupauit ipse, que^ fecit, faber. Drus. decur. 1. adag. 4. Et Lat. Gestat
faber, quas fecit ipse, compedes. Auson. (...). Theogn.
Haman to be hanged on that Gibbet himself, that for Mordecai he had erected,
and bringing him, and Ester 9.10, 13, 14.
his whole House to destruction by those means, whereby Ester 3.6.
he sought the destruction of the whole Jewish Nation. Application.


In this kind may we well say, Verse 8.
Sicut audiuimus, sic and vidimus; What we have heard we have seen; both in
that deliverance that through Gods goodness this day we survive to celebrate,
and in The powder plot etc.
diverse others also. They that came to sink us, were sunk themselves. They
that thought to blow us up, were some of them blown up themselves. They that
plotted the ruin, and confusion of our estate, brought ruin and confusion
upon themselves, and theirs. Judge. 5.31.
So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord. But let those that love thee, and
stand for thee, be as the Sun when he shines in his full strength.

Use 2. of Point 2.
Secondly, it may serve as to discourage the Adversary, so to encourage the
godly. As to discourage the wicked from attempting ought against Gods Church, (
Psalm. 21.11.
They intended evil against thee, says the Psalmist; but they were not able
to effect it) so to encourage those that 1 Samuel 18.17.
fight Gods battles; they cannot want help. Heaven and earth fights for
them. Though they may seem the weaker side, and to have fewer assistants, yet
2 Cor. 12.9.
Gods power is perfected, and appears most in man's weakness: And if we had
eyes to see it, we might see 2 King. 6.16. 2 Chronicles. 32.7.
more with them than against them: Quocunque se verterit, ibi te videat. Sen.
de benef.
which way soever they turn themselves, they might see helps always at hand;
Psalm. 46.1.
God himself, and all the Job 5.23.
creatures of God, ready pressed at Gods beck Psalm. 91.11.
to attend them, Dan. 10.12, 13.
to assist them, Psalm. 34.7.
to guard them, Judge. 5.30.
to fight for them, Exodus 23.28.
to oppose those that fight against them.

And here we may again sing, Application.
Verse 8.
Sicut audiuimus, sic vidimus; What we have heard we have seen. Quam been te,
ambitio, mersit, vanissima, ventus? Et tumidos tumidae vos superastis aquae?
Quam been totius raptores orbis auaros, Hausit inexhausti iusta v^rago maris?
Theod. Beza.
The winds, and the Seas fought for us, when time was; the one dissipated and
scattered, the other swallowed up, and devoured those, that came with hope to
have dissipated, and Psalm. 27.2. and 124.3.
with open mouth to have swallowed, drown, and devoured us. Psalm. 124.6.
Blessed be God, that gave us not up as a prey unto their teeth.

Thirdly, is it the City of God, Use 3. of Point 3.
that God thus protecteth? Then learn we the reason hence why God has in this
manner done for us. It is for his Church among us, his Name called upon, his
Gospel professed by us, his worship retained with us. And certainly (observe
we, and we shall undoubtedly find it to be so that) since Gods truth and
Gospel established with us, and that Romish Idolatry expelled from among us,
this Island of ours has enjoyed the quietest, the peaceablest, the most
prosperous times, that ever it did, for so long time together, at any time,
that any memory of man, or record of story can be produced of, notwithstanding
all the power that that 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
Man of sin, and all his adherents were able to raise up against us. And as
many strange deliverances has God vouchsafed us, as ever any Nation under the
cope of heaven had. Oh that our thankfulness to God were in any good measure
proportionable to Gods goodness toward us. But it is to be feared, that that
of Saluian is too too true of us; Deus bona dat, vt boni simus. Nos vbi bona
accepimus, mala cumulamus. Saluian. de prouid. l. 3.
God gives us good things, to make us good: but we when we have received good
from God, return evil again to him. And that of Hosea, Hosh. 4.7.
As they were increased, so they sinned against me: and I will turn their
glory therefore into shame. Which if it be so; let us remember, that as the
same Saluian says, Ideo deteriores sumus, quia meliores esse debemus. Saluian.
Ibid.
Therefore are we worse than others, whom God has not done the like for,
though we be no worse, if but as bad only, because we ought to be better. So,
as the Centurists observe, Ingentia beneficia, ingentia flagitia, ingentia
supplicia. Magdeburg. in prafat. ad Centur. 5.
great blessings, seconded with grievous sins, will at length draw down
extraordinary judgments. And it had been better for us never to have had such
deliverances, if we be not careful to show our selves truly thankful unto
him, that has wrought so great deliverances for us.

Use 4. of Point 4.
Fourthly, it may teach Gods Children not to be dismayed, if the enemies of Gods
Church seem sometime Dan. 8.24, 25. Apoc. 13.6, 7.
to prevail against it. For Ier. 31.35, 36, 37. and 33.20, 21, 25, 26.
they shall never be able to root it out for all that. Gods Church is as Exodus
3.2.
the bush, that burnt, and consumed not, as (...) etc. Plut. sympos. l. 8. q. ^^
the Palm Tree, that spreads, and springs up the more it is oppressed: as
(...). Sibyll. Mergitur interdum, sed non submergitur vnquam. Merses profundo;
pulchrior euenit. Luctere; multa proruet integrum Cum laud victorem. Horat.
Carm. 4.4.
the bottle, or bladder, that may be dipped, but cannot be drowned: as Duris vt
ilex tonsa bipennibus per damna, per caedes ab ipso ducit opes animumque ferro.
Ibid.
the Oak, that takes heart to grace from the maimes and wounds given it, and
sprouteth out thicker than before. Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae. plures
efficimur, quoties metimur a vobis. Semen est sanguis Christianorum. Tertull.
apolog. Sparsus est sanguis iustus: and illo sanguine tamquam seminatione facta
seges surrexit Ecclesiae. August. in Psalm. 39. veritas per orbem terrae
pullulauit faecundius, cum in Martyrum sanguine sereretur. Ide^ Ciuit. l. 22.
c. 7.
The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church; it springs again as V^^
est quae reparet, seque ipsa reseminet ales. Ovid. met. l. 15. Faecunda reparat
sic morte iuuentam. Claudianus in Stilic. l. 2. De Palma quadam in Chora mirum
accepimus, cum Phoenice aue, quae putatur ex huius palmae argumento nomen
accepisse, emori, ac renas^i ex seipsa. Plin. hist. not. l. 13. c. 4. Hinc
error Tertulliani enatus, qui illud Psalm. 92.12. (...) Graece, de aue (non
arbore, Hebraicae linguae ignarus) intellexit, quae se funerans renouat, natali
fide decedens atque succedens iterum. Lib. de resurr. Si tamen vt creditur de
sua morte renascitur. Aug. de orig. anim. l. 4. c. 20. Vide and Clement. Apost.
constit. l. 5. c. 7. Plin. hist. not. l. 10. c. 2. Oppian. de ancup. Orum in
hieroglyph. Claudian. and Lactant. nom carm. de Phoenice etc.
the Phoenix does out of her own ashes, or as Non hydra secto corpore firmior
vinci dolentem creuit in Herculem succisa serpens caede se reparans sua. Sen.
Med. 4.1.
the Hydra rather repaireth her self out of her own losses with a much more
plentiful increase. Exodus 1.12. Sic foenum graecum qu^ peius tractatur,
prouenit melius. Plin. hist. l. 18. c. 16.
The more Pharao oppressed the Ebrewes, the more they increased, and the
mightier they grew. The Children of God in the Word are compared especially to
two sorts of silly creatures, to Cant. 2.14. and 6.9. Matthew. 10.16.
Doves, and to Sheep. Vt fugit accipitrem penna trepidante columba, Vt solet
accipiter trepidas vrgere columbas. Ovid. Met. l. 1.
No foul more preyed upon by Eagles, Hawks, Vultures, and other birds of
prey, than the poor Pigeon. And yet, Quantum vult consumat edacitas vulturum,
tamen mayor est numerus columbarum. Optat. contr. Parmen. l. 2.
let those ravenous fowls (says Optatus) consume never so many of them, there
will be a greater number of Doves still, than of any kind of them. There is
more Doves than Hawks, or than Kites, for all that. Again, for the Sheep, it
is one of the silliest creatures that is, and most unable to defend it self:
neither is it unknown to us (to spare to speak Ier. 50.6. Esai. 56.9. 1 Samuel
17.34. Ezekiel. 34.5. In praedam lupis ferisque r^liquis exp^siti sunt cum primis
ouium greges. Spin. de prouid.
how they are preyed upon in those places where Wolves, and Bears, and Lions,
and other wild beasts are rife) how many of them are Psalm. 44.11, 22. Ier.
12.3. Ouium homini cibus frequentissimus, vt nullus fere alius in lauienam
veniat. Spin. ibid.
slain for man's use; no one sort of creatures comes so frequent to the
Shambles as they; they come not by one, or two, but they are driven by troops
thither; as also how many of them die by diseases; they are subject to
Saeuissima inter eos pestis gr^ssatur. Ibid.
rots, and murreons, that Illa cateruatim dat stragem. African. in Geopon.
make havoc of them by whole sale; nor are they naturally so fruitful as
many other beasts are, and those of prey by name, some of them, as the Fox and
others, that bring diverse at a litter, whereas Vnicum duntaxat quotannis parit.
Spin.
the Ewe has usually but one. And yet for all this we see what Nullum animal
frequentius in agris accurrit. Idem.
plenty there is every where of them. We may see Oues olim mite pecus, nunc tam
indomitum and edax, vt homines deuorent, oppida diruant. Th. Morus Vtop. l. 1.
Sheep eat out men in many places among us; and whole Towns by them
depopulated and turned into Sheepe-walkes. Such a providence of God is there in
the preservation, and increase of that Creature that so Psalm. 23.1, 2. and
74.1. and 77.20. and 79.13. and 80.1. and 95.7. and 100.3. Esai. 40.11. and
63.11. Ier. 23.1, 3. and 31.10. and 49.20. and 50.6.
often he compares his Church and Children unto, whom he has taken into his
special and peculiar protection; and whom therefore their cruel Adversaries
shall no more be able to root out, than the Hawks able to destroy all the
Doves that are, or the Wolves to woory, and slay all the Sheep in the World.

Question.
Yea but (may some say) may we in this Land then be sure ever of such safety,
Ezekiel. 34.22, 23, 31. and 36.37, 38. and 37.24, 26.
never to be ouerrunne, or rooted out?

No: It is Gods Church in general, not this or that Church in part^^ular,
Answer.
that is sure thus constantly to continue. Mica 2.12. and 7.14. Zach. 9.16. and
10.3. and 11.7, 11. and 1^.7. Matthew. 10.16. and 9.36. and 26.31. and 25.32, 33.
John 10.2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 11, 12, 15, 16, 26, 27, 28.
Now Gods Church is not confined to this, or that place; nor is Gods protection
tied unto, or entailed upon this, or that people. We have Psalm. 119.57, 94.
Ier. 2.3.
no promise of protection longer than we continue Gods portion. We have 1
Cor. 10.1-12.
no better evidence, nor assurance than the Jews had: Psalm. 132.14.
Here (says God) shall be my rest for ever. And, Verse 8.
God will establish it for ever. And, Psalm. 89.23. Esai. 41.11, 12.
I will destroy all that rise against it. And yet we know Luke 19.44. and
21.24.
what is become of them at this day, Matthew. 23.38.
Their habitation is left desolate. And 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
The wrath of God (says the Apostle) is come upon them to the utmost. It is
true indeed, that Deus nisi deserentem se non deserit, priusquam deseratur
neminem deserit. Aug. ad imposs. sibi art. 7. Recessurum non deserit antequam
deserat. Ibid. 14. Non enim nos deserit fons, si nos fontem no^ deseramus. Idem
in Joan. 32.
God never leaves any, but those that leave him. But if 1 King. 11.7, 9.
Solomon leave God, and build Temples for Milcom, and Chamosh; God will leave
him, and raise up adversaries on al sides against him. If 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
Ezekiaes heart be lift up; Esai. 39.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 32.26.
God will pull him down again. If Esai. 1.21. Ier. 3.2. and 9.2.
the holy City become an Harlot, or a Facta est vrbs tota lupanar. Iuuen. sat.
1. Vnus gurges omnium gula: vnu^ pene lupanar est omnium vita. Saluian. de
prou. l. 7.
Stews (as he speaks) no reason but that God should Ier. 7.29. and 12.7.
abandon it, and give her Ier. 3.8.
a Bill of divorce, and Ezekiel. 13.36, 45, 47.
deal with Aholah, and Aholibah, as adulterous women are wont to be dealt
with. If Gods Vine grow not Hoshea 10.1.
barren only, but bear Deuteronomy. 32 32.
bitter, Esai. 5.2.
noisome, and Deuteronomy. 32.33.
poysonfull grapes; it shall be a just thing with God to Esai. 5.5. Psalm. 80.12.
pluck up her hedge, and Esai. 5.6. Ier. 12.11.
lay her waste, Ier. 9.11, 12.
as a wild wilderness, or Matthew. 3.10. and 7.19 Luke 13.7.
to cut her down, and Ezekiel. 15.4, 6.
cast her into the fire. If Numb. 11.5. and 14.3, 4.
Israel begin to look back into Egypt; it shall be just with God Deuteronomy. 28.68.
to bring back his Israel that was, into their former Egyptian bondage
again. If the Hebrews live in those abominable courses Leuit. 1.24, 25. Deuteronomy.
18.12.
for which God cast out the Canaanites, Leuit. 18.28.
the Land that spewed out the Canaanite, shall now spew them out. If Ezekiel. 5.6.
and 16.47, 48.
Gods own people grow worse than the Heathen themselves; it shall be just with
God, to Ezekiel. 7.24.
bring the very worst of the Heathen in upon them, and by them, whom they Ezekiel.
16.51, 52.
justify in some sort, Ezekiel. 7.21.
to destroy them. Nor may Ier. 25.28, 29. Romans 11.^^, 21.
we look to fare better than they did, if we be faulty as they were. Gods
Church may stand firm and stable still, though we fall. The Lamp may burn
clear elsewhere, though the Light be done out with us. If we desire therefore
to have this Protection continued unto us, let us continue to be Deuteronomy. 32.9.
Exodus 19.5, 6.
Gods, that Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Ier. 7.23. and 31.33.
God may continue to be ours. Let us be careful to keep and maintain a
Church of God with us, Semen sanctum statumen terra. Esai. 6.13.
The holy seed vpholdeth the state. In a word, as Samuel to his people (whose
words I will end all with) 1 Samuel 1^.24, 25.
Fear the Lord, and serve him with all your heart in sincerity; and consider
what great things he has hitherto done for you.

FINIS.

