A DEFIANCE TO DEATH.

Being The Funebrious Commemoration of the Right Honorable, Baptist Lord
Hickes, Viscount Camden, late deceased.

Preached at Camden in Gloucester-shire, November 8. 1629.

By JOHN GAVLE.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper, for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear, 1630.

To the truly Honorable and religious Ladies, Julian, Viscountesse Camden,
and Mary, Lady Cooper; Daughters to the late right Honorable Baptist, Lord
Hickes, Viscount Camden; the blessings of both this, and the life to come.
Most Noble, and virtuous Ladies:
TO whom should I dedicate the memorial of your deceased Father, but to you,
in whom he lives? Who (me thinks) but his Monuments, may challenge his
commemoration? Besides the life he was personally possessed of; you are his
derived life: and he yet lives, (and long may he) though not in himself, yet
in his Successions. Yet (alas!) how much rather had you (I know) to have still
enjoyed, then thus supplied his life? But you are not ignorant, how nature
abides not always, but succeedes: how God but lends, not binds your friends
to your inioyment. He was given you, to be taken from you: yours he was, to
use, rather then possess: yours in his life, name, virtues, graces, to
inherit; and not yours, in an earthly being to ingrosse. Therefore had you him,
to lose him, and must therefore be contented with his loss: yea, ought indeed
to rejoice rather, that once ye had him; then sorrow, that now ye have him
not. Grant, it cannot be but a grief to miss him: so neither but a joy to
remember him. It was an happiness more delighting, when you might rejoice in
his presence: but is an happiness more lasting, that you may yet rejoice in
his remembrance. You both (beyond the common lot and hap) were much, and long
happy, in a double Parent: the loss of one now admonishes, yea, applaudes you,
to esteem another Parent, and fear another loss. But, I spare from further
repetitions of your loss; lest (while I would strive to consolate, and appease
them) I rather prove but to renew your sorrow; and provoke your fear. For
mine own part (who reckon my self not the least in his loss) I count it even
as envy, to bewail the happy: and but folly, forlornely to sorrow for him;
that certainly reioyces for himself. Nevertheless (for loss of friends)
forbid I no man to mourn, but murmr, and despair. Such our sorrows, are
but the late tokens of our love, and must as well be moderate, as unfeigned.
Neither should our hearts (in this case) be flinty, nor effeminate: nor our
eyes always dropping, nor altogether dry. For me, I like neither to be
niggardly, nor prodigal of my tears: neither to be desperate, nor ambitious
of my complaints. I say no more of this sorrow and loss, because I would not
pack them up, or deck them up in words only. Thus much have I written,
because I would not that a private hour should extinguish or ingrosse them.
What I have herein presumed, besides the comfort (I trust) you shall receive by
it: this also shall comfort me, that you daigne to receive it.

Your good Ladyships in all humble observance, JOHN GAVLE.

A DEFIANCE TO DEATH.
1 COR. 15.55. Oh death, where is thy sting?


Upright Adam was made immortal: but sinful Adam begat all his Sons
mortal, like as he had made himself. Adam then is dead, and so all Adams
Sons but live to dye. The sentence of death past upon us in him; we are but
borne to the execution thereof in our selves. Even as Adam himself, for the
necessity of dying, Genesis 2.17.
dyed the same day that he sinned; though, for the event, and issue of death,
he lived an hundred and thirty years after that day. Genesis 5.5.
So in him we underwent the same necessity; though it be for thousands of
years after, that we are brought out to such an event. As a Malefactor is a
dead man according to the law, at that instant the sentence is pronounced upon
him: though for some few days after, the execution be deferred: So according
to Gods law and decree, we are all dead in Adams doom: though God be yet
pleased to prolong those things of ours, wherein we must live to dye,
accordingly as he has doomed us. A malefactor is not executed sometimes of
one, two, three, four, five, or six days after his judgment: Even so were
we all adjudged to dye, before we were; but God (with whom a thousand years
is but as one day) has appointed the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, or
sixth thousand year of the world, to be the day of our execution.

There is a more necessity upon our death, then our life. No such need, that
he that is not, should be, as that he that now lives, should once dye.

The former may be supposed, but this other is expressed: It is appointed for
all men once to dye. Heb. 9.27.
There is always a more necessity of the End, then Means. Not only in
execution, but intention, is death the end of life. Mortinati sumus, we are
borne to dye, and dye from the time that we are borne. Our birthday, what is
it, but the beginning of our death-day? our death-day, what, but the end of our
birth day? our birthday precedes, or happens before our death-day: but our
death-day is preferred before our birthday: The day of death is better then
the day that one is borne. Eccles. 7.3
Did we so consider it, our birthday is indeed a punishment, and our
death-day (in comparison) a reward. Vt suppliciam non sit nasc^, mors efficit.
Death is as the remedy against the miseries of life: and to dye, is but to rest
from those labors, and cease from those sorrows, whereunto we were borne.
What a plague and punishment were our birthday into a sinful and miserable
world, did not our death-day give an end to all such evils, both of sin, and
pain?

I said, our birthday is the beginning of our death-day: and our death-day but
the end of our birthday. We are deceived, to call the day of our departure
only, the day of our death. On our last day indeed we cease to live, but from
our first day, we begin to dye. Consummat hora mortem extrema, non facit.
Our last day does not cause death, but consummate it, does rather finish, then
begin it. It is not the extreme and utmost minute of our life, that brings
death upon us: it rather but manifests, that death was always with us. As
spoke the Prophet of persecutions, We are killed all the day long, Psalm. 44.22
1 Cor. 15.31.
and the Apostle Paul concerning his own sufferings, I dye daily: So, though
no violence come against us, even through natures own frailty, we dye daily,
and by fatal mortality, we are killed all the day long. We dye daily, from the
time we first begin to live: On our first day, our life is the longest: every
day after, takes one day from our lives; and the longer we have lived, the
less we have to live. Quotidie morimur, Senec. lib. 3. epist 24.
quotidie enim demitur aliqua pars vitae: and tunc quoque cum crescimus, vita
decrescit. We dye daily, every day passes away a part of our life; and while
we are yet waxing, does our life decrease. Ibid.
Hunc ipsum quem agimus diem, cum morte diuidimus: This very day that we now
live, do we divide with death. Hieron. ad Heliodor. in Epitaph. Nesoliani.
Hoc ipsum quod dicto, quod scribitur, quod relego, qnod emendo, de vita mea
tollitur. As by the times of eating, sleeping, working, playing: so by the
instants of speaking, reading, writing, our lives are lessened. Yea (brethren)
this hour, these moments of my preaching, and your hearing, are taken away
from both our lives.

We dye daily: our times dye daily, our actions dye daily, our persons dye
daily. Our times dye daily: the time past, is dead to the time present; the
time present, is dying to the time to come: yesterday is dead to Today, and
Today is dying to Tomorrow. Our actions dye daily: what is done and past, is
dead to what is now doing: and what is now doing, is dying to what hereafter
must be done. We neither remember what we have done, nor conceive what we
have done, nor delight in what we have done: so daily dye our actions to our
memories, to our understandings, to our affections. Our persons dye daily: our
infancy dies into childhood, our childhood into youth, our youth into manhood,
our manhood into old age, and our old age dies into death. A man is in a
continual consumption of himself: His days spend him also, as he spends his
days Every day one part or piece o^ him languisheth or perishes, corrupts,
and is cast away. Seneca vt supra.
Non repent in mortem incidimus, sed minutatim procedimus. We dye by
piece-meale, and not all at once. There is no day in which our spirits vanish
not, our blood cooles not, our moisture dryes not, our stomach fayles not, our
liver corrupts not, our lungs consume not, our bowels yearn not, our heart
faints not, our head aches not: every day, either some vein stops, some sinew
shrinkes, or some bone breaks: either is some skin withered, some flesh
bruised, or some member decayed. Every day more then other, either the eyes
grow dim of seeing, the ears dull of hearing, or else the palate unsavory of
tasting. Thus dye the parts by little and little, and thus is the whole dead at
last. The Candle still consumes, from the time it first begins to burn: so
wade the oil and marrow of a man's life, from the time that he begins to live.
Man is a Candle, that either consumes himself upon the candlestick of the
world, or else sweales away under the bushel of his Mothers womb. The
houre-glasse runs continually, from the time it is turned. Man is an
houre-glasse, but a running sand, or moving dust. And as the sand in the
houre-glasse falls corn by corn, or mite by mite, till the heap be run
out: so a man drops away by little and little, till the whole lump be done. A
Traveler goes many days onward to his iourneyes end. Man is this Traveler,
this life the way, and death the iourneyes end. And is it a strange thing to
dye, when our whole life is but the way to death? Sen. ep. 78.
Tu non putabas te aliquando peruenturum ad id, ad quod semper ibas? Can we
think not once to come to, what we always go to? There is no way on earth
without an end: the intricatest labyrinth has a way out at last. We go
toward death continually, how should we but meet withal at last? We dye
daily, how should we but once be dead? Bern. ser.
Miser homo, quare te omni hora non disponis? cogita te iam mortuum, quem scis
necessitate moriturum. Wretched man then, who ever thou art, seeing thou dyest
daily, why do thou not daily dispose thy self for death? think thy self
now dead, whom thou know needs must dye. Woe to us wretches all! that so
many of us are so near death, and yet put it so far from us: so near it in
the event, and yet put it so far from us in the consideration. Death is ready
to take us by the hand, in the natural execution; ere we are willing to take
death to heart by a christian meditation. We go toward the grave, with our
faces backward: our feet are at point to fall into it, ere our eyes once look
upon it. We many feel Death before we know Death: and are brought woefully to
hazard, or experience it; ere we are drawn wisely to consider, and conceive
it, though we see it daily in others; yet can we not be led to consider it in
our selves: hereof have we daily warning; Eucher: epist: Paraen.
yet will we make it unawares. Nihil ita quotidie homines vt mortem, vident;
nihil ita obliuiscuntur vt mortem. Men daily behold nothing more then Death,
and yet then Death, they forget, they neglect nothing more. But to bring you
(beloved) to the knowledge, the consideration and remembrance of Death; I have
taken this text (O Death, where is thy sting) both to instruct you concerning
it; as also to encourage you against it. Where note first an Appellation,
secondly an Interrogation: an Appellation, or Death summoned; O Death! an
Interogation, or Death dared; Where is thy sting? Where I have 1. Something to
say to Death, for your instruction; O Death! 2. One thing to ask of Death, for
your encouragement; Where is thy sting?

I. The Appellation, or Death summoned; where I am to say something to Death,
for your instruction: O Death!

O Death! what art thou? a Chimaera, a Fable, a Buggebeare a Dream, a Shadow,
a nothing. O Death, thou art a strange thing consider: Thou art none of Gods
Creature: Wisdom. 1.13.
God made not Death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living.
God is the God of our being, he delights not in our destruction. Death was
intended not for us, but for our Sin: therefore are we mortal, that sin
might not be immortal: We must therefore dye, once, that it might not
always live.

O Death, what do thou? thou dissoluest the rarest compact of Heaven and
Earth; thou distinguishest betwixt our Spirit, and our Clay; Body and Soul
thou separatest, sharper art thou then any two edged sword, and entrest to the
dividing a sunder of the Soul and Spirit, thou even diuidest betwixt the
marrow and the bone. Thou make our Dust return to the Earth, whence it was
taken; and our Spirit to God that gave it.

Oh Death! thou make our Spirit vanish, our Breath stop, our blood cool, our
color change, our Beauty fade, our Strength fall, Eccles. 12.
Thou make the keepers of the house (our hands) to tremble, and the strong
men (our feet) to bow themselves: Thou make the grinders (our Teeth) to
cease, and them that look out of the windows (our Eyes) to wax dark: Thou
shuttest the Doors of our lips and stoppest our windpipes, the Daughters of
our singing: Thou cuttest short the silver cord of Marrow; and breakest the
golden Ewer of our Brainpanne: Thou breakest the Pitcher of our veins, at the
Well of our Liver; at the Cesterne of our Heart, there breakest thou the wheel
of our Head.

O Death, Heb. 9.27.
thou art doomed to us all. It is appointed for all men once to dye. We all
walk this one way, all tread this one path; we must all sleep, our last
sleep; and that dark night of Death, will once overtake us all, Patres nostri
praeterierunt, nos abimus, posteri sequuntur. Eucher: Paraen.
Our Fathers are dead, our Friends are dead, and our selves also must dye. Some
are gone before us, some accompany us and some come after us, like wave after
wave are we dashed against the hard and cold stone Death, Serius aut citius,
metam proper ammad vnaus. And thus soon, or late we dye all at last. We are
borne, with condition to dye: We therefore put on the Garment of our Body, to
put it off. and at first take up the load of Nature, to lay it dowen at last.
Death is Natures Law; and to dye, is but to pay Natures Tribute. It is as
natural for us to live, and dye; as for to wake, and sleep:

O Death, Thou art certainly coming, yet uncertain is it when thou will
come. Nil certius morte, at hora mortis incertius nihil. Nothing more certain
then Death; but then the hour of Death, nothing more uncertain; Matthew. 24.36.
Of that day, and hour knows no man. That is, of the day of Judgment, and
the hour of Death. Death comes as a Thief in the night, both suddenly, and
violently: it takes us, one upon the house top, another in the Field; one
working in the Vineyard, another grinding at the Mill: one upon the house top
of honors, another in the field of Pleasures; one abouring in the Vineyard of
a Christian Calling, another grinding at the Mill of worldly affairs. Eccles.
9.12.
A man knows not his time, that is, the time of his death. God will not tell
us the time, when Death shall come upon us; because he would have us think it
never but near us: He will not let us know our last day; because he would have
us suspect and expect every day to be our last. Latet vltimus dies vt
obseruentur omnes dies. Aug de discipl: Christiana.
This one hour, the hour of Death is hidden from us; that all the hours of
our life might the rather be observed by us.

O Death, thou art impartial, and indifferent to all. Pauperam tabernas,
regumque turres: thou knockest equally at the Palace, as the Cottage door:
thou likenest a Kings scull to a Beggars, and make no difference between
their dust. Neither have thou pity upon the Poor, nor respect unto the Rich;
neither scornest thou the foolish, nor do thou reverence the wise: Eccles.
2.16.
How dies the wiseman? as does the Fool. The oldman, thou long threatnest;
the young man, thou soon betrayest, Neither sparest thou for Age, Sex,
Degrees, nor Gifts. No Power of ours can forbid thee; no Diligence avoid thee;
no tears move thee; Price hire thee; no art, or Eloquence persuade thee.

O Death, thou art manifold: thou come to us in sundry hues and shapes. Thou
approachest pale, and lean, to the old man; bloody, and boisterous, to the
young man; black as hell, to the bad man, and but ugly, unto every man. Thou
come to us, sometimes in Men's hands, sometimes in Beasts mouths, sometimes
in a flame of fire, sometimes in a wave of water, sometimes in a blast of wind;
sometimes in the slipping of a foot sometimes in the faling of a stone Thou
come to us, sometimes in our clothes, and sometimes in our Meat and Drink.
We dye diversely: Some by war, some in Peace; some by Sea, some by land; some
in the Field, some on our Beds; some by our own violence, or Intemperance some
by a sudden wound, and some by a languishing disease Mill modis lethi miseres
mors vnafatigat. And thus, by a thousand ways of dying, one Death destroys us
all.

O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, Ecclus. 41.1.2.
to a man that live that rest in his possessions, etc. O Death, how acceptable
is thy judgment unto the needful, etc. O Death thou art a shadow indeed, thou
fleest those that follow thee; and followest those that flee thee, Mors optata
recedit; at cum tristis erit, praecipi. tata venit. Thou hastnest then, when we
wish to eschew thee; then delayest thou, when we seek to embrace thee. Death
is the rich man's Fear; and the poor man's Desire: Often called upon, in
Adversity; never thought upon in prosperity. In prosperity, we complain, and
cry with Hezekiah, Isa. 38.
to have it further added into our days: But in adversity, we can be content
every one to wish with Elijah; It is enough now O Lord, 1 King. 19.4.
take away my Soul, for I am no better then my Fathers.

O Death! How fearful a thing art thou to flesh and blood? How abhor we, to
have the grave, forour house; to make our bed in darkness; to say to
Corruption, thou art my Father; and to the Worm, thou art my Sister, and my
Mother? How do we hate to inherit serpents, and worms; to be separated from
our selves; to be returned to our dust? how does Death terrify us, not only
in our own experience, but others example? In others Example; so often as we see
or hear another is dead; it troubles us to think, that we also must dye. For
our own experience; how are we then aghast, not knowing either what we must be
or whither we must go? We are afraid to dye, even we, who have good hope
after Death: Even we that look for an house not made with hands; are
notwithstanding loath to leave this house of clay: we that have the promise of
a Kingdom, are but unwilling to forgo our Prison: There is a Fear in us, to
be dissolved; notwithstanding our Desire to be with Christ: and we many irke to
undergo the Passage, that even rejoice to approach to the Home.

2 An interrogation, or death dared, where I am to ask this one thing of
death, for your encouragement: where is thy sting?

Not only this I am now to ask of death but that I have already said to
death, (truly considered) serves to encourage us against death. Death is a
shadow, (...), Chrysostom. ad pop. hom. 5.
but a very Bug-beare: and are we (like children) afraid of Hobgoblings only?
death is a nothing, and are we afraid of we know not what? Death separates
betwixt soul and body; why fear we so it should dissolve us, when we ought
to rejoice rather, that it cannot destroy us? Fear we what may separate us
from our selves? rather embrace we, what will convey us to Christ. Death is
deomed to us all, and why fear we, what we cannot eschew? Our willingnese to
dye, is the only way to prevent the necessity of death. Chrysostom in Mat. 10.
Offeramus Deopro munere, quod debito teneamur reddere. Let us therefore offer
God our lives, as a free gift, which he will otherwise require as a due debt.
Deaths coming is uncertain, and shall any uncertain thing cause in us a
certain fear? Incertum est, Sen. ep 26.
quo te loco mors expectet; itaque tu illam omni loco expecta. Rather, seeing
it is uncertain, at what time, or in what place death will overtake us; let us
therefore be sure to expect death at all times, and in every place. Death is
equal and impartial to all; this also should make us less afraid of death.
Sen ep. 30.
Quis queri potest, in ea condition se esse, in qua nemo non est? Who can
complain, when himself is but in such a case or condition, in which none are
not? Who looks that she should spare any, that knows her indifferent to all?
When the like ruin is threatened to an whole world, who expects that himself
should escape alone? Some comfort against the cruelty of death, is her
equality. There are diverse ways of dying, and should that make us afraid of
death? No matter how we dye, seeing the most is but to be dead. Non multum
curandum est eis, Aug. lib. 1. Ciu. Dei.
qui necessario merituri sunt, quid accidet, vt moriantur; sed moriendo, quo
ire cogantur. Since we must dye, it skilleth not how we dye, but whether we
must go after death. Lastly, death is a thing fearful to flesh and blood;
yet should not all this make us afraid of death. For it is not death, but the
fear of death, that is so fearful. This fear fullness is rather from our
own ignorance, then according to the nature of the thing, Chrysostom. ad pop. hom.
5.
(...): did we but know death, we would not so fear death. The fear of death
is the punishment of our ignorance and negligence, which make us apprehend
things, as new and strange things, which otherwise are neither strange, nor
new. The only way then to make death not so fearful to us, is (by a daily
meditation thereof) to make it more familiar; to acquaint our selves withal,
before the coming, that we may less fear it when it comes. And thus, first
learning not to fear death, at last come we to dare death; O death! where is
thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.26.


Death is not yet destroyed, for the last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death; but death is already disarmed; O death, where is thy sting? The Text is
an (...): The Captains song of victory, as also the Soldiers song of
delivery. The words are of a mighty Conqueror, bravely insulting over a base
and wretched enemy. And who is this conqueror of death, but Christ Jesus, the
Lord of life? It was he, spoke in the Prophets words, O death, Hos. 13.14.
I will be thy death; and in his power, speaks the Apostle here, O death,
where is thy sting? Greg. hom. 22.
Quia in electis funditus occidit mortem, mors mortis extitit. Christ did once
subdue death for us; O death, I will be thy death; and we may now deride death
in Christ, O death, where is thy sting? Olim morti nostrae, Leo sermon. 8.
passion.
mortis suae potentiam minabatur. Christ once threatened his death to our death,
O death, I will be thy death; wherefore we now may glory in the virtue of his
death, against the malice of our own, O death, where is thy sting?

Christ overcame death by dying: nay, through death, destroyed be, not death
only, but him also that had the power of death, the Devil. Heb. 7.14.
Our Captain both beat our enemy at her own weapon, and caught the Hunter in
his own snare. He but yielded to death, to take advantage against her: yea,
therefore dyed the life, that death might no longer live. Chrysostom. in Math. 12.
Wherefore, Non Christum mortuum in morte credimus, sed mortem mortuam in
Christo. We do not think that Christ is dead in death, but believe that
death is dead in Christ. Death, that greedy Whale durst devour Christ, our
Jonas, (who was therefore cast forth into the sea of the world, that so the
storms and tempests of the devil, and sin, might cease) but he was
preserved alive in the Fishes belly (the belly of hell, the jaws of death) to
preach repentance to the Niniue of the Church. This same Whale swallowed the
bait of Christ's humanity, but the hook of his divinity entangled her, and made
her vomit up her bowels, Hieron. lib. 1. ep. ad Heliodor.
together with the bait. Deuorasti, and deuorata es. Death thought to have
swallowed Christ down in obscurity, and so death her self was swallowed up in
victory. Death, that Serpent, was bold to sting Christ; but he made her lose
her sting for her labor. His humanity could but receive her sting, of which
his Diety did deprive her. So that we may well ask her in him: O death, 1
Cor. 15.56. Ioh. 1.29.
where is thy sting? The sting of death is sin: Christ, the Lamb of God, has
taken away the sins of the world. In Christ Jesus therefore may we securely
say: O death, where is thy sting?

Job asked of man, Man dies, and where is he? Job 14.10.
but we may ask as much of death: Man dies, and where is death? yea, we may
ask concerning the worst of death, deaths sting; O death, where is thy sting?
Jacob thus bewailed the death of Joseph, Joseph is dead Joseph is not. Genesis 42.
And Rachel wept for her children, and would not be comforted, because they
were not. Math. 2.
Because death was there, they thought their children to be no where. But now,
death does but convey us where we should be, and death it self is no where. O
death, where is thy sting? Death is quite undone since the Cross of Christ.
When death entered first into the world, Exodus 15.
it was like the waters of Marah, exceeding bitter: but since the Tree of the
Cross of Christ, was cast therein, it is now seasoned and sweetened unto us.
We might once cry out with the children of the Prophets: 2 King. 4.
death is in the pot, death is in the pot: But since, Christ has said, This
Cup is the new Testament in my blood: we may now say with the Saints of God;
The Cup of Salvation, Salvation is in the Cup. There is now no more death,
since the Lord of life. Vita cius instruxit nostram, mors destruxit nostram.
His life has instructed our life, his death, destroyed our death; his life
quickened ours, his death sweetened ours. his life took away death from our
life; his death, gave life to our death.

The Text asks not this question; O death, what is thy sting? yet do the
words following make answer to such a question; The sting of death is sin.
(Death belike is not the sting of sin, but sin the sting of death: peccato
enim morimur, Anselm. in l^.
non morte peccamus; Since we d^e indeed, by sinning, but sin not by dying.)
And as the words following answer to a question, they ask not; So my Text
asks a question, to which it answers not; O death, where is thy sting? It
does not tell you where it is, to tell you, it is no where. Death has now no
sting. I am non est stimulus, sed sibilus, immo iubilus. Rejoice all, and be
glad; This Serpent may hiss at us, this Be may buzze about us, but now can
neither prick nor sting. The sting of death is gone; there remains but the
name of death; nay, not the name of death to them that are in Christ Jesus.
Mors piorum, non mors dicenda, etc. The death of the godly is not to be called
a death, but a sleep, a resting from their labors, a delivery from their
prison, a laying down their load, a flitting to their home. Death has lost
her sting. Death is now no punishment, but a passage; not so much an end of
this present life, as an entrance to a better; not a destruction now, but a
dissolution, separating body and soul for a time, that so both may be
conjoined with Christ to eternity.

Thus have I asked this one thing of death, O death; where is thy sting? Now let
me ask this one thing of you, why are you so desperately and forlornely afraid
of death, having heard and known how death has lost her sting? Oh saithlesse
man, and faint hearted! Why tremblest thou now to encounter with thy last
enemy, since her weapon is taken from her? Shrinkest thou so at the coldness
of the Serpent, when thou know her poison and sting are both away? Oh
faithless, and faint-hearted, to be so afraid of a shadow? Ah wretches! why
fear we death so desperately; that are not lost, but sent before; whom death
utterly destroys not, but eternity once receives? It is for them to fear
death so desperately, that pass from one death to another; namely, from a
death of the body once on earth, to the death of body and soul in hell for
ever. It is for them so forlornely to fear a temporal death, that are either
ignorant, or desperate of eternal life. It is for them so to fear their
flittings, that go from their prison, to the place of their execution. But as
for us that are in Christ Jesus, we pass from a Prison, to a Palace; from a
Dunghill, to a Throne, from a crazy and wretched Tabernacle, to a certain and
blessed home. Cypr. de mortal.
Eius est mortem timere, qui non vult ad Christumire. It is for them to fear
to be dissolved, that hope not to be with Christ. A forlorn fear of death, is
but a despair of life after death. Men had rather suffer a great deal of
pain, and live, then dye but with a little pain: the which betokens, that it
is something after death, that is so fearful, and not death it self. Let
them then desire to linger in the miseries of this present life, that so but
delay awhile the torments of the life to come. But as for us that are in Christ
Jesus, after many our storms and shipwracks, why fear we to arrive at our
Haven? Having fought a good fight, and finished our course, why doubt we to go
and have our crown? having run our race, why are we so loath to obtain our
price? Why should we fear the threatenings of a temporal death, that may
rejoice in the promises of eternal life? Romans 14.8
Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord:
therefore whether we live or dye, we are the Lords: Neither let us be so
dissolute, and profane of life, as therefore ashamed to live, nor so ignorant
and negligent of death, as therefore afraid to dye. But at the instant of our
several flittings, say every one, as a dying Saint; Egredere, quid times?
Hieron in vita Hilarion.
egredere anima mea, etc. Go forth my soul! why fear thou? go forth.
Learn each soul to say at the last passage of his pilgrimage: what though I
dye. I know my Redeemer lives; though I be dissolved from my self, yet shall
I be conjoined with Christ. Lie then down (my body!) and return unto thy
dust; mount thou aloft (my soul!) and meet thy Savior in the air; my body
may be but wormes-meate for a while, my soul (I am assured) shall be an Angels
fellow for ever.

I have done with my Text as concerning you, before whom it has been uttered.
I am now only to apply it to this honorable party, for whom it was intended.
This honorable party, your doletull spectacle, and my Texts untimely occasion;
This honorable party, our Master, Father, Brother; this honorable party,
whose honor, for his person, now lies in the dust; for his succession, Lord
let it long, and much, both continue and increase.

The blessed Saints of God learn many good lessons in their lives, which they
both teach, and use at their death. Concerning this Saint now departed, we
that heard, can witness, how well he had learnt to adapt the prayers and
sayings of the faithful, and former Saints, to his own, and instant
necessities. Luke 2.
He sang with Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. He
prayed with Saint Paul, desiring to be dissolved, Phil. 1.
and to be with Christ. Yea, said he, with both the lingering and longing
Saints, How long Lord, how long? Even so come Lord Jesus, Reu. 6. Reu. 22.
come quickly. One of these sweet sayings of his own application, had given me
my Text to treat of, save that I considered, this Text that I have chosen, did
as much as intimate them all. For, to pray to depart, to desire to be
dissolved, to call for the has^ening, and to complain of the deferring; What
other is all this, but as in my Text, earnestly to summon death, O death! and
stou^y to daredeath, where is thy sting? He mentioned the departing, he
expected the dissoluing, but he never feared the stinging. He knew he should
not be lost, he should but depart; therefore says he, Lord, now let thou
thy servant depart, etc. He knew well, death could but dissolve him, it could
not destroy him; he therefore said, I desire to be dissolved, etc. And this is
no more, then as if he had demanded of death here in defiance; O death, where
is thy sting? As he had thus said; O death, thou art death indeed, and thou
may dissolve me; but where is thy sting? Sting have thou none, and
therefore thou can not destroy me.

It has been always the Churches use, not only to relate, but commend the
lives of the Faithful, being dead, that so the living might come to know their
conversation, and be brought to follow their example. Both for our
information, and imitation of this Saint deceased; I could gladly, (as I might
justly) inlarg my self to a volume of ^is praise. I flatter him not to say the
best I can of him, that is now better then I can tell how to say. To p^ayse a
good man after his death, is not to flatter him, but to praise God for him:
besides, a dead man's commendation, is the livings admonition. Then wh^ should
we forget, whom we ought to imitate? Why should his virtues dye with him,
before men on earth? whose graces are gone before him, and live before the face
of Christin heaven. Let us yet therefore speak of him, when we cannot now
speak with him. Let us have him now in our minds, while he is now no more
before our eyes: having now lost his presence, let us enjoy him yet in his
remembrance.

The life of our Honorable and dear Brother departed, must I remember unto
you, according to the twofold state of life; his prosperity, his adversity;
and in them both, I commend unto you his Christianity. He is worthy the
consideration in either state: In as much as he drank deep of a mixed Cup;
both had he his share of the honey-combe, and withal, was vinegar and gall
made his portion to drink: as a large talent was given him, so an heavy load
was laid upon him. God wonderfully both blessed, and afflicted him, because in
both (as himself both found and said) God would try him to the full. And
indeed, neither state did more then exercise, and examine him: for, neither
did the height of his prosperity, puff^ him up, nor could the depth of his
adversity depresse him. In his prosperity I never heard but that he was just,
and temperate. This I can say, he was both humble and thankful in his
affliction.

1. For his prosperity in particular; and there to begin with him as soon as
he began to prosper. He was a man (as it is well known) worshipfully borne,
religiously educated, wisely instructed, honorably promoted; A man happy in a
loyal wife, joyful in virtuous children, prosperous in worldly wealth. Nor
were his prosperity so commendable, but for his Piety, and charity. For his
Piety, he served his God, he reverenced the Church, he heard the word, he
believed the truth, he endeavored the good; His sighs and tears, could
witness his tender heartedness; so his prayers, and meditations, his heavenly
mindedness. For his Charity, it is well noted, where ever he had any thing to
dee, the first thing he did, was always to do good. Besides his often, and
private alms, his light moreover shines in public, and both in City, and
country, men may see his good works. Were I (for memory, and imitation sake)
to catel^gue, or record his works, I could declare when, how, where, he spared
neither for hundreds, nor for thousands, to do good. But such a thing I rather
think worthy a wide worlds eye, then but only a small peoples care. What he
has bestowed to pious and charitable uses amount to more then 11000. pounds.
And this the several places endowed can truly witness, and Parties
benesitted shall thankfully confess. Both living and dying was he largely and
variously beneficent. As for the most things of common use, and need, these
were the objects of his liberality. Hale, Hospitals, Prisons, Schools,
Colleges, and Churches; of some was he sole Founder, to some a free
Benefactour I might (not amiss) call him a man of good works. He was food to
the hungry, a garment to the naked, comfort to the sick, a relief unto the
prisoner, and an harbor even to the stranger: For, besides those of his
acquaintance, many one had cause to bless him, that scarce ever saw his face.
One thing I may not here omit, that when he had done much good for many, he
further demanded of us, Who was there would have him do any thing for them?
And when he had freely and orderly given the last he gave, he yet ask^, what
else was for him to do? Though his good deeds were many and munificent, yet
such words showed a mind, beyond his deeds; that when he had done well, and
sufficient, yet was he not satisfied with doing good.

2 Touching his adversity; his heavenly Father, as he had for a long time
embraced this his Son, in the arms of his blessings: so did his heavy hand
scourge him sore, now that he received him. He so cherished him, as not to
let him escape the whip. And all to tell him, he could not be so happy here, as
not to be miserable, and must be miserable a while, to be happy for ever,
During the time of his sinknesse, his sufferings were both tedious and
extreme, so that (comparing h^^ p^ines cogether with his years) we wondered he
could be so mightily afflicted, and yet so (...) subsist in his afflictions.
Both were his pains great, and groans many, and (for many (...) together) his
(...), and sleep (in comparison) small, or none. His Bed was but as his Rack;
the place of natural refreshment, as an engine of extreme torment. Nor was
any time so restless to him, as the common time of rest. For all which, he was
never heard to charge God foolishly, but always, in his wholesome Admonitions,
his holy Confessions, his hearty Inuocations; so improoued he his breath to
the last. All those godly and comfortable sayings that proceeded from him,
should I now utter them in particular, I suppose it would be another Sermon to
recite them. Lastly, having both appointed, and perfected his whole bequests,
and so set his house in order, and now quite renounced the world, setting
himself (as he said) to present his soul before God in Christ: after a long
and bitter agony, and now toward the doomed and expected moment of this
peaceable passage: while our hearts groaned, and eyes distilled in their
devotions his soul began already to be ravished in her heavenly visions, and
blessed contemplations: and so, he cheerfully flitting from us, left us sadly
looking on.

To insist long upon the virtues of the Dead, is (in some case) to add unto
the sorrows of the living: For, to hear his goodness praised, cannot but
this way grieve us, namely, in that we have lost so great a good. We have lost
him, w^^ have lost him; nor indeed is he lost, but to us. We have some lost a
Lord, some lost a Friend, some lost a Magistrate, some lost a Master, some lost
a Pe^re, some lost a Patron, one lost a Husband, some lost a Father, and (to
mine own particular) next a Father, his loss was mine. To reckon so manifold
a loss, my Tears begin to stop my speech; and bid me bewail it rather in
sobbes, then words. But I refrain the rather to let loose mine own passion at
this time and place; considering how unfitting he is to comfort others, whose
own sorrows overcome himself. It is not for me now to show sorrow in my
face, that am now to speak comfort to your heatts.

Comfort we our selves therefore (Brethren) in the Lord, in whom (we believe)
this our Brother does now rejoice. Let us be content to lose him whom it has
pleased God to gain: How justly might he take him away from us, that even gave
him to himself? Letvs not only bewail that we want him, but rejoice rather,
that once we had him, He is dead, neither the first, nor last: we must follow
after, whither he is but gone before. Neither was he violently nor untimely
snatched away from us, but he slept peaceably, and dyed in a good age. Let it
not then so afflict us, to think how we may miss him here on earth, as
rejoice us to expect how we must meet him in the Air, at the last coming of
the Lord Jesus. To which coming of thine (Lord Jesus) not only hasten, but
prepare: that when thou shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangell, and the Trumpe of God; we which shall then live and remain,
may be caught up with them (even this our Brother, and all thine holy Saints
and Angels) in the clouds; and so be, and be blessed with thee our only Lord and
Savior, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A just and necessary Catalogue of such Noble and Charitable Deeds, as have
been done by the late Right Honorable, Baptist Lord Hickes, Viscount Campden,
as well in his Life, as at his Death: recorded to the glory of God, his own
Honor, and others good Example.
Good deeds done to the Town of Campden, in the County of Gloucester.
He built an Almes-house or Hospital for 6. poor men, and 6. poor women,
cost 1000. l. Since the year of the foundation of the said Almes-house, sc.
1612. He has allowed the said 12. poor people, wachely maintenance, to the
value of 1300. l. And now at his death, he has settled 140. l. per annum for
ever upon the said Almes-house, allowing each of the said poor Prisoners 3. s.
4. d. weekly, and yearly a Gown, a Hat, and a Tun of Coals. per annum.
140. l. He built a commodious Market-house in the said Town, cost 90. l. By
his last Will, he gave to the said Town for the setting of the poor to
work, a stock of 500. l.
To the Church of Campden.
He gave a Bell, cost 66. l. Made a Pulpit, gave a Cloth and Cushion, cost 22.
l. Built a Gallery, cost 8. l. Made a Window, cost 13. l. Gave a brass Falcon,
cost 26. l. Gave two Comunion Cups, cost 21. l. Built the roof of the
Chauncell, and new leaded it, cost 200 l. Herepaired the Chapel by the said
Chauncell, supplied, and new cast the Leads, cost 20. l. He walled the
Churchyard round, cost 150. l.
Within the County of Middlesex.
He built a Sessions House for the Justices of Middlesex, to keep their
Sessions in, cost 600. l. He repaired, and adorned the Chapel of Hamstead,
cost 76. l. He set up a Window in the Chauncell of Kensington, and beautified
it, cost 30. l. He has given by his last Will to the said Town of
Kensington, to be employed for the benefit of the poor, the sum of 200. l.
In the City of London.
He has given by his last Will to S. Bartholomewes Hospital, 100. l. To
Christ's Church Hospital. 50. l. To Newgate, Lud-Gate, and the two Counters,
40. l. He erected a Window in S. Laurence Church in the old Iewry, and gave a
Pulpit ^lo^th and Cushion, cost 30. l.
Impropriations purchased, and bestowed upon the Church.
One in Pembrokeshire, to be given to the Town of Tewkesbury in
Gloucestershire, whereof one moity to the Preacher, the other to the poor,
cost 460. l. Another in Northumberland, whereof one moity to be given toward
the maintenance of an able Preacher in Hamstead, the other to S. Paul's School
in London, toward the maintenance of certain Scholars in Trinity College in
Cambridge, cost 760 l. One in the Bishopric of Durham, to be bestowed on
such Churches as shall have most need thereof, according to the discretion of
his Superuisors, cost 366. l. Another in Dorsetshire, to be bestowed likewise,
cost 760. l. Certain Chauntery Lands also in Lincolneshire, cost 240. l. He
has also given to two Ministers to be chosen out of Jesus College in Oxford,
to serve in their several places, 40. l. a piece per annum, 80. l. He has
bequeathed Legacies to several Ministers, the sum of 140. l. He has given
to Mr. A. E. during his life, per annum, 100. l. He has given amongst his
household servants 300. l.
An Elegy.
If sorrows silent be; I should bewray
An easiness, that would my sorrow say.
But time is, and affection too affords,
To breathe from sighs awhile, and breathe forth words.
Why should I be close niggard of my grief?
Since to impart it, is to find relief.
I wail the loss of one; like Lot of all
Is to be wail'd, and feared in general.
Always the greater loss, the grief the more:
While I applaud then, I must needs deplore.
Bounties free hand, ah Bounty now lies bound!
Amities dear heart, has felt a deadly wound.
Pieties pure soul, far flitted is from hence:
Truths simple tongue, is buried in silence.
Justice impartial Eye, is shut up fast:
Sincerities bright countenance, defaced.
Temperance sober palate, pal'd and cloyed:
Chastities unpolluted body, stroyd.
Attentions faithful ear, hard stopped with earth:
Memories sound brain minds now another birth.
Patience meek spirit, humbled to the dust:
Devotions zealous Saint, reigns with the just.
Experience long days and good, are gone:
Nobility is laid in grave alone.
Can so great loss in silence now be borne?
Or can I say, I miss him; and not mourn?
I hate to count, and not condole the loss
Of good men: none but bad men slight such cross:
And s^^w their teeth, cause others wet their eyes,
For loss of Saints; which they nor are, nor prize.
Once prized I one, who so prize-worthy was;
I daily learn to prize him by his loss.
I Will wail a private want; fear the common dearth
Of goodness; since good men so leave the earth.
An Epitaph.
Reader know, who ere thou be;
Here lies Faith, Hope, and Charity:
Faith true, Hope firm, Charity free;
Baptist Lord Camdens were these three:
Faith in God, Charity to brother,
Hope for himself; what ought he other?
Faith is no more, Charity's crowned;
T^^ only Hope is under ground.
In Baptistam Camdenum.
Grati^ Baptis^^ est, dicit Camdenus hon^^^^:
(...) homi^^ claru^, sanct^^ and ille Deo.
In Baptistam desunctum.
S^^^^buitferr^ quandam Baptista (...):
Baptista his noster sunere succubuit.
(...) non est, qui f^^ere tr^n^u^;
Non (...) nobis mors tulit (...) caput.
I. G. If to be crowned with honor of the Peers:
If to be honored with a crown of years:
If to have wealth, and know the use of it,
To have a solid and ingenious wit;
If goodly houses, with good store of land;
If an unspotted, and an open hand;
If strength of mind, and vigor of the sense,
A candid breast, and a clear conscience:
A noble issue, and a noble race,
Endowed with inward, and with outward grace:
If love of friends, and friendship without strife;
Observant children, and a faithful wife,
If a religious and a loyal heart
May perfect bliffe to any man impart,
Then to Lord Campden; who in all this roll
Had every gift, in body or in soul:
His soul in heaven is a welcome guesti:
Then let his bones in quiet silence rest.
Memoriae sacrae.
Cum tot faecundos Camdene p^regeris annos;
At^ tuis largas cum nameraris opes,
Cum tibisuccreseant illustristirpe Nepotes;
Cum mira celsas stru^teris art d^mes;
Cum tibi partus honor, vict^s^ paratus egenis:
Quid superest? vitra non super esse.
Vale.
Hiesius hic situs est; Campi qui gloria Deni:
Ternus, and aeternus da^ meliora Deus.
R. A. Ad Avum defunctum.
If good men's death be but a timely sleep,
If man two childhoods has, the first to keep
The first watch of his life, then that of age
Which with the former stands in equipage
Vshering the second better life, when you
May in a moment all your years renew,
And by the fruitful privilege of death,
Claim life again more permanent then breath.
Since man's last breath to man does life apply,
Since death's the childhood of eternity,
Why weep we? rather when you leave this light
We Will ask you blessing and bid you good night:
It Is vale long enough now, for anon
You Will be awake '^th resurrection.
Children must sleep then, so must age, and both
Are roused from slumbring at their perfect growth:
Sleep then in earth thy cradle, secure lie,
May Angels requiems be thy Iullaby,
Till the last trumpe awake thee, and the fair
Council of Elders place thee in their chair,
When jointly with the quire of Angels blessed
Thou may sing Halle^^iahs with the rest.
Baptist Noel. Prosopopoea Latinis Iambis.
QVicquid sub Arcto, quicquid in gremio latet
Thetidis, vel amplo conditur Ponti sinu,
Aut aestuantis febre perpetua canis
Radians ocellus vidit inter fluctuum
Ebullientes riuulos, vel anxius
Quaerunt sub vndis alacer Jndus, Aethiops,
Maurusue pelle nigricante Barbarus.
Haec omnia domi nosse te (charum caput)
Testantur Argonautae, and abietum frequens
Catena, malorumque siluae mobiles
Pontique nemora densa, decumano mari
Tot insulas nutante fixas vertice
Toties salutantia, iteratis nuncijs
Dum tu Liburnarum reuisens nauium
Orbem stupentem, miscuisti Barbaris
Gentem togatam, interfuisti and serijs.
Mediante seruo Gangis in negotijs.
At ista menti praevolenti viltor
Conditiosordet and globisci^ntia
Exacta licet and ampla terreni iacet
Contempta, and aequatur (quod explanat) solo.
Coelestis ardor surgit ad coelestia,
Nec sufficit contractus orbis nauitae
Terrae marisque conscio, sat semitae
Rimaeque cuiusque extimae, sed altius
Orbem supernum quaeris, illic for sitan
Coelestis Eridani fluentis nauigans
Stellata in Argo coelum aquosum transnatas.
Vel forsan vndas atri adhuc tranans Stygis
(...)
Vale (...), and inter viue (...):
Tantum hoc ^^itam lice^^ vrnam carmin^
N^taret ^^tri dicat extremum vale
Piet^^ N^p^tum, h^c est^ sarc^phag^ nota
Ci^erem^^l^cul^ figet hoc Epitaphium.
Epitaphium.
Transi viat^r N^bili^
Et civit hic sepult^^ est,
At siste gradum, n^m bre^^
Videbis istum nobi^^^
Redibit, hand m^rabit^r,
Resurget extrem^ di^.
Qui transmarinam navigan^
T^t ^rbis ampli litt^ra
Expertus, ^mnem novera^
Terra marisque semitam,
Tandem suam f^^licit^r
Mundi Chari^d^i^ ab^^en^
Adegit ad p^rtum ratem,
Sed vela jam si creditis
Iterum ^eten^isse, and sua
Ventis ^edisse ^ar^asa,
Nec s^lsas^rsan erit fides
Ergo valete ^^^it, (...)
Redibit, Exp^cta^iti^,
Gaz^phyl^ci^ ^^^st
Ge^^a (...):
(...)
Ad (...)
(...)
Adnundi^as Jerusalem
Hic nobilis non civis est,
At civis illic nobilis,
Cor^lla datur hic aurea
Illi^ c^r^^^ gloria.
Henricus Noel. ^ymbolum Honoratissimi D. Viceco^^ mitis Campden: optumi senis
and bonorum patroni.
NONDVM METAM.
^Vltu, Canitie, senio venerandus, and annis,
Et sanus mente, and corpore sanus eras,
^eltx progeny, felix vxore fuisti,
Externisque potens afftuis, Euge! honis:
^isatis haec non sint, meritis and honoribus auctus
Diceris ipse genus nobilitasse tuum.
Quid! Nondum Metam ais? valde ampla est haec tibi messis.
Aeger inops non es, sed nec auarus eras:
Quod sivirtutem cupias, humilemque piumque
Nobilem and humanum te, placidumque virum,
^rud^ntem, sobrium celebramus, and omnibus aequum,
Et Regi gratum dicimus atque Deo.
Quid superest ergo? quod supra est, inquis, in orb
Terrarum non est spes, neque meta mea,
Non est haec infra, coelis mihi meta reposta,
Christus vbi viuit, regnat and ipse Deus;
^ic mea meta est, hic mea vita, hic veta fuerunt:
Non nisi per mortem huc tenditur? en morior.
(...) [Nondum Metan] vivus dixisse solebas;
Sic Tandem Metam te tetigisse reor.
De mortuis nil nisi bonum.
He who was rich in bounty, as in wealth,
In honor humble, mindful of his end,
Comely of person, full of days and health,
To rich and poor an amiable friend:
Envy! thou know not him, if thou speak ill,
Who neither lived, nor dyed against his will.
Ask not what works of piety be did
Now when he dyed, his life was liberal,
From Church and University not hid:
He made least noise when he did most of all.
Give me the prudent man, who while he lives
Does his good works; and so, sees what he gives.
He among men was just, most free from wrong,
Sweet-natured, cheerful, loving every way,
To God devout; his praises were his song;
His prayers, sighs and tears: what shall I say?
This Lord is dead; and I am left, as one
Mong many, to be sorry that he is gone.
W. B. Errata.
(...) Age 2. line 10. for an hundred, read (...): hundred, and l. 25. for
things, read (...). p. 21. l. 10. read (...), (...) Catologue, for poor
Prisoners, (...) Pensioners, in the verses, for (...) read atrae, for
cineremque, read (...).


