TWO SERMONS.

ONE, The Curse and Crime of Meroz. Preached at the Assizes at Exon.

THE other, A Sermon of Patience, At St Mary's in Oxford.

BY EDWARD GEE, Doctor in Divinity, and Chaplain to his MAJESTY.

Published since his death, by his two brethren, JOHN GEE and GEORGE GEE,
Ministers of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop
near S. Austins-gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1620.

A Premonition to the READER.
TO yield any reasons for the publishing these Sermons (considering the
sufficiency of the Author, and the excellency of the Argument) were to call
into question the value of an Offering cast into the treasury of Gods Church.
If TERTVLLIAN, an ancient and learned Father (when the Light of the Gospel
shined nearer the times of the primitive purity) confessed that he did adore
the fullness of the Scriptures: Have we less cause, in these days (indeed
not of ignorance, but of contention and liberty) to respect the sincere
Expositors of the Mysteries of GOD? especially, when every man is almost
become an Interpretor to himself. But for as much as they who are the
Publishers of these exercises, can best give resolution for their publication,
(how ever extraordinary occasions unexpectedly withcal'd them for the
present;) yet, where a man in his life time so known, and so deserving to be
known for sincerity of conucrsation, generality of learning, gravity of
judgment, and soundness of Doctrine (as the Author was) has left any
monument of his studies; there it cannot be but an injury to his memory, and
a kindt of defrauding the Storehouse of Religion, to conceal that for any
private use, which concerns a public benefit. A Teacher, after his death, is
best commended, by the remaining fruits of his labors; those parcell-reliques
of this worthy man, being then read, rightly understood, and applied, cannot
but both inform the charitable Christian Reader, and confirm him.

THE CVRSE AND CRIME OF MEROZ.
IVDG. 5. VERSE. 23. Curse ye Meroz, (said the Angel of the Lord) curse
continually the Inhabitants thereof; because they came not to help the Lord,
to help the Lord against the mighty.


AS it is the first care of a good Gardener (right Honorable, right
Worshipful, and well-beloved) to purge and rid his Garden-plot of all noxious
herbs, and pestilent weeds: So is it the chiefest work of a wise Governor
to remove all naughty and incurable persons from a City and Commonweal. The
which we need not to prove by the authorities of Solon, Lycurggus, or other
Heathenish Law-giuers, but even by the prescript of the wisdom of God, the
well and fountain of perfect policy. For when the Lord had brought his vine
out of Egypt, and had given to the people of Israel the land of Canaan, he
first and principally charged them that they should utterly root out the
idolatrous Cananites, that they should make no league of friendship with them,
but without all compassion, smite and destroy them from the face of the earth,
Deuteronomy. 7.2.3.
Deuteronomy. 7. And this commandment they kept religiously, both under the
flourishing government of Joshua, and of the Elders also which succeeded him.
But after, when they had taken root in the fruitful land, and plenty had
begotten ease, and ease had bred security, and security had brought forth
forgetfulness of God, and forgetfulness of God had caused them to make an
impious truce with the cursed Cananites, Judge. 1.28.
whom for a little tribute they suffered to live quietly in the midst of
their land: the Lord did therefore bring upon them many calamities, and gave
them up often to be subdued and tyrannously oppressed by those profane
Nations. And yet behold the Father of mercy, did in the midst of his fury
remember mercy. For in their greatest oppressions, whenever they truly
repented and turned unto the Lord, Chap. 2.16.
he raised them up Judges, that is to say, rare and extraordinary Champions,
men of valiant and heroical spirits, which by strong hand delivered them from
their oppressors. Witness this one example for all in the fourth Chapter of
this Book, wherein it is hard to say, whether the oppression was more
grievous, or the deliverance more famous. For the Lord had sold his people into
the hands of Iabin King of Canaan, whose munitions, even nine hundredth chariots
of iron, seemed irresistable; his soldiers innumerable, his Captain Sisera
invincible, who by continual excursions had overrun the whole land for the
space of twenty years. And yet when they called upon God in their distress,
he raised up Debora the Prophetess, who persuaded Barac the son of Abinoam,
to take unto him ten thousand soldiers of the Tribes of Zebulon and
Nepthalye, and with that handful of men, to encounter that huge Host of the
Cananites in a pitched field near unto the brook Kishon; whose army was
three hundred thousand men and more, as Josephus writes. In which battle
Iabin was for ever vanquished, the Cananites discomfited, their chariots
disme^bred, and their captain Sisera most dishonourably nailed unto the ground
with a pin of a Tent stricken through the temples of his head by the hands of
Iael, the wife of Heber. And upon that glorious victory, Barac and Debora did
sing this sweet song of thanksgiving unto God, in the fifth Chapter of this
Book.

In which most excellent and triumphant Hymn, as the Authors name is Debora,
Deb. signif.
which signifies a Be, so does she bring not only the sweet honey of praise
and thanksgiving for that glorious victory, but also a sharp sting of
reproof wherewith she pierces those Tribes and men that came not to help
them in that great extremity. But of all the Israelites that absented
themselves, there were none so faulty as the men of Meroz, who dwelling near
unto Mount Thabor where the field was foughten, and being called upon to come,
did notwithstanding hide their heads in the day of battle. And therefore this
holy Prophetess does thunder as it were from heaven a special malediction
against them, saying, Curse ye Meroz, etc. which words are nothing else but a
direful doom of Debora against the merciless Merozites; wherein, for
breuities sake, I will observe but

2. Points.

1. The Curse of Meroz; and what it was. 2. The Crime of Meroz; and how great
it was.
1. Concerning the former, 1. Part.
the meaning is, that an Angel of God, to wit, either Barac, as the Chaldee
paraphrase does render it, or some other Prophet inspired from above, as I
expound it, did command both the Judges and the people to pray for the ruin
and utter destruction of Meroz, and of all that dwelt therein.

Christ Jesus, who bids us in the Gospel to bless them that curse us, and pray
for them that persecute us, Matthew. 5.44.
whereunto heavens great trumpet S. Paul accords, saying, Romans 12.14.
Bless, and curse not:

I answer, 2. King. 2.
as Elias in a fiery chariot, and did behold in the cristall glass of Gods
secret counsel, who were the incurable enemies of God, destined unto
destruction, could not choose but with their hearts wish, and with their tongues
express their longing desire to have the judgments of God put in execution.
Hence proceeded the curses of Elisaeus, of Elias, of David, of other holy men
of God, who being endued with the Spirit of discerning, and inflamed with a
pure zeal of Gods glory, did pray for the destruction of them, who were
already by the Judge of the whole world appointed unto death. And therefore
Saint Augustine says of such prophetical imprecations, August.
that they were rather Verba praedicentium, quam vota imprecantium, words of
prediction, than wishes of malediction. But as for us, Amos 7.14.
who are neither Prophets nor Prophets sons, nor have any extraordinary gift
of Gods Spirit, we may not absolutely wish for the destruction of any, lest our
Savior say unto us as he did unto his Disciples, wishing for fire from heaven
upon their enemies, Luc. 9.55.
You know not of what Spirit you are. Yet may we conditionally curse the
enemies of God and his Church, if so be the Kingdom of Christ cannot be
established without their destruction. Wherein notwithstanding we must beware
that we suffer the holy Ghost to sit as pilot in our hearts, and to rule the
rudder of our tongues, lest by any mixture of humane infirmity, we do
adulterate the Word of God. For as a little ink which is powered into a Spring
makes all the water black that issues from it, and a little Coloquintida
spoiled all the Pottage of the Prophets, 2. King. 4.
2. King. 4. and one dead Fly corrupts a whole pot of ointment: even so does
a little malice make the judgments of God which thou pronouncest, both
unprofitable unto thy brethren, and damnable unto thy self.

So that the Doctrine is this, Debbora and Barac, the Minister and the
Magistrate, must both curse; the one with the Word, the other with the Sword;
the one by exhortation, the other by execution; the one foretelling, the other
inflicting the judgments of God upon notorious offenders without affection or
partiality.

Strange it is that the Lord commanded these Judges of Israel to strike the
Merozites, their brethren, with such a Maranatha in the highest degree; but it
is a notable precedent to teach all Magistrates, that when the Lords will is
revealed unto them, either by his Word, or by his Spirit, or by the Edicts of
wholesome Laws, that any heinous offenders are appointed unto death, their
eyes must not then pity them, nor their hearts must have compassion on them,
but with all wholesome severity they must prosecute them unto their end. When
the people of Israel had committed Idolatry with the Golden Calfe, Moses
called the Levites, and bade every one put his Sword by his side, and slay
every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his
neighbor, that so they might consecrate their hands unto the Lord, and receive
a blessing; whereupon the Levites slew three thousand men, or thereabouts. The
which zeal of the Levites in revenging Gods glory, did so please the Lord,
that for it the curse of Jacob against Leui was turned into a blessing, as
appears by Moses in his Swan-like Song, Deuteronomy. 33. And of Leui he said, Deuteronomy.
33:8, 93.
Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy one who said of his father and
mother, I have not seen them, neither knew he his brethren or his own
children, meaning that he preferred Gods glory before natural affection. The
which example would to God it were written in the hearts of all Judges. But yet
let them still remember to curse no otherwhere, but there where God himself
has cursed.

The false Prophet Balaam could say, Numb. 23.8.
How shall I curse where the Lord has not cursed, or how should I detest where
the Lord has not detested? And how far be we then from this rule, who are
so tender of our own reputation, that if we be touched never so little with
the scourge of the tongue, we are like that cloister in Thebes which Plutarch
calls (...), Plutarch. Moral.
which for every word that was spoken in it would give an echo of seven
sounds; even so do we return seven curses for one into his bosom that
reuileth us: But when the name of God is blasphemed, his honor defaced, his
precepts neglected, we are muti vt pisces, or if we open our mouths, Psalm. 55.
our words are smoother then Oil, and our faces are as cheerful as if we had
found a treasure.

Well; the Spirit of God does curse Meroz, and what was this curse? Surely it
was no verbal malediction, but a real effusion of the wrath of God upon the
Inhabitants of that town. For though a causeless curse (as Solomon speaks,
Pro. 26.2.
Pro. 26.) be like unto a Swallow that flies from the hand, and lights not
there whither she was sent; yet are the curses of God, and his Prophets, like
unto Ionathans bow and Saul's sword, 2. Sam. 1.
which return not empty from the blood of the slain and the fat of the
mighty, 2. Sam. 1. Witness Elisha, who had no sooner cursed the children of
Bethel, but they were by and by devoured by two Bears out of the desert, 2.
King. 2. Witness Peter, 2. King. 2.
who had no sooner cursed Ananias and and Sapphira, but they by and by fell
down dead at the apostles feet, Act. 5. And our Savior had no sooner cursed
the Fig Tree, Act. 5. Mark. 112
Mark. 11. but it by and by withers unto the ground. And surely the Hebraisme
which Debbora uses in my text, iterating the curse again and again, does
manifestly show that the curse of Meroz was no common or easy imprecation, 1.
Cor. 16.22.
but anathema maranatha in the highest degree; it was a vehement and effectual
curse which lighted not only upon their goods, but upon their persons also;
neither upon their bodies, but upon their souls also; a curse which (as David
speaks) covered them like a garment, Psalm. 109.18.19.
girded them like a girdle, and entered even as water into their bowels, and as
oil into their bones. For how fearful a thing was it to be cursed by the
Lord, whose words are as two-edged swords, Heb. 4.
whose voice is as the voice of thunder: and whose breath is as a River of
Brimstone which burns unto the bottom of hell? Surely if the son of Syrach
said truly, that the Mothers curse rooteth out the foundations of the
childrens houses: then how much more powerful is the curse of our heavenly
Father, whose irefull countenance makes the earth to tremble, the heavens to
bow, Nahum. 1.
the seas to be dried up, the rocks to rent, and the mountains to melt away
with fear? And what then shall we think, but that the houses of the
Merozites, which they hoped by their policy to continue, were now blasted by
the breath of Gods mouth, and for ever ruinated by his curse? Doubtless as it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God, so is it as horrible also
to be cursed by the mouth of God.

What shall I speak of this, that they were reputed execrable of the people of
God, that they were cut off from the Commonwealth of Israel, that they were as
Jericho and other Cities of the Cananites, devoted unto destruction? So that as
the City of Rome when they condemned Manlius of treason, Plut.
used this Preface; Manlius eras mihi cum praecipites agebas Senones; post quam
mutari coepisti, factus es vnus ex Senonibus: When thou threwest down the
Galls from the Capitol, then wast thou to me Manlius, that is, faithful and
dear; but sithence thou art now changed, I esteem thee no better then one of
the Galls: Even so said Israel unto the Merozites; As long as you joined with
us against Canaan, we counted you our brethren, but now you are changed and
estranged from us, you are no better then the cursed Cananites. Surely this was
very grievous to be anathematized by the people of God, but it was not all;
for no doubt the consideration of their own sin did so lancinate and torment
their guilty consciences, that they had a taste and prelibation of those
hellish torments, the fullness whereof they did after endure, if they did not
repent.

This was the heavy weight of the curse of Meroz, whose punishment who so
lists to escape, let him eschew their foul and ugly sin, which is the
second part I promised to declare.

2. Now peradventure you will marvel why so heavy a judgment was pronounced
against a sin that may seem light, 2. Part.
because it was but the omission of a duty they should have done.

But if you take the balance of the Lords Sanctuary, and put thereinto the
sin of Meroz, you shall find it would weigh down heaven and earth, and never
be counterpoised till it came to the bottom of hell. It was not a single
sin, as a man would think at the first sight, but a monstrous sin, made
and compounded of many others, as the words of my Text do make manifest.

1. For behold, they came not, and that was slothfulness. 2. to help, and
that was unmercifulness. 3. the Lord; that wickedness. 4. against the
mighty, and that was fearfulness.
First,

O senseless and dul-hearted Merozites, whom neither the warlicke trumpets of
battle, nor the whirling noise of so many iron Chariots, nor the beating of so
many horses hoofes, nor the skrikes and outcries of such a multitude of men,
could once awake from the slumber of sinful security. Doubtless these
Merozites were given to their ease, and therefore unwilling they were to
trouble themselves with that hot bickering; but they should have considered
that of Solomon; Pro. 1.32.
Ease slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroys them.

Again, unmercifulness was it in them to hide themselves from their own
flesh, that is, their brethren, both by nature and by religion, especially in
that great danger when their lives lay at stake, their kingdom like to be
usurped, and themselves ready to be devoured of their ghastly and bloody
enemies? Pro. 12.
Solomon says, that The mercies of the wicked are mere cruelties, and such
indeed was the mercy of these men of Meroz, without love, without pity,
without the bowels of compassion toward their brethren.

Oh, but peradventure they thought it skilled not much, whether they went into
the field or no, because if God meant to give them victory, he would then
surely do it without their assistance. As though every man were not bound by
the rule of charity, as much as in him lies, to help Gods cause, and to
defend the weak from the oppression of the mighty. A notable instance whereof
we have in the book of Hester. For when as Purim was gone out against the
Jews, Hest. 5.
and Assuerus had made a bloody decree to root all that Nation utterly out of
his land, noble Mordechay persuaded Hester, to interpose her self a mediatrix
unto the King for the safety of her Countrymen the Jews; who when she feared
and cast many doubts, Mordechay did sharply reply, That if she neglected to
relieve the Church and children of God, deliverance should surely come by some
other means, but she and her fathers house should surely perish: Even so
should the Merozites have thought, That howbeit the Lord would by his strong
hand, and stretched out arm have delivered his people, yet should not the
unmercifulness of Meroz, have escaped vengeance, whose hard and flintie hearts
either knew not their brethrens misery; or if they knew it, they considered it
not; or if they considered, they pitied it not; or if they pitied, they
relieved it not; but as much as in them lay, suffered them to be devoured of
their oppressors.

Doubtless it was savage and barbarous immanitie, so to forsake the cause of
their dear brethren: immanitie? it was no less than wicked impiety, not
only because they were cruel against the Lord in that they helped not his
children, who are as dear to him as the apple of his eye; but also because it
was the Lords quarrel in a special regard.

The Israelites and the Cananites did now fight, non vter imperaret, sed vter
esset, Tul.
as Tully speaks of the Romans and Carthaginians; not so much whether of them
should bear sway, as whether of them should solely remain in the land.
Neither was it only the question, whether of the two Nations should be left
alive, but also by consequent, whether the God of Israel, or the Idols of the
Cananites should be worshipped. They did not so much strive for the bounds and
territories of the earth, as for the privileges and hests of heaven.

For it was now the question, whether JEHOVAH should sit still between the
Cherubines, and fill the Tabernacle with his glorious presence; or whether he
should go from Israel, and in stead thereof, Dagon, Moloch, Chemosh, and other
abominations of the Heathen should be adored. Seeing then that the worship of
God was in so great hazard, in respect whereof we should esteem all worldy
things but as dross and dung, how wicked and irreligious were the Merozites,
who were so calm and silent in the Lords quarrel?

Oh! Iabin; they feared his horses, his chariots, his soldiers, and his great
power: they doubted the great army of the Cananites would devour the
Israelites, even as the Ox licketh up the grass?

And what was that but a carnal diffidence, and a foul distrust of Gods
mercy? Why did they not remember the wonders which the Lord had done for their
Forefathers in the land of Egypt? Had they forgotten the red sea, the
pillar of cloud, and the Manna in the desert? Or if these things were too
ancient, could they not call to mind, how they were delivered of late from the
Cananites by Ehud a man lame of his right hand, Judge. 3.
who slew Eglon King of Moab: and by Shamgar from the Philistines, who slew
five hundred of them with an Ox goade? Even so it pleased God by weak
instruments to bring mighty things to pass, 1. Cor. 1.
that the whole honor might redound unto his name, and that his people might
wholly rely upon his saving health.

And why then should Meroz fear that the Lords arm was shortened that he
could not help, or his will changed that he would not relieve? But if they had
been assured that they should have lost the field, and all been put to the
edge of the sword, they should not have feared them that could have killed the
bodies, Mat. 10.
but rather him that could throw both body and soul into hell fire. And
therefore the Merozites were very foolish for fear of the anger of men, to
fall into the curse of God. Not unlike Jonas, Jonas 1.
who flying unto Tharsis for fear of Nineueh, fell into the Sea, and the belly
of the Whale. So sure it is that he who is not willing to be a Martyr of God,
shall nilling be made a Martyr of the Devil; and he that will not suffer for a
good cause unto salvation; shall be sure to suffer for a bad cause unto
condemnation.

And this Doctrine (right reverend Auditors) goes near every one of us, both
Ministers of the Word, and Ministers of Justice. For we can be content to help
the Lord, that is, to reprove and punish sin in the inferior and baser sort
of the people; but when we should help the Lord against the mighty Anachims,
Deuteronomy. 2.
and great men of the World, woe is me to tell! our hearts do faint, our
courage is abated, and our minds are utterly danted; not unlike them of whom
Jeremy speaks, Ier. 9.
They bend their tongues as their Bows for lies, but they have no courage for
the truth.

O noble Caleb, as was thy name, so was thy nature. Caleb signif.
For Caleb signifies, as it were an heart, and thou wast hearty and courageous
in the Lords cause. Thou chosest Hebron to expel the Anachims the mighty
Giants from the city: but alas we lose not Hebron but Heaven for fear of
Anachim.

But let us return unto the Merozites, who peradventure thought themselves
innocent, because they took no part against Israel, nor yet joined with the
King of Canaan. Wherein they were much deceived. For as the Lord abhors all
Vterques, such as were they that halted betwixt God and Baal, and they that
spoke both of the language of Ashdod and Canaan, and they that were neither
hot nor cold, but lukewarm: even so can the Lord as little endure those
politic Neuters, which were neither with him nor against him.

I read in Liuie, Liuius lib. Hist. 1.
that when the Romans and the Albans were at wars together, a noble man
called Metius Suffetius doubting whether would get the upper hand, joined with
neither army, but houered on a hill with his forces betwixt both, till he saw
whither the victory did incline; with which treachery, the Romans (being
conquerors) were so offended, that they tore him in pieces with wild Horses: A
just punishment for one that would stand neutrall when his Country was like to
be overthrown; which as they knew by the Law of Nature, so do we know by the
Word of God, that in matters of Religion and execution of Justice, neutralitie
is always execrable. Our blessed Savior has given us the rule: Luc. 9.
He that is not with me, he is against me, and he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad.

Now if any man think, that though the sin of Meroz was very great, yet it
was the less, because as they did not help, so they did not hurt the people
of God; let him remember, that as firmly as we are bound to eschew evil, so
firmly are we bound to do good when time and opportunity does require. And so
I will conclude the sin of Meroz with this one corollarie: That it is not
sufficient for you (right reverend brethren) to be harmless and innocent men,
and to do no injury unto others, but you must also succor and relieve your
brethren in their good causes, by your substance, by your counsel, and by
your authority, which are the golden Talents whereof you must give an account
at the latter day.

For when the Thrones shall be set in heaven, Reuci. 20.
and the Books opened, and the Son of man shall hold the great assizes of
the world, to give to every man according to his works; 2. Cor. 5.10.
it shall not then so much be inquired, what sins thou have committed, as
what duties thou have omitted; what evil thou have done, as what good thou
have left undone; what acts of cruelty thou have effected, as what acts of
charity thou have neglected. It shall then be examined, whether thou feddest
Christ, Matthew. 25.
when thou saw him hungry, and cloathedst Christ, when thou saw him
naked, and visitedst Christ, when thou saw him imprisoned, and in a word,
whether thou deliueredst Christ when thou saw him oppressed. Then shall
mercy rejoice against judgment, Iam. 2.13.
as St James speaks, and judgment shall be merciless unto them that show no
mercy.

HItherto have I lanched forth (right Honorable) straight forward into the
depth of my Text; Application general to the present occasion.
and now, fearing to be carried too far with the pleasant blast of your
attention, I will strike sails, and speedily return unto the shore.

For perhaps some man will pull me by the sleeue, and say, Quid Marticum
Legibus? What has a Text of Wars to do with the affair of Peace? What is
Canaan unto England? What is Meroz unto Deuon? Preached in Devonshire.
Or what is the battle of the Cananites unto this settled judgment which is now
to begin?

Yes surely, if we look about us, we shall find that the cursed Cananites do
every where abound, and so much the more dangerously fight against us, because
they come not into a pitched field, as they did of old, but lie secretly in
ambush to hurt the innocent.

And what are these great Assizes which you have in hand, but as it were a
great battle, wherein both Judges and Justices, and Counsailors, and Jurors,
and every one in his rank must fight, not with the sharpness of weapons,
but with the severity of the Laws, against the Romish Cananites, the bloody
Peresites, and the wicked Iebusites which seek to disturb the peace of our
Israel? Behold our two gracious Princes, first Debbora and now Barac, have for
many years continued this battle of Justice, to the comfort of the godly, to
the confusion of the wicked, to the wonder and astonishment of the whole World.
It may truly be said, that in the days of their predecessors the high ways
were unoccupied, and trauellors walked through by ways, by reason of the
multitude of thieves and robbers; and that which was most horrible, the Romish
Iabin did keep the souls and consciences of men in a miserable slavery,
until our late Debbora rose up a mother in Israel, who brake the Cananitish
yoke, and brought in the halcionian days of peace, which by the goodness of
God, and our blessed Barac, we do still enjoy. And yet I know not how it
comes to pass, that many relics of the Cananites, that is to say,
idolatrous Papists and cruel robbers, and bloody oppressors of the poor, and
many other enormous offenders do yet remain in the midst of our land. And
what is the cause of this confusion? Surely one of the greatest causes of our
misery is this, that such as ought to come to these Assizes, and to fight the
Lords battles against sin and superstition, are negligent in coming to help
the Lord in the execution of justice.

For to speak nothing of them that come not at all, whereof some with Reuben
abide among the Sheepe-folds to hear the bleating of their flocks, they are
covetous; some with Gilead tarry beyond Jordan, in the green fields and
meadows of their delights, they are voluptuous; some with Dan remain in ships,
and are beyond the Seas, in heart doting upon their Romish Idols, they are
superstitious; some with Meroz, hide themselves at home in the dearne cells of
distrust, and they are timorous; How few, I say, of those that do come to this
iudiciarie field, do come as they ought, with care and conscience to help the
Lord against the mighty? Nay most part of them (woe is me to tell!) come not
to help, but to hurt the Lord; to fight for falsehood against truth, for wrong
and injury against justice, for Popery and Superstition against Religion; Who
as they are guilty of the sin of Meroz, so shall the curse of Meroz
undoubtedly light upon them. For the Lord has said it, whose sentence is
unchangeable, whose wisdom is insugable, and whose power is irresistable.

Be it far from me (my Lords) to bring you within the compass of this curse,
whose integrity has been approved both of God and man. We were unthankful
if we should not acknowledge that your Lordships have marched valiantly in this
battle of Justice, and have already dipped your feet in the blood of Gods
enemies.

Yet must you consider that the Cananites are like the Monster Hydra, Hydra.
wherewith Hercules did fight, who when he had cut off one head, another did
still arise in his place. Wherefore let me beseech you to come and help the
Lord afresh in this battle. Up Debbora, arise Barack thou son of Abionam,
and lead thy captivity captive. Set upon the relics of the Cananites, and
first those obstinate Papists, who are left amongst us, to be thorns in our
sides, and pricks in our eyes, for our unthankfulness unto God.

I know the Laws of our Land do deal favorably with those wilful Recusants,
who will not once come into the Temple with old Simeon, Luc. 2.
that they might embrace Christ; nor once hear the Word preached with Candaces
eunuch, Act. 8.
that they might be converted unto Christ: but are like the deaf Adder, which
clappeth one of his ears close unto the ground, and with his twining tail
stops the other, that he may not hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he
never so wisely. And therefore of them I may say little, save only wish that
as they refuse to come into our Churches when they are alive, so they might
have the burial of an Ass, and their carcasses be thrown upon a dunghill
after they are dead.

But for the Priests and Jesuits, who like the Devil go about continually,
1. Pet. 5.8.
in secret corners, seeking whom they may devour, who labor to withdraw the
hearts of the people from their natural Sovereign, unto Iabin of Rome, it is
high time to take the nail of the Laws into your left hand, and the hammer of
execution into your right, and to pierce the head of Popish Siseraes; yea
double and redouble your blows upon them, until you have quite nailed them
unto the ground: which if you do, the blessing of Israel shall light upon you,
and the power of Iabin the Prince of darkness shall be much weakened in this
our Land. Psalm. 137.8.
Oh daughter Babylon, worthy to be destroyed, blessed shall he be that takes
thy children, and dasheth them against the stones.

Another sort of wicked Cananites there are, no less dangerous then the
former, I mean those cruel Oppressors, who by their power, riches and
friends do oppress the poor in the gate; and that which is most horrible,
under the color of justice, by tyring them out by long and tedious courses of
Law. This is a crying sin, which ringeth in the ears of God, and does
certainly draw down vengeance upon a Land, if it be not reformed. Psalm. 9.12.
For when the Lord makes inquisition for blood, he remembers it, and
forgets not the complaint of the poor. By how much the more all Christian
Magistrates, who are gods, 1. Cor. 8.
should in this imitate God, namely in taking vengeance upon oppressors, and
in delivering the poor out of their hands. The glorious Throne of Solomon
which was made of Iuory and covered with gold, 1. King. 10.19, 20.
had stayres to lean upon, which were (...), that is, Lions, and hands
curiously wrought; to signify (as some think) that it is the duty of a good
Prince and Magistrate to be a courageous Lion to destroy oppressors, and to be
a hand of succor to relieve the wronged.

Surely, oppression is the rifest sin in this land. Let a man cast his eyes
unto all judicial proceedings, and it commonly falls out, Pauper vbique
^acet, the weaker goes lightly to the walls.

There is a pretty Emblem in Alciat:

Pissicules aurata rapit medio aequore Sardas:

The silly Sprats being under the Water, are chased up and down by the great
gilt heads; and if they spring out of the Sea for fear, they are quickly
devoured of the greedy Seamewes: even so the poor people, if they live
quietly at home, they are injured by their rich neighbors, and if they seek
abroad to be relieved by the Law, they are many times overthrown, though their
cause be good. And where is the fault? Surely a field may be lost under the
conduction of the worthiest Captains.

And therefore I must entreat also the Justices of the Bench to help the Lord
in this business. Who as they are like those threescore strong men about the
bed of Solomon, who had every one his sword upon his thigh for the fear by
night, Cant. 3.
Cant. 3. so should they draw out the sword of their authority as far as
they can, for suppressing of the wicked, and for defending of the good, that
the bed, which is the peace and quietness of our Solomon, may be preserved.

What should I speak of Counsailors who are Captains and Coronels in this
battle? Do they come to help the Lord against the mighty? Yes surely, so
long as they do faithfully deliver the Oracles of the Law; but if they help
to pervert justice, and to turn it into Wormwood, either by defending
falsehood, or impugning the truth, they join with the Cananites against the
Lord. I am not ignorant how an Heathen Orator said well, That a Judge must
always follow the truth, but a Counsailor may press the probalilitie of his
Clients cause; which I grant in a doubtful matter to be often true, but when
their consciences do know that a cause is naught, how impious is it then to
take sees, or to give any counsel to overthrow the truth? Therefore against
such I must pronounce the curse of Jude, Jude verse. 11.
Woe unto them for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily after
the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gain saying of Core. You
know that Balaam was tepted by the glittering gold of Balac to devise cursed
counsel against the people of God; but what came of it? The vengeance of God
followed him upon the heels, and he was slain in the battle by the sword of
Joshua. Oh then keep your tongues from evil, Psalm. 34 13.
and your lips that they speak no guile.

But I may not forget the Jurors and Witnesses, in whom the chiefest strength
of the judiciary battle does consist. They are indeed by our Laws the
highest Judges in matter of fact, and therefore I must say unto them: Psalm. 58.1.
Are your minds set upon righteousness, and do you judge the thing that is
right, O ye sons of men? Do you come hither to help the Lord of Heaven, or
rather to pleasure and gratify your earthly Lords? Do you come with single
and conscionable hearts to further justice, or rather with partial and corrupt
affections to pervert judgment? I would to God you were innocent (my Brethren)
but sure, an evil report, and scandalous is gone out of you. It is said (I
know not how truly) that some of you have meritorias linguas, as a false
Empress did falsely object unto a good Philosopher; that is, you are corrupted
with coin to speak and to swear either contrary or besides your
consciences. Oh then remember that of Job: Job. 27.
The congregation of the hypocrite shall be desolate, and fire shall devour
the houses of bribes.

As the Prophet fore told that Manasse should be against Ephraim, and Ephraim
against Manasse, Esa 9.21.
and both against Judah; so is there such pulling and halling in Iuries, that
some are for the plaintiff, some for the defendant, and both many times against
the truth. Chrysostom.
Of such people, Chrysostom excellently speaks in his fourteenth Homily to
the people of Antioch: As little children who with great force draw a long
rotten rope contrary ways, do break the rope, and failing backwards wound
themselves, some in the head, some in the shoulders, and some in other parts of
their body: Even so they that striving in judgment to contrary purposes do
break the religion of an oath, do dangerously wound their souls, and both
drop down into the bottomless gulf of Periu^ie; who when they lay their
hands upon the Book to swear, Zach. 5.2.
would to God they would remember that flying Book in the 5. of Zachary,
which being twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, was full of curses and
woes against them that swear falsely; yea such curses as should remain in the
midst of their houses, and consume both the timber and the stones thereof.

Surely, it makes my flesh to tremble, and my tongue to cleave unto the roof
of my mouth, when I consider that after so many years preaching of the Law, as
it were with thunder and lightning from mount Sinai, and of preaching the
Gospel as from mount Sion, there should be so little account made of swearing
and forswearing as yet there is. Oh tell it not in Cath, nay publish it not in
the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, lest the
uncircumcised be glad.

Pliny, who was a great Philosopher, Plin.
but an Atheist; one of the chiefest reasons that persuaded him there was no
God, was because when men were brought into the Capitol of Rome to swear, and
stood there before the Image of Jupiter, which held a thunderbolt in his hand,
as it were to take vengeance of the wicked, yet, says he, fulminantem
peierant Iouem, they perjured themselves before Jupiter that threatened to be
revenged of their perjury. That was but a weak reason to persuade Pliny
there was no God; but it is a reason to think them flat Atheists, who taking
an oath not by Jupiter a false God, but by Iehonah the living God, (unto whom
all things are naked and open before his eyes) do notwithstanding either
dissemble the truth which they are sworn to reveal; or overthrow the truth
which they are sworn to maintain, or smother the truth which they are sworn to
bring to light. This is an horrible sin, and too too common: yet am I persuaded
better things of many of you (beloved Brethren) and such as accompany
salvation, and therefore I exhort you in Gods name, that you will judge justly,
and follow the truth in love, without respect of any man's person.

I have read in Diodorus Siculus an ancient Historian, Diodorus Siculus.
that the old Egyptians had their Judges set forth in imagerie, in such sort,
that the chiefest Judge had a tablet of Sapphire stone hanging about his neck,
wherein verity was engraven, his eyes were closed, and a number of books were
laid about him; to note, that a Judge must only respect the truth, having no
regard unto the persons, but unto the cause which he must carefully learn.

But if you scorn to learn your duty of Heathenish people, I commend unto
you the example of holy Job, Job 29.
who said, and no doubt truly of himself, being in place of judgment as you
are: I put on justice and it covered me, Job. 29:14.
my judgment was as a robe and a Crown. I was eyes unto the blind, and feet
unto the lame, I was a father unto the poor. And lest you should think he was
more pitiful then just, mark what follows, And when I knew not a cause, I
diligently sought it out. Thus if you do, the ear that hears you shall
bless you, and the eye that sees you, shall witness unto you, and the
blessing of him that is ready to perish shall come upon you. But if on the
other side, you shall either take a reward to hurt the innocent, or hinder the
right of the Stranger, the widow, and the Fatherless, yea or do this work of
the Lord negligently, Deuteronomy. 27.
and unfaithfully, Cursed shall you be in the field, and cursed in the town;
cursed shall be your basket and your dowe. Cursed shall be the fruit of your
bodies, the fruit of your Land, the increase of your Kine, and the flocks of
your sheep. In a word, all the curses of the Law, like so many thunderbolts
shall light upon you, and Let all the people say, Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON OF PATIENCE. Preached at S. Mary's in Oxford, BY EDWARD GEE, Then
Fellow of Brasen-nose College. Since Doctor of Divinity, and one of his
MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary.

And now published for the benefit of others: BY his two brethren, JOHN GEE and
GEORGE GEE, Ministers of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop
near S. Austins-gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1620.

A SERMON OF PATIENCE.
JAMES 5. VERSE. 7. Be patient therefore, Brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord: Behold the Husbandman waits etc.


AS they that build in friths and arms of the Sea (right Worshipful and well
beloved) do at a low water fortify the place with some strong wire to keep
away the tide, lest their work should be overcome by the reflowing Ocean: even
so the children of God, who are spiritually to be builded upon the earth, as in
the raging sea of troubles and afflictions, must in the tranquillity of their
mind, sense themselves with the inexpugnable bulwark of Patience, lest when
crosses do happen (which happen at one time or other unto all,) the deepes of
heaviness breaking out, should ouerflow their souls, and bear down the
precious edifice of faith and piety begun in them. The which point of heavenly
wisdom wishing to be rooted in your religious breasts, I have made choice of
these words of Saint James, wherein he does sweetly comfort the poor
Christians of his time, who being as Lillies among the Thorns, were pricked
and rent with the injuries and oppressions of their fellow brethren. Prou.
And albeit this my Text may seem to be like unto that Wine Solomon advised to
give only to those that have grief of heart, that drinking they may forget
their poverty, and remember their misery no more; yet, if by your patient
attention you shall show that you love and embrace this excellent virtue of
patience, I shall, by the assistance of Gods Spirit, make it plain, that every
one which hears me, may receive some wholesome instruction out of this Text,
wherein there be contained

Two principal parts.

1. The Exhortation; Be patient, Brethren. 2. The Motive of this patience,
which is the fountain of all Christian comfort, namely, 2. Thessa. 1.6:7.
The coming of our Lord, when as he shall recompense tribulation unto them
that trouble, and unto them that are troubled, rest. But because flesh and
blood being impatient of delay, will straight reply, Oh but that day is far
hence, and the hope thereof being deferred, is the fainting of the heart; he
therefore meets with that exception by a double reason, the one taken from
the example of Husbandmen who do patiently wait for the former and later
rain, to receive only the fruit of the earth: the reddition of which
comparison being employed, is, that we should much more patiently expect the
great harvest of the Lord, wherein we that now gee weeping and sow precious
seed, Psalm. 126.5, 6.
shall joyfully reap the blessed sheaues of immortality. In the other reason,
he utterly denies the objection, and urges, that the coming of the Lord is
near at hand, and so iterateth his exhortation, encouraging them to be
patient, and to settle their hearts.
This I take to be the true meaning and most natural analysis of my Text: all
the parts whereof I intend not particularly to handle at this time, but in the
exhortation to insert the reasons, being as it were the sinews and bones
wherein the strength and vigor of the exhortation does consist.

First then we must understand, that this holy patience whereunto the Apostle
does stir us up, is not a quiet sufferance of evils arising either from a
senseless stupiditie of the mind which is but brutish, or from some moral
good end which is but Heathenish, or from some bad and evil purpose which is
but devilish; Definitio.
but it is a sacred virtue and slip of charity, engraffed in us by the holy
Ghost, whereby we entirely submitting our wills unto the will of God, do
chearefully bear all wrongs, crosses, and afflictions, without grudging at
men, or repining at God; and that for the glory of his name, for the benefit
of his Church, and for the performance of his Commandments.

The which heroical virtue being far above the reach of man's natural
powers, it pleased the Lord to teach by a rare example, the wonder and
astonishment of all ages. For behold he that was impassible, and could suffer
nothing did as it were euacuate himself, that he might suffer all things, and
become a perfect mirror of patience for us to behold: whose only death, if it
be duly considered, is most effectual to appease all unquiet and tumultuous
humors in our hearts.

What contumelies did he suffer? what injuries did he endure? what torments did
he bear? and yet never complained, Isay 33.7. Mat. 26.67. Mark. 8.23.
but stood as a harmless Sheep before the Shearer, not opening his mouth.
They reprochfully spit upon his face, who had a little before restored the
blind by his spittle. They reviled that name, which makes all creatures, both
Angels, Phil. 2.9.10. Math. 27.29.
and men, and Devils to tremble. They buffeted him with the palms of their
hand, and crowned him with thorns, who crowns his children with garlands of
glory, and puts palms of victory into their hands. They stripped him of
his robes, and gave him gall and vinegar to drink, Math. 27.31. and 34. Math.
26.28.
that had drunken unto them the cup of the new Testament in his blood, and had
prepared a robe of righteousness to cloathe them withal. Lastly, they
excruciated that innocent soul with most exquisite torments upon the cross,
which bare their sorrows, Esaias 53.4. Mat. 27.51. Mark. 15.33.
and carried their infirmities. And though the stars were ashamed, the
elements troubled, the earth trembled, and the Sun withdrew his beams, as
loathing to see that horrible act; yet was not he touched with any spark of
anger against his persecutors, Luke 23.34.
but mildly prayed in their behalf, Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do. O more then admirable patience of the Son of GOD, whose
constant enduring of that bloody baptism, cannot but animate the faithful
soldiers of Christ manfully to encounter with all difficulties whatsoever.

In the 1. Macch. 6. 1. Match. 6.
Antiochus showed the blood of Grapes and Mulberries unto the Elephants to
provoke them to fight; And the holy Ghost, in like sort, to encourage us
patiently to endure all the calamities of this life, does point unto the
bloody passions of our Messiah. And hence it is that Peter proclaims, Christ
has suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps.
1. Pet. 2.21.
In which steps all the blessed Martyrs and Confessors, the Ancient-bearers of
our Faith and dubbed Knights of the holy Ghost (as Nissen calls them) have
trodden, not loving their lives unto the death; but constantly enduring, some of
them to be consumed in the fire, some of them to be scalded with boiling lead,
some of them to be torn in pieces with the rack, some of them to be ground in
the teeth of wild beasts; and all of them to shed their blood for the
profession of this faith, which has been disseminated into all parts of the
world, especially by the constancy of their profession. But because this
resistance unto blood is not as yet fallen unto our share, though God knows
how soon all of us may be put unto it:

I will leave that part of patience which is exercised in persecutions, and
speak of that whereof we have continual use now in the peace and quietness
of the Church; wherein we had need of patience and longanimitie both toward
our brethren, and toward our heavenly Father: the former whereof drives from
us all anger and desire of revenge against those who have done us harm; the
latter remoueth out of our minds all murmuring against God in afflictions sent
immediately from him, and causes us meekely to wait for the complement of his
promises.

First then, we must behave our selves patiently toward such as have wronged
us, whether it be in our goods, or names, our dignities, or any thing else; not
only refrayning our hands from returning of violence, our tongues from
railing, our eyes from irefull looks, but even our hearts also from any
thought or desire of revenge.

Thus far Philosophy could never go; though Plotinus speak of virtues,
Plotinus.
both purgatoriae and purgati animi, yet neither of them both could thus far
clear the sight of understanding, to know that every motion of wrath is a
sin; but the wisdom of God which framed man in his perfection, must needs
come down from heaven to reframe him in his defection, and teach this uncouth
doctrine to carnal ears, Math. 5.22, 23.
that to be angry with a Brother unadvisedly, makes a man culpable of a
judgment; and to call a Brother Racha makes him worthy to be punished by a
Counsel; and to say unto a Brother Fool, deserves no less then hell fire;
That we must love them that hate us, Math. 5.44.
bless them that curse us, pray for them that persecute us, do good unto them
that hurt us, and are our enemies; all strange aphorisms to flesh and blood.
And yet our Savior did not only command them, Verse. 45.
but demonstrate them also by the example of our Father in the Heavens, who
showers down his blessings upon both good and bad, his friends and his foes. So
that as a Father loves that child only in whose face he sees the form, the
lineaments, and similitude of himself; so will GOD neither love nor yet
acknowledge any for his legitimate child, whose heart is not stamped with this
character of extraordinary charity.

Here then the Prince of Philosophers is convicted to be blind, Arist.
who thought that to revenge injuries is a part of magnanimity: and Scylla,
Scylla.
the Roman Captain may be noted of vanity, who thought it a great glory to
have it engraven upon his tomb, That never any man exceeded him in doing
mischief unto his enemies.

But, alas, what marvel if those Heathens were so fowly deceived, and so
vehemently inflamed with the fire of revenge, sithence that they who profess
themselves the Scholars of Christ, can hardly brook the Doctrine of patience,
but are even ready to say with the Capernaitanes, This is a hard speech, Ioh.
6.60.
who can endure it? or if they lend their ear unto it for an hour, yet do
they scarcely practice it once in their whole life. Nay would to God that we
whom wisdom and a purer knowledge of Christ should purify from all corrupt
affections, were free from inordinate wrath, and a secret practice of revenge.

Cato, Cato.
the Censour, was wont to say, not so much upon pride, as being conscious of
his own knowledge, that if other men offended they were to be borne with,
because they did it upon ignorance, or impotencie of affections; but if
himself committed a fault, it was to be imputed to mere malice, and therefore
deserved no pardon. In like sort may it be said of this impatience, that if the
unlearned do sin therein, it is more tolerable; but if we that are not
only instructed in the Arts of humanity, but also in the knowledge of divine
mysteries, and are as Lamps to give light unto others, be faulty herein, sure
our malice must needs be exceeding great, and our fault more heinous before
God and man.

Placabilitie and meekness should always attend upon wisdom, Psalm. 45.14.
even as the Virgins followed the Queen in a vesture of Needle-worke, Ps. 45.
And therefore Saint James in the third Chapter of this Epistle asks, Iam.
3.13.
Is any man wise and endued with knowledge amongst you? Let him show by good
conversation his works in meekness of wisdom. Wherefore, art thou a ruler
and have the government of people? Then have thou plentiful matter of
exercising thy patience. Xenophon.
For Xenophon has well observed in the Preface of his History, that men are
more bitter and trouble some unto their rulers than any flock of Sheep or
heard of Cattle unto their leaders; which Moses the mildest man that ever was
proved to be true, whose patience was so moved with the untowardness of his
unruly multitude, that when he came out of the Mount Horeb, having talked so
familiarly with God that his face shone as the Sun; yet seeing the people
commit idolatry, in a great rage he brake in pieces the Tables of the law,
Exodus 32.19.
which were written by Gods own Fingers. And indeed this is a godly and
zealous impatience, not to endure the injuries and dishonors of God, but to
revenge them with all severity. Nay thou must be impatient also in the wrongs
done unto thy brethren, like as Abraham who aided Lot, Genesis 14.16.
to recover his goods of the five Kings; for in this case true is that of the
Heathen, Seneca.
Si non propulsas iniuriam cum potes, facis: Thou art as much in fault as he
that does the wrong, if thou redress it not.

But if thou draw the sword of thy authority out of the scabbard to revenge
thy private injuries and dislikes, how do thou obey his Commandment, who
said, Rom 12.19. Deuteronomy. 32.
Avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath? for it is written,
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord, To. 12. Yea much more
blame worthy art thou, if thou be like unto that furious Householder which the
son of Syrach describes, Ecclus. 4.
Ecclus. 4. Be not as a Lion in thine house, neither beat thy servants for thy
fancy, nor oppress them that are under thee.

Oh but they are such as do always withstand my will, Ob. Sol.
and therefore I cannot endure it. Why, if thou have this Christian patience
which Saint James does here commend, it will repress in thee all such thoughts
and affections, and thou will not so much labor to wrest other men's wills unto
thine, as to compose and submit thine own will unto Gods, which is, that
lenity and moderation should be known unto all men, Philip. 4.5.
Philip. 4. where the Apostle uses the word (...), which signifies, that we
should deal with our brethren, and not in extremity of right to revenge our
wrongs.

When Caius Caesar was Dictator in Rome, Caesar.
and Metellus the Tribune in a matter resisted his will, Caesar being not a
whit offended, replied, Nunqua^. efficies vt iam Caesaris mereare, Thou shall
never provoke Caesar to be angry at thee. A noble speech of a Heathen
Magistrate, who having but driven Pompey out of Italy, and brought some
legions of soldiers into the City, thought it a base thing to seek revenge
of one that was inferior unto himself; And shall not a Christian Governor
who has vanquished the powers of darkness, and subdued many legions of
Devils, carry himself far more uprightly then once to think of hurting or
molesting them that be under his jurisdiction? especially considering that the
judge is at the door, Iam. 5.9.
ready to drop down the viols of vengeance upon their heads, who will needs
take vengeance out of his hands.

Some Philosophers do write, Plinius in Hist. nature.
that the Be in stinging does with such violence thrust out her sting, that
whiles she labors to hurt her enemy, she destroys her self; and therefore
Seneca in his Book of Clemency does wish, Senec. lib. de Clementia.
that the condition of men were alike, and that such as study to annoy others,
might do it to their own hurt: But Seneca might have spared that wish; for we
know (my Brethren) that he who seeks to hurt any of the children of men
(although his enemy) 47.
does not only disarme himself of his spiritual weapons, but also kills
and destroys his own soul; So that we had need (as our Savior wills his
Apostles) by patience to possess our souls, Luke 21.19.
without which we shall every moment lose and make shipwreck thereof.

But art thou a private man, under the rule of some oppessing Rheoboam, whose
little finger is as heavy unto thee, as any man's loins? who whippeth thee not
with rods, but with scorpions. Here then thou must beware of hating him whom
the Lord has placed over thee, although he be unto thee as a Lion or a Bear.
Quid odisset Clodium Milo materiam ac segetem suae gloriae, Cicero in orat. pro
Milone.
says Tullie, How could Milo hate Clodius who was the matter and the subject
of his glory? And will thou being a Christian, hate him who is the matter of
thy eternal glory, if thou endure it for Christ's sake? nay, rather take the
advice of the wise Preacher, Eccles. 10.4.
Eccl. 10. When the spirit of thy ruler is incensed against thee, contain thy
self modestly within thy duty. Nam homo sanans sedat peccata multa, Iunius in
loc.
as Iunius does well translate it; that is, If thou labor by a dutiful
submission to mitigate the fury of the ruler, thou shall both stop many sins
which otherwise he would commit, and prevent a mischief which would light
upon thine own head, as the Verses following do excellently show; But if his
heart be hardened daily more and more against thee, as was the heart of Pharaoh
by some secret judgment of God: Oh then settle thine own heart, and remember
that the patient abiding of the poor shall not perish for ever. Psalm. 37.
Remember how the souls of Martyrs which lay under the altar, Apoc. 6. cried,
saying, How long, Apoc. 6.10.
Lord, which are holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth? Verse. 11.
but it was replied, That they should rest for a little season until the
number of their fellow-brethren was fulfilled. The which blessed spirits did
cry for revenge, not upon any private perturbation, but upon an holy desire of
seeing the justice of God accomplished: the which mediocritie because we that
are clothed with this earthly Tabernacle, cannot keep, we must abstain from
all desire of revenge, and tarry the Lords leisure to be strong, Psalm. 37.
and he will comfort our hearts.

But because infinite are the occasions of iarring and coffeehouse amongst
private men, which being esteemed as injuries, do stir up choler and debate,
let us consider the commandment of Christ [ that we should love one another:
Ioh. 13.34.
] which divine song was no sooner begun of our Savior, the sweetest praecenter
that ever tuned Note, but straight-waies followed the whole Quire of Apostles
and Evangelists, descanting the same Lesson, and filling every Page of their
Epistles and Gospels with precepts of Charity. The which Charity, if it be in
us as hot and fervent as it should, it would swallow up all the injuries that
are done unto us, even as a flaming fire which burns more vehemently when some
drops of water are cast therein. And herehence it is, that Paul weauing as it
were for us a rich and glorious garment of the purple wool of the meek Lamb
of God, commands us to put on the bowels of mercy, Coloss. 3.12.
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, patience, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against another. This is
a fair and goodly coat, serving us both for indument to cover our nakedness,
and formuniment also to defend us from wrongs. For he that has those two
virtues, (...) and (...), Gentleness, and Longanimitie, will do no wrong, and
yet patiently endure the injuries of others.

But, Applica.
alas, now in these latter days, wherein self love has quite devoured the
love of Christ and our Brethren, so nice and touchous are men become, that they
cannot endure the smallest wrongs; nay the fumes arising from their testie and
boiling stomachs, do so disturb their heads, the seat and throne of
judgment, that every trifle seems an injury to be prosecuted by rigor of
Law, nay by fire and sword; or if ability and opportunity be wanting, at least
by irreconcilable hate.

I deny not but if thou see that thy forbearance does make thy enemy still
more insolent, insomuch that the Poets saying does come to pass, Veterem
ferendo iniuriam inuitas nouam, By bearing the old injury thou drawest on a
new: then may thou with good conscience seek redress of the Magistrate, so
thy mind be free from acerbitie of revenge, and only intentive upon the just
defense of thy self. As for the other two sorts of private revenge, they ought
to be far from every Christian heart.

turn Justice into Wormwood, and repel the just complaint of the poor? Sure
if this come to pass, it is no wonder, being a vanity as old as Solomon. I
have seen (says he) the place of judgment where was wickedness, and the
place of justice where was iniquity, Eccles. 3. Eccles. 3.16.
And therefore himself gives an Antidote against the poison, cap. 5. Cap. 5.
ver. 8.
If in a Country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defrauding of
judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter, for he that is higher
then the highest, regards; and there be higher then they. Here then, if thou
take unto thee Patience, it will dispell all the anguish of thy soul, like
unto that wood wherewith Moses made the bitter waters of Marah sweet and
pleasant: Exodus 15.23. etc.
which thou may the better do, if thou lift up thine eyes into heaven, and
consider that GOD regards, and will in time make thee a full satisfaction for
all thy wrongs.

Tertullian has made an excellent Treatise of Patience, full of fragrant and
odoriferous flowers, Tertullian.
whereof one is fit unto this purpose; Satis idoneus est patientiae sequester
Deus, si iniuriam deposueris penes eum, vltor est, si damnum restitutor est, si
dolorem medicus est, si mortem resuscitator est; Oh well is thee if thou make
GOD the Vmpier of thy patience. If thou put thy injuries into his hands, he
will be thy auenger; if thy losses, he will be thy restorer; if thy diseases,
he will be thy Physician; if thy death, he will be thy rayser up again: so
that thou shall be sure to have justice, either at the end of thy life when
thou go unto the Lord, or at the day of judgment when the Lord shall come
unto thee.

Antiquity did report, that Achilles weapons, which the Greeks did unjustly
award unto sly Ulysses, were in a Shipwreck lost in the Sea, and after by the
waves thereof carried unto the Trojan shore, and laid upon the Tomb of Ajax
that had best right unto them; which whether it be a fable or true History, it
skils not much; the Poets thereby would represent the course of Justice, which
at the length prevails and gets the upper hand. But we have a more sure
word (my Brethren) both of the Prophets and of Christ himself, Act. 3.19.
that a day of refreshing will come, and that every man shall be rewarded
according to his works; the remembrance whereof makes us to bear all
oppression and tribulation with alacrity, knowing that these light afflictions
which continue but for a moment, 2. Cor. 4.17.
do bring with them a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory.

In the Olympian combats, he wan the garland that bestowed most blows upon his
fellow champion; but in the Lists of Christ, where GOD is our Agonotheta, or
Rewarder, the blessed Angels our Spectators, the holy Ghost our Annointer; he
bears away the Crown that bears patiently the blows of his adversary, and
in liew thereof, returns nothing but good turns, because he plainly shows
thereby that his enemy did beat the air only, and never touch him with his
wrongs. Which kind of conflict, man's nature will better endure, if he do
consider, that his case who does harm his brother, is far worse then he that
receives wrong as Chrysostom does well observe. Was not the adulterous wife
of Potiphar, Genesis 39:
though ietting in her Palace, far more wretched and worse tormented then
Joseph in the Stocks? Was not wicked Ahab in more miserable estate, then poor
Naboth that lost both his Vineyard and his life? Yes surely: 1. King 21.
and so it is in every injury alike, wherein the actor at one time or other
time is vexed in his mind; but he that suffers has matter of joy, when he
considers that his sufferings do come from the will of God, and so does remit
all anger against those that are the doers thereof: 2. Sam. 16.
like as good David did patiently bear the reproaches of Shemei, when he
considered that the finger of the Lord was therein, and remembered that though
his good name were abused, yet the Lord would, through his constant enduring,
make his righteousness as clear as the light, and his just dealing as the
noonday. Psalm. 37.6.
And thus let every one, as Paul wills the Romans, Romans 12.21.
learn, not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil with goodness.

The second part, Of patience toward God.
Patience which we are to use toward God, which how necessary it is, will
easily appear, if we consider that no part of the worship of GOD can be
without it. Leuit. 2.13.
For as no sacrifice could be without salt, so can no part of Religion be
practiced aright without this patience. Witness the hearing of the Word
preached, the door and entrance unto life; which if it be not patiently
continued unto the end, what will it bring but that curse; Prou. 28.9.
He that withdraws his ear from hearing the Word, his Prayer is abominable?
Witness the practice of godly life, which if it be impatiently broken off,
does hear, The dog is returned to his vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and the Sow that was washed to the wallowing in the mire. Witness our
invocation and prayers, Aug. in Ps. 88.
which, as Austin notes upon the 88. Psalm, are many times repelled of God,
that as a flame of fire which is blown backward, they may return and be more
ardent; and therefore unless they patiently proceed, they never draw down any
blessing of God. Witness our love, which if by patience it burn not to the
end, we shall hear a woc sounding from heaven, because we have forsaken our
first love. Revel. 2.4.
Witness our hope, which though it be the Anchor of the soul, yet is patience
the cable which ties it fast unto the joys of Heaven, Romans 8.25.
as Paul witnesses: If we hope for that we see not, we do with patience abide
for it, Romans 8. And therefore if patience be taken away, the ship of Faith
must needs be overthrown and dashed upon the rocks of despair. Thus is
patience the pillar that supporteth every good work, which as it is requisite
at all times, so especially in the evil day and time of affliction. For albeit
we are taught out of Gods Word, that our heavenly Father does chastise those
sons whom he will receive, Heb. 12.6. and 8.
but lets the Bastards and Runnagates go free; albeit GOD himself has
promised that he will not fail his People, neither forsake his Inheritance,
Heb. 13.5.
yet such is our impatient nature, that we are ready to murmr at GOD,
either because he sends us such afflictions, or else because he delivers us
not so soon as we expect. Hence does the Prophet David admonish us in the 37.
Psalm. 37.7.
Psalm, Wait patiently upon the Lord, and hope on him; or as the Original
does sound, Be silent unto the Lord. Which word does excellently express that
settling of the mind, and quietness of affections, which in their tribulation
the children of GOD must enjoy.

Behold holy Job, the excellent Champion of God, and thou shall see, as in a
clear glass, this religious silence of mind: Behold, a more victorious
conqueror sitting upon a dunghill, than Alexander the Great upon his chair
of Estate: for the Spirit of GOD has said it; Pro. 16.32.
He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty Man, and he that rules
his own mind is better than he that wins a City, Prou. 16. Behold what
variety of evil tidings, like fearful cracks of Thunder did strike the ears
of this inexpugnable fortress, and yet could they make no breach into his
soul. The first was his orbitie and loss of children; the second his poverty
and loss of riches, both able to have burst a heart of Adamant, and yet made
they not the least scarre in his soul. Job 1.21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again; the
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, now blessed be the name of the Lord.
In all this did not Job sin, nor charge God foolishly with his lips. Yea
but peradventure he will impatiently break forth, if his skin be touched
unto the quick. Oh loathsome Lazar, Chap. 2.7.
full of sore boyles from the sole of his foot unto the crown of his head,
able to have made patience it self waspish and testie; and yet though his
wife, as bellows of impatience, did counsel him to curse GOD and die, Verse.
9.
yet did he not sin with his lips, but mildly replies, Thou speak like a
foolish Woman; Verse. 10.
What? shall we receive good at the hand of GOD, and not receive evil? Yea
though his friends like pricks and thorns in his side, did ever pierce his
afflicted soul; though these intolerable griefs should continue upon him unto
his death, yet would he still patiently expect: Cap. 14.
All the days of mine appointed time will I wait until my changing shall
come, Cap. 19.25.
Cap. 14. Yea, I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand last upon
the earth, and though after my skin Worms destroy this body, yet shall I
see GOD in my flesh, Cap. 19. Oh dantlesse patience, which would never once
shrink until the coming of our Lord! and shall we (my Brethren) who have
much more occasions of comfort than this man had, be dejected by poverty, by
sickness, by death of friends, by oppression, or by any other coffeehouse?
We know, Simil.
that as men do cause their finest linnens which they wear next unto their
skins, to be continually washen and wrenched, that they may be pure and
clean from filth, but their sacks and course hair clothes they do not wash:
even so, the Lord of Hosts does afflict his dearest children (whom he will
take up into his own bosom) that they may be cleansed from sin and
pollution of the flesh; but those whom he regards not, he suffers to enjoy
quietness and ease. And why then do not we rejoice in all distresses, seeing
we are purged thereby as by a scouring soap and purified as the Gold and silver
in the fire, that so we may be made fit for him that is purity and holiness
it self?

Many are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34.19.
but he will deliver them out of all, is too too slow in performing his promise
unto thee, and therefore thou repinest at his (...).

Saint Augustine shall answer thee upon the 35. Psalm. Oh man, Aug. in Ps. 35.
Sol.
thou art (...) ^^ke-man of GOD, and the time of the pay comes after, why then
do thou crave thy hire before thou have done thy work? If thy servant would
needs be paid before hand, thou would be offended with him, because
thereby he should seem to distrust thy fidelity; and shall not God be
offended with thee, that art so hasty with him who is verity it self? A
worthy place to repress the festination of your diffident nature which loves
no delay, and would be at a point with GOD to know some certain time of her
delivery: but the Lord himself has beaten down that humor of ours, Esa.
28.16.
Esaias 28. Qui credit non praefestinabit, He that believes will not be too
hasty, but patiently expect the leisure of our God.

Popilius, Popilius.
the Legate of Rome, being sent Ambassador unto Antiochus, drew a circle
about him with his staff, and commanded him to give an answer before he came
out of the circle; but our God (my Brethren) is not like unto Antiochus, that
we may prescribe unto him a certain compass of time. When the Disciples of
Christ were hasty to know the time of their Masters glory, he puts them off
with a long ^^iade of troubles, Mat. 24.
which they were first to endure, Mat. 24. And after his resurrection, pricked
with the same desire, Act. 1.6.
they asked, Master will thou at this time restore the Kingdom unto Israel?
but he repels them with a check: verse 7.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in
his own power; implying that they should patiently rely upon GODS promises,
and persevere to expect the performance thereof unto the end, without curious
inquiring after the time. This patient expectance is a special effect of a
lively Faith, and was in all the children of God. Look unto Abraham the father
of the faithful; how did the Lord post him over, and all for the exercise of
his Faith? Though the Lord promised him that he would make him a great Nation,
Genesis 11.28.
when he came out of Vr of the Chaldees, yet was the performance of that
promise deferred more then twenty years; Abraham notwithstanding still
patiently relying upon God, and breaking through all the impediments and
obstacles of his Faith. Look unto Jacob the Patriarch to whom at his first
going into Padan Syria, Genesis 28.13.
though the Lord promised to give unto him the Land upon which he slept, when
he saw the dream of the heavenly Ladder, yet what difficulties had his faith
to strive with, a churlish uncle under whom he served a long prentiship, a
bloody brother seeking to take away his life, a poor estate to be a silly
Shepherd; and notwithstanding all these hindrances, he firmly claue unto the
promise of GOD, and striving with the Angel, was called Israel, preuayling with
GOD. Genesis 32.28.
Look unto David, whose life though it was nothing but a Map of continual
sorrows and afflictions, yet do the Psalms (wherein a man may see the
perfect Anatomy of his soul) set forth unto us his lively faith, and patient
expectance of GODS promises.

Thus did the faithful servants of God patiently wait for benefits that were
but temporary, though shadowing unto them eternal gifts: And shall not we
(who have the Kingdom of heaven plainly see before us, without veil or
covering) far more patiently abide all the tempests and storms of this life,
for the excellent glory which is revealed unto us by the coming of the
Messiah? Shall we not be followers of them, who by Faith and Patience do
inherit the promises?

If these examples cannot move, let us look unto them who only respect
worldly commodities, and be ashamed of our own sluggishmesse in those things
which concern the Kingdom of Heaven.

Behold, Examp.
how does the Husbandman cast his seeding into the earth, and endure much
labor and toil, and wait all the seasons of the year, before he can reap
his desired crop? How do the Huntsmen endure hunger, and cold, rain, and snow
in the Woods and Deserts, and expect many a long day before they can catch the
spoils they seek after? How does the Merchant cut the dangerous Seas in
peril of Ship wrack every hour? what tediousness does he suffer? what
lothsomnesse does he suftaine before he can bring home the costly Merchandice
and price from the Indies? What dangers does the Warrier undertake? what blows
and wounds does he quietly put up? what long sieges does he abide before he can
take the sconce or city of his enemy? And shall not we be less weary, and
more patiently suffer all hardness to obtain celestial Jerusalem, whose
shining is like unto a stone most precious, Revel. 21.11.
as a Iaspir stone, ele^re as Crystal; to get that Pearl which a man should
sell all that be has to buy; Matthew. 13.45.
to win those spoils whereof we can never be spoiled any more, to reap that
Corn which makes the bread of eternal life?

Men, and Brethren, Luc. 16.8.
shall the Children of this World be always wiser in their generation, than
we that are the Children of Light are in ours? Shall faintness and
defatigation tire us, especially sithence our life is so short, and our time so
uncertain?

James stirring us up unto Patience, uses as a Motive, the day of the Lord,
and not rather, the day of our death, wherein we sooner receive the fruit of
our sufferings?

They which dye in the Lord, Apoc. 14.13.
do presently rest from their labors, and their works follow them: neither
does this place make ought for their opinion, who fondly think that the souls
of the Righteous departed, do sleep, feeling neither weyle nor woe until the
latter day; but he uses the coming of Christ unto judgment, as being the
strongest argument of comfort (like as our Savior himself did, and many
other) both because our bliss in body and soul shall be perfectly
consummated at that day, and the justice of God cleared, and all occasions of
impatience removed.

Do thou murmr and repine to see the godly trampled under feet, and the
wicked glittering with honor and riches here upon the earth?

Oh consider, Sinul.
that this world is like unto a field of Corn, wherein the Blew-bottles, and
Gouldings with their goodly colors, do outface the purest Wheat: but stay
until the great Harvest, when the Angels shall come with their sicles to
reap, Matthew. 13.
and then shall thou see those glorious Weeds bound in bundles, and burned
with unquenchable fire; but the Corn brought with joy into the Barn of the
Lord. Now is the winter of the World, wherein the Ungodly like Grass are
green and flourishing, and the Righteous being Trees, are naked and unseemly,
having all their life in the root; but stay until the Summer, when the Sun
of Righteousness that appears meek and gentle in Virgo, shall enter into
Leo, and then shall thou see the Grass burned up, Psalm. 1.
but the Trees which are planted by the Rivers of Water, to be transplanted
into the heanens, and being laden with all sorts of precious fruit, to be
placed in the Paradise of God. Art thou now offended to see the judgments of
God most fiercely striking the innocent in this life, and suffering the wicked
to go free; Oh stay until the end, and thou shall see judgment reduced unto
justice, Psalm. 94.15.
as David speaks in the 94. Psalm. And all them that are true of Heart
advanced.

When a piece of Arras is in working, Simil.
it looks foul and rude, having here a foot and there a head; but being
thoroughly finished, how glorious does it seem, when we see the whole coherence
of the work, and the meaning of the stories tapistred therein? even so the
judgments of God which are as the great deepes seem yet unto us crooked and
unjust, but when the thrones shall be set, and the Nations summoned by a
Trumpe, and the Register Books of GOD be showed; the mouths of the wicked
shall be stopped, and the eyes of the just shall be fully satisfied. This is a
comfortable argument, and of all reasons the holy Ghost uses, most effectual
to persuade. But another doubt of greater difficulty does offer it self. For
how did James say truly, Dub.
that the coming of the Lord was near at hand, sithence one thousand five
hundred years are passed since James did write, and yet all things continue as
they did?

I answer; Paul did purposely refute, 2. Thessalon. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
But the Scriptures say, that the Lords day was near at hand in three respects.



Secondly, in respect of God, Peter says) a thousand years are but as one
day. 1. Pet. 3.8.


Thirdly, in respect of eternity, whereof all the age of the World shall be
less then one drop to the whole Ocean. And in this sense, the Apostle said,
that the coming of the Lord is near at hand; but as for determining any set
time of the last judgment, the Scripture is altogether silent. Nay, it
plainly affirms, that GOD would have it unknown, to the end we should
always be in readiness, watching with our loins girt, Luc. 12.35. Verse. 39.
and our lamps in our hand. For if the good man of the house knew when the
Thief would come, he would only then keep watch and ward, but at other times
be sleepie and secure. And therefore CHRIST JESUS being desired of his
Disciples to tell them some signs when this day should come, told them, That
none might certainly presage the day, year, or any other time; as appears,
Matt. 24. Mark. 13. Luc. 21.

But because the World does now swarm with those evil servants, who say in
their hearts, Our Master does defer his coming, Luc. 12.45.
and begin to smite their fellows, and to eat and drink with the drunken:
Verse. 46.
Let them know that their Master will come in a day when they look not for
him, and in an hour when they are not aware, and cut them off, and give them
their portion with Hypocrites in the Lake wherein is nothing but weeping and
gnashing of Teeth. And because we are fallen indeed into the latter days, and
into the times of mockers, and scornful Epicures, walking after their lusts,
2. Pet. 3.3: 4.
and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers died,
all things continue alike: Let them remember, that GOD is not stacke as they
count slacknesse, Verse. 9.
but patient to wait for their repentance and amendment of life; by delaying
whereof they do but whord up for themselves vengeance against the day of
vengeance, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God: Romans 2.5.
and therefore let them take heed lest this day come upon them as a snare,
while their hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luc. 21.35.
and cares of this life. But as for you who are trodden under foot, and
oppressed by the violence of the proud, look up, and joyfully lift up your
heads, for the day of your redemption draws near; Luc. 21.28.
not your redemption from the bondage of Satan, and slavery of sin, from
which you are already freed by the blood of Christ, but your redemption from
all the miseries of this life, which Paul calls (...), Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 1.
A redemption of liberty by the glorious appearing of Christ, which cannot
possibly be far off.

Some Mathematicians are of opinion, that the Sun is approached unto us, and
holds his course in the firmament nearer unto the earth by many thousand
miles, than it did heretofore time; as if all elementarie Creatures being now
old, and at the last cast, had need more effectually to be warmed by the Sun
beams: which howsoever it be but a mathematical fancy; yet it is certain
that Christ Jesus is come nearer unto us than ever unto any of our
forefathers: nay, the cold and frozen disposition of men's minds in this age,
wherein Christian love is abated, and charity waxen more then kaye-colde, does
sufficiently argue that our Savior is even at the door. Behold, the
Fig Tree has budded, and shot forth her young Figs, the Vine has brought
forth Grapes, but the Grapes of Sodom, such as must come in the last days, 2.
Tim. 3.2.3.
to wit, Selfe-louers, covetous persons, boasters, proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, no lovers at all of them
that be good, traitors, headie, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then
lovers of GOD, having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof;
these clusters do hang upon every hedge, and who then will think but the
Summer and Vintage is at hand? If we look for fearful signs from above, we
have seen the Sun darkened and the Moon lose her light, and the powers of
Heaven shaken, and Stars falling from heaven, and prodigious Comets, which
the ordinary course of Nature could not produce. If we expect for signs from
below, we have heard the Seas roar, and the Earth make a noise, and the
pillars of the Earth to tremble and quake. If we look for the conversion of
the Jews, we have seen some branches of the natural Vine engraffed again
into their stock, and the sons of Sem are daily collected into the Tents of
their ancient Father. If the Gospel must needs be preached in all the World,
the sound thereof has stretched unto both the Pobes, and the gladsome tidings
of Christ has been heard as far as the course of the Sun. If we look for
the appearing of Antichrist, howsoever some do dream of one that shall spring
from the Tribe of DAN, and of a Jew, yet cannot all the smoke which daily
arises out of the bottomless pit, obscure the light of this truth, but that
Antichrist is already revealed, and daily abolished by the brightness of the
Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
If we look for the fulfilling of those mystical prophecies which were
revealed unto John, I think not title can be showed which is unaccomplished,
but only that joyful Epilogue of all Visions, Ren. 20.12.
in the 20. Chapter, wherein a white Throne being placed in the Heavens, the
Son of man judges both the quick and the dead. Thus shall the Righteous
stand with great boldness before the face of such as have tormented them, and
taken away their labors: Then shall the wicked sigh within themselves, and
say, These are the men whom sometimes we had in derision, and in a parable of
reproach; We fools thought their life madness, and their end without honor,
but now are they counted among the children of GOD, and their portion is
amongst the Saints. Then shall the wicked be covered with eternal confusion,
and the godly shall be crowned with everlasting glory. Even so, come LORD
JESUS, and make an end of this wicked World, for thy Childrens sake, that we
may reign with thee for ever; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed all honor, glory, power, praise, might, majesty, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

