A dittie In the worthy praise of an high and mighty Prince.
WHen heaps of heavy hap, had filled my heart right full,
And sorrow set forth pensiuenes, my joys away to pull:
I raunged then the woods, I romde the fields about,
A thousand sighs I set at large, to seek their passage out.
And walkyng in a dompe, or rather in despair,
I cast my weeping eye a side, I saw a field full fair:
And lokyng upward than, I spied a Mount therein,
Which Flora had even for her life, dect as you have not seen.
Then could I not but think the same some sacred place,
Where God or Gods such did dwell, as might releue my case:
I sat me down, for why? Death could but stop my breath,
And to a man so sorrowful, what sweter is then death?
No sooner was I set, but sleep approcht mine eye,
Wherein the Nymphs of Helicon appeared by and by.
And straight those sisters nine, the ground of Musicks art,
My thought did strive who might prevail, to ease my heavy heart.
The cunning they showed there, the subtle notes they soung,
As with a wrest clean from my heart (my thought) the cares they wrong:
Celestial were the notes, which then (amazde) I heard,
Their ditties eke were wonderful, note ye whom they preferde.
As for thy blood (quod they) right noble we confess,
Thy pettigree (to long for us) the Heralds can express.
But happy happy Duke, the second child of Fame,
Which (next unto the highest) she does so recoumpt the same.
And happy Thomas ones, twice happy Norffolke toe,
Thrice happy men that lead your lives, where Howard has to do:
Which Howards happy days, they prayed God to increase,
Three times the space of Natures course, like Nestor live in peace.
What age has seen his like, so free of purse and tongue?
Where lives a iuster Justice now, though rare in one so young?
What plaint can there be told, to his most godly ear?
But that he kepes the other still, the blamed soul to hear?
In mekenes he more meke, then is the mekest Dove,
Yet is his secret wisdom such, he knows whom to love:
In freendship, he surmounts Gisippus and his Tite,
All Nobles may well note his race, and thereby take their light.
In peace a Solomon, in war so stout a Prince,
As reigned not till Hector came, nor lived never since:
Then Sceuola, more firm, which for his cuntries turn,
His hand from arm before his foes, in fiery slame did burn.
He in the pride of peace, delights in marciall show,
Do mark his turnoys upon horse, note well his use of bow.
Nay mark him yet that shall, note well his paynefulnes,
No sugared sleep can make him friend to sluggish Idleness.
What that becomes a Prince, in his good grace does want?
In peace, a courtier for the Court, a second Mars in camp.
Thus still they soung, whose notes were cause of my relief,
And I be wrapped in a Trance, had clean forgot my grief:
And triple were my joys, ones, cause my pains were past,
And twice again, because that Prince amongst us here is plast.
I clapped my hands for joy (alas) I wakt withal,
And then my muses and their songs, my joys were gone and all.
And then retournd my grief, I felt a further care,
Because to show what I had seen, did pass my power so far:
And that a man vnlearnd, of art that has no skyll,
Should have a charge so great as this, and could do it so ill.
Yet thus I began to wright, I knew right well that he,
Which due desert did thus commend, should shade the want in me:
To whom I pray the Lord, to send like years a Noye
In happy health and quiet state, to his and all our joy.
FINIS. Ber. Gar.
Imprinted at London without Aldersgate in little Britain, by Alexander Lacy.


