SAINT STEVENS LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT.

A FUNERAL SERMON ON ACTS 7. VER. 59.

Preached at the Enterrement of the Remains of Mris JOICE FEATLY.

Together with the Testimony then given unto her By THO. GATAKER, B. of D. and
Rector of ROTHFRHITH.



LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicolas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, His very kind and much honored Friend, DANIEL
FEATLY, Doctor in Divinity.
WORTHY SIR,
YOur earnest request, to have a Transcript of this rude and raw Discourse,
suddenly conceived, and sorrily cemented, out of your affection to the party,
whom in special manner it concerned, could not but prevail with me, to
recollect it, while it was yet fresh in memory, and to commit that to writing,
as well as I could call it again to mind, whereof I had no more then some
general heads and brief notes scribled in a loose paper before: mine
obligations to you, and your interest in me, of right affording you power to
command from me a greater matter then that your request amounted unto. And how
Quod est potentissimum imperandi genus; rogabat, qui jubere poterat, Auson.
Idyl. 13.
powerful requests are, backed with such engagements, it is both commonly well
known, and generally acknowledged. But since your request therein satisfied, I
have received it back again from you, with signification of the importunity
of diverse friends, who out of that respect they bare to the party deceased,
while she lived, and desire of the continuance of the memory of her with them,
have been no less earnest suitors unto you, to have Copies from you of the
same. Which being a work over-troublesome, to make so many Transcripts, your
second request was, that with my consent it might be made more public. To
which purpose also, you had remitted it to me, that I might, if I were content
to condescend thereunto, upon review of it, add or alter in it what I should
think fit, ere it came out. Now howsoever it was never intended by me for the
Presle; nor indeed have I at present any desire or purpose, to add ought in
this kind to those things that I have published already; nor did your former
motion to me concerning it, extend it self any further, then to have it as a
(...), that is, as I understand it, a private Monument, to lie by you as a
memorial of her, whom not without good ground you so entirely affected; nor
can I yet deem it (being so indigested a Piece) such as may be exposed to so
public view, without some kind of censure: yet to give satisfaction to your
self, whom I owe so much to, and those friends of yours, that seem so much to
desire it, I have laid a Law upon my self, setting all disswasives aside, to
give way thereunto, if your mind shall continue still bent that way. And upon
occasion hereof, I have indeed reviewed it, but altered nothing at all of
moment, in the maine body of it; that those who were present at the deliverie
in the Pulpit, might not read any other then what they then heard: Only the
quotations of Scripture, and such shreds or parcels of exotike Language, as
might be some rub to an English Reader, but had been indifferent to your
self, I have removed into the Margin, and set on a little more Lace there, to
make the Piece somewhat suitable to the rest of my Works, that are in hands
abroad already. So only fourbished, I return it again entire to you, as by
free donation your own formerly; Sive tegenda habeas, sive legenda putes,
Auson. ad Drepan.
to be disposed of by you, either for your own private use, (which would best
like me) or for the public, as your self shall please. And thus with hearty
wishes of all health and happiness to you, as well in your present condition,
as in the alteration of it also, if any hereafter shall ensue, I take leave,
and rest

Yours ever much obliged, THO. GATAKER.

SAINT STEVENS LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT.
ACT. 7. VER. 59. Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit.
THIS Text may not unfitly Sum of the Text.
be termed Saint STEVENS last Will and Testament, made by him at the Stake,
being at point of death, for the Faith of Christ, whom he therein bequeatheth
and commends his Soul unto. And it is conceived in form of an humble
Petition and supplication preferred unto Christ* entreating him, that he would
be pleased to receive and accept of that, that he did therein bequeath to him,
and entrust him with.

In it, observe we may these particulars: Parts 4.


1. The Legator, or the party bequeathing; blessed 1.
Steven, now suffering for Christ's cause. 2. The Legacy, his Soul; my Spirit.
2.
3. The Legatee, or the party to whom it is bequeathed, 3.
Christ; Lord Jesus. 4. A request to him, for the acceptance of it; receive 4.
my Spirit.
Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. Now hence, in the first place, in that S.
Steven here thus (...).
invocateth Christ (for so the words foregoing precisely term it) we might
well against the Arians observe the Deity of Christ. A point, whereof very
Point 1.
pregnant and plentiful proofs might be produced and pressed out of Gods Word.

1. From the Titles given unto him. He is called Reason 1.
God. John 1. 1.
The Word was God. Elohim. Psalm. 45. 6.
Thy Throne, O Elohim, is for ever and ever: Hebr. 1. 8.
by the Apostle expounded of him, Adonai. Psalm. 110. 1.
The Lord said to Adonai, my Lord: expounded likewise of him, as Matthew. 22. 14.
by himself, so Hebr. 1. 1^.
by the Apostle also. Jehovah, (the Deuteronomy. 6. 4. John 17. 3.
peculiar name of the only true God) and that more then once; ^^r. 23. 6. and
33. 16.
Jehovah Tsidkenu; Jehovah our Righteousness. He is called (...) 1 John 5. 20.
the true God, or very God; (...). Tit. 2. 13.
the great God; (...)* Esai. 9. 6.
the mighty God; (...). Romans 9. 5.
God above all, to be blessed for ever.

2. From the Works ascribed unto him: The Reason 2.
Work of Creation; John 1. 3. Col. 1. 16.
By him all things were made: the Work of Supportation; Hebr. 1. 3. Col. 1. 17.
By him all things are upheld: the Work of Sanctification; 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Ye are sanctified in the Name (that is, by the Power) of the Lord Jesus: the
Work Of Salvation; 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
Who saves us from the wrath to come.

3. From the Trust reposed in him: as by Steven Reason 3.
in this place, so Ephesians. 1. 1^, 13. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
by other of the faithful elsewhere, exhorted and encouraged by himself also
so to do. John 14. 1.
Ye trust in God (says he) trust ye also in me. And whereas they are Ierem.
17. 6, 7.
denounced all accursed, that trust in any but God, they are pronounced Psalm.
2. 12.
all blessed that trust in him.

4. From the Honor exhibited unto him. First, of Reason 4.
Adoration; and that not from the meanest only, but from the most eminent
creatures; not some, but all of them: Psalm. 97. 7.
Worship him, all ye Gods, that is, Heb. 1. 6. and sic etiam LXX. (...).
all ye Angels of God; so explained, where it is also by the Apostle applied
unto him. Secondly, of Invocation: it being in Scripture made more then once
the description of a Christian, Act. 9. 14. 1 Cor. 1. 2*
one that calls upon the Name of Christ: and practiced by blessed St^ven, as
we see, in this place.

Which, as it overthrows that pestilent Doctrine Use 1.
of Arius, who denied the Deity of Christ: so it may serve to confirm us in
the Faith of Christ, and in dependence upon Christ, with full assurance of
undoubted safety unto all those that shall so do. For if Christ be God (as
undoubtedly he is) and he be with us, as Matthew. 28, 20.
he has promised to be for ever with all those that be his; then may we well
say with the Apostle, Romans 8. 31.
If God be with us, who can be against us? N^mo nos laesevit, nisi D^u^ prius
vicerit. August. de ^^rb. Apost. 16. and inde B^da in Romans 8.
They must overcome God himself, that prevail against us, says Augustine:
and with the Psalmist, Psalm. 23. 4.
Though I walk through the vale of the shadow of death, I will not fear, as
long as thou art with me: for, Vbi enim aut ^ecum ma^e, aut sine t^ (...)
poterit esse? Bern. in Advent. 1.
Where can any be, either well without him, or but well with him? says
Bernard. And upon this very ground does our Savior give assurance to all his,
that they shall never any of them miscarry, maugre the might and malice of all
their adversaries whatsoever. Ioh. 10. 27. 30.
My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me; and I give them
life eternal, and they shall never perish, nor shall any be able to pluck them
out of my hand: my Father, that gave me them, is greater then all; nor is any
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand: I and my Father are one.

Secondly, in that Steven here calls his Soul, his ^^^nt 2.
Spirit; we might hence observe the dignity, eminency, and excellency of the
Soul above the Body: in that, (...). Galen. pro^^eptic. ^. 7. Nostra omnis vis
in animo and corpore sita est: alterum nobis cum D^^s, alterum cum belluis
commune est. S^^us^. Ca^ili^.
whereas the Body is but Flesh, common to us with the Beasts, and Genes. 2. 7,
19.
made of the same matter and mould that they were; the Soul, it is a Spirit,
common to us with the Angels, who are also termed Hebr. 1. 14.
Spirits. Yea, Quid ^l^ud voces ani^^^, quam Deum quendam in humano corpor^
hospitem? Senec. epist* 31. Divine particulam a^^ae, Horat. sermon. l. 2. S^^. 2.
by it we come as near to the very essence of God, as the creature is able to
approach the Creatur. Since that, as John 4. 24.
God is said to be a Spirit, so the Soul is likewise termed a Spirit; as by
Steven here, so by Eccles. 12. 7.
Solomon, and Psalm. 32. 2. and ^42. 3. ^ Cor. 2. 11* Hebr. 12. ^3.
others, elsewhere.

That which should teach us, to esteem higher of Use 1.
our Souls, to make more account of them, (...). Galen. ibid.
to have more regard to them, then the most commonly have. For, Merito pos^it
studia majora pars melior, Eucher. ep. ad Valor. (...), Plut. de tranquil.
Itaque, (...), Chrysosttem. 8. ^^a^. ^7. (...), Democrit. apud Stob. c. ^.
The better part justly challenges the greater care, says Eucherius. And this
should we be the more careful of; since that (as we see in S. Stevens example
here) the Soul may subsist and do well without the Body, whereas Omne enim
dignius trabit minus dignum, Reg. Iur.
the Body cannot subsist or do well without the Soul.

As also it may justly reproove the foolish, sottish, Use 2.
and (...), Plato in Clitoph. and apud Stob. c. 4.
preposterous practice of those, whose Eccles. 6. 7. (...). Eusebius. apud Stob.
c. 53.
whole care is for Back and Belly, (as we say) for the Body, (...). Plato
Polit. l. 3. Cultus magna cura tibi, magna virtutis i^curia. Cato Censor. apud
Ammian. l. 16. (...) Chrysostom in Matthew. Orat. 49.
with a total disregard and neglect of their poor forlorn Soul: many even
of those that profess themselves Christians, so living, (...). de Athletis
Galen. protrep^. c. 9 and de aliis ibid. c. 2. (...). ut qui nec animam habere
se sen^^a^. de Dicaearcbo, Cicer. Tusc. l 1.
as if they knew not that they have a Soul; the most, as not knowing, or at
least, Tal^ ist^ stupor men's, -- Ipse quis sit, utrum sit, an non sit, hoc
quoque n^scit, Ca^ull. Epigr. 17.
not considering, what a precious piece the Soul is.

Thirdly, in that S. Steven here freely renders up P^^
his soul unto Christ; it may inform and mind us, what the duty of every
Christian man is; to wit, willingly to give up his soul to Christ, when he
calls for it. Since that, as the Heathen man well says, B^ne mori ^^^
lib^nter mori, Scnec. epist. 61.
It is one part of well dying, to be willing to dye; and to render up our
souls readily, when they are called for away from us.

Yea, to be ready and willing, with blessed Stephen here, not 1 Pet. 4. 19.
to give up our souls only in an ordinary way, but Act. 21. 13.
to lay down our lives, as he did here, for Christ's cause, if God shall please
at any time to call us thereunto.

And thus in some sort, as Bernard also well observes, every Christian man or
woman, eve^^ member of Christ, may be, yea, must be, a Martyr. For, Bern. de
temp. sermon. 23. and Greg. in Evang. hom. 35.
speaking of those words of our Savior to the two Brothers, James and John;
Matthew. 20. 23.
You shall drink of the Cup that I drink of: (the Matthew. 26. 39, 42. John 18.
11.
Cup of Martyrdom he meant) How was this fulfilled, says he, Cum corpore^
passione non sit Dominum s^cutus, Bern. ibid.
when as S. John never suffered death for Christ, but died (as Eusebius. hist.
Eccles. l. 3. c. 25.
the stories of him tell us) a natural death? And hereunto he makes answer,
that there are two sorts of Martyrs: there are Martyrs opere, and Martyrs
^ol^^^ate; act^ and assectu.
Martyrs in work, and Martyrs in will; Martyrs in action, and Martyrs in
affection; Martyrs in dispatch, and Martyrs in disposition; Martyrs in
execution, and Martyrs in resolution. Act. 12. 2.
James was one of the former, Non per Martyrium vitam sinivi^, and Martyr tamen
e^^itit; sed mente, non ca^e, Greg. spiritu non corpore* B^rn.
John of the latter. In the former respect the Apostle Paul was but 2 Timothy 4. 6.
once a Martyr, in the latter respect, he was often, yea, 1 Cor. 15. 31.
every day a Martyr: 2 Cor. 4. ^1.
I dye (says he) every day; to wit, (...) Ch^^s. in Psalm. 95. and ad. ^ud. l.
5.
in regard of disposition, propens^tie, (...), ^sidor. Fell. l. 3. ^p. 399.
purpose, readiness, and resolution so to do; (...).
expectation of it, and (...), idem ibid.
preparation sor it.

And the same does our Savior himself require of all those that be his: Luke
16. 26.
If a man (says he) will follow me, he must hate his own soul; ( (...),
anima, pro vita, ut Matthew. 6. 25.
his own life, he means; that is, be as willing to leave it, and part with
it, if occasion be, for my cause, as if he were weary of it, and out of love
with it) or he cannot be my disciple. And again, Luke 9* 23.
If any man will come after me, he must renounce himself, and take up his
cross every day: not, take it up, and not dye upon it; (That is the manner and
guise of hypocrites, says Far crucem and non mori, bypocri^^rum est, Bern.
de temp. 56.
Bernard) but be content and ready every day to be crucified; to dye daily for
Christ, as the Apostle did, in will, in disposition, in heart and affection, in
readiness and resolution at least.

But the maine Point that I shall pitch upon, and desire to insist most upon at
present, is this; to wit, that,

It is the usual practice of Gods people, in times of danger Point 4.
or distress, and especially at point of death, to commit and commend their
souls unto God, and unto Christ.

So David, in time of distress and danger; Psalm. 31. 5.
Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit: So our Savior, on the Cross, at
point of death, using also the same words; Luke 23. 46.
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit: So blessed Steven here, drawing
now his last breath; Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. So S. Peter exhorts all
good Christians to do: 1 Pet. 4. ^^.
Let them in well-doing commit their souls unto God. And so S. Paul professes
that he had done: 2 Timothy 1. 12.
I know whom I have trusted (to wit, with my Soul) and to whom I have
committed it.

And it is, as a point of great equity, so a point also of good policy, for
Gods people so to do.

Reasons hereof, the very places before produced afford not a few.

For first, he is their Father. It is our Saviors ground: Reason 1.
Luke 23. 46.
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and, John 12. 27.
Father, save me from this hour. And indeed, whom should children in distress
and danger resort and seek to, for succor, relief, support, and protection,
but to their Parents? Or whom should Gods children commend their spirits unto
in the like cases, but to him, that is Pater Spirituum, the Pater spirituu^.
Hebr. 12. 9.
Father of their spirits, their spiritual Father?

Secondly, he is their Creator. That is one of S. Peter's Reason 2.
grounds: 1 Pet. 4. 19.
Let them commit their souls, says he, to God the Creator: It is Genes. 2. 7
he that gave the soul at first; (...), An^onin. l. 12.. 26 Sedib^ aethe^iis
spiritus ille venit, Ovid. art. l. 3.
from him they have it. And to whom then should it be returned again, but to
him, from whom it came? Eccles. 12. 7. (...), Epicharmus apud P^^t. ad Apoll
The Spirit, says Solomon, returns to God that gave it.

Thirdly, he is their Redeemer. Psalm. 31. 5.
Thou have redeemed it, says David. He has redeemed it; he has paid dear
for it, and has therefore best right to it. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
Ye are bought with a price, says the Apostle, and ye are not your own; Act.
20. 28.
Christ has bought it Apoc. 5. 9.
with his blood. And Reason 3.
whom is the Soul fittest to be recommended unto, but to him who has most
interest in it, having ^ ^^^. 1. 18, 19.
paid such a price for it?

Fourthly, he is their Savior. So Matthew. 1. 21.
imports the Name Jesus, that S. Steven here uses: It is his Office, Reason
4.
his undertaking, Matthew. 18. 11.
to save. And whom then may the Soul better for safety betake it self to,
then to him, that has undertaken to save it? The rather, since that no safety
can be had for it by any other. For Act. 4. 12.
there is no salvation by any Name, but by this alone.

Fifthly, he is able to keep and to save whatsoever Reason 5.
in this kind he shall be entrusted with. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
I know, says the Apostle Paul, whom I have trusted; and that he is able to
keep that that I have committed unto him: his Soul, he means, which he had
trusted him with. It is said of our Savior, that Hebr. 5. 7.
he sought unto him, that was able to save him. And well and wisely do the
Saints and servants of God, in commending their souls to him, that is Esai.
63. 1.
able to save; yea, Esai. 43. 11.
alone able to save, both themselves and their souls.

Sixthly, he is as able, so willing; as powerful, so Reason 6.
faithful: That is another of Saint Peter's grounds; 1 Pet. 4. 19.
He is a faithful Creator: ( Non creat, and creata non curat. August. de verb.
Dom. 10.
Not one that creates, and cares not for what he has created, says
Augustine) And as a faithful Creator, so a faithful Redeemer; ( Psalm. 31. 5.
Thou have redeemed it, says David, O Lord God of Truth) one that Psalm. 9. 10.
never failed any of those, that reposed trust in him. Psalm. 34. 22.
The Lord (says the Psalmist) redeemeth the souls of his servants; and none
that trust in him, shall perish.

Seventhly, it is their only safety so to do. For, Reason 7.
as Bernard observes, speaking of those words; 1 Samuel 16. 14.
The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit molested him;
Quem Dominus deserit, Diab^lus suscipit. Bern. de ord. vit.
Whom God leaves, the Devil takes: so here, Quem Dominus ^^^ recipit,
diabolus a^ripit.
Whom the Lord receives not, those Satan surprizeth, to their endless woe, to
their eternal undoing.

Lastly, it is not in vain, or without good ground, Reason 8.
that they so do, but with assured hope of good success; they have good
assurance of faith, that they shall speed in this their suit. Psalm. 49. 15.
The Lord, says David, will save me from the hand ( A man^, i. a potestate, ut
Psalm. 22. 20.
that is, the power) of Hell; for he will receive my soul. And, Psalm. 37. 40.
The Lord will succor them, and deliver them: he will deliver them from the
wicked; (from that wicked one, especially) he will save them, Salvabit c^s.
Quare? qu^b^s meritis? A^di quod* (...). quia (...) it in co d^lcis ca ^sa,
a^^amc^ (...)* ^imirum hoc ^otu^ est hominis meritum, si totam sp^ suam sonat
in ^o, qui ^ot^ homin^m salv^ (...). Bern. in Ps. Qui habitat. conc. 9. and 15.
because they put their trust in him.

By all which laid together, it may evidently appear, that the people of God
do as well wisely and safely, as justly and equally, in the committing and
commending of their souls unto God.

Now this may first serve to control and condemn the vain, fond, and
inconsiderate course of those of the Romish Synagogue; who, in such cases of
danger and distress, or when they lie a dying, are wont, passing by God and
Christ, (whom the blessed Saints and servants of God, as you have heard, use to
seek Use 1.
unto) to commend their souls to the creatures, to the Virgin Mary, to this
Saint, and that Saint; as if they either were better able to save them then
Christ, or had better interest in them then he. But thus Ierem. 2. 13.
they forsake the fountain of living waters, and betake themselves to broken
Cisternes, that cannot afford any; while they seek for safety to those, who
Luke 1. 42. Phil. ^. ^0.
themselves needed a Savior, being Psalm. 22. 29.
not able to save themselves: and of whom we may well say, as those sometime of
Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 27.
How shall this man save us? How should such persons be able to save others, as
had not might enough to save themselves?

Secondly, this may give encouragement and heartiegrace Use 2.
to Gods people, against fear of danger and distress, yea, even of death it
self; since that they have a Christ, a God, an Almighty Savior, a most
powerful Protector, whom they may commit and commend their souls unto, in
such case, and upon such occasions. Indeed, Prove. 18. 11.
the rich man's wealth is a strong tower in his conceit, says Solomon. But,
alas, this his imaginary Fort fails then, when he has most need of it, when
it should stand him most in stead. For, Prove. 11. 4. Ezck. 7. 19.
Riches avail not in the day of wrath; and much less, at the hour of death.
No, then it utterly fails them, and their hopes fall to ground with it. For,
howsoever the wicked (and so the worldly) man may Eccles. 9. 4. (...). Theocr.
Batt^. Dum spirat, sperat.
nourish hopes, and feed himself therewith, while he lives; yet Pro. 11. 7.
(...). Ibid. Cum expirat, ex^^es sit.
when he dies, his hopes perish, and die together, with him; being Psalm. 17.
14.
founded wholly upon worldly things; that then, at least, if not before, fail.
But what find we in the same place, and in the very next words? Prove. 18. 10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower indeed; the Righteous have recourse to
it, and are saved: and the Righteous man therefore Prove. 14. 32. Etiam cum
expirat, sperat.
has hope even in death, because he has (...). Socrates apud Platon. apol^g
Iamblych. de Pyth^g. l. 2. Epictet. dissert. l 3. c. 26. Theodor^t. therap. l.
6 ^ ra compe^^^ssimo ha^eatur, quod dicturus sum. Nec cuiquam bono quicquam
mali eveni^e potest, nec vi^^ nec ^^ortuo: nec unquam res ejus a Deo immortali
neg^^gentur. Cicer. Tusc. l. 1.
one even in death to entrust with his soul, and to undertake the charge of
it; who is able, not Psalm. 3^. 1^
to save it only from death, but Psalm. 19 15
to save it in death; Psalm. 68. 20.
to give issues even in death against death; to make John 11. 26. (...)
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 48.
death no death, but 2 Cor. 5 4. (...) Antiphan.
a remedy against death; and Per mortem ad vitam reditus est. Ambr de bon.
Mort. (...) Plut. de vit. Epicur. Dies mortis, aeterni na^alis est. Senec.
epist. 102.
an entrance into life.

Thirdly, it may serve to approve and justisie that received Use 3.
course of Christian people, in making of their Wills, of bequeathing of their
souls to God, and to Christ; it being warranted, as you see, both by the
approved practice of the faithful, recorded in Scripture, and by sundry
incitements and encouragements therein given thereunto.

But, because with many, yea, the most part, this is done Usu (...), quam (...)
quo mod^ Bern. usu magi^, quam sensu.
rather of form and fashion, then of faith; and that many that so do, yet
miscarry for all that, and are never a whit the nearer for the attaining of
their desire in this kind, if they do at least desire what they would seem to
do, in it: the last Use shall Use 4.
be for Caution unto every one of us, to admonish us, so to carry things while
we live, that we may do so with assured hope of good success, when we die.

And here I instantly and earnestly (for it is a matter of no small moment, but
as much as your soul is worth) beseech every one of you, for Gods sake, for
Christ's sake, for your own souls sake, seriously to consider beforehand with
your selves, what it is that you intend to do in this kind, and how likely you
are to speed in what you shall do. When therefore thou go about the making
of thy Will, either in time of health, (and that is indeed the most seasonable
time for it) or on thy sickbed, if thou have not done it before; what will be
the first thing that thou intendest to dispose of? I suppose, it will be thy
soul; which is thy (...). Eurip. Alcest. and Greg. Naz. invect. 1.
preciousest jewel, whether thou esteem it so, or no. And whom intendest thou
to bequeath it unto? I presume, unto God thy Maker, unto Christ thy Savior,
whom thou professest to count thy dearest friend.

Yea, but here two Questions may be moved, and Doubts 2.
a twofold Doubt made:

The one, Whether thou have power to dispose of 1.
it, or no?

The other, Whether he will be willing to accept 2.
of it, or no?

First, I say, Whether it be in thy power to dispose of it? Doubt 1.
And for the clearing of this, give me leave to demand one or two things of
thee.

First, art thou a Freeman? For they are received Demand 1.
Rules in the Civil Law: Servus non potest condere Testamentum.
A slave, or a vassal, can make no Will; for Servus est in peculio and
co^mercio Domini sui, ex Exodus 21. 21.
such an one is not his own, but his Lords; and, Servus qui^quid acquirit,
domino acquirit.
Whatsoever he acquireth, it accrueth to his Lord: nor can he therefore dispose
of ought, because Servus nihil habet proprium.
he has naught. For, how can he have ought as his own, who himself is not
his own, but another? If therefore thou be not a Freeman, but 2 Pet. 2. 19.
a slave to sin, Ephesians. 2. 2.
a vassal to Satan, what power can thou have to dispose of thy soul, or to
bequeath it unto Christ?

Yea, but how may I know, whether I be so, or Question.
no?

The Apostle tells thee: Romans 6. 16.
Do you not know, says he, Answer.
that whomsoever you obey, his servants you are, whom you do obey? Our Savior
tells thee, who is John 14. 6.
Truth it self, and he binds it, for the more certainty, with a double
Amen, and bids thee take it upon his word: John ^. 34.
Verily, verily, I say unto you; (...) sicut 1 Joan. 3. 9. (...). and, Artem
puder^ proloqui, quam ^actit^s.
Whosoever practices sin, is a servant, or a slave to sin. As long
therefore as thou continuest in the practice of sin, so long art thou no
Freeman, but a slave and vassal unto sin, and have no power to dispose of
ought.

Would thou then be free, and have power to dispose of thy soul, when thou
art making of thy will? Take heed how thou Romans 6. 2.
live in any known sin: for in so doing, thou shall 2 Pet. 2. 19.
enthrall thy self unto it, thou shall make thy self a slave and a vassal to
it, and to Satan by it; and so being, thou shall have no more power to dispose
of thy soul, then any slave or vassal has to dispose of himself.

Secondly, have thou not made sale of thy soul already? Demand 2.
For can a man by will demise, devise, or dispose of that, that he has
mortgaged, yea, that he has made sale of before? Nemo relinquit, quod non
babet. Baldus. Nemo potest legare, quod suum jam non est. Cod. de legate. l. 6.
tit. 37. l. 15.
No, undoubtedly. No more have thou power to dispose of thy soul, if thou have
sold it to sin, if thou have made it over to Satan before.

Thou will say to me, it may be, How may that be Question.
done? Or how should that be? Of witches it is true, that have dealings with
the Devil, it is a common saying, that they sell their souls to the Devil: but
for my part, I never had any dealing with him, nor intend by Gods grace and
help ever to have.

Yea, but many others as well as Witches, sell Answer.
their souls to the Devil; and those, such as never had any such dealing with
him, as they have. It is said of Ahab, among others, that 1 King. 21. 25.
he sold himself to sin. Conceive it thus. They have a Proverb in Spain of
a Woman, as Ludovicus Vives tells us; Munere dato, mulier se donat; accepto,
se vendil, Ludov. Vives instruct. mulier. Christ. l. 1. c. 1^.
If she give a gift, she gives her self; if she take a gift, she sells her
self. We may thus apply it to our present purpose: 2 Cor. 8. 5.
If a man give ought to God, he must give himself with it; (for Genes. 4. 4.
(...), Basil. Sell. orat. 3. In omnipotentis Dei judicio, non quid datur, sed a
quo datur, aspicitur. non offerens ^ muneribus, sed munera ab osserente
placuerunt. Greg. in registr. l. 7. epist. 126. Omne quod Deo datur, ex dantis
mente penlatar. ex dantis enim cord id quod datur accipitur, itaque non Abel
ex muneribus, sed ex Abile munera oblata placuerunt. prius namque legitur
dominus ad eum respexisse qui dabat, quam ad illa quae dabat. Idem Moral. l.
22. c. 12.
God regards the giver, not the gift) if he receive ought from Satan, he
sells himself for it. For example: When Matthew. 4. 9.
the Devil tendered to our Savior the whole World, and the glory of it, if he
would fall down and worship him; had our Savior condescended to that his
motion, and accepted of that his offer, he had sold himself to him for it. In
like manner, when matter of pleasure is tendered to thee, that may be compassed
by some sinful or unclean act, matter of profit and gain, that may be
attained by some indirect course, A diabolo datur, quod ^raud^bas acqu^ritur.
by deceit, lying, perjurie, oppression, extortion, and the like: that
pleasure, that profit, if upon such terms thou ad^^ and accept of it, thou
receivest from Satan, thou sellest thy soul away for it.

And here, I beseech you, Pro anim^ vestra legatione apud vos sungimur. Eucher.
ad Valor.
let me plead to you, and Orator ad vos venio: smite exorator ut sum. Terent.
Hecyr.
prevail with you, in the behalf of your souls; making that suit, in effect,
to you for your souls, that David did sometime to Saul (though in another
kind) for his soul: 1 Samuel 24. 24.
As thy soul, faith he, has been precious in my sight, so let my soul be
precious in thy sight. So say I to you: As your souls have been precious in
Gods sight, in Christ's sight; in Gods sight, that John 3. 16. Rom 10. 32.
sent his Son to save them; in Christ's sight, that Act 20. 28. 1 Pet. ^. 19,
20. Quam cha^as^^^ Christo animatua, pro qua posuit animam suam? John 10. 15.
shed his blood to redeem them: so let them be precious in your own eyes. Be
not so unthankful to God, so ungrateful to Christ, so injurious to thy self,
as Cave, ne sort dumacquiris pecuniam, perdas animam: nemo enim habet injustum
luerum siae justo damno, August. de temp. 215.
to barter away thy soul for such toys and trifles, either of momentanie
pleasure, or of transitory pelf, as the Flesh, or the World, Satan's Brokers,
and he by them, shall tender unto thee, to deceive thee, and bereave thee of
Vsque adeo charu^ est hic mundus hominibus, ut vi^uerint ipsi sibi? Idem epist.
162. Esto tu charior tibi quam tua, id quod es, quam id quod habes. Eucher. ad
Valor.
so precious a piece. Consider seriously with thy self now beforehand, what a
dis-heartening it will be to thee, when thou shall lie on thy deathbed, to
remember how often thou have, at such and such times, upon such and such
occasions, made sale to Satan of thy soul, which thou shall desire then to
dispose of otherwise. And when any such offer therefore shall be made unto
thee, call to mind again what now is told thee, and say to thy self; Oh, with
what heart or hope may I hereafter be^^eath my soul unto God, if I sell it now
away to Satan? ^^nd, as thou would be free, to dispose of thy soul, when
thou die, take heed of bartering it away, while thou live. Imitate thy
Savior; refuse the whole World offered thee, in way of exchange for it: it is a
more precious piece then the whole World besides, and (...). Plato apud Plut.
de util. ex immic. and adv. Colo^.
all the wealth of it to boot: More precious at least ought it to be unto thee,
because Non potest ulla compendri causa co^sistere, ^i co^stetanima intervenire
dispendium? ubi salutis damnum, illic utique jam lu^rum nullum est. quo enim
lu^rum capiatur, nisi capiendi sede^inconcussa servetur? Eucher. ad Valor. Quid
tibi proderit, si omnem mundum, aut ipse babeas, ^ut tuis relinquas, si salutis
atque animae detriment^ patiaris. damno enim ammae totu^ penitus secu^
auserunt: nec quicqua^ homo omnino habere poterit, qui seipsum damno animae
percuntis ami^^^. Salv. de avarit. l. 3. Si enim puer infans, cum st Dominus
omnium quae jur^ sunt ejus, nihil possidet mente sopita, quonam tandem modo
quisquam quicquam mente possidebit amissa* Aug. de Trin* l. 14. c. 24.
the whole World, if thou had it, cannot avail thee, without it; Psalm. 49.
7, 8. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
nor will be accepted in exchange for the redeeming of it, once lost, and the
regaining of it again. For, Matthew. 16. 26.
What shall it avail^ a man, says our Savior, to win the whole world, if he
lose his own soul? or what shall he give in exchange for his soul?

And so much for the first Question to be considered of, Whether thou have
power, or no, to dispose of thy soul?

The second Question, that may be moved, and Doubt 2.
Doubt, that may be made, is, Whether God will be wiling to accept of it, or
no. For Legato renunciari potest, A Legatariis and fideicommissariis Legatum
relinqui potest.
a Legacy, though bequeathed and given never so solemnly, yet may be refused:
Legatum accipere nemo no^em cogitur.
None are bound to accept of Legacies, unless themselves will; and such as are
matters of mere charge, we see many times refused. It is a question therefore
not unworthy the discussing, to examine, whether God will be willing to accept
of it, or no. For many commend their souls to him, and yet he accepts not of
them; many bequeath them to God, and yet the Devil surprizeth them, and
carries them away with him to Hell, for all that. And it is a point not
unworthy our due and serious consideration, to understand, and be well and
truly informed, what course we may take, to be assured of this, that God will
be willing to receive and accept of our souls, when they shall be in such
manner commended unto him: the rather, for that our eternal safety and
welfare depends mainely, yea, wholly hereupon.

Would thou know then, how this so weighty Question.
a work may be effected?

Take it briefly in these few Directions. Answer.


First, addict thy self to the service of God, while thou Direction 1.
live, if thou would have God to take charge of thy soul, when thou
die. For, Psalm. 34. 22.
The Lord, says David, redeemeth the souls of his servants: and, Psalm. 86. 2.
Lord, save thy servant, that puts his trust in thee. Thou must be, with
David, a servant of God, while thou live, if thou desire that God should
take thy soul into his custody, when thou die. Otherwise, if neglecting and
rejecting the service of God now, thou shall abandon thy self to the service
of sin and Satan, to thy worldly courses, to thy fleshly lusts; it shall be a
just thing with God, when thou come on thy deathbed, to commend thy soul
unto him for safeguard, in that dreadful and Heram illam decretoriam prospice,
Sene^. epist. 102. qua scil. de ^tern^ salute decernitur.
decretorie hour, to turn thee over to them, whom thou have served and
followed in thy life; as Judge. 10. 14. Ierem. 2. 28.
he does the idolatrous Jews in Scripture.

Secondly, reconcile thy self to him, while thou live, if Direction 2.
thou desire to commend thy soul to him, when thou die. For what hope can
a man have, if he shall commend his children, his charge, on his deathbed, to
one, whom he has been at enmity with all his life long, that he will be
content to accept of such a Legacy as that? As Eliphaz therefore advises
thee, Job 22. 22.
Acquaint thy self with God, and make thy peace with him; make a friend of him
now, that thou may find a friend of him then. But that thou can not,
unless thou come out of thy sins: for, Peccatores and Dei hosts, voces
convertibiles. Psol. 37. 20. Romans 6. 8, 10.
sinners and Gods enemies are, in effect, one and the same. Thou must therefore
break off thy league with sin and Satan, ere thou can enter into league of
amity with God; Nisi discordav^i^ cu^ Diabolo, pacem non habebis cum Deo,
August. nom. quest. N. Test. 92. Bellum ad Diabolli, pacem patrat ad Deum,
Orig. in Romans 5.
thou must fall out with them, ere thou can fall in with him.

Thirdly, receive his Word now, if thou would have him to receive thy soul
then. That is Eliphaz his advice Direction 3.
also. Job 22. 22.
Receive, I pray thee, the Law of his mouth; and lay up his words in thine
heart: not in thine head only, but in thine 1 sal. 37. 31. and 40. 8. V^ figam
orationem tuam in auribus meis? Fige in cord tuo legem meam, Aug in Psalm. 85.
heart. Hear him now, that he may hear thee then. As Iotham to the
Sichemites; Judge. 9. 7.
Hearken to me, that God may hearken unto you; so say I to you, that now hear
me: Qui audiri vult a Deo, prius audiat Deum, Aug. hom. 28. (...), debilies
apud Homer, I^ad. ^.
Hearken ye, not to me, but to God, that God may hearken unto you: Ne avertas
aurem ^uam ^ mondatis Domini, ne avertat and ipe suam a pr^cibus tuis, Lern. de
temp. 29. Quare i^ non percipts auribus tuis^ver. ba ejus, ^ quo vis percipi
lachrymatuas? August. de temp. 245.
Hearken to God, now calling upon you, for obedience, for repentance, for
reformation and amendment of life, for charitable and conscionable dealing, for
just and upright carriage, for circumspect and (...), Ephesians. 5. 15.
accurate walking before him; if you would have God hereafter to hearken unto
you, calling upon him, and crying unto him, for the safegarding of your souls.
Otherwise, if you will imitate Psalm. 58. 4, 5. Vide August. Inn. alios ibi.
the deaf Adder, that stops his care against the Charmer, that he may not
hear the charm; hear what Solomon tells you beforehand, and you will one
day find too true, to your woe: Prove. 28. 9. Ejus enim Deus precem i^
tribulatione co^temnit, qui legem ipsius in tranquil ta^e contempsit, Greg.
Moral. l. 5. c. 30.
He that turns his ear from hearing Gods Law, and God speaking to him in it,
his very prayer shall be abominable: Yea, what God himself fore-telleth thee;
and as he fore-telleth thee, thou may be sure it will be with thee: Prove. 1.
24. 28.
Because I called, and you refused; I stretched out my hand, and you did not
regard it; you set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof:
therefore will I also laugh at you, in your calamity; and mock you, when your
fear surprizeth you; when terror shall seize upon you, as a violent storm,
and destruction as a whirlemind: Then shall you call upon me, but I will not
hear you; Esaias 1. 15.
cry you never so long, and never so loud. And surely, as Salvian well says;
Quid justius? quid aequius? non respeximus, non respicimur; non audivimus, non
audimur, Salv. de provid. l. 3.
What can be more just? what can be more equal? We regard not God, and God
regards not us; we refuse to hear him, and he refuses to hear us: if Zach.
7. 11. 13.
because we stop our ears against Gods voice now, God stop his ears likewise
against our suites then.

Lastly, cleanse thy soul: and having so done, be careful Direction 4.
to keep it clean, that it may be a fit gift to bequeath unto God: 2 Cor. 6.
12.
Come forth, says God, from among them, and separate your selves, and touch no
unclean thing; and I will receive you.

How is that done? may some say. Question.


Read but a Verse or two further, and there thou Answer.
shall find it: 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and
finish our sanctification in the fear of God: For, 1 John 3. 3.
Every one, says Saint John, that has this hope, does purify himself, as he
is pure.

And, I beseech you, consider this seriously with your selves. Is there any man
so vile, and void of shame, as that he dare presume solemnly to bequeath
Malach. 1. 8.
to some honorable person, some greasy dish-clout, or some durtie shoo-clout,
or some filthy, menstruous, materie ragge? or so sottish, and void of common
sense, as to imagine once, that such a person as he is would accept of such a
gift? yet Peccante nil est tetrius, Nil tam leprosum aut putridum: Cruda est
cicatri^ criminum; Olctque ut antrum Tartari, Prudent. de Coron. 2.
is not any such thing so vile and abominable in man's eye, but a sinful soul
is much more vile and Psalm. 11. 5. Esaias ^4. 6.
abominable in Gods sight. And Indignum est dare Deo, quod homo quilibet
dedignetur. Hieron. in Mal. 1.
dare any then presume to tender such a present unto God? or can he conceive
the least hope, that God should accept of it? What should God do with a foul,
a filthy, a profane, an impure a sottish, a beastly, a brutish, a swinish
soul? Is suc^ a soul fit to be and abide with God in heaven, where i^ 2 Pet.
3. 13.
nothing but holiness, where Apoc. 21. 27.
no unclean thing ca^ enter?

Do thou intend then to bequeath thy soul unt^ God? 2 Timothy 2. 21, 22.
purge it and cleanse it, that it may be a fit gif^ for him, who is 1 Samuel 2. 2.
holiness it self; and having so done Iam. 1. 27.
be careful to keep it so. Had thou some one choice jewel, that thou
purposedst at thy decease, to leave to some special friend of thine, how
chari^ would thou be of it? how careful to keep it fair and clean, when
thou should at some time, as occasion is, wear it and make use of it? And,
if it should, against thy will, and beside thy purpose, upon such occasion, by
some occurrent or oversight, take any soil, how diligent to wipe it, or
burnish it, to get the soil off it, and to reduce it to its former luster
again? Have the like care for thy Soul, that precious Piece, that thou
purposest at thy decease to commend to thy God, to thy Christ; Iam. 4. 8.
Ierem. 4. 14.
make it clean, and 1 Timothy 5. 22. 1 John 5. 18.
keep it clean. And because that, by daily occasions, while 2 Cor. 10. 3.
thou live here in the flesh, and Ioh. 17. 11, 15.
conversest in this Galat. 1. 4. 1 John 5. 19.
wicked world, Nemo non aliquod nobis vititim, aut commendat, aut imprimit, aut
nescientibu^ allinit, Sen. epist. 7. affricant nobis rubiginem suam. Ibid.
virus suum in vicinos transferunt. Idem de ira, l. 3. c. 8.
it will be gathering of soil, be thou never so careful; be ever and anon
washing it with the tears of renewed repentance; be ever and anon scouring it,
and fetching off the soil that it so gathers, by serious contrition and
hearty remorse; that, when the time shall come, which Eccles. 9. 12.
thou know not how soon or suddenly may come, it may be 1 Thessalonians 5. 23. 2
Pet. 3. 14.
presented pure and spotless to him, whom thou intendest it now unto.

To close up all in few words. Would thou resign Conclusion, with
Recapitulation.
and give up thy soul unto God, at thy going out of the world, with good
assurance of gracious acceptance with him? Then be thou now careful, while
thou live here in the world, to addict thy self to the service of God, to
reconcile thy self unto him by unfeigned repentance, to yield constant
obedience to his known word and will in all things, to cleanse thy soul from
all sinful filth; and having so done, to keep it in an holy and pure plight.
Thus if thou shall do, assured thou may be, that thou shall not be so
forward to recommend thy soul to God, when thou die, but (...), Plato Polit.
l. 10.
God will be as ready and forward to receive it, and accept of it, when it
shall be by thee so recommended unto him. Yea, suppose thou should be taken
so suddenly, that thou should not have time and space in solemn sort to
commend thy soul to God, yet shall thou find him as ready and forward to
accept it, and to take charge of it, as thou would have been to request so
much of him, had thou had time, and ability, and opportunity so to do.

And thus much for my Text; though not for the Time.
IT remains, as is usual, and not unusefull, if it be not abused, in these
cases, and upon these occasions, to speak something concerning our right dear
and deservedly beloved Christian Sister, M^is I^ice Featly, whose remains we
now perform this last office unto, to the praise and commendation of Gods
work and grace in her, and the incitement of others to the imitation of her.
And I could wish, that some other, better able then my self, were to perform
this office; or that mine own abilities were better, for the performance of it
according to her due desert. But it was her desire, which I might not say nay
to; and I might peradventure, in some respects, be deemed fitter for it then
many others, though of better abilities then my self. What I shall speak of
her, I shall speak the more freely and boldly, because I shall speak most out
of mine own observation; having known her a long time in several estates, a
Wife, and a Widow, again and again, in the prime of her years, in her
decaying days, and in her last concluding times; and having had special
occasion to take notice of her and her carriage in each.

It had pleased God to adorn her with outward endowments, such as are usually
of Job. 42. 15. Esther 2. 3. Psalm. 144. 12. Itaque Aristoteles qu^renti, qua de
causa pulchrarum consortio* delectentur homines, respondit, (...), Laert. l. 5.
no small esteem in the world, in that Sex especially; I mean, with
comeliness of person, and amiablenesse of countenance, above and beyond many,
if not the most, of her Sex.

And, howsoever the Heathen man has well observed, and by experience
over-common too often it appears, that Rara est concordia form^ Atque
pudicitiae. -- Iuvenal. Sat. 10. L^s est cum forma magna pudicitiae. Naso ep.
15. -- (...). Eurip. apud Galen. pro^rept. Quas majora ^ranent discrimina,
Iuven. ib.
Beauty is a shrewd bait, and has been the Helena apud Euripidem, (...).
bane of not a few; yet was it far otherwise with this our Sister: she passed
the flower of her youth, Sine culp^, sine ^abul^, Apul. apol.
without fault or fable, as he speaks, free from any the least aspersion or
Quae ^asta est? de qua mentiri faina veretur, Bias apud Auson Lud. Sap.
imputation in that kind.

It is true indeed that Solomon's Mother says, that Prove. 31. 30.
Beauty alone is but vain, and favor is often (...), Menander. (...), Galen.
protrept. c. 4. (...). Theocrit. Idyl. 23. -- Summ^ nequicquam pelle decorus,
Pers. Sat. 4. Introrsum turpis, speciosus pelle decor^, Flacc. l. 1. epist. 16.
full of deceit. Yea, it is true that another says, that (...), Eustath. in
Iliad. (...).
Beauty without Virtue is no grace, but a disgrace to those that so have it; a
means, as Inde Homero, (...). Eustath. in Il. ^.
to draw more eyes after them, so (...). Plato Menexen. Proverb. 11. 22.
to expose them to the more disgrace and reproach, while their defects, by
occasion thereof, are more eyed. But it is no less true on the other side,
that the Poet has, and is generally acknowledged; that, Gratior est pulchro
veniens e corpore virtus. Maro Aeneid. lib. 5. licet reclamante Seneca epist.
66.
where Virtue and Beauty do concur, they give much luster mutually either
to other. And so was it with her; her inside was suitable to her outside, or
superior rather unto it: God had dealt largely and liberally with her, in
regard of either, and in that part especially, that is the more to be regarded.
He had endowed her with a greater measure then ordinary, in that Sex
especially, of wisdom, of discretion, of understanding, of knowledge how to
behave her self so, as her behavior should be, not inoffensive only, but
very grateful and acceptable to those, that had either interest in her, or
occasion to converse with her.

And what God in this kind had bestowed on her, she was careful accordingly to
employ and improve. For, for her carriage and courses, she was such an one as
Solomon's Mother describes Prove. 31. 10. 29.
in the last of the Proverbs, as the Apostle Paul requires Tit. 2. 5.
in the second to Titus; a constant (...), unde (...), mukeris conjugatae
symbolum, (...), ^lu^. conjug. praecept.
keeper at home; nor idle in the house, but a diligent and industrious, a
prudent and provident, directer and disposer of domestic affairs;
housewifely, without harshnesse or hastiness; quiet and peaceable, without
sluggishnesse or sheepishnesse; grave, without austeritie; cheerful, without
levitie; modest, without stateliness; kind and courteous, without either
incivilitie on the one side or loose daliance on the other. In general, such
was her sweet, discreet, and well-tempered demeanure, as gave abundance of
satisfaction and contentment, not to them alone, that it pleased God
successively to join her unto, but to their friends, and those that had
interest in them; yea, to all, familiars or strangers, of what state and degree
soever, that had occasion to repair to them, and to be entertained with them.
Issue indeed she had none: it seemed good to God, to deny her that blessing.
But to the children of some of them, that God had joined her unto, she was no
stepmother, but as careful of procuring their good, and as forward to
perform any good office for them, as if she had been a natural Mother unto
them: That, which some of them, were they surviving, I know, would freely
testify; and those of them that do survive, if they be not extremely
unthankful, cannot but right willingly acknowledge. And some of her first
Husbands kindred, beside others not a few, she brought up as carefully, as if
they had been her own children. In a word, she was such an one, as Eccles. 7.
28.
Solomon could hardly sind one of a thousand; a complete Woman, a complete
wife; defective in nothing, that might be required in either.

But to rise a step higher. Moral virtue indeed, without grace, is, as Jerome,
after Irenaeus and Tertullian, tells us, but Vitreum Marga^^tum. Irenaeus
^rasal. adv. haeres. 1. Tertull. ad Martyr. c. 4. and ex cod Hicron. ad Demetr.
and ad Laet.
a glassie Bugle, but a counterfeit Pearl; and all the acts thereof, unless
they be sanctified, are but Splendida ^eccata, Aug. adv. I^^ian. l. 4. c. 3.
and de nupt. and conclip. c. 3.
glittering slips, as Augustine speaks. And yet let me tell you by the way,
that even these help much to Tit. 2. 10.
adorn grace, where it is; and that for want of these, to the no small Plus in
he^^ valere vires ingeni Quam gratiam, insirmat valorem grati^^.
disgrace of grace, even such married persons as profess and pretend much
grace, yet live many times less quietly, contentedly, and comfortably
together, then many other mere natural ones do. But these things, in this
our Sister were seasoned with grace. She was a woman, as of a virtuous, so of a
gracious disposition: and this her gracious disposition was manifested in two
things especially, her Piety, and her Charity.

To begin with the latter. For her Charity, Charit^^s incipit, ut a se, sic ^
suis.
it began indeed at home; (both 1 Timothy 5. 4, 8.
reason and religion require it should so do) at her kindred and allies, I
mean; of whom, not a few (as I touched in part before) were relieved and
supported by her; there seldom or never wanting some or other of them, that
were either educated with her, or maintained near to her. But neither did her
charity stay and stint it self there, with them that were with her, as at the
Wellhead; but the streams of it issued out and dispersed themselves abroad to
poor neighbors of all sorts, on every side of her. Diverse pensioners she had,
that in a constant course received the fruits of her bounty; but no other were
excluded from tasting thereof, and that liberally and largely, when occasion so
required. For she was (which I take to be 1 Cor. 13. 4.
two principal properties of Charity) as very Hebr. 13. 1. 3.
pitiefull and prone to commiserate the wants and necessities of others; so no
less 1 Timothy 6. 18. (...).
bountiful and forward to communicate thereunto, as well by personal aides,
as by free and liberal supplies. And whereas she had pretty skill in matter of
Physic and Chirurgerie, (as indeed what was she not skillful in?) in this kind
she was exceeding helpful, by Waters and Medicines, as well as advice, to such
poor souls as were not able to entertain Physician, or to go to the cost of
procuring Physic; being not only as Physician, but as Apothecarie also to
them. In regard of which her charitable both disposition and practice, as I
doubt not, but that she both had the prayers of the poor, that 2 Cor. 9. 12.
blessed God for her, while she lived, and has now the Matthew. 10. 42.
reward of it from him and with him in Heaven; so I assure my self, that those
poor souls in those parts do find no small want of her, now she is gone, and
will ^eele it daily more and more.

For her Piety, it appeared in her Devotions, public and private: Public, in
her constant repair to Gods House, and the public worship and solemn Service
there celebrated, when and while health and strength permitted. Private, (and
howsoever there is a Matthew. 18. 19, 20
promise of a more ample blessing upon the public means; yet peoples private
devotions, Matthew. 6. 6.
wherein fewest eyes are upon them, and which none are conscious unto but God
and their own souls, are a Psalm. 63. 6. Esa^ 26. 9. Ca^. 3. 1.
surer seal and evidence of their, inceritie: Vere dolet is, qui sine test
dolet. Martial. l. 1. epigr. 34. Tal^s quisque est, qua'is apud se est; qualis
est r^mo^s a^bitris.
such are persons indeed, as in private they are) as by her constant standing
times of prayer, four several times each weeke-day, and six on the Lords day:
a course, which (as I am informed) she had constantly for many years
continued: so by her diligent reading, in the first place, of Gods Oracles,
having within some term of years next before her decease, read the whole New
Testament twelve times over; and that, not slightly and super^icially, but so,
as Quod Lucitio Seneca, epist. 2. Cum multa pe^curreris, ^num altquod excerpe,
quod illo die concoquas.
to observe somewhat that might be useful unto her, either out of or upon
every Chapter she read; that which by a multitude of Notes left behind her in
writing, may evidently appear: as also by her frequent perusal, in the next
place, of the pious works of religious Writers, that might further and forward
her in the good ways of God. Among which, she professed her self to be much
affected with some, because they seemed to her to write, as she said, not to
show their learning, but out of their own sense and feeling; of that, no
doubt, that she felt also together with them, and which caused her therefore
the rather so much to affect them.

Yea, one good proof of her piety may be this: That for her better
advancement and improvement therein, in her last choice, among many Matches
moved to her, (as one of her parts and means could not want motions) yea, and
some of them not lightly to have been disregarded; yet passing by all other,
she pitched upon one, of whom, in regard of his presence, I will not say what I
might; only this I will say, one that she justly deemed might be a prime
instrument of procuring and promoting her spiritual progress in the work and
course of grace. And that this was her maine end and aim in that her choice,
she manifested by a speech (which I may not let pass) uttered by her to him at
the time of her enter-marriage with him, (at what time she stated him for his
life in the house she lived in; that which his pastoral charge there afforded
him not) and remembered again by her in the time of her late sickness; I
settle thee here for the Earth, that thou may settle me for Heaven. And as
this was her maine end therein, so her desire and endeavor was to make use of
it accordingly, (for she was not one of Solomon's fools) that Prove. 17. 16.
have a price in their hands to get wisdom with, but have no heart or mind,
wit or will, to make that use of it.) To which purpose, I remember, that
repairing sometime to visit them, (that which mine engagements to either of
them required, and had been more frequent, but that distance of place,
necessary employments, and crasinesse of body restrained it) when he and my
self were in her presence talking together, of the occurrents of the time, and
some points of Schoole-learning, somewhat out of her element, and above her
sphere, she struck in with us, and requested us to discourse rather of
somewhat, that she might also receive some benefit by, that might be useful as
well to her as to us.

But I forget my self: The time spends, and my strength and speech with it;
and I must therefore of necessity omit many things, that might else have well
been mentioned.

I draw toward an end, together with her end. And the Termi^^^ ad quem dat
appellatien^m.
end indeed is that, that is all in all. Yea, the maine end of a man's whole
life, should be to make a good end of his life. ( Tot^ vita discendum est ^ori.
Senec. de brevvit. c. 7. Egregia res est, mortem condiscere, Idem ep. 26. Magn^
i^s est, and diu discenda, cum advene^it hora illa inevitabilis, aequo animo
abire, Idem epist. 30
We should be all our life long a learning to dye, ^aith Seneca.) Perseverantia
sola virtutum co^onator, Bern. epist. 32. and 109.
It is perseverance alone, says Bernard, that carr^eth away the Crown. And,
Cedunt prima postremis, Tacit. annal. l. 13. Vita posterier priori praejudicat,
Hier. ad Furia^.
The latter part of a man's life carries it away from the former, says
another, if the latter be not answerable to the former. But it was not so with
her. The close of her life was suitable to its fore-passed tenor, in renewed
acts of piety and charity enter-woven together the one with the other. For,
beside other Legacies, to the value of three hundred and forty pounds, and
upwards, by the free consent of her worthy Consort, disposed to pious and
charitable uses; she has given to this Parish, wherein she drew her first
breath, the sum of four pounds per annum for ever; partly, for a Sermon, a
work of piety; and partly, for the relief of the poor, an office of
charity. And to the Church of Lambeth, in which Parish she spent the greatest
part of her life, and gave up her last breath, she has bequeathed a fair
Communion Cup, to be raised from the sale of some of her principal Jewels;
that so those ornaments (I give it you in her own words) that had adorned her,
while she lived, might adorn the Church of God, when she was dead.

In her last and fatal sickness, her carriage was such, that her ^ietie and
her patience might have seemed to contend for the superiority, but that they
were so sweetly combined together, that the one was expressed and appeared in
the other. Nor is it to be marvelled, if it were so with her; for she freely
professed to some of those that resorted to her, That she had always been
careful to lay up in store for the great day of her dissolution. Patience she
still prayed for, frequently using that sweet and pious saying of S. Augustine;
Da quod jubes, and jube quod v^, August. de dono ^ersever. c. 20.
Lord, give what thou command, and command what thou pleasesl. And patience
she practiced. For it is credibly reported by those that were most and nearest
about her, that albeit her pains and torments were very great and grievous,
yet no one idle word, or speech savouring of impatience, was ever heard to fall
from her. And, when those that attended her, offered sometime to have removed
her for her ease, (and pain, we know, makes persons usually desirous of often
removal) she refused it, saying, That she should shortly be removed; to a
better place and state, she meant.

The Evening before her departure, she requested Prayer (of which always she
was much desirous) to be continued by her, until two of the clock; about which
time, (which was not before understood what she meant) as if it had been some
way revealed unto her, her senses so failed, as she could not longer be
apprehensive of ought done about her.

Her last words were, not much unlike that of S. Stevens here; Sweet Jesus,
help me: And, with the Spouse in the Apocalypse; Apoc. 22. 20.
Come, Lord Jesus, even now. With which words her speech failing, yet ceased
she not, so long as any use of sense continued, to lift up incessantly both
hands, while ability so to do lasted; and the one of them still, when the
other of them failed; thereby giving notice of her heart inwardly lift up unto
him, who by his gracious hand at length took her hence, and received her to
himself.

With whom leaving her at peace and rest, in joy and bliss, let us likewise
lift up our hearts and hands to him; humbly beseeching him, that he will be
pleased to make the things now spoken useful unto us, and to prepare and sit
us for the like end. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
December. 10. 1637.
PErlegi concionem hanc funebrem cui Titulus est [ S. STEVENS last Will] eamque
typis mandari permitto.

SA. BAKER.


