THE Defense of Military profession.

Wherein is eloquently showed the due commendation of Martial prowess, and
plainly proved how necessary the exercise of Arms is for this our age.

IMPRINted at London by Henry Middleton, for John Harison. 1579.

VERO NIHIL VERIVS


TO THE RIGHT honorable, Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxenford, vicount Bulbecke,
Lord of Escales and Bladesmere, and Lord great Chamberlain of England.
EXperience bears such a sovereignty over all things humane and divine,
that without it the quality or power either of word, deed, devise, or matter,
cannot make it self known to the understanding of me^: for the heavenly
truth justifies it self by the effects of his nature and power, made
apparent to the eyes and capacities of earthly creatures.

Adam not well staid upon the truth of Gods word, transgressed the
commandment, and feeling the plagues of his offense, had thereby experience of
the power and truth of his Almighty Creator.

The first world ouerflowing in wickedness, was drowned in the flood of Gods
vengeance: to geeue experience to the world that ensued, what it is to contemn
his word and Prophets.

Noah believed the word of the Lord, and obeying his commandment, prepared the
Arc and was saved in the flood, he and all his family: by experience whereof
the world is made to understand the power and assurance of Gods truth and
favor toward his elect people.

The Lord willed Moses to denounce his plagues against Egypt, and in the effect
of his power and truth he accomplished the same upon man and beast, upon fruit
and tree, upon earth and water: the experience whereof made Moses and the
Israelites so hardy in faith, that they took their way through the red Sea,
as through the fields on dry land.

Pharao in the hardness of his heart pursued the Israelites, and was drowned,
he and all his army in the paths where Jacob went dry shod* whereby all the
kings and princes of the earth had and have experience, what it is to contemn
God, to persecute his people, and to despise his word and ministers.

The like experience made Iosuah bold to lead Israel through the deep waters
of Jorden: where they passed on foot, and went dry shod to land.

The Israelites breaking the covenant of the Lord their God, and standing in
their rebellion were destroyed out of the land of Judah, and Jerusalem, and
made slaves to the Chaldeans: whereby they were taught by experience (and so
are we by the same example) what it is to despise the Lord of hosts, and to
stand in disobedience against his majesty.

The Lord restoring Jacob out of Chaldea to his inheritance again, according
as he had promised by the mouths of his Prophets: does teach us by experience
how faithful he is in his promises, that we therefore should rest upon him
without doubting.

Christ our Savior wrought wonders before all Israel, that their eyes might
see his divine power and believe him for his works sake: but they believed not
their own eyes, and are therefore confounded by the experience that testifies
against their own consciences.

By examples of experience, the Lord Jesus taught the Jews, as by that of
Dives and Lazarus, of the sower of seed, of the evil Steward etc. As by
familiar demonstrations.

Our forefathers the old Christians, so polluted their Tabernacles with the
works of impiety, that they extinguished the holy Ghost in the Sanctuary,
whereby they fell to ignorance and corruption* and were given over to
superstition and Idolatry. The experience whereof should teach us of these
days, and our children to walk wisely in the presence of our God.

Experience discovers the effects of wisdom and folly: and makes
demonstration of the fruits of virtue and of vice, and teaches to
distinguishe, betwixt the righteous and the wicked, betwixt the fool and the
wise man, etc.

Experience is the mother and nurse of the policies and gouernements, civil
and martial, private and public, guiding the counsels and doings of men
with orderly discretion.

Experience of the inordinate iniquities of me^ fuonded the laws and the
judgment seat.

The experience of the troublesome furies of men founded Arms, and advanced
Military profession, for the repressing and restraining of the tyrannies and
noyfull malice of the wicked.

The experience of the profit and value of law and arms, makes al prudent
states and commonwelths, to embrace and to uphold them both with much care and
endeavor.

So to conclude, experience is the ordinary companion and natural ornament of
reason, which makes me^ wise in knowledge, and prudent in the direction and
use of things. He therefore that judges or directs against experience, is
not in deed a man, but a fool more ignorant then a beast.

The experience of other men's harms, warns the wise to be ware.

The experience of foreign evils, warns England to waken it self out of
security, and to be watchful, and wisely to take it self.

Experience has taught me to love and to honor arms, and in the zeal of a
good heart to covet the advancement of martial occupation, which made me (an
unlettered man) to take unto me a notarie to set down in writing this drift
in the defense and praise of warlike prowess, against al co^temners of the
same: for the benefit and encouragement of my country and countrymen.

And finally, the experience of the high noblenes and honor of you, my
singular good Lord, does enbolde^ me (in the love of a faithful heart, to your
renoumed virtues) most humbly to commend this little work to your honorable
protection, that under the shield of your noble favor and judgment, it may
stand in grace before our nation, to some good effect. God grant it. To whom
be praise, and to your good Lordshippe, abundaunce of heavenly graces, and
fatherly blessings, even to everlasting life. Amen. London. 23 December. 1578.

Your honors most humble GEFFREY GATES.

The defense of Military Profession.
IT has been an old controversy in the opinions of the English nation, what
profession of life is most honorable in worldly states. What worldly estate
most honorable
They being Ilanders, what by their famous might and prowess, and what by the
natural safety of the situation of their Soil, (environed with the maine
Ocean sea, and dwelling in greater security, then any one nation that
inhabiteth the continent) they may reasonably differ from the judgment both of
Greeks and Romans in discussing this question. For it may well be granted,
that the profession and occupation that is most in use, and most necessary for
the maintenance and preservation of the common wealth, that the same should be
had most in honor, standing most in use and value. England therefore dwelling
in safety and commonly in peace, may seem to give the pre-eminence unto the
lawer: For by his wisdom and travel is justice ministered, to the maintenance
and advancement of sovereign authority: by the benefit of whose majesty,
Revenge and Tyranny is forbidden in public and private, every injury and
quarrel committed to the judgment and direction of the law: that the
unnatural rage and furies of ye mighty, of the cruel, and of the wicked,
being restrained and repressed, sociall unity and universal obedience may be
nourished and holden in the civil fellowship of men: so that the Lamb may suck
safely by the Wolf, the Calfe by the Leoparde, and the Ass feed quietly by
the Lion, etc. And happy is the state where this is accomplished by the
industry and prudence of the peaceable Lawyer. But forasmuch as the thoughts
of man are wicked even from his youth, and all his ways naturally inclined to
extreme evil, desirous to satisfy his own lusts and affections with injury
and cruelty, to revenge, and to reign in his The only mean to uphold the
seat of Justice, and all other estates, is the profession of Arms.
own will and power without correction, and yeldeth not unto the obedience and
direction of any other but for fear of stripes: There must be therefore an
other state and profession of men, whose power and prudence must comprehend the
maintenance and defense, not only of the Seat of Justice, but also of the
Cow and Plowe, of the Bed and Cradle, yea of the Altar and of the sovereign
state: which rests in the profession neither of the Priest nor Lawyer, nor in
the occupation of the Housbandmen, Artisans nor Merchants: but lies in the
prowess and value of them that profess Arms. For when Preaching, process,
Plee, or Persuasion cannot prevail, in reforming the evils and outrages of the
wicked: then must the sword of violence be put in execution, by the hands of
them that are able, and skillful to abase and to extinguish the furies of
tumults and Rebellions: and either to bring to obedience the disordered
multitude, or else to cut them off from the earth, that peace and civil
justice may possess and rule all the land, to the restitutio^ and
preservation of domestical concord and Society, without the which mankind
should decay from the face of the earth, and the rest that remained in the
world, should be in more miserable state then the wild beasts of the desert.
And as it is proved by experience in all ages, that Justice and Civil policy
is not surely seated without ye aid and attendance of Martial guard: So is it
to be seen, that where military prowess has in any part of the world most
prevailed, there Where military prowess prevails justice florisheth and al
virtues
has orderly most flourished, Justice, Nobleness, Science and all manner of
virtuous and commendable occupations both of body and mind. Witness of Greece,
Italy, and France, and now last of Germany. Whereupon this is to be
concluded, yt as Justice is not of it self able to set up it self in
authority, and to exercise rule over the multitude of Adams rebellious and
stiffenecked brood, without the friendship and aid of Arms: so must we
esteem martial prowess, as the common fortress, wherein civil Policy with
all her parts and appendants, are hatched, nourished, and preserved: for the
orderly nourishment and preservation of Man and Beast, of Fish and Foul, of
Fire and Salt, of Earth and Water. Where this benefit wants, there wants
Science and government, without which, the whole world would soon become a
desolate wilderness, ewithout man to manure or to inhabit it. So that the
wickedness and transgressions of men being the founder and mother of humane
laws and policies, we must give most honorable place to that profession and
occupation, that is most of force and value to chastise the wickedness of the
wicked, and to uphold the righteous: to preserve the weaklings and little ones,
and to give free passage and estimation to right, and virtue. And further, as
man naturally is inclined to pride and emulation, and thereby infected with
malice and covetousness, and look how much mightier the person is that is
possessed of the vices, so much the more hurtful they are in work and
practice. And therefore are they most pestiferous and noyfull in kings and
sovereign Princes, which as they are of hautie courage and ambitious, so are
they dangerous and commonly full of quarrels and troublesome to their
Neighbors. When such are encouraged with a desire to conquer and to bring to
their obedience, them that are free from their bondage, or to spoil them of
lives, goods, and habitations: they are not ruled over by the equity of law,
neither pacified by persuasions nor mollified with praying or preaching, but
violence must be resisted with violence, and one lawless No state in safety
without Military profession.
injury satisfied with an other injury, which without the force and terror of
arms cannot be once offered, much less accomplished. Every state therefore
that wants the guard and assistance of martial prowess, lies open to be
ruinated by every spoiler that will invade it: whereby we find that no state,
Kingdom, Empire, or common wealth, can stand in any assured safety, either
inward or outward but by the benefit of military profession, the friend and
nurse of Laws, of Religion and of ciuell concord. The necessary use and high
value whereof made the wise Grecians and valiant Romans, to commend all high
courages to the use and exercise of Arms, as the noblest and most profitable
occupation that a worthy mind should desire: which estimation it also
holds continually and must in all estates kingdoms, and Empires of the
continent of the world. And though the wickedness and infidelity of the
world, be generally punished by sword fire, famine, spoil, and murder, the
ordinary works of war, Whereby the Justice of God is executed upon the
inhabitants of the earth: yet has the Lord planted, maintained, and restored,
his truth and religion, by the means and assistance of warlike force and
policy, and practiced his most especial Sons in the knowledge of Arms. For
Abraham being called to Abraham* had fyghting men*
receive the promise of salvation to the whole world, and brought by the Lord
his God to dwell in the land of Canaan, had of his own family and aliance
above three hundred fighting men, by whose power and courage, he not only
defended himself and al his from the spoil and injuries of the wicked, but
also revenged the wrong done to his neighbors, the Kings of Sodom and
Gomorha, and recovering their goods from the spoylers, he restored to every
man his part that was lost by the overthrow. For which famous deed of
prowess, Melchisedech the King of Salem blessed Abraham and praised the Lord
God, possesser of heaven and earth in his behalf.

In the value of warlike prowess, Simeon and Leui, the Sons of Jacob,
revenged the violation of their Jacobs sons.
Sister Dyna, upon the sons of Sychem.

By force of Arms, the Israelites coming out of Egypt, The Israelites.
made their way through the Amalekites, and vanquished the Kings of Hesbon and
Basan: and possessed their lands, their cities, and their riches: so did they
vanquish and destroy the mighty Kings, and invincible people of Canaan, and
possessed their lands, and cities. By Arms their posterity defended their
inheritance, and held the same: for by Arms the Lord God vanquished and
destroyed the enemies of Jacob, and therefore is called the Lord God of
hosts. By Arms Cyrus conquered Chaldea, and possessed Babylon, giving Cyrus.
liberty to Israel: yea, and through his great victories restored Sion and
Jerusalem, and the people to their inheritance again. By Arms the Romans
enlarged their Empire over many nations, and by virtue of their The Romans.
wisdom and prowess they brought many barbarous countries to civility and
prosperity: For where they governed, there reigned Prudence and Justice, as
ordinary companions to Martial nobleness.

By the Arms of rude nations, the Goths, Hunnes, and Vandalles: the Lord
visited the proud Empire of the Romans, for their pride and tyranny, and
confounded it.

By the Arms and prowess of the Emperor Constantine the Lord relieved his
church, and restored true religion amongst many nations.

By Arms, El Enfante de Pelago recovered the kingdom of Leon, and comforted
Spain, in the days of cruel afflictions, when all the land was harrowed and
possessed by the Moors and Infidels.

By Arms is the worthy kingdom of France guarded and preserved in a State
most honorable: so is Spain: so are the commonweales and principallities in
Italy.

By Arms, the Switzers purchased their freedom, and by Arms they defend and
preserve their limits and liberties, to their great fame and benefit.

By Arms has Germany made her might and prudence known to the whole world:
by Arms they hold the majesty of the Empire in their power and election: and
bytheir invincible prowess, they mayntaine and preserve their states and
honors, private and public, and are terrible to the nations round about them.

By Arms are the kingdoms of Denmark and Polonia defended and saved from the
power of the cruel Russians and Muscouites.

So is Germany from the powers of the cruel and mighty spoylers of the world:
the Turks, Tartarians, Muscouites also, and Russians: and by Arms, they
establish peace amongst themselves, and are preserved at home and abroad.

By Arms, Ferdinando the king of Spain seized into his power the West Indias,
and by Arms are the same possessed and holden in obedience to the Scepter of
Spain.

By the Arms and prowess of civil princes, are many rude and savage nations
subdued to civil government.

The Lord our God uses no occupation of men in his works and proceedings upon
earth, like as he does Military prowess: For by it he executes his wrath
and Justice upon the rebellious and faithless people of the world.

Also by the same means it pleases the heavenly majesty to deliver the
righteous from oppression, and to give way to his truth upon the earth, to
restore his Church, and to defend his Sanctuary from the rage and violence
of the tyrants: As for example.

After the great and wonderful favor of God in relieuing and comforting his
Church in old time by the Constantine by arms restored religion.
Emperor Constantine, being suffocated with heresies and ruina^^d by
persecutions: the rebellious and bastard christians, falling from the way of
truth, and abandoning the paths of righteousness, were not only delivered
over to the regiment and conduction of Antichrist, Turks were raised of a vile
people to spoil the bastard Christians.
and made slaves to the Scepter of darkness: but were also for their
incurable corruptions in Asia, Greece, and Africa, delivered over into the
power of the cruel Turks and Sarrasens: whom the Lord raised of a vile
people, to be mighty, dreadful, and invincible in Arms, for the lamentable
spoil, ruin, and extirpation of many Empires, states, kingdoms, and nations,
not only in honor, names, bounds, and liberties: but also in civil policies,
honest sciences, in knowledge of true religion, and in the very tongues,
generations, and procreations of the vanquished people. Wherein the Lord has
showed forth a fearful hand of his intolerable wrath and Justice for the
sin and disobedience of these irrecouerable nations: to the good warning of
the nations that do yet rest in their old seats, in knowledge eke and
liberty to profess and to serve GOD, according to his truth in Christ Jesus.
Which if they abuse and contemn as their forefathers did, and as they of Asia,
Africa, and Greece have also done, and received their The victory is of God.
punishment for their offenses by utter destruction: then let us and our
children look that the Lord God of hosts (High general of all wars) can
levy an invincible Army, when and where him lysteth, to vex us, and to
punish us, and utterly to destroy us. For it is he only that bears the
sword of vengeance, that strikes in the battle, and gives the victory to
himself. The war is his, the Army is his, and he is cheefteyne of the
feelde: and as he uses them for the punishment of the world, so does he
occupy the same also to the comfort and deliverance of the righteous, and to
make way for the Scepter of peace, (that is, of true religion) to come to her
regement and orderly occupation. Wherein the Lord has showed and daily does
more and more show, his wonderful works and power in this last restitution of
his Gospel: which began in Germany with peace, but was forced to hold on the
way, by the aid of warlike prowess and fidelity: which was valiantly
attempted, and prosperously Maurice.
achieved by that famous Soldier of God, Maurice Duke of Saxoni, the first
vanquisher of the Armed enemies of the Gospel in this latter restitution.

By the fidelity also and industry of Military occupation, does the Lord
hold possession for his saints in the proud and mighty kingdom of France,
preserving Rochel the fortress of his sanctuary, for the invocation Rochel.
of his holy name amongst that nation, in true religion.

That holy city Geneua with all the godly places Geneua.
of the neighbourhead and confederacy, are also guarded by Arms, as the
appointed means which God occupies for the defense of his people, against ye
power of their enemies. By arms also, has the Lord God of hosts entered
foot in Belgia, and there taught the ignorant hands to fight, and the slow
couraged, War in Belgia.
to be bold and hardy. Whereby the pride of the enemies is dauted, and their
glory abased, (and that before our eyes) in such apparent and wonderful
manner, as we may well say that the Lord of hosts is abroad with his armies,
to pourchase to himself honor and praise, for the year of his redeemed is
come: neither will he give over ye field any more, til he has utterly
destroyed his enemies, and confounded the wicked for evermore, and give
perpetual rest to Israel, according as it is written.

These being the public effects and works of martial Judustrie: what
occupation or vocation darre put forth it self to make comparison withit?
the exercise and substance whereof consists of Whereof warlike industry
consists
prudence, high courage, and magnamitie. Prudence, to invent, to direct, and to
govern. Courage, to execut and to perform that which politic prudence has
devised and set down to be done. And magnanimity, to sustayn with
irremoueable temperancye what soever happens. And farther to amplify upon
the praise of this occupation, what work or volume can be sufficient to
express in orderly recital the nobleness and particular virtues of the famous
martialistes of the old and later world, which stand renoumed in hystories:
and for every one left to memory by name, a thousand of great worthiness are
past over without mentione. But this is generally to Warlike Princes.
be noted in the warlike Princes and Nobility: that as they exceed in
military prowess and worthiness, so do they excel in wisdom and all
nobleness of heart: and he that will worthily be called a military man, must
cast off all vilanies and baseness of mind: and full charge his thoughts and
doings with honest inclinationes and like effects. Neither are the
commendable virtues of the mind so necessary for any occupatione, as they are
for them that profess and Commendable virtues necessary for them that
profess Arms.
exercise arms. And the martialist that wants them, shall not prosper in
war, but sink in obloquie and dishonor: neither is there any state or
vocation of man that can worse sustain, the infection and use of vices, then
can an army governed in warlike manner. Foolish therefore and beastely is the
common speech, used of the base and humble minded sort of our natione, that do
not only say, but also affirm in their doings, that the worst sort of men,
(and such as for the vileness of their conditiones the earth is not able to
sustain) are fit for the wars: and accordingly do call out the refuse of
the people to be soldiers for the service of their Prince and countreie, where
in deed the worthiest people ought to be chosen, and preferred: as to a state
most honorable, and of most credit and importance.

But if England stood in the continent of the world environed with mighty
nationes, that in the days of frendeship would move discretion to fear their
malice in the time of controversy: then should it know ye value of a soldier,
and lick the dust off the feet of her men of prowess: then would the lawer
and the marcheant humble themselves to the warriers, and be glad to give honor
and salary to the martialist: and show friendly grace to his page, and favor to
his lackye. And al be it our state is better at ease and that we by the
benefit of the seat of our land, do stand in more security then the
nations of the firm land: yet is not our assurance such as may so deliver us
up in the time of peace, to ye careless and spiteful contempt of arms: as
though the commonwealth and state public stood in such prosperity and
saftie, by the wisdom of the lawier and by the riches of the merchant, as
that they should never stand in need of military forces, nor to nourrishe
men of war, but to consume them with penurye and with the galowes. Let all the
miserable drudges The glorious effects of Military industry.
of this present world, (whose God is their belly, and whose idol is their
riches) that so beastly and opprobriously disdain the warlik people, look
into the records not only of the former times of old, but also of these
present days, and see in what hazard, not only the Throne of their
sovereign Prince, but also the whole state of the commonwealth (and
consequently, the chest, the chamber, the bed, and cradle, the wife and
daughter of the lawier and merchant, the Pulpyt, and Preacher, the Judge and
the Judgment seat) have been to suffer general and particular shippwracke, by
the conspiracies, mutinies, and tumultes, of traitors and of the rebellions
multitudes of the vulgar people, cruel and implacable: And confess by whose
diligence, wisdom, peril, iudustrie and blood, all these things have been
defended, and saved out of the power of the furious spoylers, restoringe
justice to her seat, the plowe to the feelde, the cow to the payle, the
shephearde to his flock, the merchant to his trade, and the learned to his
quiet study and exercise. Yea and let them be ashamed of their ignobilitie of
hearts, and consent with other nationes to give unto the people of prowess, and
milytarie profession, the honor that is due unto them. For it is a rare age of
the world, wherein the sureste Kingdom, and the safeste state and nation upon
earth, flies not at one time or other to the covert and succor of Arms, to
save it self either from intestine violence, or from foreign depopulation, or
else from both.

Whoesoeuer therefore will see the value of martial prowess in preserving a
kingdom, in vpholdinge the sovereign majesty of their Prince, in redeming
their country from the power of foreign enemies mighty and warlike, in
pacifyinge civil vprores, and in extinguishinge the most ragiouse furies of any
rebels in the world: and in reducinge the government to obedience, justice,
housbandry, traffic, literal exercise, and all civil policies and ordinances
to their places again. Look through the state of France, from the beginning
even to this day: But specially in the days of King John, of his son also
King Charles the fifth, and eke of Charles Valiant Kings in France.
the sixte, and above all in the days of Charles the seventh, who being so
molested, and ruinated not only by the victorious wars of the Englishmen and
Bourgonyons: but also by intestin diuisiones and civil vprores, that he held
not the fifte part of his kingdom in obedience, insomuch that he was driven
to hold himself in a small corner of his land, and was contempteously called
King of Bourges: For his ennemies possessed and ranged all the parts else of his
Realm at their pleasures. But that famous King (aided with the prowess and
fidelity of his approved martialistes:) never gave over the field til he
recovered his kingdom and restored the commonwealth: which had been so
spoiled, wasted, and depopulat, that the fields and vineiards were grown to a
wilderness, their cities become heaps, and their habitationes desolate. Peace
and idleness before conquests.


When the Lord means to plague a wicked natione for sin and to translate
them to the power and scepter of another nation: then he fills them with the
fatness of the earth, and geeueth them peace that they may wax rotten in
idleness, and become of dulle wits, slow of courage, weak handed, and
feeble kneede: that when the spoiler comes, they may in all points be
unfurnished of warlike prowess, and not able to resist, but so made a pray
to their ennemies. As the Persians were to Alexander, the Greeks and
Hungarians with many other natones to the Turks: and the old Brutes to the
Saxons.

And likewise when the Lord means to advance God makes apt to war, whom
he will advance.
a nation and to make any people famous and honorable upon earth: he stirs
them up to high courage, and makes their minds and bodies apt to the war,
and in all points sufficient for the pursuit and accomplishment of Military
travail. As he did the Israelites for ye recovery of their promised
inheritance, by subduing and destroying the mighty Canaanites. Cyrus and the
Cyrus and Alexander
Persians for the subuerting of ye empire of Syria: Alexander and the Grecians
for the conquering of the Persians, and for translating of the Monarchy from
Asia to Europa. The Romans eke being a poor small people, and of an Romans
opprobrious foundation, were made fit in policy and courage for the pursuit
and exercise of Arms: whereby they became Lords and commanders of all the
chief nations, Empires, states, and kingdoms of the world. And again, for
the chastisement and confusion of them the Lord raised up to Arms and warlike
courage, the rude and barbarous multitudes of the Goths, Hunnes and Vandales.
And so the Turks of a small people, and Goths, etc
of the savage Scythian kind, to be the most cruel and noyfull spoylers and
destroyers that ever were upon earth, to subvert all ye civil states and
Empires of Asia Turks.
and Africa, and to subdue and depopulat* the noble Empire of Greece and the
kingdom of Hungary, Tamberlan Tamberlan.
a heardman with the rude Scythians to chastise Baiezet the Turkish Emperor
and all his dominions* And lastly the Spanyard to chastise France, Italy,
Spaniards
Germany and low Duchland. And now let us farther behold with discretion what
work the Lord is entered into by Arms, in these last days of the world: And
how martial prowess and industry has mightily served to advance the name
and glory of God, and to give passage to his Gospel, where it lay prostrate
and trodden under the feet of Antichrist and his consorts. For when the time
was come, in the year of our Savior Christ 1517. that ye Lord set foot on
earth to restore his Sanctuary, he began his business by a poor ministry
under the covert and protection of the most worthy prince Duke Frederick of
Saxony, and so increased under the defense of the most noble Princes, John
Duke The worthy acts of the Duke of Saxoni, Lantgraue etc.
of Saxony, and Philipe Lantgraue of Hesse, and of the famous and warlike
cities, Augsborough, Strasborough, Vlmes Magdeborough. etc. And when the
champions of the kingdom of darkness (under the conducte of the most
renowned Emperor Charles the fifth) seemed to renge the host of Israel under
a terrible victory: then did the Lord of hosts bestirre himself, and
frustrating the counsels, and dispersing the forces of his enemies, he
vanquished the troops of the Philistims by the Armed hand of his chosen
captain Maurice Duke of Saxoni: who vy the virtue of Martial prowess aided
by the Lord God of hosts, brake the teeth of the ungodly, and restored the
word of God to a free passage throughout all Germany. So did the Lord
prevail by Arms in Surike: by virtue of which also, wydened the passage of
his gospel into France, and by the force and power of one poor town, there
holds possession for his Sanctuary, maugre the might and malice of all his
enemies. This being the most glorious effects of Military industry in these
said countries, to the enlarging of Christ's kingdom for the salvation of
many, and comfort of the whole world: praise the invincible Arm of our God
mighty and victorious in battle: and see yet a greater work then all these,
now a doing by force of Arms for the civil liberty, and for the freedom of
true Religion in low Dutchelande: where the hand of the Lord has been so
apparent favorable, that in all the progress and success of these wars it
may be said: This is the work of the Lord our God, in the sight of all the
Heathen, and it is marvelous in our eyes. Let us therefore examine some part of
those affairs, and see how Jacob has prevailed in his wars by slow and
inexpert soldiers, against the most famous, arrogant, and implacable enemies
of the gospel of Christ: and then let the swinish fools that contemn martial
profession, stop their mouths and be ashamed. For the heavens do rejoice,
the world is comforted, and Israel shall be glad through ye victories of God,
purchased by the fidelity and prowess of his valiant men at arms.

When King Philip had wearied his good subjects of Philip, vexed low Duchland
low Duchland, with fained pacifications, in the advantage whereof the
defendants being taken unprovided and unarmed, were daily spoiled and
murdered, they fell to arms for public defense, and stood upon their guard:
but being overcome by the false promises of the faithless Regent, the Duches
of Parma, they accepted conditions of agreement, and while they rested upon the
same, came the Duke of Alua accompanied with chosen The duke of Alua his force.
forces, and took the country in charge, as Lieutenant to the King. He
planted his bands of war in all the strong towns and holds through out the
Low country: he apprehended the Counties of Horn, and Degremont, and
executed them as captains and chief pillars of the Mutiners. He builded the
Castle of Antwerp for mastering of that proud city, and renged all the whole
Land under fear and oppression, minding to bring the people under extreme
exactions, for the nourishment of their own plagues and servitude: I mean for
the maintenance of the kings forces and fortifications throughout, for the
holding of the people in subjection to what yoke or ordinances so ever should
be enforced upon them: Wherein the Duke missed the Tracte of that wisdom and
pollycie that was famed to be in him. For this tirannous porpose coming to
common appearance, then revolted the Holanders and Zelanders, God by an unlikely
host shows his migt
in an unlikely state to stand to their cause. But the Lord God of hosts
that had stirred up this quarrel, meaning to prove the force of his blow by an
unlikely host, against the troops of the proud and dreadful warriers his
enemies,) did show himself sufficient, able to confound the mighty by the
weak, the prudent by the foolish, the industrious by the slow, the
courageouse by the cowarde, ye glorious by the vile, the noble by the churl,
and the King by the vassale, the rich and imperial by the poor and servile
multitude: For comparison being consideratly made of the Holanders Hollanders
and zelanders against Philippe King of Spain.
and rude Zelanders with their King: he mighty in powers both by land and by
sea, standinge in continual redines: they weak and unprovided both for land
and water: he in renowned arms, strong, experimented, and politic: they
naked, and of al other their Kings people and subjects, contemned for their
natural slowenes, cowardice, ignorance, dronkenesse, and most unwarlike
spirits: the King infinite in artillarye, munitiones, treasures, and eke in
friends, lieutenantes, commanders, and martial bands of incomparable fame and
approved value: the mutiners easy to be exhausted of their money, unfurnished
of all habilementes of war, of trained Soldiers, and experimented Capteines,
and having their nearest neighbors, yea and them of their kindred and alience,
to be their most fyerse and noifull enemies. And in this unequal match to
enter war, it would have seemed a motion in the mutiners, proceedinge rather
of a desperate rage, then grounded upon any reasonable hope to prevail to any
other effect, then to the thraldom and confusion of themselves, and of their
posterity. How be it the Lord that commands his Soldiers, and capteines
that bear arms in the quarrel of truth and righteousness, not to fear the
multitude of their enemies: stood by the Hollanders in their honest cause, and
has justified their quarrel, and will maintain it to the end, as it seems
at this day. For he has in the behalf of that contemned people (nay rather
to make good the glory of his great name against the vanity of flesh and blood)
brought impossible things to a marvelous prooffe: Else could it not have come
to pass, that poor little and weak Vlushing, should Little Vlushing famished
strong Middleborough.
have famished and subdued the rich, large, and strong City of Middlebourgh,
aided by the rich and mighty towns of Antwerpe and Ansterdam, and eke of
Tregose, and Barowe: and guarded with 2000. approved Soldiers, under the
commandment of that famous Gentleman, Mont Darragon, who was driven by
distress of victuals (all the forces of the king being not able either to
relieve him or to succor him) to render up the town, departing from it with
1400 men of war in arms: whereby the whole Island of Walkeren came entirely
under the direction of the Prince of Orange, to the inspeakeable comfort of the
cause public. For by the benefit of this victory, ye Zelanders, utterly
vanquished the kings forces upon the Sea and bet him quite from it: whereby
the Brabanders and Flemings, The low country revolted from the Spaniards
were put from their fishing and traffike, other then under the courtesy of
the Zelanders: which so endamaged all the continent of the low country, that
the inhabitaunts finding themselves pressed in an extreme wrenche, betwixt the
wars of their neighbors, and the oppression of the Spanyardes: they fell in
conclusion to join hands with the mutiners, in a more convenient and a far
better policy, and in a more assured hope, that by a general consent in
Arms, they might redeem their country from the power of ye oppressers, and
drive the Spaniards with their adherents out of the land: then to nourish the
wars against their neighbors, in whose discomfiture and subversion stood the
thraldom of them all: in whose victory, the liberty and desired restitution
of the one and of the other should rest assured. Hereupon proceeded the
general revolt of all the low cuntrie, yea rather enforced by the good
success and prowess of the Hollanders and Zelanders, then willingly accepted
of them of Flanders, Brabant, The good success of the Holanders and zelanders,
caused the rest of the countries to join with them
and of other Countries, for any free zeal to the cause public. But blind
were the hearts of them that did not see, that the Prince of Orange and his
poor vnexperimented adherents, were the very Army of the Lord God of hosts,
who will never fail to break the Jaws of his adversaries, turning their
wisdom to folly, and their glory to shame: which was fully accomplished in
the Duke of Alua, that dreadful and renowned chieftaine of the Papists. For
had not he been overcome with a very tirannous madness, he would not have
entered his government in Belgia with oppression, murder, pillage, and
intolerable decrees, upon the people that were (by easier prouocations then
these, stirred and ready to break out in Arms) in mind rather to dye in the
field for the defense of their ancient liberties (so dearly purchased and
defended by the blood of their forefathers) then to yield themselves and their
posterity under the heavy yoke, and arrogant domination of so implacable
people, as be the Spanyardes: which might well have been considered in the
wisdom of the Duke of Alua, but that God blinded him with the might of his
Prince, and the opinion of himself, that if this whole Country of low
Ducheland, should in general consent fall to Arms, and withstand their Prince
by vyolence, and that they were not to be reduced to obedience, but by
extreme wars, and infinite charges: after much blood and spoil of the land,
the King should reduce them to his yoke and subjection by the sword: that even
so, and by that wearisome and cruel means, he must ever after retain them
and their posterity in his obedience: which would be an intolerable charge to
him, and would set down a continual pillage and oppression upon the
Subjects: whereof should ensue the orderly decay of the common wealth, and
nourishe a perpetual malice in the people against their Sovereign Lord, and
continually prick them to tumultes: which at the last, should either set them
free and reject their Prince, or else utterly confound them by the increase of
their tyranny and miserable servitude, which also would eat the king out of
his inheritance. But had the Duke called to memory how apt this nation has
been in old time to fall to war in quarrel of their liberties, and for
defense of their ancient compositions: and how they shook of the tyrannous
Sovereignty of the French kings (yet more gentle and profitable then this of
the Spaniards) and how dearly and painefully the French kings have in times
past forced their obedience, and could not, but were at the last, after much
wars and many bloody victories, quite shut out: he would have endeavored his
wisdom and labor to reconcile them by mollifying the government, and by
gracious gentleness and bounty, rather then proudlye to press down the yoke
that had already Tyranny abhored of God ^ man.
wearied them: which cannot prosper, nor long endure: for the Lord God in his
Justice hates tyranny, and destroys tyrants from the face of the earth: and
usually destroys the root and branche of every cruel grinder of the faces
of the poor, and casts him of for evermore.

And farther, he fell into this oversight: that he exceeded so far in the
proportion of the kings charges, by fortifications, and superfluous supplies:
above all the levy and receiptes that were to come in, by all the pillage,
duties, and lones that he could devise: that he ran indebted to the men of
war, above xxxiij. Months pay, whereby the soldiers became disordered
spoylers: and at the last so mutinous, that the Spanyardes forced their pay,
and bound the Duke to shameful conditions, and for his last farewell he was
forced to keep his lodging under guard, and durst not present himself openly
to the men of war at his departure out of Belgia, until the Commander Don Jews
de Requezes the new lieuetenant, had given his promise, in the words of the
king, and set down an order for the soldiers full pay.

With these errors he joined many faults in the direction and pursuit of these
wars: which turned to the advantage of the poor defendauntes, but much to the
disgrace and discredit of himself. Immediately upon the getting of Harlam, and
the horrible massacher there done: the The siege of Harlam
Spaniards mutined for their pay: and putting away their co^manders and
officers of sworn loyalty, they chose unto themselves a coronel, captains, and
other officers, and at the opening of the day, they took up their ensigns and
marched toward the walls of Harlam, and making upon them that guarded the
vnrepaired breaches of the same, they drove the^ to abandon their charge, and
fol^^^^^d the^ with match in the cock into ye market place: and there Monseur
Lamot and don Julius Rhomero (who with five ensigns of footmen possessed and
guarded the town) being assembled with their companies, departed with their
people, leaving ye town to the possession of the mutiners: which standing
stiffely upon the demand of their full pay, and finding the Duke slow and
ouersterne to yield to the same, they fained that they would keep the town
to the use of the States of Holland, and the prince of Orange: and that they
would surrender it to Monseur Delorge: which brought the Duke into such a
perplexity, that he passed conditions with the mutiners: such as danted his
glory and hautinesse, more then any one matter that ever happened to him in all
his life.

Thus was he impeched, and could not, neither did he seem to be desirons to
follow the opportunity that ye victory over Harlam did present, to the great
advancement of his service, had he followed it with like industry and
expedition: For the terror of that atchiuement, and eke of the overthrow of
the countey Batenburgh with the Princes army, had opened unto him all the Gates
in Holland, had he hotly pursued the advantage given.

After he had reconciled the mutiners, and set al things in order in Harlam,
he went forth to beset Alkemer: where he arrived upon ye day of a great fair
holden in the town: which was therefore filled with the country The duke of
Alua by a tempest driven from the seege of Alkemer.
people young and old, and with catle, without guard of men of war, without
store of victuales, or of any other habilements of war: saving ye Captein
Richauor through great peril and industry entered ye town with 500. men of
war. The Duke battered ye town in soundry places, and assaulted it fearcely,
and was repulsed: he commanded the second assault, and as ye Spaniards made
toward the wall, there fell a very terrible tempest of hail rain wind and
thunder, that so danted and the Soldiers, that refusing the service they
turned upon their Commanders, and would not forward: for the former attempts
were dearly bought. The Duke seeing the Capteins to sley their own soldiers
for their disobedience, commanded retrait, and so ye assailants returned to
their lodgings, minding to gather better courage against ye next day: But the
tempest continewed all that night, and powered down such abundance of rain, yt
by ye morning, their cheef enchamping ground was al under water, and most of
the pieces that battered, lay suncken up to the axiltree, and for the softnes
of the ground might not then by no means be recovered. Wherevpo^ ye Duke
dislodged himself, and encamped farther from ye town in a dry soil, from
whence also within a few days he removed quite away, after that he had spente
full six weeks in that siege to his great loss and dishonor: for by that day
that he gave it over, the Town was not victualled for six days.

This was the Dukes last attempt in Holland, and this his repulse much hardened
and encouraged the Hollanders to stand fast in their cause.

He had so far exhausted the Kings Treasure and his own money, that he
borrowed. 12000. gylderns of The duke of Alua unto his last trump
his host in Amsterdam, to bear his charges into Spain. Thus this great Duke
that came into Belgia so glorious and dreadful, is daunted and returned into
Spain with shame and discredit.

Then succeeded in his charge, Don Jews de Requezes great Co^mander of
Castile: who practicing to mingle hypocrisy and blood in one drift and
policy, (that was to snare and to confound the Prince of Orange) he
prevailed in both less then he hoped. For he could no more prevail against
Israel, then did Fernando de Toledo. Duringe his government, was the Kings
nauey and all his forces by sea quite vanquished and broken. First as they
relieved Midleburgh by Estecaple under the conduct of S. de Beuoys: in which
exploit perished viii. or ix. ships great and small.

At the conflict by Rhomers wall, the Papists making forth to the fight, under
the government of Julius Rhomero: they were discomfited with the loss of xvi.
or xvii. boats of war, and above 1500. of their most chosen Soldiers: where
that valiant Julius flyinge the terror of the Zelanders, hardely saved his
life, recovering to land by a Scute, where also the Commander stood lookinge
on the fight with a cross in his hand, and a Friar at the right side of him,
prayinge together for the good success of the batell: wherein it appeared that
the Lord heard them not, yet were the Zelanders sore spente and weakened,
with ix. weeks cold winter lyinge on shippeboorde, thinnely clothed, and as
thinnely dieted, with brown bread, cheese, read heringes and small beer, in
all points inferior to their ennemies: but God was with ye poor, against the
proud and mighty: to him be the glory and the praise.

Upon Whitsondaye next folowinge, ye Zelanders invaded and spoiled the rest of
the Kings nauey in the river of Andwerpe. The Papists once beseeged the city
of Leyden for the space of six months, and prevailing not, they departed.
Now being informed that the Town was unfurnished of men of war, and none
would receive, and vnstored of victualles and none would provide, but rejected
the commandment of the Prince in both these points, they come again, and
shut up the unarmed city with such forces, that the prince and states were not
able to make any reasonable attempt to succor the distressed Town by land:
which made them to fall in devise to drown the country, preparinge an Armada,
of small boats well appointed for The Lord provides for the zelanders contrary
to expectation.
the purpose: which after dificult passage on the most part of their way,
were stalled at Sonterwold xi. days in wanne hope for want of water to carry
the^ through their appointed voyage. The Admiral Boysot having one day
dispatched a post to the Prince lying at Delft, with letters to certify his
exellencie of the untowardness of their attempt: the beseged in that while,
destitute of al manner of victuals, were in an inclination to talk for
compositiones with the enemy. But the Lord that would bring them to
understand how much he was on their side, and ever at hand with them that
faithfully trust in him, in the same very night next folowinge the said
dispatch of the post with the Admirals comfortelesse letters to the Prince, and
when that all their councelles were shut up in a hopeless dungel, came a
mighty wind from the North West, which drove the Ocean sea to run in at
the sluices and breaches of the sea walls so violently, that in the drift of
one tide, the water was flowed up three foot and a half deep, where it was
not a shaftment deep, at the dispatch of the said post. Then did the Admiral
so besturre him, that he the next forenoone dislodged them of the first scoute,
and so them of Leiden Dam, and of Leiden Dorp: and so terrified all the
ennemies dispersed in scouts, to the number of 12000* men of war, that they
ran away from all their standinges, and abandoned the siege, in a flyinge
fear. And the Admiral poursuinge the occasion with great industry and courage,
arrived with his shallowe and vitorious navy at the walls of the hungry
Town. And forthwith sent aduertisements to the Prince of this most happy and
unlooked success, within xxiiii. hours of the former contrary letteres. And
this was a wonderful work of God, by the hands of a people, erst slow,
fearful and vnwarrelike: and now (by the exercise of Arms, and conduct of
the General commander of all Armies) industrious, hardye, and vanquishers of
the most warrelike. Here is to be noted for a wonderful work of God also. In
the very night that the wind so served the point, to drive the floodde over
the land, 200. pases of the wales of the besieged City fell into the ditch,
with such a noise as terrified ye ennemies, as it had been the noise and stir
of the adversaries cominge in a Camisado, which made the Papists to fly
their places, to the discomfiture of all them that were in the farther scoutes,
assaulted by the Admiral and his people, and so ran all away without any
reasonable cause why, other then the fear that God struck in their hearts. God
also provided further for the miraculous preservation of that Town: that where
at the first pitchinge of the siege, they made proportion of their victualles
but for two months, according to the number within: the Lord sent a plague
that diminished of the^ six thousand and more: and so leaving not above seven
hundredth able men to wear Arms, the victuals served for six months: but
xv. days before the succors came, they were universally without bread within
the town, and two or three days without any manner of food: yet were not ye
faithful and valiant Bourgars weery of their parts: so dear is civil
liberty, and so terrible and odious is irksome servitude and oppression to
honest and manly hearts. Then followed, the surprise of Schonehouen, Olderkyrk.
etc. by the Papists: and inuadinge also the Island of Zeland called Scowen,
where at their entry, perished ye noble and faithful gentleman Charles Boysot
General governor for the Prince in Zeland, being hurt with the shot of one
of his own people. They besieged Bomenyer, a little village fortified at the
sodeyne by the country men, who had to their aid and defense of the place,
Capteyne Hook and two hundredth Germans, who together with the valiant Boores
(newely made martialists) so approved their prowess and fidelity, that they
all (saving five men) spent their lives in resistinge the fierce assaults of
the ennemies, which at the sixth assault recovered the place, where many a
worthy Soldier of the Spanyardes perished, to the number of 3000* and
vpwardes: among which were some such special Capteines and Gentelmen, as the
loss of them brake the very heart of the famous Marquis Vittello, whereupon the
Commander made a vow, that he would never more attempt to win town in
Hollande or Zelande by force of assault.

Zurickesea being also surprised by the Papists (a Zuriksea surprised, by the
Papists.
town full of corrupt Papists, and common whores) the Hollanders and
Zelanders began to doubt of their matters: and greatly to fear the
forewardenesse and success of their ennemies: and distrusting their own state
and value, they labored for to obtain aid and confederacy abroad: where
they found such cold comfort, that they might well say. Non est Salus in
filijs hominum. Whilst they stood yet reeling and could not find a sure
ground to rest upon, the Lord that in this manner does use to try ye faith of
his people (and finds little in flesh and blood but fear and distrust in
God) awakened, and wrought for himself: and at a moment altered so the state
of things that the Commander being dead, the Duke of Arskot, the county
Meusfeelde and Monseur Barliamount, entered the Government civil and martial,
until the King sent thither the Lord John of Austria: who at his first coming
The duke of Austria his fond and false devise failed him.
behaved himself so sweetly, that he would seem of faithful intent and
deuior to reduce the commonwealth to peace, concord, and obedience, by
gentleness and liberal dealing: and upon this devise, passed couenantes of
reconciliation through al: for the credit and accomplishement whereof, he
forced himself to swerve from al reasonable policies, in drawinge the
Spanyardes and the bands of war out of the strong places, in abandoning the
Castle of Andwerp, in remouinge the Kings forces out of all the low country,
in executinge certain Spanyardes, in concluding himself to do nothing
without the consent of the States, in the government civil or martial, in
ratifying the pacification of Gannt: In all which drifts he meant to illude the
States, and to dare the Prince of Orange (as a lark) til he had snared them al
in his power, and then to execute his bloody intention: which the Lord God
frustrated, turning this wise platte of the Papists, to the utter overthrow
of their porpose, and to the everlasting shame and discredit of the Lord
John: who by this fondly fette devise, shut himself out of all, and dying
vanquished by his own folly and slowenes, he is for ever shrouded with this
opinion amongst wise men, that he was very void of deep policies, of
martial prowess, and eke of military industry, and so let him rest with Don
Lewys. Their bosting pride and malice is at an end, and the Lord God of hosts
proceeds in his wars, and so shall he confound and consume al his enemies
from the face of the earth: prosper and advance his name, his truth, and
glory, and make the Crown of his anointed to floorish, by the hands of his
men of prowess, and by the value of his armed martialistes, by whose labor
and industry he has wrought and done al these things before our eyes, and we
behold them even in our bedes. Praise God therefore, and give honor to his
faithful Soldiers: and let the coueteous merchant, and the ambitious lawier
leave of his drudgerie for greedy lucre, despise the delicacie of his belly,
and dassh ye wantonness of his eyes, and cast his idol out of his seruil heart:
that is, senseles avarice, and put on Arms, and furnishe himself with policy
and warlike Prowess, if he will justly be numbered amongst the people of
nobleness and honor.

Having said somewhat concerning military profession and military men in
general, now behooves it to describe what kind of man is worthy of the name
of a martialist, what men did proffesse and exercise this occupation in old
time, now do, and hereafter must: and eke to distinguishe betwixt Soldier and
Soldier: The qualities of military men.
that the profession in his self nature and quality may stand vnattaynted
before the malignant and foolish adversary, and walk freely delivered from
the scourfe and corruptions of ye lewd multitude yt vante themselves of
Souldiership, that through their vileness, do give matter to the rotten and idle
bellies to deprave, and so to despise martial Arms, that in their servile
discretion they judge it a discredit for an honest man to be a soldier.

The man that loves right and honoreth justice, is fit to be ye defendor of
the same: he yt is merciful to ye poor, and pitieth the afflicted, is a meet
man to succor his country nation and against the violence of tirantes and
oppressors: he that loves the habitationes of the just, and the prosperity of
ye righteous: he yt tendereth ye widow and the fatherles: he that delights
to se science, social amity, and virtue to floorishe in his country, divine
Who is to be accomted a right soldier.
honor advanced, faith, peace, and equity to reign in every fellowship, and
hates covetousness, robbery, theft, extortion, brawlinges, striffe, murder,
fornication, idleness and dronkenesse, that man is worthy and fit to be a
Soldier. For the first foundation and use of Arms was erected of necessity,
to restreine and to repress the violent cruelty, and beastly disorder of men,
and to establishe social peace and Justice upon earth: which else could have
had neither seat nor possession in the world, for that the nature of man is so
euel, and his heart so perverse that there is no mean to bridle his furies, and
to hold him any while in a peaceable order, but by fear of corporal
punishment. For how unwilling man is naturally to be subject to the rule
and direction of an other, and to suffer an examiner of his offenses, and to
minister stripes for the same, that woteth every heart of flesh in his own
feeling and understanding. The power therefore and wisdom, to reform and to
govern people is absolutely given of God, for the benefit and preservation of
mankind, established and vpholden by force of Arms, as the mean, judged
fittest in the heauenely wisdom, to preserve and to govern this rude and
rebellious world.

The chief man therefore of military order, is each sovereign prince in his
state and government. He being a man complet in all the virtues and
conditions that are behoofull to one of that charge and proffession: shall
pass full fraighted of love and honor, and rest in glory and praise upon
earth, as the Sun in the firmament.

The office and charge of every soueriegne majesty in general, is to minister
justice, for the maintenance of right and domestical peace amongst his
people, and eke to defend the same from intestine and foreign violence. For the
true accomplishement whereof, this Prince or cheefteine, must be furnished with
prudence to consider the state and nature of all parts and particulars
pertaining to the commodity and advancement of the health and wealth of his
people, private, and public: and accordingly to provide to establishe and to
continue the same.

For as he is the head of his people, so must he be their wisdom, their
light, and their example: and look The prince should be an example to his
people*
what equity, what modesty, what temperance, what use and exercises of virtue
he would should reign and dwell in his people, of the same must he himself
be the very springing Fountain, running in continual streams throughout all
his Regiment: In vulgus enim manant exempla regentum. The Commons do follow,
as they have their ruler for a guide. But seeing that corruption does stick so
fast in flesh and blood, that neither Prince nor vassal can be without
imperfections: we must allow more liberty of infirmities, in the city then
in the field.

For as the Armed host is the extreme remedy to chastise, and to repress
the insolency, injuries, and* offenses Vices in soldiers must strongly be
brideled.
of others, so should the regiment of war be free from the same: and every
vice in a Soldier strongly bridled and extremely punished. So did and do all
Cheiftaines that ever prevailed, or shall prevail by Arms, and be renowned in
Military prowess. For where corruption and liberty is suffered in a
Soldier, there is the shame and confusion of Arms. Precise Discipline
therefore, is the ordinary nourse of honorable warfare: whereby the Proverb
(no less wise then it is old) is also profitable, as it is most true, He
that is fit for the Chapel, is meet for the field. And whereas Arms are
most in use and be best governed, there are the virtues and worthiness of the
mind had most in exercise and honor. Whereof it follows, that the
Cheeftaine must be wise in counsel, temperate in life, affable in speech,
faithful in words, courteous in greeting, wakefull in charge, provident in
peril, abstinent in diet, continent in life, apt to traueile, prudent and
courageous in Battle, constant in wisdom, prowess, and virtue: bountiful to
the worthy, amiable to the honest, severe to the wicked, gracious to the
afflicted, and merciful to the Captive, modest in victory, and constant in
magnanimity, not fearing the frailetie of warlike state and prosperity, nor
drowping under the alteration of the same: Such a prince is a complete
Martialist. Such was Jupiter Jupiter Belus:
Belus, that first repressed by force of Arms, the furious cruelty, and
ragious insolency of men, and subdued many people to the authority of civil
government, laying thereby the foundation of the Empire of Syria: whereof
proceeded such a benefit to mankind, that he was esteemed and honored as a
sovereign God amongst the Gentiles. So was Hercules of Lybia, that for Hercules.
to chastise the tyrannous Girones that usurped and oppressed Spain, took his
voyage out of his country into Spain and destroyed them: And after his
return, came Cacus out of Italy and molested Spain, which brought Hercules
again: who vanquishing the robber, redeemed the land and people, restoring
them to civil peace and liberty: whereby he purchased divine honor amongst
the heathen.

Such also was Cyrus King of Persia. Such was Alexander the great, til he began
to wax idle (as not having whereupon to exercise his prowess) and to give
over his life to drunkenness and incontinency. Such was Philippe the Father
of Alexander. Such was Agesilaus: Themystocles, Simon, Aristides, and other
most famous Captains amongst the Greeks. Such were the Metelli, the Fabij,
the Scipiones, and such was Pompeius: and many other most renowned Cheefteynes
amongst the Romans.

Such was Mythridates the most valiant and warlike king of Pontus: and such was
Pyrrhus king of Epyrus.

Such was Julius Caesar, the most worthy and best renowned martialist of the
world. Such were also Octauius Augustus, Marcus Anthonius Pius, Alexander
seuerus: and many other renowned Emperors, kings, and Cheefteins amongst the
old heathen. And by these virtues they prospered in Arms, and became great in
the world: and under the government, nourishment, and protection of them,
flowrished science, honest exercises, and civil policies.

Amongst the Israelites and Christians are also to be remembered in dutiful
love and honor, many Emperors, kings and princes, endued with plenty of
high and most noble virtues, and as they excelled in Israelites that excelled
in Arms.
Arms, so were they rich in wisdom and goodness, to the great benefit of the
world, to the everlasting praise of themselves, and eke to the glorious relief
and advancement of the knowledge and honor of God upon earth: which without
the zeal, industry, wisdom and prowess of noble princes had been in hazard
to make utter shipwreck many hundredth years past. And of these, are chiefly to
be renoumed with sacred reverence, and perpetual thansgiuing to our good God,
Moses, the first ruler and captain of the special people and Army of the Lord
God of hosts. Then Joshua. Othniel, Gedeon, Samson, Iephthe Samuel, and Deborah
the woman. The^ David, the most acceptable and worthy captain and prophet, gods
special and chosen king over his people Israel, by whose mighty value and
martial prowess, ye Lord stretched forth the kingdom of Jacob, to the promised
bounds: and being a terror to the enemies of Israel abroad, and a chastiser of
the rebels and hypocrites at home he, stablished peace and Justice in Israel,
and applied his wisdom, zeal, travail and treasure to advance the honor,
truth, and true worshipping of God and his covenant in all the common wealth
of Israel: which he pursued with such endeavor and integrity of heart, that all
things so prospered in his hand to the glory of the Lord, and to the health
and wealth of Israel: that (in that respect) the Lord said: that He had found
David his servant, a man after his own heart.

Such also were Zedekiah, Iosaphat, and Josias, renowned in the Scriptures of
God.

With these are to be numbered (though not in that preeminencie) many Princes
of the Christians, greatly endued with wisdom, civil virtues, and prowess:
which ever go together, woorking the effect of peace and prosperity, in all
places where they dwell in use and power. Amongst such are chiefly to be named
Constantine the great, Charles the great, and many more Emperors of the old
time: and now lately, Charles the fifth: neither is the last Ferdinando cast
out of the Kings of high prowess and virtues.
Catalogue of good Princes: for he was very learned, desirous of peace, meek,
and modest, and liberal to honest deserts.

Of the French kings, many were of high prowess virtues and value, and great
nourishers of iberall Sciences. As were Charles martel, Jews the pitious,
Philip Augustus, the holy Jews, Philippe the fair, Philippe de Valois. John,
Charles the fifth. Charles the sixth, a very sufficient Prince till he became
Lunatike, Charles the seventh, Jews the eleventh, Charles the eyghth, Jews
the twelfth, and Frances renowned for his prowess, modesty, prudence, and for
his affection and advancement of lerning, commonly called, The Father of
Sciences. Then succeeded his Son King Henry, a prince of high value in
Cheualrie, gracious to his people, and bountiful to his friends, and very
ready to gratify the deserts of men, and to advance men of worthiness, and
in Arms most valiant.

And considering what rebellious and furious people the French are: it is to be
wondered, that the prudence and industry of their kings was continually able
to repress to refourm, and to reconcile so mutinous and rageous a nation, as
they have alwais showed themselves to be, molesting, vexing, and spoiling the
King, the gonernement, and commonwealth, by peopetuall vprores, continuing in
Arms. Pillage, murders, horrible massachres and disloyalty (in some ages)
three score years together. As in the days of King John, Charles the fifth,
Charles the sixth, and Charles the seventh, which approves great fidelity,
prowess, and prudence, in the gentlemen, nobility, and bands of war: by
whose value, so implacable and mad rebels could be repressed and the state
reformed.

Of the Kings of England been also many renowned Renowned Kings of England.
amongst the good Princes: And he of them that exceeded in military feats and
prowess, the same verily (as I have often said) excelled also, in wisdom,
justice, and civil virtues. As did Arthur amongst the Brutes. Edmonde, Edgar,
Athelston, Edward and Edward amongste the Saxons. And since the conquest:
William the conqueror himself, Henry the second, Richard the first, Edward the
first, Edward the third, Henry the fifte, and Henry the seventh, and Henry
the eighte.

Of Spain King Pellaro: and some others: but lastely and chiefly Fernando the
fifth, the first entire Monarch of Spain, that by his noble wisdom and
passinge value in Arms, recovered the kingdom of Granado from the Mores:
took the kingdom of Naples, held Sicilia in peace, and possessed the Indias.

The Charles, that advanced the honor and state of Spain to the full sum: by
virtue of military industry and martial prudence, became renowned among the
most warrelike Princes of the world.

Now omitting the famous Kings and Princes of other countries and nations,
for that I have inferred authorities sufficient in force and number, to
approve and to magnify the praise of Arms: and to avoid more tediousness
then here needs: I will sum up the Catalogue of renowned Princes, with the
sacred memory of them that are most worthy to be praised among Renowned
princes of our age.
the Christians of these days, for the incomparable value of their prowess
and wars, as due unto the special martialists of the Lord God of hosts, by
whose Arms, he did put in foot to fight with Satan in plain battle, for the
recovery of his holy Sanctuary, that lay many a tedious year trodden under
the feet of Antichrist: and erst durst not be attempted, till the Lord had
provided his Army, and appointed his Cheefteynes of courage, faith, and
Military prudence, fit for the wars of Jacob. As were Frederick, John, and
Maurice, the renowned Princes in honor, chivalry, and virtues, Dukes of
Saxoni: Philippe Lantgraue of Hesse: Albert Marquis of Brandenbourgh,
Christopher Duke of Wyrtembergh, the warlike and faithful states of Germany
and Zurik. The Nobility of France, and above them al, William, Earl of Nassau,
the virtuous, good, and happy Prince of Orange. By virtue of the faith,
industry, and prowess, of these sacred martialists, is the gospel, and
kingdom of Christ Jesus, brought again to their passage, and freely preached
to the world, an inspeakable comfort and riches to al mankind, and that
specially to the elect children of God, to whom be praise, Amen.

These Military men being the most renowned, the most sacred, beneficial, and
profitable personages of the world: to the world, and to all that dwell, and
have dwelled upon earth, and that by warlike industry: It must be granted,
that al their assistants, and adherents: by whose labors, perils, blood, and
valiancie, the great effects of Arms have been wrought: must be comprehended
in the fame, and honor of their Princes, as a matter justly to be imparted to
every one, according to the value of his worthiness: wherein the Romans used
orderly distributions of aduanceme^t, and graces to each on, as the prowess and
nobleness of the Soldiers deserved.

The nature and due honor, of Military profession being such: what means
the vulgar multitude of the English Nation, so maliciously to contemn
soldiership, and so bravely to despise the profession of Arms, as a vile, and
damnable occupation? Surely, because they are of servile and unnoble hearts:
foolish in discretion, idle bellies, careless of the commonwealth of their
country, little friendly to mankind in general, and less zealous toward the
glory and preservation of their Sovereign Prince and government. Now be it
they may seem to void this rebuke with a slight, in denying to contemn
Military profession: for they honor the, profession, and do accordingly
esteem of all them that worthily pursued the same: But to despise the common
sort Dissolute soldiers ar worthily despised.
of our Country men that go to war, of purpose more to spoil, then to
serve: and as under color of pursuit of Arms, they put themselves to the
liberty and use of swearing, dronkenes, shameless fornication, dicing, and
Theeuery, in slow wars, and under loase government in the tumultuous state
of a foreign nation, where they think it a foolish scrupulositie, to use
either tenderness of conscience, or yet any honest manners: So do they return
into their Country, so much corrupted with all manner of evils, that they seem
rather to come from hell, then from the exercise of warlike arms, or from the
regiment of military discipline: and therefore so venomous a brood to their
native country (standing in civil peace and government) that they are rather
to be vometed out of the bulk of the common wealth, then to be nourished in
the same. To contemn such (say they) yea, to abhor them as ye shame of martial
arms, and to cut them of, as ye most infectiue nest of domestical society, is
both honest and necessary by all civil, and divine policy, and discretion. And
as for those that are worthily called martialistes, bearing the true form and
substance of military men, they (say our people) are highely to be esteemed and
maineteyned as the honorable and necessary members of the state public.

If the contemners of martial Arms did keep themselves within the compass
of these reasones and discretion, they could not be justly reproved: for the
wicked in his wickedness is not to be defended, because he professes chiualry,
or because he is a divine. Let the evil therefore bear the blame and shame of
his The profession of Arms is honorable though some professors stand rightly
unreproved.
own trespass, and let the profession that is honorable in it self nature,
go vnuiolat, though all the professors of the same should stand rightly
reproved. If all the Preachers of the word of truth and salvation were corrupt
bellies: yet stands the heavenly doctrine true and perfect in his own
quality. Military occupation does execute the high Justice of God upon earth,
though all the followers of the same were most horrible and wicked (as the
greater number of the^ is) yet must the occupation by it self property stand
honorable in the world, as the two edged sword of the Lord God of hosts, to
whom al Scepters and swords do perteine, and by his power and direction are
used to effect.

Now let us examine the matter to try whether these contemners do directly
despise the very self profession of Arms, or not. If they do not, then do
they favor it: and grantinge it to be commendable and necessary, they desire
to practice the use thereof in their domestical pastymes and exercises: they
covet the company of such as can instruct them in the same: they are provided
of habilements for the purpose, they love honest Soldiers, and are frendely to
them: they put themselves forth to the public show and practice before the
presence of the royal majesty and the nobility: they strive in emulation to
excel in the redines and knowledge of Military order, and in the use of their
weapons: they desire to serve against the intestine disturbers of the State
public, and covet to fight against the inuaders of their country: and are
liberal in contributing to the charges of wars. But when the prince
commands Musters through the realm in city, town, and country, and to
appointe selecte people to be numbered and divided into bands, for to be
practiced and exercised in the use and order of Arms, that thereby the realm
may be the better furnished of Military men for the field, and thereby stand
in the more assurance if need of war shall happen: for the host of an
unskillful multitude in Arms, is before an Army of experimented warriors, as
a flock of sheep before a troop of wolves: which consideration should move
honest hearts fervently to desire to be of profitable value for this
occupation: wherein consists the preservation of the sovereign majesty, and
of the state public: and consequently of every particular state and person
comprehended in the same.

If then I say, the rural man, by bribes, by a liuerie Contemners of Arm
Coat, by frank labored friendship, by counterfaite sickensse, or by
starting from his house under color of far business, does shifte himself
from the ordinances of the prince, in so high and provident direction: he is
not only to be counted a contemner of Arms, but is also (whether he be
gentleman, or yeoman) to be rebuked with discredit, either as a slothful
cowarde, or else to be punished with stripes, as a traitorous contempner of his
sovereign prince and country. If the citizen or townesman, do inlike wise put
forth his apprentice, his servant, or poor hireling, to supply his place, and
to withdraws his own person from the royal ordinances being himself of
commendable sufficiency in body had it an honest heart) he is to be noted,
either a fearful cowarde, and dare not deal with Arms, or else a slothful
beast, or else in the abundance of his wealth, in the height of his proud
countenance, or in the opinion of his gravity: a dispiser of so contemtible a
state, as to march with a Calieuer, or a Pike on his back in the ranks of
poor soldiers (men stripped in light clothes, bearing their tools in their
hands, ready at every moment to be offered up in the praise of martial
prowess, for the service of their prince and country) and consequently,
disdaineth the profession, and bears a faint courage toward his sovereign
prince and country: and therefore not to be accepted amongst the men of sound
loyalty, and honorable The description of them that be no lovers of Arms.
value: no though his riches be never so much. He (whatsoever state or
profession he be of) yt has liver bestow five pou^des on a superfluous banquet,
to fill ye gluttonish wombs of greasy swine ye are over fat, rather the^ a
shilling on a destitute soldier: he is no lover of Arms.

He that will rather bestow ten thousand pound on a purchase, then give his
xl. s. toward the furnishing of an honest minded poor gentleman to the wars:
the same is no lover of Arms.

He that sees a man of good ablenes, distressed with nakedness, and hunger,
begging his relief, and wandering in miseries, without home or harborogh? and
rather then he will comfort them with a Testone, would bestow five pon^ds on the
lyning of a so^mer gown, and five thousand pou^des to purchase leases over the
heads of the poor, and to build up old rotten tenements of the new, yt he
may enhance the rents thereof: that fellow is no lover of arms, but a
caterpiller in the orchards, and a noyfull swine in the meddowes of the commonwealth of his country.

He that will rather bestow a hundredth pou^ds on building of a banketting house
in his garden, then a hundredth shillings in a subsidy to aid the charges of
his prince in the affairs of his country: the same surely, (if any such be in
England) is no lover of Arms: neither has he any fancy to military exercise.

He that had rather hang twenty able men for small offenses (forced through the
extreme oppression of miserable want) then to relieve on distressed body, and
to plant him in state to live without evil shifts: surely the same man is no
lover of Arms. For he that loves Arms, loves men also: and he that
acknowledges the honor and value of warlike profession, will be tender over the
lives of men: and will therefore open his purse to help the distressed: lest
through want he fall to evil and perdition.

Look so many of our nation as are tainted with these faults, and such like,
are conte^ners of arms, and consequently no faithful friends or lovers of
their prince and country, and likewise improuident toward their own private
state: The estate of that country is ruinous that is not able to stand in
Arms.
for where ye commonwealth is in hazard, there ye coward and the covetous are
in one assurance: and where ye state public makes wrack, there does perish ye
lover of himself, and the foolish contemner of arms also. For the state and
nation that is not able to stand in arms, and to vanquish the rage and power of
both intestine and foreign violence, ye same is sure to be revenged under the
oppression and lust of the spoilers, at one time or other: and then go al
things to hauock, the gold of the covetous, and the money of the usurer, the
deintye wife, and the tender daughter, ye delicate son made a slave, ye proud
and rich father laden with gives, clothed with vermin, and fed with penury, and
beaten with stripes, til he gree to redeem himself with a greater ransom then
he is ever able to satisfy. The gay houses with the winter parlours, and
summer parlours, with the inner Chambers, and the utter, consumed with flames,
and the whole City with fire: their streets and fields lying covered with
the dead carkeises of them that contemned prowess, and had Arms in derision:
the wives and children wandering harbourlesse without honor, or succor,
bestow their carkeises amongst the ashes, and ruins of their desolate
habitations, and in the Bushes, the infant likewise with his mother, starve
with hunger and nakedness. These dreadful matters, made ye wise
Lacedaemonians, to bring up al their youth in hard diet, thinnely clothed,
poorly bedded: extreemely The Lacedemonias bringing up.
holden in the practice of difficult feats, in labor of the body, in the
feats of actiuitie, and under the practice and rudimentes of military weapons
and orders: that in all points they might be perfectly fashioned for the wars.

The like considerations made the Romans to pursue the exercise of war (for
many years at the foundation of their state) without wages or stipende: and
whilst they did grow, there was never Citizen in Rome esteemed noble for his
riches, but for his prudence and prowess. Nay, the man of Rome that omitted
arms, and became a merchant, for gathering of abundance of riches, was rather
reckoned amongst the servant, then esteemed as a very Roman.

The French also do not esteem a merchant worth thousands, so much as they do
a valiant soldier not worth a Testone in wealth. So in Germany, and likewise
in Spain, howbeit, the Lawier, and Merchant, the Rustique, and Clearke, that
by honest bounty and friendly grace toward Martialistes, do show them selves
to be lovers of arms, and to honor warlike prowess: are in their vocation
greatly to be worshipped and praised. But the merchauntes and Lawyers of most
countries in the continent, think not so to satisfy the desire of their own
credit and estimation, or so to accomplish their bounden loyalty toward the
state public: that by their favor and liberality toward men of war, it
were seemly and lawful for them to withdraw themselves from the pollice and
use of arms: and therefore do labor to be skillful in the use of warlike
weapons, and in the policies eke, and orders of the war, and stand) each
according to his ability) always furnished for the feelde, as the merchants, and
Citizens in high Almaine, are horsemen: the Artificers are footmen. Neither
do the citizens of high Almaine, that are of segnioritie and worship, ever
walk abroad in the streets, without their Swords by their sides: For where
the men of chief rule and creditte in a city, do leave of the usual wearing
of domestical weapons, within their own jurisdictions, there seems the state
or city to be vanquished and subdued to an Armed ruler, that for avoiding of
mutinies and rebellions, forbids the inhabitants to bear any Armorie.

Well, this discourse may seem more tedious then available: for it is hard
to teach an old horse to manach: so is it nothing hopeful, to see the secure
rustikes, and dayntie citizens of England, faithfully to favor the pursuit of
Arms, much less to practice the use and skill thereof: For say they, it
belongs not unto them, neither does the state of our Country (and as they
hope it shall not) stand in any such need, that men of credit, of worship,
and of wealth, should be driven to enter the occupations of Soldiers: for
their purses shall serve the turn.

If they will answer men so, I will reason a little They that make shifts not
to bear armor are corrupted with three vices.
farther with them, letting then to understand more plainly, the improuidence
and straightness of their hearts: for these reproueable shifts cannot
proceed but from a mind specially corrupted with three great faults: the one
is Avarice, the other is Self love, the third is very disdain, and (as I have
said) a very great contempt of the profession it self: which have no dwelling
places, but in hearts wanting wisdom, and all the parts of high and virtuous
nobleness.

If these men would lift up their eyes from the greedy desire of fleshly lust,
and set their hearts at liberty from the wretched bondage of servile love to
this present world and to the vanities thereof, and discreetly consider the
alterations and troubles of all the States, kingdoms, and nations of the
continent, throughout all the whole flower of the old Roman Empire, and how
things do daily more and more encliue to dangerous and dreadful chaunges, and
then conclude that England also (though in the midst of the great Ocean) is a
worldly state and kingdom, subject (as the rest are) to the uncertainty of
peace and prosperity, standing renged withal the world, under the sword of
Gods high justice: and therefore, doubt the frail felicity of their Country,
and accordingly have care and regard to the same. Then would they use the
endeavors of wise hearts, then would they love virtue, embrace godliness, honor
Arms, and consequently provide and furnishe themselves (each one after his
ability) of those habilements yt are behoueful and necessary for covert and
defense, in the day when the Lord shall visit the pride and security of men,
pouring out the tempest of is wrathful indignation, either by foreign: or
intestine war, or else by both: which does orderly fall at one time or other,
upon all and every nation upon earth, so yt not one city of the whole world
can escape the araignement of the most high, when he sets him down to judge.
The armor that saves all men, and nations from the dint and dart of the
enemy, is a sure faith, an humble fear, sound love and trust in the Lord God
of hosts, through Christ Jesus our Lord, that great conqueror, king of kings,
Lord of Lords. The wisdom eke and prowess that does make a man pollitike in
wars, is heavenly contemplation, and a righteous heart makes the soldier
invincible in the battle: adding unto these matters, the iron armor, the
sword, the spear, the shield, and the horse, the corslet, and the pike, the
murrian, and the caliuer, the bow and the bill: with the requisite skill,
courage, industry and agilitie that do apperteine unto the use of the same.
The city or kingdom that is stored of men, furnished with these habilements,
may well set forth an army, complete in arms, hopeful of victory, and
assured of triumph.

Of such a suite of Military men, consisted the hosts of Moses, and Iehosuah,
and Gedeons three hundredth, by The Midianites vanquished by Gedeon.
whose prowess he vanquished the mighty and dreadful Army of the enemies of
Israel. When Jacob was appointed with any captains, and bands of this
Military perfection: then went the Lord God of hosts with their Armies into
the field: then were they sure to vanquish their enemies, and to return to
their houses with a joyful victory: For one true Israelite was able to drive
a thousand Philistims to the flight. Such a Soldier was Ionathas, and such
was Caleb, and his sons: such was David, and his worthy men, and such was
also Judas Macchabeus and his brethren.

These were the good children of God: most valiant, and most famous in warlike
prowess: For by virtue and arms, they became invincible in the field, and
most profitable in the city. The christa^ therefore, that desires to be
worthily reckned amongst the honorable, praised of the honest, and esteemed
with the wise and faithful sort: ye same must in martial arms, and eke in
heavenly virtues, be a complete Israelite. This being true, (as it is a
heavenly truth, and cannot be repugned, without the contempt of the high
majesty of the lord God of hosts) let every citizen and rural man, gentle or
ungentle, noble or unnoble, rich or poor, that means to prove himself a
good christian, a faithful Englishman, zealous toward the state public of his
country, of commendable integrity toward his prince and fervent in the love and
maintenance of Gods kingdom and glory upon earth: let every such one I say,
embrace godliness: honor, nourish, and exercise Arms, and learn with
diligence, the skill and prudence that do necessarily accompany the same.

Though the purses of the rich, do sufficiently serve ye turn in furnishing
forth others, to serve in their steed in these wars, yt seem rather
voluntary or politic, the^ dangerous to the state public of their Country:
yet should they each in his order, and sense, covet to know the policies and
discipline of war: and so desire, and voluntarily put forth themselves, to
advance Mililitary knowledge and actiuitie, that they would rather beseech
the Sovereign Majesty, to give them liberty to practice the feelde upon their
free courage and charges, then to tarry the commandment and direction of what
danger may ensue by preferring hirelings to the service of war.
the Prince for the same, and then do it so unwillingly, as I will not speak,
and so contempteously, that the servant and hireling is preferred to serve the
ordinances of the Prince, whereby that good policy and purpose of the
sovereign Majesty is greatly deceived, and the pretended providence should
(by this fraud) be poorly satisfied in the day of service, as need might
possibly happen. For if civil discord should rise, and the realm fall to
Arms (as it is a rife matter) who were fittest to defend the Throne of the
royal Majesty, the Judgment seat and the City, the Cradle, and Pulpit?
Surely they that are likeliest, of faith, credit, and ability: therefore,
are even they to be committed to the practice and trust of Arms: For in the
day of tumult, the armed servant will be a co^mander of his unarmed master, and
the armed Son will be a terror to the unarmed Father. Then will the drudge and
servile man, the hireling, and fugitive person, starte from his Musters, and
join himself with the mutiners: for unto such the hope of common spoil, and
the desire of ruinous theft and liberty, is more delicate then the defense of
civil government, or the preservation of the weal public: which should move
them to prefer themselves, and not their servants, to the practice and
profession of Arms.

Let London therefore, the royal Chamber, and head of the state, appear to
love Arms, and endeavor themselves to advance the knowledge and practice of the
same: and as they are more prudent, more honorable, more mighty, and more able
then any state, or particular country else within the Realm, and most
conveniently associated and united together, to enter, and to erect the
familiar and domestical practice of Military knowledge and actiuity: so should
they be an example and an encourageme^t to all the rest of ye co^minalty, to
immitate the^ with honest emulatio^, through the favor and authority of ye
sovereign majesty, ye same being admited to ye people of honest state and
credit, and likeliest in civil towardenes. So should London be more honorable
then erst it has been, and the nation strong and prudent against the day that
those virtues might hap to stand them in better steed then much riches, and
more auailable to the commonwealth, then all the law and merchandise in the
land.

For methinketh that it is poor thing and a very ignominious Citizens should
be furnished and practiced for the feelde.
to see so large and rich a city, so populous of select and passing manry, to
be so ignorante and so naked of warrelike adrest and endeavors. The French
citizins are furnished and practiced for the feelde, so are the youths, their
sons and servants. The citizens of Italy do strive to excelle the nobility
in the knowledge and feats of Arms. The citizines of Germany profess Arms,
and are accordingly exercised and furnished for the same.

In the little city Geneua, are 5000. citiziens of ordinary Defenced cities.
bands sworn in Arms: ready at a call in every moment. In Strasbourgh are
likewise 8000. citizens redye to Arms at a call: the like in Ausburge, in
Norynbergh, and after the same manner in all other cities of Germany, and the
East Countries, each in adrest, and appointment of Military forces, according
to their largeness, and ability. And is London so sure that it needs not
the very simple knowledge of Arms? and is it so careless that it despises
the exercise of the feelde, as a matter nothing apperteining unto them? Such
sloth, and security has brought many a famous city of the world to ruin,
desolation, and servitude. London might often times (in her life days) have
been brought to the same predicament, had not their kings been at hand, to
stop and to vanquishe the insolency of ragious Wherefore the Majors of
London are adorned with knighthood.
rebbels, by the force of Arms. The sword of one noble, citizen won more
fame and honor to the city of London, in killing the arrogant rebbell Jack
straw, then ever it had before: and for that worthy fact, the Majors of
London, are adorned with knighthood, which is an honor properly perteining to
chiualry: not to merchandise, nor to any other occupation, nor yet to the
abundance of riches.

If they then, and their ancesters, citizens of London, are beholding to
Military prowess, for the chief honor and ancient (yea, and new)
preservation of their city: why do they not honor the profession, and desire
liberty of their prince, to practice arms, and to nourishe Military practice
amongst themselves? Their approved loyalty shall not fail to obtain that
grace of their blessed Queen. Then should London be martial against the day of
war, and able upon the sudden to put it self in arms (the sovereign prince
and nobility being far of, and otherwise entangled) for the repression of
domestical mutinies if any should happen nere them, or toward them: As all
rebels have their chief purpose to make hauok of London.

It were a small matter for the city of London to have five thousand citizens
of special manry, trained in arms, booked, and divided into bands, and ready at
a moment, if need were: in which number, should no servant nor fugitive person
be admitted, but the very householders, and their sons: neither were it much
for them to have five hundredth furnished and exercised horses for the field.
Anthony Fugger, the great money master of all Christendom, Anthony Fugger,
kept always fifty horses of service in his own stables in Augusta, and so
many warlike chosen Reisters of his own family. This number of trained people
being ever ready to be levied out of one city at the sodeine commandment of
their prince upon sodeine occasion, might serve to a greater purpose, then
twenty thousand long in gathering, and them of rude and ignorant rural people.

And to speak in general, pity it is to see so worthy a nation as ours is (so
valiant and active in arms, when they be entered in ye exercise thereof) to be so
poorly inclined to follow wars, and to continue the pursuit of chiualry: ye
punishment therefore of our idle people cannot be to extreme: so that there
were a sufficient order set down for ye employment of them But to say truly,
let the sovereign majesty and the court of parliament, provide and establish
never so easy, and never so profitable and seemly means for the succor of the
poor, and for imploiment of the able people, this nation will not observe it:
such sloth and corruption is in the Justices of the country, and in the
magistrates of towns and cities, and eke such peruers obstinacy in the
merciles hearts of rich folk, both of town and country, that every man's
endeavor wholly tends to his own private profit, that of al hands they
neglect, yea, and contemn ye public wealth and honor of their country: much
less do they regard the preservation of the poor: so dull and senseles is the
common sort of this nation: neither will it be remedied for any thing that can
be devised or commanded, til God himself do remedy it with a scourge of his
own making. Five persons standing at the bar condemned to dye upon the
statute of Rogues, and upon no other matter, proclamation was made in the full
appearance of the country, that if any would come forth and take any one of the
condemned, and retain him in service, and answer for his behavior, he should
deliver a man from death, in all the throngs of the people there was not one
moved with compassion so to do, then were all these miserable wretches
executed: surely a hard condition amongst the people that profess Christ:
whose commandment it is, that as we are his, so must we love one another as he
loved us.

Christ committed his body to the shameful Cross, and his soul to the
torments of hell, for the redemption of traiterous Rebbels against the high
Majesty of God, and to reconcile the wicked to grace: and wills us to be
merciful, as our Heavenly Father is merciful. But how far we are from these
qualities, the Lord he knows it, and so do the poor. God surely will judge
it with a heavy sentence.

But surely, this is a true conclusion, that the man, the people, or nation
that favor not the renown and maintenance of Military prowess, nor imbrase
the high value of Arms, the same are enemies to all virtues, neither have they
respect to godliness: but all to their own bellies, as the swine. If the
nourishment and practice of Arms should depend on the voluntary charges and
endeavors of the common multitude, Martial profession should lie in the
street, until it were trodden to dunge.

In deed it is not a matter that does properly apperteine to base and servile
minds, but does belong to the noble and ambitious courages. Let them therefore
that are truly noble, love Arms, and let them that challenge, or love the name
of honor, virtue, honesty, or worthiness, put their hands to the use and
advancement of warlike knowledge and actiuitie: yea, the more noble, the more
prudent, and honorable that men will be esteemed, so much the more friendly to
Arms ought they to be, and the like delightful in the practice and use of the
same.

And as they esteem of it, so to esteem of them that do apply the occupation
thereof in the feelde, where they sustein no wanton labor, but are in
continual trauail of the body, and eke of the mind, daily presented to the
dangers of death: whose hourly appearaunce to the Martialist in Arms,
should make him to consider the frailty of his state, and the fewness of his
days, and therefore to apply his heart to wisdom, and virtue, and to be
always, as a man prepared, and ready to be sacrificed? yet when the secure
belly does rest upon an assured hope of long life: and hating the remembrance
of death, hides himself from the sight of wisdom, and gives over his heart
to lust and covetousness, the mother and nourse of all evils.

If any tongues more malicious, then discreet, will disable our martialists,
and defame our soldiers, and then make a false conclusion, against the
profession it self: let those malignant spirits confess the renowned
Englishmen by training up, the most valiant and famous in martial feats and
knowledge
value of our nation in the old time, and grant (in spite of their beards)
that we are the sons of those our Fathers, whose strength and courage in
martial actiuitie, neither Scots, French, nor Spaniards, were able to resist:
nor yet safely to stand within the compass and industry of the Captains: and
that this present generation of the English people, being trained and exercised
under the like conduct, nourishment, and government as our kindred were under
the most famous kings, Richard the first, Edward ye first, Edward the third,
Edward the black Prince, Henry the fifth, the Duke of Bedford, etc. would show
it self to be the rightfully begotten children of the old English Fathers,
most valiant and famous in Military feats and knowledge: yea, look how much
more subtle and perilous the wars at these days are, then they were in the
old time: by so much the more should we exceed our ancesters in the affairs
of the same, if we were accordingly employed and maintained.

Let therefore, the gracious Nobility of England (Fathers to their Prince,
people, and common wealth) remember, that as martial profession must of
necessity be used and nourished, that even the followers of the same must be
likewise esteemed and maintained: and eke to set down an arrest, for the
domestical practice of the same. Vsus enim promptos facit. And that being
continued through the Realm by such order and direction, as may conveniently
and sufficiently be proportioned and stablished: there should be within a few
years, many thousands of able Soldiers in England, that never saw enemy in
the field: and that with small charges to the Sovereign Majesty.

And as all Soldiers of worthiness and knowledge are to be highly esteemed
and maintained, so are the gentlemen, and worthy people of our nation that
have pursued the defensory wars in the low Country, specially to be
praised: for they have approved that the old English valiancy is not so
extinguished in the English nation through long security, and corrupt
idleness, but it is soon stirred up to a double force, when it has a while
acquainted it self with the exercise of the field.

Record of their service in Brabant against the Spaniards, upon Lammas day
last: where the Commanders showed commendable value of prudence and courage,
and in likewise the common seruitours, honest hardiness, and worthy actiuity:
and are therefore to be cherished for their own deserts, and eke to be
esteemed fo the encouragement of others.

And for that I have here made mention of the service of our nation in Brabant,
that it may breed further encouragement unto others that are likewise well
minded unto Martial occupatio^: I have thought good briefly to set down the
manner of their service done at the same time, that the worthy acts of those
valiant and worthy captains and soldiers, may remain a proof of the value of
the English nation, and show that they are not so far degenerate from the high
courage and manlines of their ancestors and forefathers, but that (if they
were exercised and accustomed to the field and practice thereof) they would
soon attain and deserve their pristinate valiantnes, and so become a terror
to their enemies, as their forefathers in times past have been.

It is to be noted, that the camp of the States of the low Country, lay
entrenched in a great heath or sandy ground, on the right hand of whose camp
toward Loueine there was a river ran all along, and without the trenches on
the same side, was the English and Scottishe men's ward, wherein was a hill
that the Spanyardes laid hard at to have gotten, which if they could have
won, from the same they might have discryed all their manner of dealing in the
States Camp. On the other side of the camp toward Askot, was another hill,
upon the which, the horsemen of the States kept scoutwatch, and between these
two hills was a great valley of champion ground, with some small sandy hills at
the entering into the plain.

On the farther side of the plain, were certain houses, which the Englishmen
set on fire, thereby to anoy the enemy. The horsemen of the States which lay in
scoute upon the hill, on the left hand, perceiving the Army of Don John to
approach out of the straight into the plain, sent word unto the Captains of
the Englishmen and Scots, willing them to stand manfully to it that day
against the enemy, and to do their best, and they should be assured that
they would not forsake them, but live and dye with them.

Whereupon the Chief commanders of the English and Scottishe regiments went
to counsel, to take advice for the ordering of their companies, and how they
might endomage the enemy, fully purposing to try the value and courage of
their enemies, for that such a brute had been spread over the world (but
especially in all the low Countries) of their invincible prowess and
knowledge in Martial discipline, as though there were not any nation that
durst encounter them in the field. After good advice taken, every Captain
and officer was appointed to his charge for ye day, as some to stand in battle,
some to lie in ambush, others to relieve their fellows with fresh shot, and some
to furnish them that wanted shot and powder: and the chief Coranels taking to
them certain valiant gentlemen, and a convenient number of approved soldiers,
determined to give the onset upon the enemy.

Betwixt nine and ten of the clock in the morning, the horsemen of Don John
issued out of the straight, into the plain and champion ground, whereupon the
States horsemen (for what purpose, it was to us unknown) The English and
Scottishmen encounter the Spaniards at Pel Mel.
retired within their trenches, and there abode until they saw which way the
game went, and who had the better. The footmen also of the Spaniards, being
entered into the plain, the chief Coranels of the English and Scottishe
regiments, taking to them those loose shot which were before appointed,
encou^tred the Spaniards upon the plain, and dealt so hotly and frankly with
them at Pel Mel, that within three quarters of an hour they made them forsake
the plain, and retire over, into the fields, there nere adjoining: at the
entry whereof was many a man slain, to the great discouragement of the whole
Army of Don John, and the Spanyardes. Thus through the goodness of God (in
whose quarrel they fought) for the advancement of his name and true religion,
and by the prowess of those valiant English men that there served under the
States (whose noble hearts shows forth a lively pattern of the prowess of
their progenitors) with the aid only of a few Scottish men that served there
also: so terrified the hearts of the Spaniards, that amongst all the encounters
that I have seen in all the time that I have served, for these xxij. years, I
never saw enemies so danted with any loss or repulse as the Spaniards were
that day, in flying the fury of the people, they being of so great strength,
and our folk but a few loose shot. Then issued forth the Grave van Bussu,
general of the States army, and stood upon a little hill, facing the horsemen
of of Don John, and vewing the manner of the skirmish. After that the Spaniards
were thus driven to forsake the plain, and to retire into the closes near
adjoining, seeing the invincible courage of our men, durst not any more come
forth into the plain, but now and then salyed out, and straight ways retired
in again. About four or five a clock in the after noone, the English and
Scottish soldiers were so stirred up, that they determined no longer to stand
dallying with the Spanyardes, but purposed to forsake the plain champion, and
to follow the Spanyardes into The Spaniards put to flight.
the fields, and there to have them by the ears. Don John seeing his footmen
were put to the worse, and fearing a further mischief, was driven of necessity
to make a profer with his horsemen, but did not break, which caused our men to
stay their going over into the fields, so that in this mean while, the Spanish
footmen (before the English and Scottish men were a ware) were a quarter of a
mile off, retiring in running manner over hedge and ditch with their ensigns,
and so ended the skirmish. The Coranels and captains both of the Englishmen
and Scots did lead the service themselves that day, with such great boldness,
that it greatly imbased the glory and force of the Spaniards, and had utterly
overthrown them, if the horsemen had done their endeavor half so well as did
the footmen.

Thus gentle reader I have briefly described the service of our countrymen
upon Lammas day last past, whose valiant service, for the exalting of the
word of God, and honor of their country, deserves the favorable liberality
of all honest and loving hearts, yt where occasion serves and need requires,
they would reach forth their hands, and out of their plenty, relieve the
necessity of such poor soldiers as have adventured their lives for the
advancement of true religion: so shall others thereby be encouraged to employ
themselves in the like service, and be ready, and pressed at all times to offer
up themselves and their service in the defense of the quiet state and
prosperity of their prince and country: for these days are dangerous, and
more dangerous will yet be.

Honos enim alit arts. Let England therefore while it has blessed rest and
leisure, wise regiment, and God present in the Sanctuary, waken it self out
of senseless security, and diligently look to her Tacles: for a storm will
come, and a tempest will fall: for at this present hour, the hand of the Lord
God of hosts is in the second time for gathering together of the remnant of
Israel: the year of his redeemed is come, and every kingdom that will not
serve the Lord, shall utterly perish from the earth: stand fast therefore, O ye
people of England, for the sword of the Almighty is drawn, and will not be
put up till he has confounded, and utterly consumed all the enemies of Jacob
from the face of the earth for evermore. Every vain and misbelieuing soul is
adversary to Jacob, and it shall be cut of. Serve the Lord therefore in truth
of heart, and remember the wonderful benefits and blessings of God so
abundantly bestowed upon you, and upon your fathers, and be thankful: for you
and they have enjoyed your country many years in universal peace, and in daily
increase of private and public prosperity. The Lord has now twice delivered
you his Gospel without blood, and in this second restitution, he has holden
you twenty years in the free occupation thereof, without murder or
molestation: the Lord has not so dealt with your neighbors, look upon the
miserable state of France, and low Dutchland, and in the view thereof consider
the goodness and providence of your heavenly Father toward you: for their
troubles have nourished your rest, and their miseries have continued your
blessings. See into the proceedings of the Amighty, and be wise hearted, lest
through lewd ingratitude you move the Lord God of hosts to wrath, and through
your rebellious insolency, you provoke the most high to forsake his Sanctuary
in England: as they of Judah and Jerusalem through their wickedness drove him to
abandon his holy mount Sion in the days of Zedekiah. But if the Lord depart
from you, woe shall be unto you, as it was to them of Judah and Jerusalem.

Look wisely to your selves, and as ye love the advancement of Gods kingdom
in England, so will you pray and labor for the preferme^t of the same amongst
the French and Dutch: as that the Lord may set his sanctuary at rest amongst
them as he has done it amongst us, and that they may have the grace so to
receive, and so to retain the Lord their God, as he may have delight to
continue with them.

As time draws to his end, and the corrupt world to her death, so shall all
manner of evils abound amongst men: and these last days shall be troublesome,
dangerous and cruel, for the last drams of Satan that must fill up the
measure of wickedness to the brimme, shall be most infectiue and pestiferous: be
wise therefore, and acquainte your selves with arms, both corporal and
spiritual, that you may at al times and in all causes be complete Israelites
ready for the field. God grant* it

The Lord God of hosts bless and preserve our good Queen ELIZABETH, the
Nobility, people, and comminaltie of England. Lord, Amen.
FINIS.

