The troubles of Geneua.

With the wars which the Duke of Sauoy has made against it these three
years space.

And the great victories which God has lately given to the Citizens of Geneua.

Truly translated according to the French copy. by W. P.

map of Geneva and surroundings The Map of Geneua.
GENEVA

LEMAN-LAKE

THONON

BALIADGE DE GEZ



Printed at London for Thomas Nelson, and are to be sold at his shop at the
great South door of Paul's. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords of her Highness most Honorable Privy
Council.
IT is a thing of very great consideration (Right Honorable) to behold The
Wonderful work of almighty God, in strengthening and preseruinge those that
continually fight for the defense of the true and sincere Religion of Christ
Jesus: as has been seen within this Island, which in comparison to the
world, is but as a handful: yet is the same so defended (by the providence of
almighty God) from spoiling and subuerting, that neither foreign practices
abroad, nor civil discord, or privy pretended treasons at home, or the inuasio^
of the mightiest enemy can once prevail against it: as has of late years
been manifested, to the great amazement, overthrow, and confusion of the
chiefest complotters of such bad actions. And this (right Honorable) is not
seen only in this Island, but generally even in all Nations, Cities, or
Towns, where Gods truth is advanced, preached, and preferred before Idolatry
and superstition: as appears by that famous City of Geneua, where God is
rightly honored, and his word sincerely preached. Of which City, (right
Honorable) this discourse ensuing truly describes, and as well lays open
their troubles, sustained by the invasion of the Duke of Sauoy and his forces,
for the time of these three years, as also the battles and unlooked for
victories which almighty God has given the Citizens of Geneua, against the
Sauoyans their deadly enemies: Thus presenting the said discourse unto your
Honors, being truly published in the English tongue, according to the French
Copy, I humbly take my leave.

Your Honors most humble T. N.

The description of the Town of Geneua, with the troubles that happened
thereunto by wars which the Duke of Sauoy made against the said Town, from
the beginning of the year 1589. until this year 1591.
GEneua is a most ancient City, lying between the Countries of Sauoy and
Swiserland, whereof Caesar in the beginning of his Commentaries makes mention:
which town ever since has (by the providence of God) bin preserved and
defended from all dangers, even in the midst of all the wars and troublesome
times, which until this latter age have happened in many Countries enuironing
the same, and now of late having received the reformation of the Gospel, it
has been more renowned then ever it was, by diverse marvelous actions and
events, which the Almighty God has shown in the defense and conservation of
the same. It has for a long time ben a free imperial City, situated at the
end of one of the most great and notable Lake in the world, called Leman-lake,
in breadth at the largest part, eight English miles, and extends in length
thirty or two and thirty mile, which Lake abounds in great store of fish,
and is very commodious for all the Country, by reason of the traffic upon
the same, specially for the carriage of their woods which they fetch from of
the mountains. This Lake serves in place of a rampire unto the Town on the
North side thereof. On the East part it has the balliages of Thonon, of
Chablais and the Country of Fossigny, within two, three, four and five
leagues of the gates, which Countries are bordered with great and high hills,
being environed with the Alps. On the South part there is a most fertile and
pleasant hill named Saleue, at the foot whereof lies the balliage of Ternier,
in a most rich and goodly plain, extending in length three leagues, and in
breadth two leagues, which balliage is bordered on the South part with the river
of Rhosne, and on the North part with the river of Arue, little more than a
quarter of a league distant from Geneua, and lies at the foot of the mountain
of Wache, which runs a long by the end of the town, separating the same by
a bridge from Saint Geruais, a borough very well fortified and strengthened.
On the one side of the river of Rhosne toward the South lies the balliage of
Gez, containing in length four leagues, and in breadth two leagues, enclosed
with the mountain of Iura, on the further side of which mountain lies the
Franche Count. At the one end whereof is the town and castle of Gez, two
great leagues distant from Geneua. At the other end toward Lions is the
straight and narow passage of the Cluse, a place both by art and nature very
strong, situated between two mountains and the river of Rhosne. Thonon is
five leagues distant from Geneua, lieng upon the Lacque, extending it self
toward the country of Valois, in such manner that Geneua is found to be
environed with the three balliages aforesaid, which upon certain conditions
were restored unto the Duke of Sauoy by the Lords of Berne in the year 1567.

map of Geneva and surroundings The description of Geneua.
GENEVA

LEMAN-LAKE

THONON

BALLADGE DE GEZ



In these three balliages (the territories of the Lordship of Geneua being
comprehended) which are enclosed within the same, there has in times part
been almost 300. good villages, besides the hamlets and houses standing
scattered in diverse places, barnes, and a great number of Castles, whereof
more then the half of them have been burnt, destroyed, and overthrown in
these last wars. Part whereof are hereunto anexed.

Long time since, as it were naturally, and by inheritance, from the Father
unto the son, the Dukes and Earls of Sauoy have used many means, and sought
diverse occasions both by practices and violence, to make themselves Lords of
the town of Geneua, the most fair and greatest City (whatsoever) in those
parts, and is the key, whereby (if they could enjoy the same) they might
enter into Switserland. The Duke last deceased, having obtained the three
balliages aforesaid, during the time of his life, did greatly molest and
trouble (although very subtly) the commonwealth of Geneua, yet not minding
to enter into an open war with the said town, the discommodities whereof he
had otherwise oftentimes assaied and experimented. But Charles Emanuel his
son, not long after his entry into the estate of the Duchy of Sauoy, did
presently discover and make known his evil will and hatred unto the said
City of Geneua, by seeking to surprise the same in the year 1582. and at that
time showed his forces before it, threatening them with a great army, under
the conduct of the Earl of Raconis, Piamontois. Not long time after having
espoused Lady Katherine, the youngest daughter of the king of Spain, he took
a further matter in hand, that was, to invade all the Country lying about the
Lake of Leman, which appertains unto the Canton of Berne, thinking by that
means in short time to become Lord of Geneua, which Town in the mean time did
not cease to be much molested and troubled, not only by his foragers,
exactors, and commissaries, but also to be solicited and tempted by diverse
means, both with fair promises and threatenings. To the which end he had
appointed Francis Melchior de Saint Ioire, Baron of Ermaus, with other his
adherents, that they should secretly practice in the Country of Vaut, the
winning and taking (at a certain day appointed) of the castles of Chillon,
Veuay, Lausanne, Morges and Nion, principal places situated about the Lake.
He had likewise made a view and muster of all his forces, and had already
caused a part thereof to pass the mountains. He held a great garrison within
the Castle of Gez, as also in the country of Cluse, and the castle of Thonon.
And within the forte of Ripaille about a quarter of a league from Thonon, he
kept a garrison of five hundred Piemontois, men purposely chosen out, where he
had likewise two galleys, great and sufficient enough to hold two hundredth men
in each gallie besides their furniture, which were ready at all times to be
lanched into the Lake if occasion should serve. During these practices, the
Duke fell in hand with another enterprise, in the month of October 1588.
usurping upon (the crown of France) the Marquisate of Salusses in Piamont:
which in short time having brought to effect by means of the intelligences he
had within the same, he caused his pretense to be put in practice against the
states of Berne and Geneua, who in the mean time continued very peaceable and
quiet, although Geneua endured great injury by means that the traffic and
victuals were hindered and kept from it. Upon this occasion the French king,
Henry the 3. being moved with the usurpation of his Marquisate, by his
Ambassadors solicited the Seigniors of Berne and Geneua, together with some of
the Cantons of Switsers, the Valoisons and Grisons, to aid and assist him
against the Duke of Sauoy, by whom he alleged himself to be unjustly
assailed and despoiled. The conclusion was, to invade those countries which he
held about Geneua, mean time that the king should give him somewhat to do
out of Daulphinois. This resolution finished, on wednesdaie the second of
April 1589. the horse and footmen of Geneua issued forth, and marching toward
Fossigny wanne the Castle of Monthou, and a little town called Bonne, brake
down certain bridges upon the river of Arue, and marched as far as Saint
Ioire, a castle belonging unto the Baron of Ermansse, wherein they found (and
sent them to Geneua) all the papers, remembrances, letters and commissions of
the Duke of Sauoy and of his principal officers, concerning the secret
enterprises devised against the states of Berne and Geneua. These troops
conducted and lead by Monsieur de Quirry, a Gentleman of France, and knight of
the order, turning their course the monday following, marched on the other
side, wanne the town and castle of Gez, together with all the balliage: and
having assaied (although in vain) to force the passage of Cluse, returned with
their army unto Geneua, being in number above nine thousand men, whereof the
most part were footmen.

These exploits caused a great rumor and marvelous astonishment in all the
Country of Sauoy, which the Duke himself and his secret friends rejoiced at,
saying, that the occasion by him and his so many times sought and procured, did
now voluntarily offer and pres;ent it self unto them. Which he neglected not,
but with great diligence embraced the same, as by the gathering of his forces
(which in few days after he had prepared and made ready) easily appeared: for
that the French Kings army entering into the passage of Thonon, having taken
the town, which is not very strong, and the castle yielded by composition,
laid siege unto the fort of Ripaille. The County of Martineugue, with the
bastard of Sauoy, resolved to raise the siege, having gathered above twelve
hundredth lances, five hundredth Argolettiers, and about fifteen hundredth foot
men, marched over the mountains, and did so much, that on tewsdaie the nine
and twentieth of April, they descended without resistaunce, within the
country, very near unto the Town of Thonon, from whence (after a few
skirmishes and charges given on both sides) the County Martineugue being
wounded, they retired to their shame and dishonor, without succouring or
delivering the assieged within Ripaille, who having greater want of courage
then of victuals, or of good means to defend and keep the place, not long
after yielded it up, their lives and goods saved, leaving the two galleys
behind them, which with two frigates (other kind of vessels for the water) were
burnt, and the fort destroyed and laid wast. That done, they marched into the
Country of Fossigny, which the Duke of Sauoy understanding, caused part of his
forces, as well horse as footmen, to make have thither, to keep the passage,
which country of Fossigny is a territory or Lordship comprehending about ten or
twelve leagues (as well mountains as plain ground) in breadth and length, and
begins about the town of Bonne, having the Alps on the East part, the
County of Geneua on the South part, and Geneua it self within three leagues:
The Lake on the west part, and Thonon with the Country of Vaut on the north
part. The winning of this country gave an entry unto these of Geneua to pass
further: and is a very strong keie or passage into Sauoye. The balliage, of
Chablois, Boige, with other places adjoining. Whereof those of Geneua hold the
town of Bonne, which is as it were the gate or entry of the same. Mean time,
the Barron of Ermansse, which not long before, had by composition recovered his
Castle of Saint Ioire, knowing of what importance the said place (being
within two leagues of the town of Bonne, and so far within the mountains)
was unto all the Country, caused a forte or skonse of earth to be made upon
the mount of Castles, between the high mountains of Maule, and those of View,
and Estaux, placing in the same a company of Piemontisians, under the which
fort, he raised a platform of earth, whereon he placed four field pieces, each
piece bearing a Bullet of the bigness of an egg. On the further side thereof
upon the way going to saint Ioire, he made a Barricado, and under in the way,
leading from Vieu unto saint Ioire, not far from a barn called Warnoz, an
other strong Barricado, kept by a company of Harquebusiers of Fossignie. The
rest of the Country being straight, narrow, and difficult to be entered, might
easily be defended and kept by very small force against a puissant army.
This notwithstanding, the Baron did so much, that besides the companies, as well
of horse as foot men, whereof he had sufficient to defend the Country, procured
an aid of 500. Lances to be sent unto him, which were paid by the towns and
Country of Piemont, and conducted by the Countess of Valpergue, and S. Martin:
wherewith he being joined, they determined (trusting unto the fort aforsayd,
and of their foot companies, which they might easily place in ambuscado
between the Barn of Warnoz and the village of Latour,) to show themselves in
the field which lies between that village, and the Castle of Tyer: hoping of
two things, that one would take effect, which was, either that the army of
Berne, consisting of thirty eight or 40. Ensigns approaching, might easily be
overthrown by them, (for they esteemed not of the companies of Geneua) or else,
having feared and astonished that army, they should constrain it to retire.
So that on saturday, the 16. of July 1589. they being encamped in the field,
between their fort and the Castle of Tier, (the army of Berne lying at
Pillonay, about half a league from that place.) They divided their horse into
3. Squadrons, a bow shot distant one from the other: The last of their troops
being in the houses of the village of Latour, and the first part near unto the
said houses among the brackes. The Lanciers of Piemont were in two other
Squadrons, at the end of the three first Squadrons: there was likewise a
squadron of Argolitiers of Fossigny, conducted by the Baron of Ermansse, which
made a halt covertly under the trees and houses of the villages of Latour:
part of their footmen were set in diverse places for their most advantage. The
Lord Vateuille Auoier, General of the army of Berne, considering and
beholding the countenance and manner of the Sauoyans, caused all his army to be
raunged in order of battle, between Pillonay and Vieu, choosing out of the
same three companies of Harguebusiers and Musketeers, under the leading of
Captain Berole, Bossey, and N. with the number of twenty Argoletiers or
thereabouts, and a company of harguebuses of Geneua, lead by captain Jacques,
to march forwards, which made the point, being seconded by the shot of
Boisioli, he therewith seconded by the Sauoyans footmen to forsake their
ambuscado, and Boisioli at that instant ceazed upon the castle of Tier. On the
other side captain Guinet with one hundred shot taking the lower way,
suddenly set upon the baricado of the horse of Warnoz, where he slew all such
of the Fossigniers as resisted him, and put the rest unto flight. Captain
Jacques with his bands, following likewise after the companies of foot, which
had left their ambuscado under a hedge. The Duke of Sauoyes horsemen perceiving
that, began to retire, which the horsemen of Geneua (being placed in the side
way between Vieu and Tier) being descended into the plain field, and
perceiving the Dukes foot men to fly, trauersed forcibly among the Dukes
horse which because they were enclosed on each side within a straight and narow
lane, near unto the village of la Touer, had neither time nor leisure to turn
their horses, so that of al their troops there was not above three ranks,
which couched their lances against the enemy, into one of the which captain
Bois (lieuetenant to the Lord of Varro, Colonel of the horses of Geneua)
entered, where being hurt in the mouth, he was constrained to turn on the left
hand, but he was so well seconded by 120. lances and fifty argoletiers, with
certain companies of footmen, that the Countes of Valpergne and of S. Martin,
with the greatest part of the Piemontoisians horses, having received the
overthrow, remained dead upon the place, the rest being scattered fled in
great disorder unto the top of the mountain, whereas many of them were lost,
the rest with great danger saved themselves within Bonne ville and other places
of Fossignie: which the Dukes footmen perceiving, forsook their fort and fled
into the mountains, but the Baron of Ermansse with his Argolettiers saved
themselves with the first, not once offering to fight, by which means the honor
of the field, together with the fort, the four field pieces, and all the
barricados remained unto the companies of Berne and Geneua. The Duke lost at
that time almost 300. horse and foot, and the Bernors not above five men at the
most, whereof captain Bois was one, who not long after died of the wound
received in his mouth, being very much lamented for his valor and prowes.
Which done (those of Berne having the field, yielded thanks unto God for their
great victory) the General Vateuille caused the army to march toward Saint
Ioire, whereas the castle within few days after yielded by composition, which
they burnt. Until that time the affairs of Geneua seemed to prosper and go
forwards: but not long after the Switsers and Grisons changed their course, and
marched toward France by the way of New castle, and the Franche Count, by
which means Geneua itself was forced to sustain the whole charge and burden
of the wars, wherewith the Duke of Sauoy being very well pleased, thought thereby
to attain unto the effect of his desires, he failed not to approach nere Geneua
with a puissant army, consisting of more then 16. thousand, and great store of
ordinance for battery: his Vauntguard having done certain small exploytes in
the Country of Fossigny, so that about the beginning of the month of June, he
entered into the balliage of Ternier, whereas with his Canon shot he battered an
old town, the soldiers whereof in number about forty or fifty, being ready
to yield the same unto him, he promised to save their lives, but having
entered, contrary unto his faith and promise, he caused them all to be hanged.
From thence, to the end he might astonish those of Geneua, and so constrain
them forcibly with all humility to yield unto him, when they should see so
puissant an enemy, with thirty canon shot under their walls, he enterprised
to batter a little mount of earth, which they in great have had raised by the
bridge of Arue, whereas five times one after the other he gave the assault, but
to his shame and dishonor, both he and his army were repulsed and driven
back, with the loss of many of his valiantest soldiers, which truly was done
more by Gods hand then by the force and industry of those of Geneua, which had
theerin but a very small number of men, and those fighting only by handfulls
and without order, yet with an incredible courage and boldness, and with an
extraordinary success and event. He seeing himself to receive such a
repulse, took another course, and after certain small exploits went and
assieged the town of Bonne in Fossigny, wherein lay three companies of Geneua,
which yielded unto him by composition: but the same was as well kept with the^,
as it was with those of Ternier, for that the Duke at their issuing forth
caused them all to be cut in pieces. This done, he recovered the castle of
Thonon, from whence he marched with all his forces unto the country of Cluse, a
Country situated between two hills near unto the river of Rhosne, wherein the
Duke held a fort named the Cluse, the situation whereof is as follows.

Mount Iura being about four or five days journey to travel outright,
begins in the West about four leagues distant from Geneua, stretching
toward Lions. At the place where it ends, there lies right against it in
the South the mountain of Wache, between the which two ends of hills (as
near one unto the other, as a musket shot) the famous river of Rhosne has
her course, which by diverse turnings and windings runs unto Lions. Farther
within at the foot of mount Iura, it is bordered and prospected with an high
hill named Cresdo (a word signifieng, a mount of earth raised on high) under
the which lies a little plain about half a quarter of a league in breadth,
at the end whereof there is a village called Longeray. Passing along the rock
or stones of this mount Iura, about the end thereof there is a straight and
narow way, winding in form of a serpent, upon the which a cart may very well
pass, and by reason of the steepnes of the same, having the river of Rhosne
very swiftly running at the foot thereof, is very easy to be kept. In the
midst thereof, which is about two musket shot in length, there stands a fort,
part whereof is by maine force cut out of the rock it self, the rest builded of
hard stones, specially on that side which butteth upon Geneua, and half
covered with earth, in manner of a wall, about the length of eighteen or
twenty paces toward Geneua, all the foot of this fort (before that time being
hollow, and serving for a passage unto carts and horses) was filled with earth,
and that horse and men might pas. There is a draw bridge made which comes out
of the Fort, and stretches along by the same, which although it should be
taken by the enemy, does not any thing at all hinder the said fort, but might
easily be wone again, by reason that it can not be held but by those within
the Fort, not possible to be scaled, wherein you may not enter, but one by
one, and that very hardly. Within this Fort, partly out of the Rock, and
partly builded of free stones, there are lodgings for a Captain and about 60.
Soldiers, with certain places for their provisions. On that side which
butteth upon Le-Vache and Longeray, it lies more open and discovered, and is
easier to be battered: but very difficultly upon Geneua side, by reason the
artillary may not be placed nearer then within 100. pases of the same: although
that they of Geneua, about the month of April, in the year of our Lord 1589.
did assay with their Canon to batter the same. This Forte the Duke minding to
fortify, and make it of greater strength, caused another fort to be made,
naming it the little Cluse, being on the other side of the river of Rhosne over
against the place where those of Geneua had battered it the year before, right
against the other fort. Which done, he entered into the balliage of Gez, where
without resistance, he took both the town and Castle: mean time, pacifiyng
the Lords of Berne, he began to make a fort at Versoy, thereby to hinder on that
side the passage to Geneua, both by water and by land.

A description of the fort of Versoy.
This Versoy is a little Bourg, containing in it about seventy houses, having
Geneua, (from whence it is distant 2. French leagues) on the South part, the
balliage of Thonon and the Lacque of the East part, mount Zura on the west
part, and the country of Vaut on the North part. It is situated on the side of
the Lake, having two gates, and a river issuing out of the mountains named
Versoy, the which by one of her branches runs through the midst of the
bourg, and by the other passes along before the gate which goes unto Geneua,
besides this, there is the proportion of an old castle, the walls whereof are
yet standing, with an high tower. This place the Duke perceiving to be very
fit to bridle those of Geneua, resolved to fortify the same, which he did with
great diligence: his army being lodged therabout, the better to bring it to
pass: first therefore he caused the entries and feeble places to be baricadoed,
the old castle to be new repaired, and a trench toward the West in form of a
spur, he stopped the breches, erecting a platform on the side of the Lake,
whereon were placed two field pieces, which hindered the passage of all barks
and galleys that would pass up unto Geneua, in such sort, that by day it was
not possible without great danger to pass by water unto the town
(notwithstanding that the Lake is half a league broad in that place) by reason
the pieces carried so far, and that the stream (whereby the boats were
carried up) ran principally in the midst of the Lake, which fort being made, he
committed the custody thereof to the baron of de la Sarra, esteemed for one of
the best soldiers of Sauoy, leaving with him 600. chosen soldiers, under the
leading of old Captains, to keep and defend the same, furnishing them with all
manner of munition for war and victuals in great abundance: and besides the
two field peeees placed on the water side, he caused four Canons to be
brought thither, with great quantity of bullets and powder. He left likewise
with the said Baron seventy gally slaves, both Turks and Christians, (which
had served in the building of the fort of Sonzy) for to make an end and finish
that which was begun at Versoy, where they together with the Country men and
some soldiers, used such diligence, and made so great expedition, that in
short time the said Bourg became meruaylous strong, and by them was named
Saint Maurice: which puffed the Duke up with such pride and assurance, that he
called his Canons the keys of Geneua, and at his departure he desired the said
Baron very earnestly to do his endeavor. This done, in the month of October
1589, for that there happened diverse new and strange diseases in his army,
he retired with his soldiers (in very pitiful and languishing estate) unto
Sauoy, and from thence unto Piemont. All this he did in the months of June,
July, August, September and October, with extreme desolation of all the
Country round about Geneua, specially in the balliages of Gez and Ternier,
wherein he caused all acts of hostility to be used and exercised against
his own subjects, for that the second day of September he caused the
frontiers of Colonges to be burnt and destroyed, which was done and executed by
the garrison of the Cluze, wherein they murdered, massacred, deflouted, drowned
and hanged of men, women and children to the numder of one hundredth and two and
twentieth persons well known, besides such as were not found, and remain as
yet unknown: and upon the thirteenth day of September he being in the
balliage of Gez, the day before, his troops marching unto Croset, took one
Gead Barbir Minister of the word of God in the said parish, being about the
age of 70. years, whose feet they cloue in two, and setting him very
contemptuously upon an Ass, his face toward the Asses tail: They led him
in such manner before the Duke himself, in whose presence he affirmed that
he had preached nothing but the truth: and wherein he was fully determined to
persevere until his end, whereupon they brought him back again, and cast him
upon a little straw before his house, where he gave up his ghost and died, a
spoil being made of all his goods and substance: in the which village they
likewise spoiled, murdered, and destroyed eight other poor and aged persons:
whereof the names are exstant to be seen. And about the fiftenth of the same
month, the said troops being in the parishes of Gez, Diuonne, Villars, Plaus,
Aberoz, and Petigny, they massacred, burnt, and destroyed by diverse torments,
to the number of one and twenty persons, with fourteen houses which they burnt
in the parrish of Villars, besides all these herein specified, and many other
which are not as yet come to light or known. It were hard to number the women
and Maids that were forced and deflowred by them, without any respect of age:
for that many grave Matrons, who were to be reverenced for their years, and
diverse Maiden children to be respected for their tender age, could have no
assurance against the rapes, violences, and furies, of these enraged Devils
incarnate. For it may be said truly, that few of all the Women or Maids that
fell into their hands, have hardly escaped dishonesting, and such as resisted
their violence, in so much as that they could not force them) were massacred:
and (which is a thing most execrable, whereof the like has not been heard of
among the barbarous Scythians.) Some women being hurt to death, and ready to
yield up their ghosts, (those villains desirous to enjoy their companies)
departed out of their lives, as they lay under them. They likewise burnt diverse
Villages, and many Farms, near the forte of Cluze, so that in a manner, they
left dessolate, and made waste the most part of all the Villages thereabouts,
depopulating the Country by their barbarous and inhumain cruelties. By which
murders it may be gathered, how many Orphants and fatherless Children they
have made, living in great misery and poverty, how many Families ruined and
subverted, and how many honest houses impouerished and beggered. The Baron de
la Sarra in the mean time lay not still, but daily skermished, and beat the
boats which passed up unto Geneua, and had diverse times bragged and boasted,
as well by his Letters which were intercepted by those of Geneua, as by word of
mouth, that in short space he would force the town to yield to the Duke. They
of Geneua, perceiving themselves abandoned of all men, considering likewise and
feeling very well, that Versoy, remaining in that estate, daily fortifieng it
self, would be such a yoke unto them, that in the end, it would be their
utter overthrow and confusion, concluded to use some means (by Gods help)
whereby they might break the same, and after diverse small attempts, (procuring
an assurance rather then a fear unto the enemy,) The seventh of November,
1589. keeping their gates shut, that no man might pass out: In the Evening
they caused their small troops to be assembled, in number about five hundred
footmen, with some hundredth and fifty voluntary Soldiers: two companies of
Argoletiers, and two of Lances, under the conduct of the Lord of Lurbignie,
(commanding the said troops, in the behalf of the most christian King,
together with diverse wise and expert Captains,) making their prayers unto God
with a full deliberation: about ten of the clock in the night, issued forth of
Geneua, cariyng with them certain Lathers, and pieces of wood, thereby to
pass the river, within half a league of Versoy. Not long before their issuing
forth, there appeared in the Element a great white circle which shone very
bright, after the which followed certain fiery Pillars, whereat those of
Versoy were astonished, and being in a fear, said that they of Geneua would
come and visit them. But because they had been in arms all Thursdaie at
night, having watched until two of the clock after midnight: between Fridaie
and Saturdaie, the most part laid them selves down to sleep: In the mean
time, those of Geneua marched forwards, and on Saturdaie after midnight passed
the river, close by a mill without any resistaunce, coming about two of the
clock before Versoy, where having received a brief instruction from their
General, they divided themselves into four parts, the greatest part of the
footmen went toward the gate, opening upon the country of Vaut, there to use
their engine which they had purposlie brought with them, and the most part of
the Argoletiers, and Lances, made a halt upon the ways to the fort, part of
the^ descending on foot, were ordained some to go unto the scaling of the fort,
and the rest (being seventeen in number) followed a peisaunt, who with a
Leauer on his shoulder, led them very quietly, and expertlye between the
Bourg and the Lacque, where he brought them unto a certain easy passage,
being the entry (through a little lane or streat) into the fort, he himself
showing them the way, mounted first up, encouraged those that followed him to
do the like, which being perceived by the senturell, they sone prevented by
killing him: that done, those seuenteen armed men, each man having a Partisan
or courtelas in his hand, entered into Versoy, where they began to make a
marvelous boucherie of the Dukes soldiers, having supprized them in Peir,
Corpse de guard. Which certain Captains hearing, awaked, and began to make
resistance, but being slain, as the Baron thought to have joined unto them
with the rest of his troops: they of Geneua, with their engine forced the gate
of Copet, persuing the exploit already begun by the seuenteen men aforsaid.
Those likewise which scaled the walls, entered at the same instant. But as in
speedy executions, it is impossible for men to see into all places at once,
and that against all hope, the place was so suddenly won, (day as yet not
appearing) The Baron, with the rest of his Soldiers, and part of his slaves,
found means with speed to enter into the Castle, wherein there stood two
Tents, the Dukes 4. Canons, and great store of warlike munition: but the
victuals were within the bourg which was presently taken, and almost three
hundredth Sauoyans, Piamontisians, and Italians, remaining dead in the place and
in the houses, not accounting such as were burnt, with others sore wounded,
which saved them selves by night, (leaping over the walls) and so got unto
the Castle of Bastie, and of Gez, about a league and a half distant from
thence, wherein the Duke held garrison. The Barron, who had diverse times
threatened those of Geneua, that he would constrain them by famine, with
halters about their necks, to kneel before the Duke, and submit them selves
unto him, then found him self to be enclosed with his Soldiers, for the most
part being in their doublets and hoase, without either bread, wine, or water:
yet nevertheless, making of necessity a virtue, to astonish the victors, and
move the Garrisons about him, as Thonon, Bonne, Sonzie, and Gez, to come unto
his aid and assistance, as also to hasten the Lord of Sonnas, not far from
thence, with four or five Cornets of Lances, (for the Duke had promised him by
letter, that he should want no succors:) began most furiously to thunder with
his Canons, (their bullets waieng seuentene pounds) against the houses of
Versoy, which he continued until three of the clock in the Evening, in which
time he did little or nothing at al indomage those of Geneua, which had means
to choose such places for their safeguard, as were out of the force of his
battery. They lost in all four or five Soldiers, and about sixteen or
eighteen hurt, and those almost all by their own follies. The Baron that day
having discharged at the least 35. or 40. shot, yet ceased not to do the like
all the next day being sunday, (expecting his succors, whereof those of Gex had
made him a sign,) and hurt with Musket shot such as discovered themselves. But
in the Evening, the water being cut from him, whereof he, and his began to have
want: no succors appearing, he desired a treaty of composition and yielding
up, which was granted unto him, and that more graciously, then either he or
his, had any ways deserved, by reason of their insolences committed, whereof
the History at large can well declare and show forth: for they were suffered
to depart, with such Arms as they had, their matches not lighted, their Drumbs
at their backs, two Ensigns wrapped up, with all their baggage light enough
for them to carry: in which manner, they were safe conducted unto Gez, being in
number about 200. men, in very poor estate, and altogether astonished, to
have bin so rudely awaked and compelled to receive the same intertainment,
which they threatened to give unto those of Geneua. The four Canons, and the
two other of the Dukes pieces, were drawn unto Geneua, with fifty barrels of
powder, diverse Iron bullets, and great quantity of Lead, as also the remainder
of their meal, whereof the soldiers made great waste, for that at the taking
thereof, it was more then 200. Quintals: They likewise brought away with them
two Ensigns, and all the Gally-slaues, to the number of threescore and ten,
whereof the Lords permitted some to depart where they would, the rest willingly
staieng there, (being courteously used) were employed in such service of their
wars as need required. The fort of Versoy was soon after pulled down, and
raced to the ground, the walls of the Castle overthrown, the Tower undermined
and overwhelmed, and the most part of the houses burnt, thereby taking all
means from them, for ever after that to fortify again in that place: Of the
which yoke, the town of Geneua being freed, (yielding thanks unto God,)
they found themselves to be greatly eased, by reason that victuals began in
great store and abundance to be brought thither out of the Country of Vaut,
and so has continued ever since, their navigations being free until this
present, God be thanked. This done, they took diverse other places about
them, which anoied the^ very much, they threw down diverse bridges and
castles. And in the year 1590. having overthrown the Baron of Ermansse, taken
the town of Gez, and beaten down the castle, where the Duke lost a great
number of soldiers, they troubled the Dukes garrisons in diverse places: at the
last they perceiving and considering the situation of the place of Cluse to be
very strong, and that it would be a means to bridle their town and keep it
in subjection (although, they esteemed it but lost labor any more to assail
so difficult a place as that was to be won, as also being won, of so great
and dangerous defense unto such as are not masters of the field, and specially
on the other side of the river of Rhosne: although at other times they had
determined not to enterprise the same) occasion then being offered to think
thereon, they took the matter upon them in manner following. About half a
league from that fort on Geneua side, there stands a little castle somewhat
strong, named Pierre, within the which a Sauoyan called the Lord of Arsene,
held a garrison of forty or fifty soldidiers, which daily issuing forth,
spoiled and wasted the poor country men inhabiting in the balliage of Gez, and
specially such as dwelt in the villages that were appertaining unto the
seigniorie of GENEVA. with them likewise: there issued ordinarily out of the
Cluze, about twenty Soldiers, who spared neither man nor woman, but violated
both women and virgins, committing infinite other extortions. The Lord of
Lurbigny, and those of Geneua, (having taken and thrown down the Castle of
Gez, with other places anoying their town,) seeing the insolences of those of
Berne, (which thought them selves out of fear, by reason of the distance
between them and Geneua, and trusting to their aid when time should serve,)
determined to abate their pride. To the which end, they took with the^ 2. of
the Canons which they had taken from the Duke at Versoy, and two other field
pieces, wherewith, they meant with all speed to batter the said Castle. And on
Thursdaie the 16. of April 1590. they sent a troop of forty or fifty
Argoletiers before to discover the place, and to show themselves unto the
enemy: the same day there were about twenty eight or thirty Harquebusiers
issued forth of the Cluze, and running as far as the village of Farges, (a
good league distant from their fort, toward Geneua:) they took down the Bell
out of the steeple, and carried it with them, but in the end, it cost them
very dear: for that they were no sooner departed from thence, but the
Argolatiers of Geneua arrived at Farges, and understanding what had happened
unto the Village, presently made after, and having over taken them, within a
Musket shot of the Castle of Pierie, set upon them, and entering among men,
ouer-threw them all: of whom, they slew about five or six and twenty,
without any damage or loss unto themselves, only that the Sargeaunt of their
Company was hurt in the Arm, (whereof, nevertheless he died not,) and the
Captains horse slain under him. The Lord of Arsene, and those of Pierre made
a show as though they would have succored their companions, but the execution
being so speedily done, and they perceiving that the Argoletiers made toward
them, entered again into their fort, wherein they were presently enclosed by
those of Geneua, and upon Saturday after, without any resistance, yielded up
the Castle upon composition, heerevpon, the Lord of Lurbigny and those of
Geneua, finding so good an occasion, presently sent three companies of their
Soldiers, on the other side of the Cluze, to break the bridges, and to keep
certain passages, that thereby, those of the Cluze might not be aided with
fresh men from the Garrisons lying about them. The Captain within the same,
being a Piemontois, with about a thirty Soldiers more, having intelligence
of the overthrow of his men, which they thought had been taken prisonners,
was much amazed: yet in the end after great grief (by reason he had lost the
best Soldiers he had) he determined to stand in defense, expecting aid from
other places, presently after the yielding up of the castle of Pierre: The
pieces were drawn beyond Colongs, for to batter the two fortes, and men were
sent up upon the mountains, not only to keep the passage, but also to pull
great stones out of the rock, and to roll them down upon the enemy within
the fort, with the which, and with their canon, having broken the walls,
ouerthrewe their enclosure and baricado, or platform before the Rauelin. On
Saturday the 19. of April, the said Rauelin was taken by those of Geneua:
Notwithstanding the furious resistaunce of the fort beseiged, and the
Musketeers which shot out of the fort of Saint Victore, and down from of the
hill of Wache. The next day, those of Geneua having gotten underneath the foot
of the fort, ceased not to molest and grieve the Soldiers in the same with
engines, Miners, and artificial fires of diverse sorts, and that very often:
They within having gotten into the strongest places of their fort, upon whom,
those of Geneua threw and rouled down great stones from of the mountain, which
indomaged and hurt them very sore, and in the end, would have spoiled them
altogether, from beneath, they made a great smoke which ascended up into the
fort, devising al means they could to plague them within, to encourage the
assieged: Those of the fort of Wache cried unto them, courage, courage,
assuring them that their aid approached, as in truth it did and that on all
sides of the mountains, and specially on sunday at night, the enemy made
great signs and shows of fire unto those that were besieged: this
notwithstanding, the Lord of Lurbignie peceiuing his small troops (although
they were but hardly furnished of victuals) to increase in courage, and to be
earnestly bent unto the fight, resolved to assay al means possible whereby he
might force the fort, by mining, by throwing down stones from the mountains,
and with fire, whereupon on monday at night, he caused a mine to be made with
great diligence at the foot of the tower. They within hearing a noise thereof,
and having assaied (but all in vain) to drive the miners from their place,
which wrought out of their danger, the better to find out the mine, they fained
to parle for an accord, but for that in place of making a composition, the
captain began to speak very high and proudly: The Lord of Lurbigny caused him
quickly to retire, and therewith continued the mine: whereat they within,
required him to sursease, promising him, that if their succors did not come
unto them the next day within an hour after the appearing of the day, that
then they would yield up the place, and depart with their arms and such
necessaries as they had, which was granted unto them. Mean time, the Sauoyan
forces were assembled with great diligence from al places, and upon monday the
20 of April, came unto Chastillon in Michaille, within 2. leagues of the fort,
marching toward the same, but the craggines of the way which they had
marched, had so wearied their footmen, that they were constrained to lie all
that night within a league of the Cluze. On tusdaie early in the morning they
entered into the field, being in number about 1500. men, and were commanded by
their leaders, to divide and raunge themselves into five Squadrons: whereof,
one should take the way, leading along the river of Rhosne, the second should
go close under the mountain: (These two were Lanciers, Pistoletiers, and
Petronels al horsemen) and the other three Squadrons al footmen with murrions,
should march through the plain, leading right upon Longeray, where they hoped
to enclose and overthrow the footmen of Geneua, who having discovered their
forces by little and little began to retire, feeling themselves to weak for their
enemies, not having any horsemen to defend them. The Sauoyans, having sent forth
2 spies to discover their enemy, and understanding, that the companies of
Geneua began to dislodge, made have after them with a great noise and out-crie.
While this happened, the time appointed for the yelding up of the fort was now
expired, and the Lord of Lurbigny, who had made the composition, understanding
of the enemies approach, made a great noise with drums and trumpets, to the end
that the Captain of the fort should not hear the cries and shouts which those
within the fort of Wache made at the approaching of their aid: and therewithal
wrought so speedily, that he caused the Captain and eight and twenty
soldiers which he had left him, with two women and five or six of the Country
men, which they had taken prisoners, to issue out of the fort, and in their
place caused certain pikes and muskets to enter in and take possession of the
same, speedily co^ueying the captain and his soldiers (all wearied, and part
hurt as they were) some part on their way. At the same time that the fort was
yielded up, the Sauoyans began in great number to come down unto the fort, and
perceiving the retreat of three companies of Geneua, began to spread
themselves abroad, as they thought best, making their account that not one of
them should escape their hands, specially trusting to the succor of the fort,
which they as yet esteemed to be theirs, and whereof the Duke of Sauoy made so
much account, that he bragged, that with the same Fort and thirty men he had
driven back, and could bridle a whole army of Frenchmen and Switsers. Being
thus dispersed, they began very boldly to discharge against those of Geneua,
who having by good hap, recovered the side of a hill, made them so hard an
answer, that their footmen in the end were constrained to retire, but being
ranged in order, they began a fresh charge, mean time that a great troup of
their horse men, with certain armed men on foot approached very near unto the
fort, calling the Captain by his name, and displaied one of their banderols,
having a red cross upon the same, but the answer that they received was with
musket shot, which overthrew diverse of them, besides a great piece which so
played upon them, that it slew diverse of their horse men, wherewith the foot
men of Geneua which were on the one side, gave them such a fresh charge, that
they retired with all speed, and being a good distance from the fort (perceiving
that they had staide ouer-long) in as good order as they could, they took the
way leading unto the mountain, leaving diverse of their company dead in the
place, and all the ways covered with their blood, in such manner, that it
seemed a butcherie or slaughter of cattle. The Lord of Lurbigny and those of
Geneua were not a little ravished with admiration, not only to see themselves
so soon to be delivered of their enemies, and that without any loss but
only three men slain, and four or five hurt, but also that they were with
such speed become masters of the strongest fort in all that country, for the
which both there and within the town of Geneua they yielded hearty thanks unto
God: in the besieging whereof they lost about seven or eight men, but presently
after they perceiving that the said place could not very well be holden by
them, not having sufficient forces to keep and defend so many passages and
ways, as well on the one side as the other of the fort and of the river of
Rhosne, caused the fort of Cluse to be blown up with powder, which within
certain weeks after, was again ceased upon by the Dukes forces, causing it to
be made somewhat longer, and as much under the covert of the mountain as he cold
devise: but yet in such manner, that whosoever has the plain on that side
which butteth upon Longeray and the Wache, may easily compel them within the
fort to abandon the same. The Dukes garrisons lying in Fossigny, being moved
with the good success of those of Geneua, about the 20. of May, and the 22. of
April 1590. assembled themselves together, and entered into diverse villages on
that side within a league of Geneua, and belonging unto their master, where
they most furiously and in great rage fell upon the poor Country men: whereof
they slew a great number, not sparing any one, no not the women great with
child, nor yet little children, for that they slew, murdered, and destroyed by
diverse torments, to the number of 62. persons. On the other side, the Duke
again having taken, and new built the Forte of Cluze, under the conduct of the
bastard of Sauoy, sent an army of 5. or 6. thousand men into the balliage of
Gez, which army in the month of June, after they had slain about 250. men of
Geneua, made a most horrible waste and destruction through out all the
balliage, slaying such of the Country men as they found, to the number of 27.
persons, whose names are recorded, committing such villainies as are not to be
rehearsed, and before their departure, burnt more then 60. good villages. On
the side of Ternier, in the year 1589. about the month of June, they made a
fort (in a village named Sonzy,) calling the same S. Katherines fort, wherein
the Duke left his great shot, wherewith, in few months, he threatened to
batter Geneua. The garrison of this fort, has ruinated and destroyed the most
part of those villages, which at this day are not inhabited: there remains
only the balliags of Thonon, wherein there are six or seven score villages,
which the baron of Ermansse, and his companies do by little and little spoil
and destroy, attending the coming of the Spaniards, Piemontoisians, and other
of the Dukes troops, to set them all on fire, as they have done the rest,
following their pretended resolution, which is, to make a desert within six
leagues round about Geneua, if otherwise they can not bring their purpose
about, to get the town into their hands. Thus, one of the most fair, and
fertile little countries of Europe, has in the space of eighteen months,
been fourraged and spoiled by their own Lord: and yet, all this
notwithstanding, those of Geneua, in the midst of so many discommodities,
have continued without spoiling, being sustained by a special favor from God
himself, and aided by certain friends, both far and near, specially the
most Christian king, who in diverse sorts, accompanied with good effects, has
shown a most great affection towads them.

Let this suffice you (gentle reader) as a scantling or small proportion of one
of the most memorable Histories of our age, until such time as it shall please
God to give the means unto some others which think thereon, and whose
memories may serve them, to collect and gather it in order more at large, to
the end, that now you your selves, and your posterity after you, may see and
behold the wonders and miracles of almighty God. Unto whom be all honor,
praise, and glory, for the preservation of Geneua, as unto him only it
appertains.

Written at such time as the troops of Geneua, assisted by those of the most
Christian king, overthrew three cornets of Spanish and Neapolitane horsemen,
belonging unto the Duke, and therewith took the strong castle of Buring in
Fossigny.

FINIS.

