THE COVNTRIE GENTLEMAN MODERATOR.

Collections Of such intermarriages, as have been between the two Royal
Lines of ENGLAND and SPAIN, since the Conquest: with a short view of the
Stories of the lives of those Princes.

And also some observations of the passages: with diverse reasons to moderate
the Country peoples passions, fears, and expostulations, concerning the Prince
his Royal Match and State affairs.

Composed and collected by Edm. Garrard.

AT LONDON: Printed by Edward All-de. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY Lord DANVERS, Baron of Dauntesey.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IF I (poor and unfortunate) should say, that I can no more forget your Noble
house, I so long followed, and many Noble favors from thence received: then
the children of Captivity, could forget their own Jerusalem: if I should tell
your Lorship how much I honor you, joy at your sight, memory, and happiness,
liberally protesting all this, and much more; it may be thought but
superficial, and the common phrase of indigent men: But God that knows the
secrets of all men's hearts, can witness from mine, it sincerely proceeds: If I
could do any thing worthy acceptance, I humbly acknowledge, it is due to your
Lordship; yet howsoever, I here make bold to put out under your Honorable
Patronage, these my poor endeavors.

First, the Title is some way suitable to the condition your Lordship now lives
in, as being (indeed) more a Country Lord then a Court: If the Fate and State
shall please to have it otherwise, (Tam marti quam Mercurio) for the service of
the King, and Country, amongst the rest of the Stars placed in that Sphere,
your Lordship would at least contribute light: but your daily relieuing of many
poor in the Country, where and for which your renown is, done more to Gods
glory then your own; your Lordships preferment will be in a better Kingdom.

Secondly, the Subject and Treatise are likewise agreeable to your Lordships
loyal disposition, which is only desiring God may be truly honored, all
things suit and succeed to the complete comfort, contentment, and good of the
King, Prince and Kingdom: if they amongst their serious affairs, shall
vouchsafe to look into this work. I humbly desire the motive thereof might
be as from your Lordship, receiving your favorable acceptance, pardon for
this my boldness, and to live esteemed

Your Lordships ever devoted servant, Edm. Garrard.

To the Reader.
I Intend by Gods help, and your patience (gentle Reader) to present unto your
view an Abstract of such intermariages as have bin between the two royal
Lines of England and Spain, and some other passages betwixt the two Nations,
from the time of the Conquest, until this present: the subject appropriating
to that which is now most autentick on Englands fair stage, and of the
greatest consequence that has been there these many years, therefore the
greater, is both my adventure and presumption, for that the same and such great
affairs of State, are not to be meddled withal or talked of, but with great
caution and reverence, or rather indeed not at all, upon the former and
accustomed courses of restriction, of the vulgar in that particular, having bin
a long time in council consulted of, and now someway public: These my
endeauours being but merely collectio^s out of our English Chronicles (as
history) which is said to be the witness of time, the light of truth, the
memorial of life, and report of antiquity: with some other observations
concerning those affairs, and in the country too much expostulated of, I hope
I shall give no cause of offense, tax, nor exception; having no affectation to
talk or busy my self in State affairs, nor minister more, but rather less
occasion for others so to do. But that I should presume to write in a
business of so great a consequence, and of this nature, and the rather coming
now so late, and not in so good a season as formerly it would have done, I may
be subject both to reproof and tax. Only, I shall desire the Judicial, and
best affected (prima facie) not to judge me; what follows comes from a
Protestant pen, from one that wishes all may be well, lives in the country
far out of sight, and almost out of hearing, from the helm where the
affairs of State are steared: therefore more then by observation, and what the
country affoords is beyond my knowledge, neither sent, nor set on to write or
speak, having neither thought, aim, nor expectation of preferment, (not
assuming to my self thereof any ways worthy) should think my self happy, if
I might as a Moderator some way quallifie passion that the Country people
might not so much expostulate of our Princes Royal Match, and the affairs of
State as now they do. For that purpose it is only to them sent, meant, and
intended: having only treated of the passages of former times, concerning that
affair or others of State for the present or future, I neither have, nor will
meddle withal, as indeed not fitting for the common people so to do: As they
are far from their knowledges and apprehensions, so should they be likewise
from their discourses and expostulations, not to look where Lions wake or
sleep: The actions of Princes not to be pryed into, but by such as are in
authority. Peradventure some will say, that in this my Discourse I have been
squint-eyde, as not looking or bending my course any ways direct: those who
have been auerse, and unwilling for our Princes Royal Match, will tax me for
a temporizer, J conceive J have not magnified the Spaniards above measure, more
or otherwise then our own authors and other Writers affirm; so could J wish
they should not out of passion, and invention, be detracted beyond merit, and
with those that have so much desired our Princes Match, my self with them I
shall not any ways ingratiate, I hope my honest plain meaning and intentions,
shall indicially justify me against either. Will as a good subject ought
(wishing all the Country people would do the like) only desire God may be
truly honored, praying to him to direct all things for the best, his Majesty
obeyed in all his Commands on earth, have complete content and comfort, and
live long to see his holy intentions take effect for the good of Christendom,
and not with any farther expostulations to trouble our selves, but rely on Gods
providence, the King and Princes wisdoms, and integrities, letting them and
those that are in authority alone in the business; neither fear nor doubt,
that any thing will be done, which shall any ways impair the honor of
Religion, or general good of the kingdom: The farther particulars, this my
Epistle Dedicatory by way of anticipation, shall not relate, but the work it
self shall make particular demonstration thereof: What I have here begun, some
of better ability (if it please them) may supply that wherein I have been
defective: these my poor endeauours, I humbly leave to your considerations,
and my self to your favorable censures: resting

Yours, E. G.

ENGLAND AND SPAINES INTERMARRIAGES, with a brief tract of the story of those
Princes concerning those affairs.
PRescription and precedents, swaying with the positive laws of the Kingdom,
they may then far better overrule, or at least give Real satisfaction, in
point of mere conceit, and late conceived disaffection: reading our own
Annalles and Chronicles, we shall there find many mutual intermarriages, to
have been between the two Royal Crowns, of England and Spain, began in the
very infancy of our Monarchy, running in a long descent, chayned and linked
together one with another, making as it were a golden Orb and circle of
sincere Princely love and amity: so that many mighty Kings of Spain and
Portingale, have had Royal mothers of the English Nation, and likewise many
Royal Princesses of Spain, have been the blessed mothers of some puisant,
and victorious Kings of England. King William surnamed the conqueror, by whom
England received his last subversion, and general alteration, his courses of
government, institutions and laws (by which we are now governed) being
exactly executed, were as linkes intermutually fastened, made so strong a
Chain, that it has ever since held together, the whole frame of the state in
peace and order, as all the politic Regiments upon earth, all the
inter-leagued societies of men, cannot show a straighter form of combination.
This King first began, contracted Margaret his youngest daughter, to Alphonsus
King of Galicia: 1076.
Henry the second lineally descended from him, a famous and worthy King of
England, married Elenor his second daughter, to another Alphonsus the ninth,
1171.
surnamed the good King of Castile.

Richard the first, surnamed Cuer de Lion, son of Henry the second, he took
to wife Berengaria, daughter of Sanctius King of Nauarr.

The next intermarriage we find, to have between those two Nations being
England, had thereby a Queen (therein) And so for other in like sort; I will
be more particular; it was in the time of King Henry the third, Henry the third
reigned 56. years.
who of all the Kings of England since the conquest, reigned longest, and his
troubles therein the greatest: not any ways occasioned by the marriage, but
for that he would rule and govern, according to his will, and lusts, and not
by his laws: those that desire to be more particularly informed thereof,
Stowe. Hollinsh. Speed.
the story of his life written by many, will give them further, and full
satisfaction: for so much as shall concern marriages, and other passages
between England and Spain, I will only contract my self.

This King when he had reigned 39. years, with infinite and daily troubles, of
civil wars, with his Barons, he was suddenly called to another service
from home. Alphonso King of Spain, The King of Spain claimed Gascoyne.
claymed title to Gascoyne, by virtue of a Charter from Henry the second,
confirmed by Richard and John, Kings of England. Henry the third, fearing the
Gascoyners would draw in the Spaniards, peaceably as it were in the manner of a
Progress, repaired into Gascoyne, King of England went into Gascoyney.
and from thence sent Ambassadors to the King of Spain, to desire that the
Lady Elenor his sister, might be given in marriage to his son Prince Edward,
Ambassadors sent into Spain to treat of a marriage.
which was after Edward the first: this motion was well approved, besides that
they brought Letters Patents with them, from the King of Spain, in which
amongst all other clauses, it was contained, The King of Spain released his
claim to Gasconey.
that the King of Spain did quit his claim, and whole right, which by virtue
of any graunts, from Henry, Richard, and John, Kings of England, he had or
ought to have: hereupon the King of England sends both for his Queen, and
his son, (whom the King of Spain desired, The King of Spain sends for the
Prince of England.
might be conuayed unto him) only with a noble intent, to see and do him
honor. Among other acts of sincerity, and love, Alphonso sent to the King of
England good advice, that after the example of good Kings and Princes, he
should be a Lamb to his Subjects, and Seruitors, and a Lion unto Aliens and
Rebels.

Soon after, the Queen and her son arriving in Gascoyne, when all things
were rightly prepared, Prince Edward was thence presently sent into Spain,
where, at the City of Burges, he married the Lady Elenor, sister to the King
with great honor, The Prince of England marries with the King of Spaines
sister.
having first received Knighthood at his hands, which done returns to Burdeux,
from whence they altogether came safe, through France into England; the King
of France being not long before returned from the Holy land, The Prince of
England had great entertainment in France.
gave them both safe conduct in their passage, and did to him and all his whole
company, all the honor, with triumphs, and feasts, which the wit of man, or
the goodly Kingdom of France could afford: afterward landed safely at Dover;
what treasure this noble young Princess brought in portion to her husband, our
Writers have not delivered unto us, but the king forthwith gave to his son
Gascoyne, Ireland, Bristowe, Stamford, and Grantham: King Henry lived after the
marriage of his son seauenteene years; during which time, this Spanish Lady
carried her self, The Spanish Lady a most virtuous Princess.
as a most noble and worthy Princess, and afterward being Queen, a more
renowned, loyal, and virtuous wife, no age ever afforded. This King Edward the
first, amongst many his enterprises, of a Royal and Kingly resolution, went in
person to War against the Sarazenes: where that renowned and virtuous Lady
Elenor his wife, did endure with him an inseparable companion of all his
fortunes, and was at Acon delivered of a daughter, there baptized by the name
of Ione, she is denoated by our own. Writers, to be a matchless precedent,
of conjugal affection; the King her husband being traitorously wounded by a
Sarazen, with a poisoned knife, that when no medicine could extract the poison,
this Lady Elenor (whilst the King her husband slept.) With her tongue daily
licked his ranckling wounds, drawing forth the impoysoned matter, that soon
after he was fully cured, and she fortunately preserved.

The King and Queen not long after taking their journey together toward
Scotland, the Queen in her way thither-wards, sickned and dyed in the year
1284. The king almost struck dead with sorrpw, alters his resolution, returns
back toward London, with a long and sorrowful journey in a slow and stately
manner, she being conuayed out of Lincolnshire toward London, in her honor,
the king her husband, (who loved her above all worldly creatures) caused those
many famous Crosses to be erected, wheresoever her Royal corpse did rest.
Charing Cross, at Waltham, St. Albones, and Dunstable.
The King with his whole Nobility and Clergy, in a pompeous and Royal manner
meets the body at Saint Albones, and with a Noble and general concourse of
his Subjects, brings it to the Royal Sepulture of his Ancestors at
Westminster; and there in Saint Peter's Church, it was with all possible
Royalty, and magnificence honorably interred. The King gave unto the Abbot
there, twelve large and rich Lordships, charitably to give Alms, and devoutly
to pray for the blessed Queen, until the worlds end.

Our own Writers affirm of this Queen, Speed. Walsing. Camdens Britania.
to our Nation she was a loving mother: and says one, the Column and pillar
(as it were of the whole Realm) she added the virtues of a wife to her sex;
to them both, her immortal fame is a glory, and an honor to her Nation.

King Edward the third, 1360.
married his daughter Iohanna to Henry the second King of Castile, son of
Alphonsus the 11.

John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, fourth son of King Edward the third, did
take to wife Constancia, eldest daughter of Peter King of Castile.

To whom in right of his said wife Constancia, the Kingdom of Castile and
Leon, did descend, and they both styled themselves King and Queen of Castile,
and Leon, which illustrious title is yet to be seen, upon his noble monument
in Saint Paul's Church in London.

Katherine the sole daughter of the said Duke of Lancaster, by his aforesaid
wife Constancia, was married to Henry, 1388.
the third son of king John of Castile and Leon.

Edmund Duke of York, youngest son of king Edward the third, 1391.
married Isabella youngest daughter of Peter king of Castile.

King Henry the fourth married Iohanna the daughter of Charles king of Nauarr.
1403.


The next intermarriage we find, between England and Spain, was in the time
of king Henry the seventh, his own marriage, his sons with Spain, and
marriages of his daughters, are the greatest acts of State, our English
Annalles do afford us, first his own marriage made a Union, whereupon after
the effusion of much blood, to the consumption of the greatest part of the
English Nobility, there followed, and ever since continued, a happy peace, and
then by the marriage of his daughter, settled an undoubted and permanent
succession, for the Crown of England, the blessed happiness at this instant
we enjoy. All which with the patience of the Reader, contrary to my intended
resolution, which was only for the story of the Spanish matches, I will a
little digress, and briefly touch, having one with another dependancy and
coherence.

This king Henry the seventh, for his wisdom was said to be a second
Solomon, and lay somewhat heavy on his people, and was Auncestor to our now
Sovereign, who will peradventure some way, both for the mannaging of the
State, and marriage of his children, make him a pattern, and precedent: But
the difference is (the more is our happiness) Henry the seventh his gathering
of treasure together, was to heap up in store, as appeared being found at
Richmond, after his decease under his own key, and keeping eighteen hundred
thousand pounds sterling. A huge mass of money for those times. Our king has
expressed his Royal and Princely bounty, and exposed his treasure upon
important occasions, whereunto his Majesty has been necessitated, gathered
up from his Subjects, but as showers of rain, that falls back upon the earth
again. But it has been of late, and it is very like henceforth it will be
employed to repay, support, and supply.

About the ninth year of king Henry the seventh his reign, there was one
Peter Hyalus an Ambassador, A Spanish Ambassador sent into England.
sent from Ferdinando and Isabella king and Queen of Spain, to treat of a
marriage between Katherine their daughter, and Prince Arthur, son and heir
of Henry the seventh: it was observed this Hyalus was a man of great wisdom,
that through the present could see far into the future: which king Henry
soon perceived; Hyalus instantly became in great favor and estimation with
him, brought it so about, and yet not seen therein, that Hyalus was employed
for him into Scotland, both about a treaty of peace, as also a marriage for
Margaret his eldest daughter with James the fourth, then king of Scotland: it
was not king Henry his course, to seek peace at any Prince his hands: But it
was conceived he did it then, as not loving the barren wars, which he
thought would not be worth his charge: Hyalus so carried himself in those
Ambassies, that it was his masterpiece, which ever after gave him the esteem
of an excellent workman, which shall be hereafter more particularly related.
The wars between the king of England and the king of Scots, were then at the
height, when Hyalus was sent, but coming as it were from the king and Queen
of Spain, as from friends, equally well affected to both parties, to mediate a
peace between the two kings, of England and Scotland, as also about a treaty,
or ouerture, at least of a marriage, which perhaps in their own persons would
not have been so easily brought about, the point of honor might thereunto
give impeachment. Hyalus so handled the point of his employment, that
immediately after, Bishop Fox was sent as an Ambassador into Scotland,
whereupon followed an honorable truce, and shortly afterward a marriage
concluded, between the king of Scots, and Margaret the eldest daughter of
Henry the seventh king of England: so that Doctor Morton afterward Cardinal,
and this Peter Hyalus the Spanish Ambassador, were two of the happiest
instruments that ever were, the one for composing and contriuing the marriage
between king Henry the seventh, and Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Edward
the fourth, whereby the two houses of York and Lancaster were united, and
Hyalus a forerunner of good hap, was therefore by some called an Elias, being
the first motive and special means of the intermarriage between England and
Scotland, whereby we enjoy our now Sovereign, whom God grant long to reign
over us.

The Spaniards are observed generally to be acute and ingenious, and many of
them of great wisdom, and deep judgments, some reason thereof conceived, for
that they are freer from the dull discease of drink, then other Nations are.

The great Historians writes in this manner of them. The Spaniards are more
able, Guichardine. Biterus.
then either the French, or Germans, to endure the actions of the body, and to
suffer the passions of the mind. Their first founder was a Soldier, therefore
are they held naturally the more for war: Jgnatius.
and no Nation has ever been therein more exercised. They have a Spanish
Proverb, To have peace with England does us betide, wars with all the world
beside.

These our ancient Writers affirm, Droder. Siculus lib. 6. Strabo lib. 3.
Mila lib. 2.
that the Spaniard is most patient in want, hardness, hunger, thirst, heat,
cold, and all other toil and trouble, both of body and mind, and most ready
and resolute, for love of Country, or honor, to encounter all dangers
whatsoever. For the last particular, wherein the Spaniard has that height of
commendation given him, it neither can be any detraction or diminution to the
English; they have deserved as much: whereof the Spaniards themselves have had
experience.

The marriage with Spain was almost seven years in treaty, The Spanish match
seven years in treaty.
which was in part caused, by the tender years of the marriage couple,
especially of the Prince: But the true reason was, that those two Princes,
being Princes of great policy, and profound judgment, stood a great time,
looking one upon another fortunes how they would go, knowing well that in the
mean time the very treaty it self, gave abroad in the world, a reputation of
a strait conjunction and amity between them, which served on both sides to
many purposes, that their several affairs required, and yet they continued
still free: But in the end, when the fortunes of both Princes did grow every
day more and more prosperous, and assured, and that looking about them, they
saw no better conditions, they shist it up.

The second day of October, Queen Katherine arrived in England.
in the 17. year of the kings reign, the Lady Katherine, daughter to
Ferdinand, and Izabella king and Queen of Spain, arrived in England at
Plymouth, and she was married to Prince Arthur in Paul's, the 14. day of
November following; the Prince being about 15. years of age, and the Lady 18.
The manner of her receiving, the manner of her entry into London, and the
celebration of their marriage were performed, with great and true magnificence,
in regard of cost and order. The chief man that took the care, was Bishop
Fox, who was not only a great Counselor for war, or peace, but also a good
Suruayor of works, and a good Master of ceremonies, and any thing that was fit,
for the active part belonging to the service of a Court, or State of a great
king.

Amongst the devices, and conceits of the tryumphes at the marriage, there was
a great deal of Astronomy: the Lady being resembled to Hesperus, and the
Prince to Arcturus: and the old king Alphonsus, that was the great Astronomer
of kings (and Ancestor to the Lady) was brought in to be Fortuneteller of the
match: And whosoever had those toys in compyling, they were not altogether
pedanticall. But we may be sure, that king Arthur the Britain (in whose acts
were worth enough to make him famous, besides that which is fabulous written of
him:) the Prince his descent from him, and the Lady Katherine from the house of
Lancaster, was not forgotten; those two particulars had a great part in the
play: But it seems, it is not good to fetch fortune from the Stars. This
young prince Arthur, drow upon him not only the hopes and affections of his
Country, but the eyes and expectations of Forraigners, all frustrated, enjoying
him so little a time, as they did, the great alterations, and strange events
afterward ensuing.

The marriage portion the Princess brought, The marriage portion.
which was turned over to the King, by renunciation, was two hundred thousand
Ducats, whereof one hundred thousand were paid ten days after the
solemnization of the marriage, and the other hundred thousand, at two payments
annual; but part of it in Jewels, and Plate, and a due course set down to
have them justly, and indifferently prised.

The Ioyncture, Queen Katherines Ioincture.
or the advancement of the Lady, was the third part of the principality of
Wales, and of the Dukedom of Cornwall, and the Earldom of Chester, to be
after set forth in seueraltie; and in case she came to be Queen of England;
her advancement was left indiffinite, but that it should be as great, as any
former Queen of England had: Prince Arthur, imediately after the Solemnization
of the Marriage, was sent to keep his rescyance and Court, as Prince of Wales,
at the Castle of Ludlowe: after a few months, in the beginuing of April, he
there deceased; Prince Arthur deceased.
So that in respect he dyed so young, and by reason of his Fathers manner of
education, that did cast no great Luster upon his children, there is little
particular mention of him, only thus much remains, that he was very studious
and learned beyond his years, and beyond the custom of great Princes.

The February next following, Henry Duke of York, afterward Henry the Eight,
was created Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester; For the Dukedom of
Cornwall, deuolued unto him by Statute, which was half a years distance
taken for his creation, and his Prince Arthurs death, which was construed to
be, to exprect a full time, whereby it might appear, whether the Lady
Katherine were with child by Prince Arthur or not; when this doubt was
cleared, Henry the Prince of Wales, was presently Contracted to the Lady
Katherine his brother Prince Arthurs Widow, the reason of the Kings so doing,
some Writers affirm, was because he was close handed, and would not part with
a second Dowry; some others affirm (and it is like they are nearest the
truth) out of his affection to Ferdinando King of Spain, with whom he had ever
a consent, even in nature and customs, and out of a politic consideration,
to continue his alyance with Spain, being assured, that the Lady was of a most
worthy, virtuous, and Princely disposition, and in his profound judgment, knew
that wives were casual commodities, both for the love he bore to his Son,
and the kingdom; for that neither of them should run another hazard,
retained the Lady to be Queen of England.

The next instantly taken in hand, The King of Scotlands marriage with the
Kings eldest Daughter, done by Proxy.
was the work begun by Hyalus the Spanish Ambassador, the Solemnization of the
Spowsals of James the Fourth, King of Scotland, with the Lady Margarel the
Kings eldest Daughter, which was done by Proxy, and published at Paul's Cross,
the 25. day of January, and Te Deum solemnly sung; But certain it is, that the
joy of the City thereupon showed by ringing the Bells, and Bonfiers, and such
other incense of the people, was more then could be expected, in case of so
great and fresh enmity between the Nations, especially in London, which were
far enough from the feeling any the former calamities of the War, and
therefore might be truly attributed to a secret instinct, and inspiring, (which
many times runs not only in the hearts of Princes) but in the pulses and
veins of people) touching the happiness there to ensue in time to come.

The Marriage was in August following consumated at Edenborough, King Henry
bringing his Daughter as far as Colliweston on the way, and then consigning
her to the attendance of the Earl of Northumberland, who with a great troop
of Lords and Ladies of Honor, brought her into Scotland to the King her
Husband.

This Marriage had been in treaty by the space almost of three years, from
the time that Hyalus made the first ouerture, and that the King of Scotland
shortly after, opened his mind to Bishop Fox.

The sum given in marriage portion by the King, The Marriage portion.
was ten thousand pounds. The ioyncture and advancement assured by the King of
Scotland, was two thousand pounds a year, after King James his death, one
thousand pounds a year in present, for the Ladies maintenance. This to be set
forth in lands of the best, and most certain Revenue.

The King as it is reported, A question proposed by the Lords of the Counsel.
before this Match was concluded, proposed it to his Council, and amongst them
it was debated, some of the Table, in the Freedom of Councillors (the King
being present) did put the case, that if God should take away the Kings two
Sons without issue, that then the kingdom of England would fall unto the
King of Scotland, The. Kings Reply.
which might preiudise the Monarchy of England: whereunto the King himself
replied, that if that should be, Scotland would be but an accession to England,
and not England to Scotland, for that the greater would draw the less; and
that it was a safer Union for England then that of France; This passed as an
Oracle, and silenced those that moved the question; This was a kind of divine
and prophetical proposition, made by the Lords of the Council, and so
accordingly answered by the King; so that the said James the fourth King of
Scotland, had issue by the Lady Margaret, James the Fifth, The Kings Descent.
and he had issue Queen Mary, she had issue our now Sovereign; so that he is
great Grandchilde of Margaret, eldest Daughter to Henry the Seventh.

Now seeing I have gone thus far in matters of Marriage, contrary to my
intent, as not to have meddled with any but those of Spain, I will now go
through by way of touch, rather then by ample discourse, of the marriage of the
last, and indeed of all the Daughters and children of King Henry the Seventh;
Henry the Seventh contracteth Mary his youngest Daughter to the Emperor.
and the rather, for that it was the last act, that concluded his temporal
felicity, which was the conclusion of a glorious match, between his Daughter
Mary and Charles, Princes of Castyle; afterward the great Emperor, both being
of tender years (which treaty was perfected by Bishop Fox, Henry the
Seventh dying, the Marriage took not effect.
and others his Commissioners at Calice.) But by reason the King about some
year after died, that marriage did not take effect; Mary King Henryes youngest
Daughter married to the King of France. Afterward to the Duke of Suffolk.
she was afterward married to the King of France, who being aged, shortly after
died, had no issue by her: King Henry the Eight her brother sent over into
France, Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, to fetch her from thence, who married
her, and by him she had issue: the farther particulars in those affairs, I
leave the readers, to the perusal of the works of many Writers, Stowe.
Holland. Speed.
that have written the same at large.

For Henry the Seventh I will conclude, being he himself by the general
concluder of all, was concluded. (Only this) he had the fotune of a true
Christian, as well as of a great King, ^ote.
in living exercised, and dying repentant, his happiness was much the more; as
when he left the world, was in great felicity (being as it were at the top of
all worldly bliss) in regard of the high marriages of his Children, his great
renown (throughout Europe) his great Riches, and the perpetual constancy of
his prosperous successes, all which were some way a shadow and veil; that it
did not so evidently appear, as otherwise it would, in what obloquie of the
people, (he notwithstanding lived.) So that death to him was wonderful
opportune, to withdraw, and preserve him from any future blow of Fortune,
which in all likelihood would have fallen upon him, in regard of the great
hatred of his people; and the Title of his Son, being then come to eighteen
years of age, and being a bold Prince, and liberal, gained upon the people,
by his very aspect and presence.

The King according to the contract made by his Father, King Henry the 8.
married the Lady Katherine, his brothers widow.
married his Brother Prince Arthurs Widow. The secret providence of God
ordaining that Marriage to be the cause of great events and changes: our Writers
do not lay it to the Ladies charge, that she in her particular ministered any
occasion thereof.

The story of the Kings life, more or otherwise then it shall concern the
divorce; the Ladies life and conversation, I will not here meddle; many have
written of him at large, but the less is the more, for his commendation:
Queen Katherine lived twenty years with the King
When this Lady had lived above twenty years with the King, as a virtuous and
loyal Wife, Cardinal Wolsey we find had a great part in this play, whose
descent Pollidor Vigill relates, Parentem habuit virum probum at lanium, had
an honest man to his Father, but a Butcher: then for the particular story of
his life, more then shall concern this affair, I leave the Readers to many
other Authors that have written the same at large; but in brief, he was
intolerable wicked, pompous, and magnificent, and according to the fate
(commonly of such men) his end was infamous and unfortunate; upon some private
grudge he bore to Queen Katherine, partly to be revenged thereby upon her
Nephew the Emperor, because he would not make him Pope (as secretly he had
requested him) and partly because oftentimes in a most secret, loving, and
gentle fashion, she had admonished and warned him of his covetousness,
tyranny; of his extortions, oppressions; of his pride and licentious course of
life; such men, when they are told of those things, being eminent and
powerful, usually will extend it to the highest, to execute their malice;
which Wolsey so did toward the Queen, as it afterward fell out to be
apparent, that to the King in private he had cast some scruples, with some
subtle disputations, concerning the lawfulness, and nullitie of the Kings
marriage, who having (as it seemed) a desire to change, as by his having so many
Wives, afterward it was somewhat probable, made a great show and expressure to
the world, that he began to be tender over his conscience, and provident to
establish the true succession of the kingdom, in a lawful heir; struck so
great an impression into him, and so busied his cogitations and thoughts, that
a religious sorrow began to seize upon him (and to avoid the continuance in
that incestuous sin) until by a judicial sentence, the doubts were cleared,
he refrained from the Queens bed; and the Cardinal to make himself more
great then he was, procured a Commission from the Pope, to be directed to him,
and to his ancient brother Cardinal Campeius, that before them as supreme
Judges, that question (by legal process and proceedings) might be heard,
debated on, and censured, according to the laws of God.

These two Legates (having received their Commission) informs the Queen of
their authority and power, and she in some passion accused Wolsey, as the
principal brocher of that doubt, and a maintainer of that contention, which he
denied, and excused himself. The King pretending nothing in this business but
truth, sincerity, and Justice, according to the Laws of God and man, was well
contented, that the Queen should make choice of the greatest Clerks, and the
best learned men in the kingdom, to defend, and maintain her cause, which she
accordingly did, Commissioners chosen by the Queen.
as namely, William Warham then Archbishop of Canterbury, and Nicholas West
Bishop of Ely, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Henry Standish Bishop of
Assoph. For the prosecuting of this business, a stately Court was crected in
the great Hall at the Blackfriars, where the two Legates sat as Judges, the
King and Queen scited in their own persons, or by their Procters to appear.
The King by his Procter submitted himself to the Apostulation authority and
power, which by the Pope to the two Legates was given: But the Queen her self
(accompanied with many Lords, Knights, Ladies, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen) and
having first done great reverence to the two Legates) appealed from them (as
from Judges, which were not compotent, and indifferent, to determine betwixt
the Queen and King) to the Court at Rome; This appeal they allowed not, but
in the same Court they sat weekly, and before them many learned and subtle
Disputations, touching the lawfulness; and also concerning the insufficiency
of that Marriage, were daily made before them.

The King perceiving, that no quick dispatch was used, though oftentimes they
deliberately consulted, came with the Queen into the said Court, where his
Majesty solemnly protested his infinite love toward her, acknowledging her to
be the most amiable, The Kings protestation and love to the Queen.
loving, kind, dutious, modest, and sweetest Wife, that he thought was in the
world; and that therefore he should not take so much joy and comfort in any
thing else whatsoever, as he should do in her; if by the laws of God and man,
she might remain his Wife, and therefore for the determining of that question,
and for the quieting of his troubled conscience, he instantly importuned a
quick dispatch, and a final end.

Then was the Queen demanded, whether she would stick to her appeal or no,
who answered yea, yet for all that, the Court proceeded weekly, though softly,
as before.

The Queen presently rose up, and going about the Court to the King, fell
down on her knees before his feet, and in the hearing of the people spoke
thus in effect; The Queens speech to the King.
Sir, I desire you to take some pity upon me; and do me justice and right: I
am a poor Woman, a stranger borne out of your Dominions, having here no
indifferent counsel, and less assurance of friendship! alas, wherein have I
offended, or what cause of displeasure have I given, that you intend to put me
away? I take God to my judge, I have been to you a true and humble wife, ever
conformable to your will and pleasure, never gainsaying any thing wherein you
took delight: without all grudge, or discontented countenance, I have loved
all them that have loved you, howsoever their affections have been to me-ward:
I have borne you children and been your wife, now this twenty years. Of my
virginity and marriage bed, I make God and your own conscience the judge, and
if it be otherwise proved, I am content to be put from you with shame: The King
your father in his time for his wifedome, was known to be a second Solomon,
and Ferdinando of Spain my Father the wisest amongst their kings; could they
in this match be so far ouerseene, or are there now wiser, and more learned
men then at any time were? surely it seems wonderful to me, that my marriage
after twenty years should be thus called in question, with new invention
against me, who never intended but honesty; Alas Sir, I see I am wronged,
having no Council to speak for me, but such as are your subjects, and cannot
be indifferent on my part; therefore I most humbly beseech you in charity stay
this course, until I may have advise and counsel from Spain; if not, your
Graces pleasure be done, and therewithal rising, and making lowly obeisance to
the Court, departed thence, Queen Katherine departed the Court.
leaning upon the arm of her servant, deceived each man, expecting she had
returned to her seat, when as she took directly out of the place; which being
perceived, the Crier again called her by the name of Queen Katherine, to come
into the Court; Madam quoth her guide, you are again called; on said she, it
makes no matter, this is no indifferent Court for me, therefore go forward.

The King perceiving that she was departed, The Kings report of the Queen.
presently spoke thus unto the assembly; I will (quoth he) in her absence
declare before you all, that she has been to me a most true, obedient, and
comfortable wise, endued with all virtuous qualities, conditions, according to
her birth, and lowliness, equals any of the meanest estate.

The Court sat many times after, where many subtle and vebement allegations
were urged for the lawfulness and nullity of the Marriage, the King eagerly
bent to have an end, foresaw he should never there have any: whilst the
business was in debate and handling, he privately employed diverse Lords, and
the greatest Divines within his kingdom, to travail into all the Universities
in the Christian world, and there to be resolved of their opinions, touching
the validity or nullity of the marriage. And when they all returned, they
brought with them twelve Instruments, sealed with the public Seals of so many
of the Universities, and also the opinions of sundry great and famous learned
men: The Kings marriage judged unlawful.
by all which it appeared, that they agreed and consented in one, that the
Kings marriage with his Brothers wife was utterly void, and contrary to the
laws of God and man, notwithstanding the dispensation of the Pope.

The King sent those Instruments unto the Queen, desiring to be satisfied from
her, whether she would yield her consent to the Divorce or no, for the quieting
of the Kings conscience, to refer it to four Prelates, and four temporal
Lords.

The Queen thereunto made a long, grave, noble, and patient answer, positiuely
concluding, she would not submit her self to any course therein: until the
Court of Rome which was privy to the beginning, had made there a determination
and final end: the King having several times formerly sent unto the Pope, had
been long delayed, seeing no likelihood of an end, resolved no longer to wait
in his attendance on the Court of Rome, went roundly and resolutely on in
another course, summons a Parliament, there showing the twelve Instruments from
the several Universities, The Kings Divorce by act of Parliament.
an Act passed, and his marriage with the Lady Katherine was dissolved and made
void, a sentence of Divorce pronounced by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
she was ever after to be called the Queen Dowager: few or none but are either
so far read in our English Chronicles, or may observe what afterward became
of the Popes usurped Heptarchie in England, and what further followed.

So here you have heard the relation of the Story of this great Queen
Katherine, though unfortunate, was indeed, a mirror and example of wisdom,
integrity, sincerity, and all Royal and Princely virtues. Yet it is unlike,
but that before her coming ouet into this kingdom, she might be detractiuely
expostulated of, and had not she been as she is here discribed, (as the times
afterward were) she would assuredly have had her part of detraction from our
Writers, as they have been some way sparing of her due commendation.

After her separation and divorce from the King, there is little news of her,
but that within some three years after at Kimbleton in the County of
Huntington, Queen Katherine deceased.
she there religiously lived and dyed, and lies interred in the Cathedral
Church of Peterborough.

The next marriage betwixt England and Spain, King Philip the second came over
into England and married Queen Mary, Daughter to Henry the Eight, which he had
by Queen Katherine of Spain.

That Marriage is yet so fresh in memory, and amongst the country people is
indeed a great occasion of producing those fears and doubts, they seem to
apprehend, these things I must acknowledge, are too great a consequence of
State for me to meddle withal, yet under favor as a Moderator, I would
willingly the country people should truly know and take it into their
considerations, that for those persecutions in Queen Maryes time (it was
thought) she was much the more thereunto drawn by her two Bishops, that were
such bloud-hounds ( Gardener and Bonner) King Phillip was both a mediator, and
Moderator, what he could, to stay them, the which with the story of the
marriage, and other passages concerning the same, I will here as our own
Writers have affirmed, briefly and truly relate.

Queen Mary her intent to marry with King Phillip, she caused to be published:
Stephen Gardener then Lord Chancellor, made a speech to the Nobility in the
Chamber of presence, setting forth the honor, the riches, and augmentation of
Titles to the Crown of England; yet was it distastefull to many, great fears
and doubts instantly conceived would follow, as well the Church reformed, as
for the pollitique, and State affairs of the kingdom.

The first beginners of commotion were, Henry Duke of Suffolk, and Sir Thomas
Wyat, making Proclaimations for the abandoning of strangers, and to withstand
the Queens marriage with King Philip, the reasons they further alleged and
published, their proceedings and unfortunate ends, I leave the reader to the
perusal of their Stories by diverse Written at large.

The Queen removed to the Tower, The Queens marriage confirmed by Parliament
Anno. 2. Ca. 2. Some of the Nobility and Commons much discontented. The Queen
sent Letters to give them some content
summons a Parliament, wherein by Statute the marriage was confirmed, to the
great contentment, comfort and joy, of the then time obseruers. But some of the
Nobility, and the Commons for the most part were much grieved and discontented
thereat. These distastiue stomachs, Queen Mary well perceauing, therefore to
give them the more content, she sent Letters signed with her own hand into
Wales, charging the Lord President, the Bishop of Oxford and Salisburie, to
intimate the benefit thereof to the whole land, as much as might be, and
especially London, whose Lord Mayor and Commons were sent for; to whom the Lord
Chancellor made a Speech, told them how by the match, all the Realm would be
much intiched, The Londoners became instantly for the marriage.
but especially London by their Trade and Traffic with Spain, that was
enough, not only to alter and reduce, but to set them an edge beyond, or at
least equiuolent with all other respects, or considerations whatsoever.

The Earl of Bedford and the Lord Fitzwaters, King Phillip sent for.
were sent into Spain to conduct King Phillip into England, the Lord Admiral
with twenty eight ships securing the seas, the space of three months before.
All things thus ordered, and Phillip in readiness, took shipping at Carone in
Gallezia, and with a Navy of an hundred and fifty sailed directed his course
for the Queen; upon Friday the twenty day of July he arrived at Southampton,
King Phillip landed in England.
and was the first man of the Fleet that set soote on the shore, which no
sooner done, but he drew his Sword, and bare it naked in his hand as he went.
The Earl of Arundle Steward of the Queens house, presented to his Highness
the George and Garter, and the Mayor of the Town of Southaempton the keys of
the Town, thither was sent the Lord Chancellor from the Queen, and he again
of his Nobles sent to her (who was on the way to Winchester to welcome
himself.) Toward which City upon Monday following he set forth, being
accompanied with the Marquess of Winchester, the Earls of Arundle, Darby,
Worcester, Bedford, Rutland, Penbroke, and Surry; the Lords Clynton, Cobham,
Willoughbie, Darcy, Matreuers, Talbot, Strange, Fitz-warren, and North. The
Spanish Nobles.


The Spanish train were the Dukes of Aluer and Medina Cellina the Admiral of
Castilla, the Marquess of Bergnes Piscara Sarra Valli Anguilar, the Earls of
Egmonde, Horn, Peria, Chinchon, Oliuares, Saldana, Medela, Euente, Sallida,
Landriano, Castellar, the Bishop of Cuenca, and others, so that more honorable
Attendants had sildome been seen.

Then there were Articles agreed on, which were branched out into ten
propositions, whereunto King Philip subscribed, they were very honorable for
England: the perticulars of them I leave the Reader to Mr. Speed his excellent
compendious work, where the whole passages of this affair, and these Articles
are at large related.

Then with the consent of all parties, The matriage of King Philip and Queen
Mary. Anno 1554.
the marriage with great state was solemnized at Winchester upon Wednesday,
being the 25. of July on Saint James day, where the Emperors Ambassadors
presently pronounced, that in consideration of this marriage, their Master had
given unto his son Philip, the Kingdoms of Naples and Jerusalem: whereupon
their titles by Garter King at Arms, was solemnly proclaimed with these styles
as follows.

Philip and Mary by the grace of God King and Queen of England, France,
Naples, Jerusalem and Ireland, defender of the Faith, Princes of Spain and
Cicill, Archdukes of Austritch, Dukes of Millane, Burgundy, and Brabant,
Counties of Haspurge, Flaunders, and Tyroll.

In November following the marriage, the Queen was reported to have been
conceived with Child: for joy whereof, Te Deum was commanded solemnly to be
sung, and Processions and Prayers made for her safe deliverance. The Queen
took her Chamber, the Court was full of Midwiues and Gentlewomen Attendants,
Rockers were provided, the Cradle prepared, and all made so certain, that some
were punished for publishing doubts thereof to the contrary, in so much as it
passed in Parliament, that if God should take away Queen Mary, their supposed
young Master coming into the world, So called by Sir Richard Southwell Knight
of the house.
should find himself provided for. It was by Act of Parliament ordained, that
King Philip should be Protector of her issue, and Governor of the Realms,
until their Prince or Princesses should come of able years. Anno 2. and 2.
Philip and Mary. Enacted that King Philip should be Protector of his supposed
issue.


King Philip apprehended continual fears, and doubts of the English, in
regard of the maligners of his marriage: for at his first entrance the door of
his great Hall of his Court, for the most part kept shut, or straightly
guarded, not any suffered to enter, unless his business was first made
known. Acts and Menuments. page 1643. 6. King Philip fearful of the English.
Those Lords that were against the marriage, commanded to send their weapons to
the Tower.


The Lords some of them having formerly showed themselves to have been much
against the marriage, having leave to depart London, had straight commandment
to send all their Harness and Artillary to the Tower, which was done. The King
was as well doubtful of those that bear a fair show, conceiving it upon this
ground: For that a Noble man in consultation had given his counsel to cut off
Lady Elizabeth's head; whereby he assured himself, that those so bad minded
toward their own natural Princess, could not be better to him a stranger:
he was graciously courteous to the English, and endeavored all ways and
means to gain their loves and affections: For which he laid a good
foundation, became an earnest mediator, King Philip a great friend to the Lady
Elizabeth.
and solicited the Queen for the liberty of that innocent Princess her sister
the Lady Elizabeth, who still remained a solitary prisoner in Woodstock about
Wyats conspiracy, though no proofs could be brought against her for any
offense.

King Philip at length obtained his suite, that the Lady Elizabeth was brought
to Hampton Court, and for 14. days there locked up, and laid at by Gardener to
submit her self, having not seen her sister in two years before: she was
sent for into the Queens Chamber about ten of the clock in the night, which
she no sooner had entered, but falling upon her knees, she prayed to God to
preserve her Sovereign Majesty, protesting her loyalty, and truth to her
person whatsoever had been spoken, or instigated to the contrary.

At which time there was between them long and much debate, the Lady Elizabeth
made good her innocence: Queen Mary replied in Spanish (God knows,) and so
went away, King Philip standing behind the Arras all the time.

About some week after, Princess Elizabeth released of her imprisonment.
the Princess Elizabeth was discharged of Bening field, whom she termed her
laylor, and leave of liberty, yet so that Sir Thomas Pope a privy Counselor,
and Master Gage the Queens Gentleman Usher, were still her Attendants, all
Queen Mary's time.

But the death of Gardener immediately followed, those storms grew more calmer,
and the Lady Elizabeth every day more affectionately respected. King Philip by
this his honorable and worthy act, gained him the love of many the Nobility
and Gentry of the Kingdom, and did thereby so indeare and ingratiate himself
into the affections of the Commons, Nota.
that they turned their hate and distaste upon those that had been the chief
opponents and maligners of the marriage: So that they are indeed like a
stream of water, though turned out of the current, yet will run.

He every day gained more and more upon the loves of the English, King Philip
gained the love of the English.
in his affection gracing and countenancing them, and his own Country men: he
carried himself wondrous euenly, which kept good correspondencie between the
two Nations, though his marriage with Queen Mary made him Master of all here
in England, yet in his honest and just disposition, those Articles which he had
formerly agreed unto, always maistered his affections obsequiously, and
exactly performing them, which is not always seen in Princes; he had the two
chief ornaments belonging to a King, that is to say, mercy and Justice, for
the one he was both a moderator and mediator, King Philip his good disposition
and inclination to Justice.
what he could to restrain those severe and cruel persecutions, committed in
Queen Mary's time: then for Justice he had a Princely inclination to have it
duly administered. Amongst many there is one piece of Justice noted in him: an
Englishman at London in single fight being killed by a Spaniard, he was
executed, though by the Strangers two hundred Ducats were offered for the
Spaniard his repriue, which could not stay the hand of Justice: For that there
will be further occasion hereafter in my intended course, for the pursuing of
this my relation, I will write here no more of him in his particular (as being
not to be doubted) he was no less worthy and graciously disposed a Prince,
then he is here briefly discribed, or at least howsoever if his virtues had
not exceeded his imperfections, (which is a great happiness to a State where
such a King is) by some of our Writers that have written of those times, we
should have heard of him at large.

King Philip frustrate of his hope for his heir, upon the fourth of September
1555. took shipping, and went to visit his Father the Emperor, and to take
possession of the Low Countries, where he stayed a year and a half, to the
great grief of Queen Mary his wife. But returning, came to Dover, he was by
the Queen met on the way, and brought through London, accompanied with many
Peers of the Realm, as in triumph against a Coronation.

In the Kings absence many conspiracies had been attempted, but they were like
vapors that are drawn up by the Sun, and falls again: so those actors (as
commonly incident to such men) were drawn up with hemp by the hand of Justice,
before they did any hurt, Hollinsh. Grafton.
the persons and particular passages, I also leave to those Authors before
mentioned.

The Emperor ouer-worne with the affairs of the world, Grimston in his
French. History.
and wearied with the troubles of turmoyling wars, or rather touched with
remorse of conscience, for the infinite miseries brought by him upon Florence,
Naples, Scicilie, Tuscane, Elbe, and Calabria, persuaded that those mournful
iarres of Christian Princes, Nota.
had given to the Turk advantage upon diverse parts of Europe, Iarres of
Christian Princes gives advantage to the Turk.
he called his son King Philip of England unto Bruxels (as is said) where by
authentic Letters, resigned all his Realms unto him, commanding all his
Estates, and Subjects to acknowledge and hold him their lawful King, and among
many other instructions, and most wise exhortations, gave him charge chiefly to
hold amity with the French, least otherwise the wars of those puisant Nations
might oppress all Christendom.

Charles the Emperor, as he has been discribed, by those that have written
his life, he was an excellent wise Prince, which is showed both in that his
sage and grave observation, as also for his like Council given to his son
Philip.

The consideration of both are fitting, Nota.
and suitable for these our now times; as first the infinite miserable
calamities that those Countries of Germany have endured, and may be brought
unto by the late Wars there, and may give much advantage for the Turk
against Christendom.

The other in likelihood, it may be a great happiness for a State to be in
league, and amity with a neighbor Nation, that is opulent and powerful, and
to have it confirmed and fastened by marriage, Nota.
which commonly is then inviolable: There might be much written upon this
Subject, but I will leave it to those of better ability to do it, only as I
passed by I have called.

King Philip was much inclined to peace, and Queen Mary his wife at that time
much more, both to hold him with her at home, and to support the Religion which
she had again raised by restoring the Clergy to their wonted possessions,
The Nobility would not part with the lands they had belonging to the Clergy.
The Queen by Parliament all such like lands she had.
whereof much was then held in the Noble men's hands, from whose hard hold
hardly could any thing be wrested: But those in her own, she freely resigned
by Parliament, with this most Christian resolution and Princely saying, that
she set more by the salvation of her own soul, then she did by the revenues
of all the Kingdoms of the world, and so committed the restoration, and
dispose thereof unto the Pope, and Cardinal poole his Legate, to the great
enritching of the Church, and impouerishing of the Crown.

King Philip following his Fathers advice, made peace with France, which was
to continue for five years, The Pope besieged, confined within the walls of
Rome. John Slcidon.
which no sooner was made, then again was broken: one principal occasion was
ministered, by Pope Paul the fourth, then an Enemy to the Spaniard, whom Duke
Alua had besieged, and confined him within the walls of Rome, he sent to Henry
the French king for aid, and withal sent him a tryumphant Hat, with a stately
Sword, and thereupon had succor by the Guise, who removed the siege, and set
the Pope at liberty. But the French decreasing for want of pay, and the
Spaniard still raising their Trophies of victory, the Pope thought it the
surest to hold with the strongest, The Pope took the surest side, reconciled
himself to the Spaniard.
fell off from the amity of the French King, and was reconciled to the
Spaniard: so that by this occasion there grew a strong party against the King
of France: For by King Philip and Queen Mary his wife, he had both England
and Spain against him, and the Pope, no less powerful there, then he was,
within the walls of Rome.

The occasion that Queen Mary took for the breach of the peace, was more upon
pretenses, John Stowes Annalls.
surmises, and picked quarrels, then any just cause ministered by the French
King. Queen Mary sent him a defiance, and instantly proclaimed wars against
France. And King Philip her husband went in person for the prosecuting
thereof. The Queen immediately sent after the King her husband, the Earl of
Pembroke General, Viscount Mountacute, with diverse Earls and Barons, with a
great Army, who came to King Philip, and joined with him, whilst the Duke of
Sau^y, Brunswike; the Earls of Egmonde, Horn, and Mansfield, invaded the
French confines, and planted a strong siege against Saint Quintens, which
shortly after by the English, St. Quintens won by the English.
was nobly and victoriously won to the great loss, and discomfort of the
French, Monsieur Mountomorancie Constable of Frunce, and General, was taken
prisoner.

Queen Mary contrary to her promise and agreement, made upon her marriage with
King Philip, entangled her Subjects, with the quarrels of the Spaniards: The
greatioy conceived for the victory, was shortly after dashed, with as much
sorrow for the loss of Galice.

The English after they had so gotten Saint Quintens, they afforded to
themselves either little list, or leisure more, or otherwise; but betook
themselves to their delights, disorders, and pleasures, and only to keep, and
make good what they had newly gotten, grew negligent, and careless of the
Town of Calice, that the Forts thereabouts for defense being vnrespectiuely
regarded (won by that victorious Prince Edward the third) and that by no
less then eleven months siege (were in the compass of eight days besieged,
surprised, and won) in the depth of Winter, to the worlds wonder, and not
without great suspicion of treachery, which happened the the 12. day of
lanuary: and in the second month, were surrendered the strong Fort of Guies,
and Hames, whereby all the English sooting was lost in the continent of France.

So here you may see, that our own Writers affirm, that the breach of the
peace with the French King, was not any ways by the occasion of King Philip,
nor the loss of Calice by his default: After his great victory at Saint
Quintens, he would admit no peace at all with the French, but with restoring
Calice, until the English themselves, without him made their peace, and
renownced Calice to the French for ever.

These Iosses were grievous, to the English Nobility, and most of all, to
Queen Mary her self: After she had abolished the Gospel, restored the Popes
Supremacy, whatsoever she took in hand, was no ways prosperous, but in all
things unfortunate: her conceptions failing, extreme dearthes rayning, hurt
done by thunders from heaven, and Fire in the Royal Navy, Foreign losses,
Calice surrendered, which could never be recovered, upon any composition; and
King Philip always in troubles, and turmoyling wars, occasioned his keeping
from court, so that Queen Mary her life (during her raignet) was little
pleasurable, or that she scance ^^ioyed any delights, or at lease little
contentment as all: which so much augmented hor melancholy, which grew to a
burning Fever, when she had reigned five years; Queen Mary with grief died.
she ended her life at her Manor of St. James, and lies interred amongst her
Ancestors in the Abbey of Westminster.

Now next in course does follow, the relation of the passages, between England
and Spain: after King Philip his return thither, which was immediately after
Queen Mary's death, and during the time of the reign, of the late Queen
Elizabeth, where then I come to the Spring head, from whence the auersenesse,
and unwillingness of the Commons do rise, for our Princes Royal match with
Spain, the remembrance of the late Hostile wars, with other the passages,
which plebian like, they have by tradition, as the Britains had the story of
their times delivered them by their Druides. These things, being they concern
the breach of the league between England and Spain, may be thought too deep,
and of too great a consequence of State, to be meddled withal: I hope I shall
minister no cause of offense, nor innovation, but rather give satisfaction, and
occasion moderation: For here I observe in the Country, the Papists in their
discourses, magnifying the Royal proceedings of King Philip, and the Spaniards
in general, lay some tax, and aspersion upon the late Queen Elizabeth, which
is very harsh, and much displeasing to the Protestants: And then on the other
side, they urge and agrauate against the Spaniards, with much bitterness, and
thereupon they fall into expostulation, Pro and Gone, of the Princes match,
neither understanding nor taking into their considerations, more or farther,
then to make good their own part, and conceit, which breeds difference
amongst our selves, makes and maintains a partition wall, betwixt the
English and the Spaniards, in such love as should be betwixt Subjects, whose
Sovereigns are in league and amity. That the Commons might not so
disobediently, in their affections, muteny against that which the King has so
labored, and does so much desire to bring to pass, as also for their so much
expostulation thereof, the scope of my endeavors, only end, and aim of my
ambition is, that these my labors might occasion some moderation therein: For
the better accomplishing thereof, and giving the better satisfaction in those
particulars, I will here relate some observations, which the Papists have
formerly collected, and usually in their discourses will urge them: the usage
and carriage of the Spaniards toward the English, and other Nations, and the
English toward them, with some other former passages between the two Nations.
I could wish the Commons would believe these things, so far forth as their
own knowledge, or true informations do not extend the contrary, and the
Papists to do the like; for that which is here alleged either concerning the
late Queen Elizabeth, or the King of Spain, neither part to be transported
with passion; but of those things, to make a favorable, and the best
construction, and mutually to take them into a charitable and reconciliable
consideration: The particulars are as follows.

The Papists allege, The Papists collections.
that King Phillip had a great desire to continue in league, and amity with
England, and that after he returned into Spain, constantly maintained the same
for thirty years together, would never hearken to give assistance to any the
discontented English Nobility, that would have rebelled; and in the year 1568.
absolutely denied aid to the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, and the
Lord Dacres, when they rose up in rebellion, in the North parts of England, how
the King afterward, to wit, in the year 1575, for contenting her Majesty at
the Persuasion of some of his own Officers, but namely the Co^mendador Mayor,
that forth present governed Flaunders, was content to yield to the banishment
of all English Papists, out of his estate in Flaunders for the space of two
years, though he paid them always their pensions to live on, as before. And
for the same consideration of friendship with the Queen, and for keeping his
league, he denied diverse years help to the Irish, that desired the same, as
namely in the year 1578. to Sir James Fitz-Morris, and Sir Thomas Stukely,
Siukley slain.
and to the later of them, when afterward he with some 5. or. 600. men that he
brought from Italy, the King would not grant so much as a port in Spain, to
enter into; whereby he was forced to pass to Lisborne, where finding the King
of Poxtugall ready to go with his Army to Barbary, he could not refuse to go
with him, was there slain.

Sir James Fitz-Morris returning again the next year, to ask succors for
the Irish, to have from Spain some forces, to carry for Ireland, denied the
same again, until at the last, at the carnest suite of the Pope, for that
Doctor Saunders upon his extreme zeal, had adventured to go thither before
in person, to comfort the Irish, not having with him above 50. men, the King
was contented to wink at, and say nothing, whiles Sega the Bishop of
Placentia, the Popes Nuncio, under certain of the Italian Captains, did send
thither some five hundred Soldiers, taken upon the Sea coasts of Italy, which
were those that were slain by the Lord Gray in Ireland.

Then do the Papists farther urge, the Queens taking of Flushing, Brill, and
Oste-end, and other Towns in Flaunders, and likewise the assisting, and
countenancing of Duke Mathias, at his first coming, and after Monsicur Duke of
Alenson; and likewise the setting up the title of Don Antonio King of
Portugale: and sending him into his Country, with an Army: The intercepting the
King of Spain his money, first in the Duke of Alua his time, and many times
afterward, the sending of Hawkins, Frobrisher, Drake, and Candish, and others
to the Indies, and some of them even to Spain it self: For which there were
special Commissions granted, that whatsoever could be taken from the
Spaniards, to be held as lawful reprisalls, and those Commissions to be
specified, in Stowe his Chronicles.

Then they allege, The breach of the peace between England and Spain.
that the King of Spain did thereupon make arrests of the English ships, then
instantly grew enmity, and oepn wars: and afterward, viz. in the year 1588.
the King of Spain, with his great Fleet, attempted the invasion of England,
which yet with many the English, is too fresh in memory.

The Papists farther urge, and have collected, that in November 1591. Queen
Elizabeth published a strict Proclamation for searching out, apprehending and
punishing of Seminaries and Jesuits, and such as received and favored them in
England, sharp and severe laws, made and executed upon them, and further both
to put fears and doubts into the heads of the Commons, as also to exasperate
them against the Spaniards; Farther urging, that the King of Spain, his great
power, forces, and wealth, were dangerous to England, possessing more Crowns,
Kingdoms, and countries, then ever any Christian Prince had before, and yet
ambitiously seeks more, endeavoring to make himself absolute Monarch of the
world, and that his carriage toward other Princes and their subjects was
tyrannous, and those nations which he subdued, were cruelly dealt withal, and
kept in great slavery.

The Papists for all these particulars, hane collected appologicall defenses,
which in their arguments and discourses, they will much insist upon, to the
high commendations of the Kings of Spain, their royal and gracious
proceedings with other Princes, and toward their subjects, as also with their
own, which are as follows.

First, they propose and recommend it to consideration; For the conceived
opinion amongst the English, that the Kings of Spain, their government is
strict, or rather indeed somewhat cruel, the maine occasion thereof is. The
countries, dominions, and territories, are very large and spacious, many of
them achieved by conquest, formerly governed by Roitelets as petty Kings, and
now inhabited by several nations, of several natures; So that the nature,
necessity, and disposition of the Kings of Spain their affairs requires;
that they must carry somewhat a harder hand in their government, then
ordinary, otherwise they cannot secure, nor make good their plantations, nor
retain their subjects in obedience. And the very name of conquest, imports
violence and misery, and is of so harsh a sound, and odious in nature, that
from a Nation subdued, detractions will suppress all commendations a
Conqueror shall any ways deserve; Though their governing of such like
subjects may be particular, yet the aspersion in that kind will run in the
general, and a long time (as it were) in descent, especially amongst malignant
dispositions.

In remote parts of Kings Dominions where the government by them is committed
to subordinate Officers, and Commanders, sometimes barbarous and in humane
acts, may be done by them, and the common people, which Kings in their nature
may much abhor and detest, yet for the same in their honor and reputation
they often suffer.

Then they further allege, that the Kings of Spain to the Turks, Moors, and
such like Infidels, have been many times a scourge. But then in particular,
with the Italians, Portugals, French, English, Scottish, and Flemmish, their
dealings with them, to have been most honorable, quiet, just, and without
injury offered to any, which is said to appear, by their own testimonies and
witnesses, also of many Writers.

For the war, Thillip the second.
and other affairs, that have passed in Portugal, they were so carried and no
otherwise, for the justification thereof, out of Hieromme Francht a Genoes that
was present, and wrote the story, and in other points shows himself no great
friend to Spaniards; yet does he so justify all the Kings actions, in these
affairs, even by the testimony of the Portugals themselves, as they seem
rather ouerscrupulous then only justifiable.

Then there is further cyted Genebrard a French Writer, that sets out the
King of Spain, his noble proceedings with France, in all the times of the
minorities of King Henry the second his children, to wit, Francis, Charles and
Henry the third, and how he never sought, either to profit himself, or to
impair the kingdom of France during those troubles, and thereupon gives a
touch by way of tax, for the taking of Newhauen by the English; further
alleging, that the King of Spain at his own charges, sent aides of men,
horse, victuals, and money often times to the succors of those young Princes,
notwithstanding the old enmities and emulation, between those two Crowns of
France and Spain, and the cruel wars that had passed between them many
years. And makes further relation of the king his clement proceeding with his
own subjects, that rebelled in the low Countries, as appeared by his many
pardons, peaces, and tollerations made with them: his liberal and noble
dealings with the English, Irish, and Scottish, especially such as were subject
to troubles, for their conscience at home, those he sustained liberally,
without requiring any service at their hands.

And lastly for the great wealth, forces, strength, Note.
and power of the King of Spain, being a friend, and temperately used, cannot
be fearful to any good man but rather comfortable; nor to be dangerous to
Christendom, but rather a great and singular stay, and providence of Almighty
God (who foreseeing the tumults and reuolts) that heresies might bring in and
the dangers Christendom might be subject unto, by the great power and strength
of Infidels, the Turks and Moors has provided so potent, and opulent a
Prince as the king of Spain, for the defense of the Catholic Church.

For the manifestation thereof, two special observations worthy of note have
been collected, and cited, the first after that interleaged and indissoluable
knot of amity and alyance which was between Henry the seventh, Ferdinando and
Isabella, King and Queen of Spain, there mutually passed between them, many
Letters congratulatory, amongst which, there came Letters from Ferdinande and
Isabella, signifying the final conquest of Granada from the Moors, which
action it self so worthy, King Ferdinando (whose manner was) as indeed the
nature is, never to lose any virtue for the showing) expressed and displayed in
his Leters at large, all the particularities, and religious punctures and
ceremonies, that were observed in the reception of the City and king dome;
showing amongst other things, that the King would not by any means in person
enter the City, until he had first aloose seen the Cross set up upon the
greater Tower of Granada, whereby it became Christian ground: That likewise,
before lie would enter, he did homage to God alone, pronouncing by an Herald
from the height of that Tower, that he did acknowledge to have recovered that
kingdom by the help of God Almighty, and the glorious Virgin, and the
virtuous Apostle S. James, and the holy Father Pope Inocent the eight, together
with the aides and service of his Prelates, Nobles, and Commons; that he
stirred not from the camp, till he had seen a little army of Martyrs, to the
number of seven hundred and more Christians (that had lived in bonds and
servitude as slaves to the Moors) pass before his eyes, singing a psalm for
their redemption, and that he had given tribute to God by alms and relief,
extended to them all, for his admission into the City: these things were in the
Letters, with many more ceremonies of a kind of holy ostentation.

King Henry ever willing to put himself into the consort, or quier of
religious actions, and naturally affecting much the King of Spain, (as much as
one King could affect another, partly for his virtues, and partly for a
counterpoise to France upon the receipt of these Letters, sent all his Nobles
and Prelates, that were about the court, together with the Mayor and Aldermen of
London in great solemnity to the Church of Paul's, there to hear a declaration
from Bishop Morton, then Lord Chancellor and Cardinal, standing upon the
uppermost step, or half pace before the Quier; and all the Nobles, Prelates,
and Governors of the City at the foot of the stayres, made a speech unto
them, letting them know that they were assembled in that consecrated place, to
sing unto God a new song; for that (said he) these many years the Christians
have not gained new ground, or territory upon the infidels, nor enlarged and
set further the bounds of the christian world: But this is now done by the
pronenesse and devotion of Feredinando and Isabella, King and Queen of Spain,
who have (to their immortal honor) recovered the great and rich kingdom of
Granada, and the populous and mighty city of the same name, from the Moors,
having been in possession thereof by the space of seven hundred years and
more: For which, this assembly and all Christians are to render laud and
thanks to God, and to celebrate this noble act of the King of Spain, who in
this is not only victorious, but Apostolical in the gaining of new Provinces
to the Christian Faith; and the rather, for that this victory and conquest is
obtained, without much effusion of blood, whereby it is to bohoped, that there
shall be gained, not only new territories, but infinite souls to the Church
of Christ, whom the Almighty (as it seems) would have to be converted.
Herewithall, he did relate some of the most memorable particulers of the war
and victory; and after his speech ended, the whole assembly went solemnly in
procession, and Te Deum was sung.

Then for the other particular observation I collected and cited, was in the
reign of Philip the second King of Spain, here formerly treated of. And about
the 14. year of the late Queen Elizabeth, the Turk having conquered many
Islands, and Cities, bordering upon the Seas, and in the year 1571. knowing
division among diverse Christian Princes, as well for matters of Religion, as
affairs of State, upon hope of which advantage, he assembled a great Army of
Galleys, presuming thereby to make himself Master of the Sea, and Lord of the
Land; they were encountered by the Christians: The battle of Lepanto.
For the which Don John de Austria, a brave Commander, was sent by the King of
Spain, with a great Fleet of Ships, Galleys, and Galliasses; so that at one
instant there were sunk and taken 230. of the Turkish Galleys, and 30000.
Mahamotists slain, besides many taken prisoners. There were 12000. Christians
redeemed from Turkish slavery, and 8000. slain; with the loss of leaven or
eight Galleys: Our Writers affirm, Stowe.
that the Spanish Fleet, was a main occasion of that memorable victory, and
that the Galliasses did admirable service in that expedition.

Lo here you see the King of Spain, his commendation by the Papists, extended
to the height; with some tax of the late Queen Elizabeth: wherein I have
been sparing in my relation, to that they will speak in some bitterness,
they do therein but as men that throw dust against the wind. Her Royal
worth is left behind recorded, far more durable, then in Letters of Br4ass,
a Princess of blessed fame, and everlasting memory: to write of her
commendation, any thing near in proportion to her deserving, it is a work for
excellent Writers. They may in that faculty excel, but upon that subject never
exceed; therefore for my particular, I will begin, and conclude both together,
she had every way as many virtues as could live, and more then could dye. I do
not here reuine, nor make repetition of these things, to give farther occasion
of faction; but rather for the present moderate, and in the end some way
reconcile, and reclaim the disaffections of the common people, presuming they
will produce no other effects, as when the Country people, especially those
affected to Papistry, shall understand, and take into their considerations,
former passages, and then being not so peremptory, and confident, as now they
are to cross, grieve, and agrauate against those (that in respect of religion)
in their affections, have been somewhat unwilling for our Princes Royal
match: I presume it cannot but rather farther moderation and community, then
otherwise.

The Papists did not observe, or at least do not desire it should, that though
the King of Spame did often deny to afford succors to the Irish Rebels: yet
at the last (as by their own collections appear) did wink and say nothing,
when Doctor Saunders and Sega, the one going over into Ireland in person, the
other sending forces thither: so that Queen Elizabeth, her succouring those in
Flaunders, which the King of Spain held Rebels, she did no more then he did,
but only the difference was, she wont roundly and resolutely on, and the King
of Spain somewhat reserved, and privately: And the moneys taken from Duke
Alua, and other rich prizes brought in, by Hawkins, Frobisher, Drake, and
Cauendish, they were only to pay the Soldiers. Queen Elizabeth was of such a
gracious and Royal disposition, she could not endure but to have her Soldiers
paid the money should have paid Duke Alua his Soldiers: but it paid them
that fought against him, so that it was but misimployed.

The king of Spain doubtless was desirous to have continued his league with
England, whereof he made many good demonstrations: therefore I could wish he
should not loose his due commendation in that particular: But it seemed he
presumed on Queen Elizabeth's patience, that for suffering, as it were, but a
handful of Soldiers of his Subjects, to go for Ireland, to assist the Rebels
there, thought so small an occasion, would not have broken the league: But it
seems peace long before, was laid up, that it became a dry commodity, so that
it soon took fire.

Then for the Proclamation, urged against Queen Elizabeth, published in
November 1591. with the severe laws then made, and executed against the
Papists: they were always plotting, conspiring, and attempting, the taking
away her life; those laws were but like a good and skillful Phisician, that
drew some blood, to preserve much more, the life of our Sovereign, and indeed
the life and light of the Gospel. Tyrants shed blood for pleasure, Princes for
necessity. Let the proceedings of her predecessor, be put into the other
balance, there will be found great difference: Wherefore it is best for all
parties, either ways affected, to let these things alone vnreuiued, neither
weighed, nor farther discoursed of.

I will here (under savor) presume to add some observations, which may some
way moderate the disaffections of the common people toward the Spaniards,
concerning those particular passages before mentioned.

The Pope you see was Author, though he made the King of Spain Actor, for the
breach of the peace, as being too much led by the Pope, which was no
extraordinary thing. Let us but read our English Chronicles, we shall there
find, that many of our most puissant and victorious Kings here in England,
their powers and prerogatives have been captiuated by the Pope, and some by
them brought to untimely ends, always working upon them, and the indisposition
of the times, where they saw, either a weak Prince, a factious Nobility, or a
mutinous Commons; by their directions, their Legates and Clergy would be
always working, to make the Pope and themselves masters both of the King and
Kingdom. If they would teach Kings truly the ways of righteousness, let God
alone with his providence, and Princes with their inheritances: not to devise
and direct stratagems, nor be so violent wheresoever they get dominion to
suppress the Protestant Religion, and advance the Roman Catholic, it would
bhee a most blessed happiness to all Christendom.

Then lastly, the King of Spain his attempt in 88. was by the Popes
instigation, and had no doubt his benediction, for assurance of good success
therein: but it had a contrary effect, brought a malediction, and an infausting
upon him, and his King dome, as an ill Prognostic, which in the event proved
true. The Spaniards have no cause to joy at the remembrance thereof; the
English only to thank God for their deliverance. If the Spaniards will forget
and pass it over (as being far the greater loosers) it is both charity and
religion, for the English to do the like. And the rather for that, and such
like hostile actions, passing between the two Nations in the time of war:
and now in peace, in all Christian and religious considerations, envy, and
hatred, should have an end, and not be continued. States are subject to the
wheel; times have their turnings, and great Princes themselves not free from
calumny and detraction, and many times with much agrauation therein.

For these particulars I will conclude, with that grave and sage observation,
of Cornelius Tacitus, that free tongued Roman, that wrote, they made it a
custom, to make Kings the instruments of oppression; they may many times seem
so, and yet they themseues of a most gracious and Royal disposition. Queen
Elizabeth therein not second to any, and yet according to the fate, and fashion
of great princes, by some great and grave Councillors near about her, and by
some that could thrive only by war; she was much swayed and ruled, which she
thought was no diminution to her commendation, though it made not so much for
her absolutenes, yet it seemed she held it the more for her safety.

Let us not be transported with passion and doubts, beyond reason, good ground,
or probability; the Kings and Monarchies of England, in their whole choice of
wives made from all parts of Europe, were never more fortunate, and happy in
any, then in those Royal Queens, which they had from Spain.

The first in this Scene of honor, shall be the Royal Queen Elenor, wife to
Edward the first formerly mentioned: what was she but the wonder and miracle
of her Sex?

The next, Queen Katherine, wife first to Prince Arthur, afterward to Henry
the eight; she was the clear mirror, and example of wisdom, integrity,
sanctity, and all Royal and Princely virtues; in all which she was far more
precious and excellent, being so tried as she was, with the touchstone of
fortune.

Constancia, Izabella, Beringaria, and Ioanna, Spanish Princes, all these were
proper, and peculiar to our English Monarchy: our own Chronicles tells us no
otherwise of them, but that they were, as so many glorious and conspicuous
lights of matrimonial faith, love, piety, and chastity.

And lastly, King Philip the second, that married Queen Mary, our own Writers
leaves him to posterity, highly commended. So that for those Princes; that we
have formerly had from Spain; England has had joy, and comfort of them; we
have loved them, and they us.

Wherefore should we now so much doubt, and fear, for the future, the like
success? unless we will conclude, our dispositions are grown worse, and that
the then times deserved a great part of their commendations: So that here you
may see, that no Nations in former times, did ever more faithfully and entirely
love each another, or were in more straighter leagues, and bonds of friendship
united together, then the English and Spaniards, until by the late war they
were ^^^oynted.

Severe judgment threatens high places. Sa. ca. 6.4.8.
The greatest happiness of great Kings and Princes, is to make happy their
Subjects; and that happiness on eath, is esteemed greatest, which comes
nearest to that in heanen, consisting only in the eternity of blessed peace:
then consequently those Princes must be deemed most blessed, who do chiefly
direct their Royal cares, and endeavors to bring glory to God on high, peace
and good will to those on earth. Our now gracious King has so governed us this
21. years, that we have enjoyed that happiness, as God has been truly
honored, he obayed, and we have lived in quiet under our own Fig trees, and
Vines, eating the fruits of our own labor4s free, from those calamities and
miseries of war, some of our neighbor Nations are subject unto; and by Gods
grace he will so continue us, whereby he will be worthily held in the esteem,
and deemed one of the most blessed Princes, according to the position before
mentioned.

How willing, desirous, and obseruant the Spaniards have been, to be in peace
and amity with us, let the Reader but duly consider, that which has been
formerly related, and for farther satisfaction, to an ocular experience we late
had thereof. The Xing of Spain his desire to be in league and amity with
England.
No sooner then our now gracious Sovereign, came to the Crown, but the King
of Spain, Philip the third, instantly sent over his Ambassadors, sought peace
at his hands, and had it, which ever since has been religiously, nobly and
muioable kept, and so continued his son now King of Spain, Philip the fourth.

An ouerture of marriage long time in treaty for our now Royal Prince Charles,
with the Lady Maria, daughter of the said Philip the third, by him much
desired, and now as much as her brother Philip the fourth, (as it is generally
conceived) that those two Royal Scepters, should be now conjoined in the
sacred knot, and bond of marriage, thereby to strengthen their ancient
Alliances, and make a perpetual league, and indissoluble confederation of
blessed peace and friendship betwixt them.

Seeing many excellent learned men, merely out of zeal, and some others wise
and polliticke in the affairs of State, that are true lovers of their
country, have written and spoken freely, proposing doubts, fears, and dangers
that may come and ensue to England with the marriage with Spain, and also
others of both those sorts of like rank and quality (only in religion
contrarily affected) have written, and will speak as much, for the approbation
and commendation thereof, proposing the infinite and unspeakable good, the
match may be to the Kingdom of England. Without farther intermedling, I will
leave those things to their learnings, and judicial experiences: that which I
relate, may be as materials for them to work on, and is intended but as home
made stuff for the Country people, who in State affairs sees no farther then
the Rhine, and many of them wade not so deep, as into the point of Religion,
yet in their affections have been very auerse, and expressed unwillingness,
for our Princes Royal match: I would herewithall cloathe, or at least someway
cover their bare opinions, that there is no such great cause of fears, doubts,
and dangers, as they seem to apprehend, though the Spaniards were lately our
enemies, yet aunciently they were our friends, and seem to desire to be so
again, to live in league and amity with us: I would gladly so moderate and
reclaim the disaffections of the common people, that they might forget and
remit, all former occasions conceived of distaste, and not in their affections
and discourses, so disobe diently mutiny, and dispute against our Sovereigns
high commands, and Royal intentions. It is incident for men so to do, of some
one of the dispositions following.

A kingdom composed of men of diverse humors and dispositions, whereof some
do burn in hatred, some busied in seditious practices, some distracted with
factions, some transported with dissentions, some carried headlong with fury,
others to save themselves from some punishment they have formerly deserved, or
else having entangled, or rather prodigally consumed then inheritance (Novandis
quam gerendis rebus aptiores) rather desiring factions and disorders, then to
have affairs of State settled, as knowing they can receive no benefit, by the
well settling and composure thereof, as the sick disrelisheth all meats
whatsoever: so distempered dispositions do all passages of State, be they
never so good, and are indeed a kind of wild beasts, that sometimes brings
themselves into the toil, occasioning the virtues and loyalties of some good
men to be suspected; his Majesty highly discontented, and the subject thereby
infinitely prejudiced.

Both of the Protestants and Papists in England to many of them, do
perticipate of those imperfections, such indeed as are drawn from the Lees of
each Religion.

First for the Papists; some of them are grown so impetuous, vnbounden, and
vnlimmited, both in their carriage and discourses, proposing and maintaining
dangerous and fearful positions, insolently intimating, what a golden time
they now shall have: these things do much grieve, and produce great fears to
many, that are truly religious, and zealosly affected: let us not doubt, but
that by Gods grace, the Kings wisdom and integrity, they shall freely enjoy
that happiness to have quietness, and contentment in their courses of life
and consciences, until their lives end, when many of those Papists (who in
respect of their former exploits and practices have been found very dangerous)
shall have a straighter hand carried over them then otherwise.

Then there are of those, which only in seeming, are somewhat more then
Protestants, their farther description would ask a long discourse, which I
will omit: More then this, they think they have much knowledge, when indeed it
is mere ignorance, and that engenders vehemence, and vehemence produces
passion: then with true, sincere, and regular discipline, there is no
cooperation. His Majesty has been pleased to denote them long since, in a
speech he made, in his higher house of Parliament, as saying they were a
people, that were ever discontented with the present government, and impatient
to suffer any superiority; which makes their sectvnable to be suffered, in
any well governed Commonwealth: many of them think they cannot miss the way
to heaven, if they be opposite to the Pope, and yet in another way will meet
the Papist in superstition; they have so much talked, expostulated of our
Princes Royal match, and in their dispositions and discourses, mutening so
much against it, occasioning many to do the like, forecasting and seeming to
foreknow future events, preiudicating dangers, both for religion, and state
polliticke of the kingdom, so that they thereby, and that sort of Papists
before mentioned, with their insolency and boldness, have much prejudiced the
Commonwealth, amuzeth the country people; making them stand as it were at a
gaze, so spending their time; buying and selling, and all dealings in the
country, more then for victuals and clothes, are much out of use; great
scarcity of money every where complained of: they find by woeful experience,
that royal Trading and commerce are much decayed, and our money which was wont
to be employed therein, is now converted into the basterd and barren employment
of Usury: Lands and Rents fallen, and clothing failed: so that the poor in
that course, neither scarce in any have been set a work: whereby they have
endured the extremity of hunger, of all extremities the extremest. The
affairs and passages amongst men, do not run so smooth as they were wont to
do; all cry out want of money: some that have it, sits as it were abrood
thereon; they will not vent nor adventure it, as saying they will first see,
what will become of the world, which is now a common phrase: some now and then,
speaking as they would have it, as saying the world will mend: the reply that
follows is; Nay it will be worse: Yet it has pleased God, out of his infinite
goodness and mercy so to deal with us, (God give us grace to be thankful)
that for our enjoying the fruits of the earth; the times have been very
seasonable, and we have, and are like to enjoy them in great plenty. Yet the
state and condition we do, and are like to live in only preiudicated, and
chiefly by our selves occasioned, will rather be miserable then happy: We are
falling into the latter days, ignorance and heresy strives to get the upper
hand.

It is said that God above all men, does inspire Kings; and then it is like, he
does and will inspire great Councillors of State above ordinary men; therefore
let us pray unto God, they may consult, and debate of the reasons, work, and
effect the remedies.

I am now come near the end of my stage, though some man of better ability
(which had been far more fitter) to have undertaken this work, I am
consident against all those good Wives formerly mentioned, to have come from
Spain, and all the reasons that either has or can be alleged, that in all
likelihood and probability, the match may be happy and successful for
England; the objection will be, Exempla illustrant, sed non probant; in those
former times, there was a uniformity of Religion, so that now the difference
therein, is the only stone of offense, and the maine occasion conceived of the
fears and doubts of dangers may ensue, as well to the Church reformed, as to
the polliticke, and state affairs of the kingdom.

I must ingenuously confess, my homebred imaginations did fly with the
flock: I am no Courtier, (of whom there be too many) that upon the shift of
every King or Princes marriage, do please themselves with some probable project
of preferment, before all other respects or considerations whatsoever. I do
not yet much joy at the match, nor should sorrow if it should not be: only in
point of religion, I will pray unto God, and hope, we may have cause to joy
thereat hereafter; in the mean time I will not further trouble my self, as
being not the duty of subjects, to intermeddle, or busy themselves with the
actions of their King; neither in their dispositions and discourses, to mutiny
against the match, if his Majesty and our hopeful Prince shall be pleased to
proceed therein: all that we have to do is only to obey, and pray to God to
direct all things for the best, relying on his providence, the Kings wisdom
and integrity, and without our further expostulations, to let his Majesty and
his Council alone in the business. Certainly God will be glorified, and
whatsoever man does or shall determine, he will dispose; It is said by him
Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. Pro. 8.15.


I have to my self both grounded and collected some particular considerations,
which gives me confidence and real satisfaction, that there is no such cause
of doubts and dangers, for the Protestant religion, or state polliticke of the
kingdom, as is generally feared; Which collections, I will here in my
conclusion relate, only inuiting unto them my country neighbors and friends:
and do therein according to the fashion of Feasters, wish their cheer better
for their satisfaction.

Though the eyes of humane providence, cannot see beyond that Horizon, as
directly to discern future contingents; yet can they only judge, what seems
fit to be done by probability grounded upon mature consideration and profound
judgment: therefore let us not fear nor doubt, but that by Gods infinite
goodness and mercy, the Kings great providence, judgment, and integrity for
religion, there will be a gracious, royal provision, and preservation made.

Amongst the country people there is much fear and doubt conceived, the Pope
in his power and prerogative, being so predominant bth in Spain, and with
other foreign Princes, by them as Stales we may be drawn into that net.

The King, that does so much insist upon his prerogative here in his own
kingdom, that will not admit any dyminution therein; that he should now give
way to have it subjected to such a dangerous sorraine power; there is no manner
of likelihood.

There have been many of our Kings of England, Roman Catholic Princes that
have been at difference with the Pope.
that were Roman Catholics, and other Foreign Princes, yea, and Spain it
self (which I will here make bold to tell them) wearied and tired out with the
insupportable pressures of the Pope, have been at great difference with him,
at mortal enmity and open war: as namely Henry the fifth, the Emperor
(haning by the Popes instigation) banded against his father Henry the fourth,
who associated him in the Empire, and held him prisoner in that distress, that
he died; touched after with remorse of this act, Note.
and reproach of the State, for abandoning the rightes of the Empire, leuies
sixty thousand foot, and thirty thousand horse for Italy, constrained the
Pope and his College to acknowledge the rights of the Empire, in that form as
Leo the fourth had done to Otho the second; and before that, Adrian to
Charlamaine, according to the decree of the Council of Rome; and made him take
his oath of fidelity between his hands, as to the true and lawful Emperor.
The Pope, so soon as Henry was departed home, assembles a Council, nullifies
his acknowledgement as done by force, and shortly after died. The Emperor to
make himself the stronger against his successors, Note.
enters into aliance with the King of England, takes to wise Maude the daughter
to Henry the first, being but five years of age.

Calixti the next succeeding Pope, at a Council held at Remes by
ecclesiastical sentence, caused Henry the Emperor to be declared an enemy to
the Church, and degraded him of his Imperial dignity. The King of England,
seeing this Council was held in France, composed chiefly of the Gallicane
Church, desirous to ouer-master Louis the King of France, incenses his son in
Law the Emperor, to set upon him (as the Popes chief pillar) on one side, and
he would assail him on the other; The Emperor easily wrought to such a
business, prepares all his best forces: the King of England does the like.

The King of France, seeing this storm coming so impetuously upon him,
wrought so with the princes of Germante, as they taking into their
consideration, the future mischief of a war rashly, and unadvisedly taken,
with the importance of a kind neighborhood, advised the Emperor not to enter
thereinto, till he had signified to the King of France the causes of his
discontent; Whereupon Ambassadors were dispatched to the King of France, who
answers, that he grieved much to see the two greatest pillars of the Church
thus shaken with those dissentions, which might hazard the ruin of the whole
Frame; that he was a friend to them both, and would labor and endeavor all he
could to mediate an atonement, rather then add fuel to a fire too fierce
already, which he desired to extinguish for the good and quiet of Christendom.

This Embassage and answer so took, that the Emperor was diuerted from his
former resolution, and was glad to have Louis a mediator of the accord between
the Pope and him, which shortly after was concluded at Worms, for the Popes
advantage, to whom the Emperor yields up the right of the inuestitures of
Bishops and other benefices.

The King of England expecting great matters to have risen by this business,
was highly displeased, being so disappointed of the Emperors assistance;
proceeds notwithstanding in his intentions against Louis. Between them there
were many great conflicts, with the expense of much blood, and charges, (which
is the only fruit war affords) but in the end both wearied and tired out,
a peace was concluded.

Then of late years (as it has been here formerly related) in the reign of
King Philip the second, there was enmity and open wars between Pope Paul and
the Spaniard. The Pope besieged and confined within the walls of Rome by Duke
Alua; relieved by the French King, yet fell from him, and reconciled himself
to the Spaniard, as to the stronger side.

That the Pope cannot err in matter of faith; his power to depose Kings, and
dispose of Kingdoms; are two main positions the Papists hold: both which, I
humbly leave, to our Divines to deal with them therein. But for those two
particulars here now mentioned, and many other former passages of the Pope, the
vulgar may judge. In the time of Queen Elizabeth; did familiarly and freely
give Bishoprics in Ireland: but those that had them so given, could never
gain possession.

Then farther, there can be no such fears and doubts for the alteration of
Religion, as is apprehended, if we take into consideration these particulars
following:

First, we having a well ordered and well governed Kingdom, where Religion is
established, Rites and Ceremonies ordained, and by a long use and custom
received and confirmed; the many apparent probabilities of the Kings integrity,
the many rare and worthy learned men that are in the Kingdom considered.

The King, though Prince-like for his recreations, and that his affections have
been carried with some delights and pleasures; yet has he been so studious,
that he is learned beyond expectation, and custom of great Princes: and for
his integrity, it is of fifty seven years growth, has made thereof many
religious and worthy expressions both by his learned works, and words, and
indeed has shot such arrows, which will hang in the sides of the Romish
Religion in after ages, as he is Defender of the Faith by title, he will so
continue in truth.

The first that had the Title, was Henry the eight, given him by Pope Leo the
tenth, for writing against Luther. After his conversion and suppression of
Popery, yet retained he that style, and afterward during the reigns of Edward
the sixth, the late famous Queen Elizabeth, and our now Sovereign, it has
been continued, and doubtless by him will be maintained.

Amongst many his worthy expressions of himself therein in one of his works,
he thus declares: that it is one of the principal parts of the duty which
appertains to a Christian King, to protect his true Church within his own
Dominions: to extirpate heresies is a maxim without all controversies. In
which respect, those honorable titles of Custos, Vindex vtriusque tabulae,
keeper and revenger of both tables of the law, and Nutricius Ecclesiae, nursing
Father of the Church, do rightly belong to every Emperor, King, and Christian
Monarch: so that there is no question or imagination, that he will suffer the
Religion now professed, to come under the Egiptian servitude of the Pope: But
rather will be like a goodly Caedar tree, of full growth, irremoueable, not to
be otherwise, or other where set or planted: under whom his Subjects shall sit
safe and protected. Our hopeful Prince, a branch thereof, will be of the like
kind, affording the same fruit, who doubtless will now be the more precious
in that kind, in respect of his late travel and trial, longed for the sweet
comfort, and preaching of the Gospel (according to the saying of the Psalmist)
even as the thirsty Heart did for the watery Brook: Though he has bin amongst
the Sirens, his ears would admit no audience: a sound was always in them, as
if he heard his religeous Father King James speaking unto him, 1. Chro. 28.9.
as sometimes holy David spoke unto his son Solomon: And thou Charles my
son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind; for the Lord searches all the hearts, and understands
all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of
thee; if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever: all which served
only but as addition. Our Prince his integrity is such, so firmly settled in
the true Religion now professed, that there was no possibility of his
alteration. For which, we are infinitely bound unto God, and an
incomprehensible happiness it is to the Kingdom, that his disposition, all
his courses and carriages affording all Royal and Princely virtues (as indeed
merely composed thereof) his patience far exceeding his passion, which
brings peace to himself, and victory over others; free from all
imperfections that Princes many times are subject unto, the more having no
strict nor disciplinated education, but rather soothed and flattered in all
they say or do.

What an exceeding great comfort and joy may we take to see his willing heart,
and ready hand to receive the Petitions and complaints of the poor distressed
Subjects, and his gracious disposition to see them relieved? which doubtless
will occasion the whole progression of his life, to be much the more happy and
prosperous, gain him blessed fame, and everlasting memory, and a Crown of
glory in a better Kingdom.

Positiuely our King and Prince, the one for paternall affection, the other for
filial obedience, for after ages may be worthy patterns.

That by the Spanish Lady her coming over, the Protestant Religion should be
any ways endangered, or subject to alteration, there is not so much
likelihood, as probability she may come to be a Protestant, for these reasons
following: the effects of true love are great, and the rather, she being a
young tender Princess, and far from her own Country and friends, amongst
whom she has bin bred, and now come to have others new, and living in their
companies, she may of her own accord by degrees have her affections
incorporated amongst them; borne and bred amidst the pleasures and delights of
the Court, accustomed to Royal Courtship, may much farther it. Towns before
they yield, do usually parle; That the Lady neither can nor will avoid, and
then having so pleasing an object to the eye, and so Royal an affailant in
such a person as our hopeful Prince is. These things may go near the point
to do it: Then her Ladies and Maids of Honor, which of like at the first,
will be the Cabinets of her Council, and other her followers, though Sermons
they will not hear, yet when in daily discourses they shall have such siege
and battery laid to their Romish Religion, by an Army of reverend Bishops,
Doctors, and many famous learned Preachers in that kind, the whole forces of
our Kingdoms; assuredly it will rather loose ground then gain any: the proper
nature of Religion, is far sooner to be persuaded by reason, then forced by
constraint. Those are the two things that Religion stands on: the world cannot
create a new creature, be it never so little: So no law of man, nor compulsion
can make a good Christian in heart, without inward grace: wherein the Minister
is to persuade, and leave the success to God. More famous, learned, and
worthier men, no age ever afforded: who will be a glory to the age: The King,
and they, as the Sun and Moon, and some others of the Clergy, as lesser
Stars will make perfection of light, though they contribute somewhat less,
will make the light of the Gospel in the course and manner as it is now
professed, shine so bright, that it shall dim all Romish superstition and
Idolatry, as the blessed Sun does a burning Taper: and there shall be no such
Curtain drawn to keep out the light, but that it shall shine over the whole
face of the earth, that we shall see their good works, and be taught by them
to glorify our heavenly Father.

The two famous Universities, the Spheres from whence learning, and so
consequently the true knowledge of Religion, has his motion, they will not be
ecclipsed. Let us be confident, that our Iosuah and his Clergy being of his
house, will profess (whatsoever other Nations do) he and they will serve the
Lord. If any of the Clergy, when they shall come to the touch, prove not right
(as peradventure some of them may not;) it will be said of them, Ye children
of Jerusalem, weep, and lament, that for want of courage you betray your
Master.

So in conclusion, wishing the country people, from henceforth in their
resolutions would be satisfied, and not to trouble themselves as now they do,
in their expostulations of our Princes royal match, nor take upon them to
foreknow and preiudicate, that dangers may ensue, either for matters of
religion or government, but abandon all doubts, and despair of those things,
and rather take it to their comforts, hopes, or rather indeed assurances, that
all those things formerly related, will rather so come to pass then otherwise;
and that there will be no more such rubbes in the passages of State affairs as
late have been, but will run smoothe, as formerly they have done, and all
dealings and passages between man and man, will come again into their course
and current, and the Iron age we have lately lived in will have an end, which
may be the beginning of a golden world; so soon as it shall please God, our
Princes royal match be once settled. For his safe return, and the assurance
we have of his integrity, with unanimous hearts, let us give God hearty
thanks, and pray that his marriage may bring with it glory to him on high,
peace and good will to those on earth, and all happiness and joy to his
Highness, to the complete comfort, contentment, and good of the King and
kingdom, and to Reign many years, honoring the age we now live in, with
the merits of their wisdoms and integrities; and finally, that their
selicities in this world, may overtake that in the next, and make them wear
perpetual Crowns of Gods glory and their own, and that successively their
Royal Progenies may sit upon the thrones of their kingdoms, even to the
worlds end.

FJNJS.

