Rodomontados. OR, Brauadoes and Bragardismes.

Collected out of the Commentaries of the most Dreadful, Terrible, and
Invincible Captain; Mattamores, Crocodillo, Raiabroquelos.

Arma virumque cano.
Printed by W. Iaggard, 1610.

To my Lord Vieillart, Councellor to the King, Treasurer of France, and
General of the Reuennues belonging to Soissons.
My Lord,
I Stood a long while in doubt, whether I should deliver to public view or no,
this slender impression, and under your favor: because the matter appeared to
me too small, in regard of your great merit. But when I considered, that
generous minds do always receive with grateful acceptance, whatsoever is
offered them in honest affection; I was excited to proceed on boldly.
Wherefore, I present unto your honor (with such respect as becomes me)
these pleasant Castillian Rodomontados, or brauing boastes of an humorous
Spaniard: wherein you you shall find nothing else, but some harmless jests
and meriment, without injury or wrong to any one offered. Specially not unto
Spaniards, whose name is no otherwise here used or borrowed, then was that
bragging Soldier Thraso by Terence: under which might be understood, an
Englishman, Scottishman, Frenchman, or some man of any other Nation. And indeed
I am verily persuaded, that many men in reading this Book, and falling into
laughter: may happen to laugh and smile at themselves, because they may chance
to find their own follies recorded, under the fable alluded to another.

Well do I know, my Lord, that you are no such censurer as Cato, nor yes so
severe as Aristarchus, but after you have employed your spirits in great and
grave affairs; you may find some content in reading this trifle, as a
pleasing relaxation from former perturbances, as my self have often made the
like use of them.

If the Bow stand always bent, it will at length become too slack, and fit for
no service when it is needed. After storms and Tempests, the heavens do
afford us fair weather; and such as are stockt in Prison, or chained to the
Oar in a Galley, will sometimes consolate their afflictions, by the help of
Songs, or pleasant discourses.

These Jests and Braggadochio mirthes, may serve in the like Nature to such
men, who, after they have travailed and spent their spirits in great and
serious matters; desire some other honest and sportiue recreation. And if I may
perceive, that your wonted sweet and gentle inclination, shall receive this my
poor unworthy gift (which I offer you with my most humble service) with good
looks, and kind acceptance; It will excite me to more painful labor
hereafter, and to remain for ever

Your most humble Servant, Iacques Gaultier.

To the Reader.
SIr, understanding what curious desire you have to attain unto the lofty
elegancy of the Spanish language: J have dared as the most hardy and coragious,
that I could hear off, since the world was a World, to adventure on this
small Summary of Spanish Rodomontados. And yet not without some dread in my
boldest resolve, representing unto me this conceit, that effects are oftentimes
more myraculous, and suller of Divinity, then of common sense or humanity.

Nevertheless, the invincible courage that J have had, and yet do contain for
your eternal service, has armed me at all points: not with Armor only of
Musket proof, but those sillye and light Arms beside, for the taste of
Codlings or sodden Apples, to resist against the threatenings of that
Sun-shaddow, which never yet appeared in our France, without being many times
ecclipsed, by the sight and presence of him, who lately reigned most happily
over the true French.

Rodomontados. OR, SPANISH Brauadoes, and Bragardismes.
I.
WHen I came into the World, Mars entered into my shoulders; Hercules into my
right arm; Sampson into my left; Atlas into my legs; Mercury into my head;
Venus into mine eyes; Cupid into my countenance; Nero into my heart, and
Jupiter into all my body. So that by the very abundance of my power: when I
walk I make the earth to tremble, heaven to look fearful, the winds to cease,
the Sea to become calm, women great with child to deliver abortiues, men to
fly amazedly here and there. And men of greatest valor, and highest courage,
beholding but my presence, say all with one voice, Libera nos Domine.

II.
I Swear by my Sword (Villain) if I can but see thee, I will give thee such a
blow with my Bastinado, as by the very strength thereof, I will strike thee
six foot down into the earth. And there shall remain nothing of thee out of
the ground, but only thy right arm and thy head, reserved for this especial
occasion: to take off thy hat, and do me reverence, as I shall pass or walk
along by thee.

III.
ASsuredly when I consider how highly Fortune has endued me with graces, I find
that I want time to put all those considerations in effectual employment. For
first, she has heaped such strength upon me, given me an immeasurable mass
of courage, and builded such a fabric of extraordinary valor in me: that I am
as a Colonie in France, a Bastillion in Spain, a Fortress in Italy, a Castle
in England, a Cittadell in Germany, a Tower in Poland, a rock in Armenia, a
wall in Denmark, and generally the has adorned me above all ye men of this
world. For I am of a most purified and refined kind of mettle, formed from
the choysest grace of the earths entrails, and merely engendered of
Generositie.

IIII.
I Make a Vow to Jupiter, that I am as a Man without sense, and even half
desperate, because I cannot instantly meet with any man that is desirous to
entreat peace, or take truce with me. Al my glory therefore shall be, to
find out some one, upon whom I may discharge this choler, and revenge my
spleen, since I cannot prevail to deal with them that have occasioned this
passion in me, by reason of their cowardly and speedy flight. For this is
infallible, I can never express the height of my manhood, against poverty in
power, or silly resistance.

XIII.
I Swear by the bones of the Sun, that it is not possible for me to restrain
my right arm, from striking one stroke with my Bastinado, but it is death to
the endurer: except the Sun will stay his course in the firmament, and
entreat me to be more merciful.

VI.
I Am undoubtedly persuaded, that there is not any thing in the world, which is
able to equal the horrible, dreadful, and furious terribility of my courage.
For what created creature is there in the world, but yeildeth me honor and
obeisance? Such is my awefull and commanding power, that I make the earth to
tremble, the Skies to look affrighted, the Plannets to stand at gaze, and the
rudest winds to be whist. The Sea shrinkes in her head, and dare not be
seen, or stir: the Beasts that haunt the highest Mountains, and those that
live among the lesser hills, are glad to run, and hide themselves in their
wombes, as in Dens or caves: nay, that which is more, the Byrds which fly in
the air, the Fishes that swim in the Sea, and men that are most valiant and
courageous, at one very wink or turn of mine eye, they sink, and so I send
them into their Graves or Sepulchers.

VII.
GO, run to my Cook, command him from me, that forthwith he spit and lay
down to the fire, a dozen and a half of my great Cannons or Ordinance, and to
larde them with infinite Trunchions of Spears, Pikes, and Halberds, broken by
mine own arm, in so many several fights, when none in the world (except my
self) was able to depart thence conqueror. Bid him also to dress some two or
three Dozen of Muskets, and make me a Sallet or two, of Petronilles or
Pistolles, strewed about with Bullets, instead of Olives and Capers. Then, let
whosoever dare, come suppe with me: for these are the Vyands, whereon I am
usually accustomed to feed.

VIII.
I Am King of all the Paladines, the terror of the World, the Flower of
Nobility, among all the Rodomants, Rowlands, and Reynards; endued with infinite
special graces: Goodly, like an Angel: I have the heart and courage of
Lucifer: I am Servant to the choysest Ladies of Beauty, and Prince or
Sovereign of the company of Amaracoes.

IX.
Upon a certain day, it was my hap to meet in Battle the Queen of the
Amazons, who advancing her arm, was in good hope to have slain me with her
warlicke Sword. But I (never admitting the least loss of time) at one blow
smote her down to the ground, and then catching her by the hair, I threw her
with such violent fury up into the air, that she never stayed, but went on so
faxre as the fifth heaven: where she fell upon Mars (who was playing at the
Saunt with Venus) and shrewdly brake his head. Venus being there at not a
little affrighted, cried out for help and succor, and at her cry, all the Gods
ran immediately to her: where they were extraordinarily amazed, to see Mars
lie along in such gastlie manner. But Jupiter putting his head out at the
Window, and seeing me lay such strokes still on mine Enemies, my courage and
choler holding on so furiously, that the Fire sparckled about the Field, as if
it had been another Mount Gibell or Aetna: he forthwith said to all the
other Gods: See that you stir not, neither make any noise, for he that
has already slain Mars; is able and sufficient of himself, to kill as many
Gods as remain alive, or dare use any resistance against him.

X.
I Know not what kind of death I should devise or make choice of, for the
punnishment of two villains, that eyed me this day in the street after a base
and scuruie manner. I desire to look over mine Index or Repertory, where I have
set down with mine own hand, seven hundred, sixty, and five several kinds
of slaughter, to see which of them may be by me best likt and allowed. For
indeed, those which now adays I would customarily use, and have as an
extraordinary exercise in my hand: I could wish, that they might be blows
without blood, slashes of the sword, yiedling no purple sluices, but as if my
weapons edge were Lead, or the reuerses only industrious* agile, and subtle.
For my other kind of fight, I find and confess it to be too dreadful and
fatal: because I never stab, but it is quite through, the very fall of my
Sword makes an huge wide wound; my Estoccado is over dangerous, and the least
stroke mortal. Therefore I am oftentimes (in mere mercy) compelled to
bestow some few blows with my Bastinado; to the end, that I may give rest to my
weapon, and let it rejoice a little in the Scabbarde.

XI.
Look to your selves, my Lords, retire or withdraw a little out of the way,
until I have put on my Cape or Cloak: because the very wind thereof, is
sufficient, to send you suddenly above fifty leagues hence, beyond the
Pyrenean Mountains.

XII.
IF my Sword could speak, and tell what it daily does, time were not able to
allow it discourse. Who could else, more people all the Churchyards in the
world, then he has done? who has made richer Chirurgions every where, then
he has done? Who could, or can make the Armorers to have more toil and
continual trouble, then he has done, and daily so endures? What can cut
through more armors of proof, then it does? Who more scoffs or scorns the
Bucklers of Barcelona, or carues through the curious Helmets of Calataynd, then
it does? As for ye Casks of Almazen, it cuts through as easily, as if they were
all made of Muske-Mellons.

XIII.
IT is now full twenty years, since this sword has bin my feeder and
maintainer: For, thereby am I feared of men, and beloved of women.

XIIII.
IT has bin told me, that the great Turk commits many murders, and that he
cuts off men's arms and legs. But by the life of my dead Fathers bones, if I go
to him, that courage will be cold, and quickly forsake him. For I shall no
sooner appear in his presence, but he must presently strike himself dead with
his own hand, for fear least he should fall into mine.

XV.
WIth one word only, I can penetrate and strike down to hell, and with my
very presence, I am able to subdue the whole world, even from the East unto
the West, spoiling, defacing, and tearing all men and other matters in pieces,
that shall dare to oppose themselves in my way. For it is universally known
what I am: That my Bedsted is built with the ribs of Giants; the Ticke or Bed
it self, is stufte with the Monstachios of the chief Commanders in the great
Turks Camp, and the Bolsters with the brains, which by very boxes on the
ears, I have beaten out of his best Captains heads. My Sheets are wouen of
the fairest locks of the Amazones; my Couerings, of the Switzers beards, and
my Curtains of the soft down of the Eyebrows of the Hungarians and
Germans: The Walls of my lodging is constructed of diverse parts, not only
of Caskes or Helmes, but of whole of whole heads enclosed in them, carrying
plumes and pendents of the Queen of England, who (being dead) I have frighted
in her Grave with my formidable Bilbo, for terrifieng me in the terrible year
of eighty eight. The Floor of my house (instead of Plaster of Paris) is
artificially compounded of Ianissaries Teeth: The Tapistrie or Hangings, are
Skins of Arabes and Sorcerers, flayed off with the very point of my Dagger:
And the Tyles or Slates which cover my House, are the Nails of Monarchs and
Kings, whose bodies I have long since (in despite both of them and their
Corpse du Guard) sent in Slices of a foot long, into their Graves.

XVI.
SCorning (in mine Person) to draw my dreaded Sword, against a single brave
English Captain: I gave him such a kick with my foot, that he mounted, and
smote his head against the Sun, with such violent strength, that it
continued ecclipsed for the space of fifteen days together. And then, within
a while after, the Captain went and fell upon his knees before Jupiter,
entreating him to pardon me my Sins, in recompense of the good deed that I
had done, that with a spurn of my foot, I had placed him among the Stars,
whereas (contrary-wise) I might have cast him down into Hell, among the Wicked
and Damned Souls.

XVII.
WIth one hair of this Moustachio, which I carelessely cast away, I will make
such a wide ouverture or breach through thy Body, as all the Spanish
Infanterie, and the French Caualaery, shall pass along easily through,
without any touch, either of the one side or other.

XVIII.
WHat matter were it, if Asia, Europe, Africa, the Pyrenian Mountains, and
the Alps were all whelmed one upon another: seven Draggons, eight Elephants,
ten Tigers, two and twenty Lions, and sixty five Bulls in fierce
opposition? All these for me to couquer and make peace-able, were a matter of
nothing.

XIX.
Mistress of my heart, command me some service becoming my vocation; for I
swear by the greatest Tooth of Cerberus, to give desiance (for your sake) to
ten men together: and though there should come twice as many more, yet I stand
resolved, not to fly, but to resist them all. Command me to kill one, two,
three, four, fifty or sixty persons, to hew off legs, arms, noses, or the
faces of any whosoever, as dare presume to equal themselves with you. For such
offices are easier to be by me performed, then at any time by you they can be
commanded.

XX.
WIth this most re-doubted and terrifying Sword, I ruinate, I destroy, and set
all things on fire: Ouer-throwing whole Armies, breaking down cities, racing
castles, leuelling Trenches, battering walls, and shaking in shiuers
inexpugnable Fortresses. For, at my very sight or presence, I make Jupiter to
run and hide his head; Mercury flies like a Schoole-Boy; Cupid quakes and
trembles; and Mars he stands in amaze, as if he were transformed, rendering
over his tribute from Venus to me, because she affects me, as her much more
amorous Servant.

XXI.
IN what place soever I am, Death is always with me, because he gets more
profit by me, the^ if he were in the midst of the most furious and bloudiest
battles in the whole world. He has bin my continual companion and
follower, in conquest of ye kingdoms of the Grimeans, Diceans, Dinameans,
Alopitians, Pitunians and Espinomeans. For to speak nothing but the naked
truth, without him. I had walked alone night and day: because I can find no
other more familiar resemblance to my self, or one that can be so pleasing to
me.

XXII.
I Find in my self the Nature of the Basiliske, and (indeed) something of
greater power. For if he with his sight can kill one after one, when I look
upon men in my spleen and choler, I make them to fall down by ten and ten,
even as if mine eyes were the Balls of your greatest Artillery.

XXIII.
I Am too old to enduce any Travail, and yet but young to all valiant and
aduenturous sufferance: For from the time that I was in my Cradle, Venus made
it her daily custom, in stead of Milk to feed me with fire, and for fruit
and sweet meats, I swallowed leaden Bullets, and Balls of Brass.

XXIIII.
LIke as the World is divided into four parts, whereof three are Asia,
Africa, and Europe, and these three are circkled or round engirt with the Sea:
Even so is my heart divided into three other parts, which do contain three
several Natures, to wit; affable, terrible, and cruel. Now these three parts
are round environed, yet not with Water, but with living flames of hot
cousuming fire. And as this fire (in Loves behalf) is so sweet, as much
better for me were it, if it were sower or bitter, because I cannot captiuate
the poison which is in my heart, enen so in the same manner is my heart it
self. And yet with three strokes of this bright brandished blade, the one
delivered slycing, the second reuersing, and the third meerelie poynting: I
could kill and ouer-quell all mankind, making Rivers of blood longer then
Ganges, larger then Poe, and more terrible then Nylus. But let the World be
thankful for it, that at this instant I am become amorous, or fallen in Love,
for in my former fiery and ouer-fierce humor: I used to kill daily (at the
least) three or four dozen of Men, Women, and Children. But now, in this more
mild and temperate alteration, I use not to kill past a dozen in a day. And
what do you think may be the reason thereof? Let me tell ye for an
infallibletrueth, it is nothing else, but the mere love or Cupidicall
affection, wherewith I have changed my furious humor, and prostrated it in
demure Devotion, to the eternal service of my dainty and most Divine Mistress.

XXV.
MY Shoo-makec one Morning pulling on my shoes, I found one of them somewhat
too strait in the insteppe, I gave him such a kick with my foot against the
ground, that the earth immediately opened, and he fell in as far as Hell.
Beelzebub, Satan, Pluto, and Barrabas, Lords and Princes of those Tenebrous
obscurities, were thereat driven all into no mean amazement. Great Cerberus
cried and howled most pitifully: Proserpina rent and tore her hair, shrieking
and weeping very bitterly, because she saw her dark kingdom receive a glimpse
of light. The little Diabolotinos or lesser Spirits, hid themselves in
corners here and there. Some leapt out of hell, and fled fearfully thence,
and since that time, many of them have houered aloft in the Air, and others in
nookes and crannies of the earth, tormenting diverse people, as in many places
of the world it is daily noted.

XXVI.
WHat woman dare be so bold or audacious, as not to confess her self most
highly inamored of this strong thigh, this puissant arm, this breast full of al
force and valor; this visage, more goodly then that of Ganimede, or that of
Dido, or the looks of Absolon? Let me but see that blushlesse huswife, and
then bid her abide the fury of my indignation, if she can or dare.

XXVII.
Lady, you may (by good right) forsake the Name of Madame Beatrix, and entitle
your selfhence forward, Imperatrix or Empress, Queen, Princess, Marquess,
Countess, Dame, and Damosil: Seeing these two great Colombs or Pillars of
Hercules, which do support and sustain the whole world, are soly obliged to
your service. I could tell ye, that this Castillian body, is filled with the
abounding courage of infinite Armies; that this breast and this arm is stronger
then the Tower of Babylon: Especially, when it is assisted by this redoubted
Sword, for the fires sparkeling from it, do penetrate, and surmount in bright
splendor, the luminous beams of the Sun.

XXVIII.
IF mine infinite courageous valor, could possibly be bought with the price of
Gold or Silver, there needed no other traffic either by Sea or Land, nor
should you hear any more speech of Merchants or Merchandise, or of any man
that would labor or addict himself to follow such a fruitless vocation.
Because all men would procure to employ their industry, to get the strength
but of one of mine arms, of a leg, of a finger, of my nails pairing, of an
hair from mine eie-brow, or the very smallest from my head or beard, which
only might suffice to make them valiant, and (then valor) what can be of
greater price or estimation? But it is my joy and comfort, that it cannot be
compassed, and I am the rather therewith contented, in regard of the peace and
quiet of al those Kings, Monarks, and Princes, that hold friendship with me*

XXIX.
MY Maquerella, that old bawd Fortune gave me her word, that I should enjoy the
Lady, of whom I am so highly amorous. But if she keep not promise with me, I
swear by the horns of Pluto, by the Beard of Mars, by ye laws of Sampson,
and by the Alchoran of Mahomet, that I will take from her all her tricks, and
bereave her of her inconstant and variable wheel. As for her body, with one
Estoccado, I will hurl her to Valladolid, bruised and broken into so many
pieces or small fragments, that she shall no sooner be fallen down there, but
she shall be squandered into dust and power, which I will make use of, to cast
upon those letters, that by me shall be daily sent to my sweet Mistress.

XXX.
I Have more augmented and increased in the compass of two poor days only,
the Stigian Kingdom of grim-faced Pluto, and peopled his dark and smoaky Hal
with subjects, then either Rodomont, Orlando, Reynard of Moutauban, Mandricard,
or Radamanth, with all their powers could do, and I have dreadfully subjected,
and humbled upon their knees, in a thousand thousand other places, hearts that
were dauntlesse, most valiant, and of unmatchable courage. If you require any
witness or testimony heerof, send to all the inhabited Countries of the East,
West, North and South, and perusing their Chronicles, do but note what you
find written in them all, of my virtue and valor.

XXXI.
THe great Turk is more afraid of my valiant resolution, which this
vnconquereable Arm has dearly made known unto him, then of ten armies or main
battalions joined together. Because I being one day in ye war of the Venetians,
against the forenamed great Turk, I gave such a box on the ear to Abenhamet,
great master of his Camp, yt I smote his head quite from his shoulders: and
presently, with another spurn, I kicked it into Constantinople, where it
delivered the tidings of the foil and loss of all the army. But when the
Graunde Signeur himself, and all the rest there present with him, beheld the head
without a body, they fled forthwith into their houses, making their doors
very fast upon them, and continued in such fear, as in 6. years after they
durst not peep abroad, through ye bread they stood in of me: til at length, I
putting on an humor of more mild temper, and falling into my woonted
magnificence, gave them free leave to enjoy their liberty, and to walk about
the streets, as in former times they had done.

XXXII.
WHen I walk along through the streets of the City, a thousand Ladies
present themselves before me. One pulls me by the Cloak, another winkes with
her eye at me, another prays me to sup with her, another offers me presents,
another kisses my hand, and blesses the Mother that bare me, accounting her
self to be most happy if she could compass but one Nights lodging with me:
To no other end, but only to have a child sprung from the race of so great
and valiant a personage, as the world well knows me to be.

XXXIII.
IF the strength of my members could be imparted among disordered persons, and
mutinous spirits; the world would be in an uproar, revolt, and confusion, and
nothing else were to be seen therein, but only battles and conquests. The
bells would ring night and day, as delivering the interment of slaughtered
bodies: Surgions could never come forth of their houses, for stitching up
slashes of swords, healing Estoccadoes, setting in right shape broken arms
and legs. Women would weep for the death of their Husbands, young children
for the loss of their Fathers, and Maids for great wrong done to their
Mayden-heads, having lost their Lovers, and in danger to die Virgins.

XXXIIII.
IT is I only that never felt fear, but have menaced the Skies, the Air,
Earth, and Water, yea Jupiter and Hell. I could wish to war with all the
Elements: for I fear no tempests, storms, thunder or lightning. And I doubt
not, but in very short time, to make my self Lord of the Sea, Earth, and
Hell: I will do it, and I can do it, for my forces are sufficient to perform
it.

XXXV.
IF I come to thee, I will give thee such a spurn with my foot, that it shall
raise and mount thee so high, as if thou were provided with ten Cart load of
Bread, yet should thou stand more in fear of famishing, then of bruising or
death, when thou fallest down again.

XXXVI.
OH, how I smile to my self, when I call to mind the ignorance of the Gods, in
deyfying Hercules, and giving him a name of equal excellency with them,
calling him a God: only because he killed the Hydra, took the Bull by the
horns, rent the Dragon in pieces, vanquished the Lion, surmounted the
Centaure, and the wild Bear: because he made the Harpies fearfully fly
away, slew Cethes and Achelous, foiled Diomed King of Thrace, and overcame
Gereonea Qu. of the Amazons: fiinally, because he erected Collombs or pillars
in many places. In effect, al these things are nothing else but a mere fable,
and actions of a young womanish spirit, being compared with my unparalleled
strength, fortitude, and courage. For neither the puissance of Daryus, King of
the Persians, nor yet of that Alexander, entitled, styled, or epittethized,
the Great; nor the strong Sampson, nor mighty Hector the Troyan, nor the
valiant Achilles, nor the mad and furious Rowland, ycleped (by some) Orlando
Furioso, nor the aduenturous Gridasso, nor the gallant Sacrapant, nor the
terrible Mexican Mandricarde, nor the famous Rugiero, or French Roger, nor the
horrible Agricano, or the robust Rodomont: No, not any one of them, or all
assembled together, could or are able to equal my terrible, horrible,
formidable, fury-bond, and dreadful force, if I please to let it appear in my
thundering humor.

XXXVII.
MIne arm quakes and trembles, at that which I am determined to do for my
Lady and Mistress: For continually I ponder how and which way to compass her
contentment, and yet I never attain unto it. All the night long I dream that
I am performing deeds of Arms (for her sake against ten men, six whereof,
I slew outright, and of them which fled away, he that escaped with best safety
and security, was glad to leave his left arm at my feet. But then (O you
Sacred powers) how much more am I able to do in the day time, when I am awake,
and at my martial exercise? Twenty men together dare not touch the string of my
Shoo.

XXXVIII.
ONe day as I was playing at the Balloune, I smote it with such force, that it
flew up into ye third heaven, where it mounted and leapt up before the Gods,
who were then assembled in a very serious Counsel. They looking earnestly one
upon another, becam so confounded, yt they sat wide gaping, and had not the
power to speak one word, until at length their senses being restored, they
thought it necessary that Jupiter should descend to earth, and falling on his
knees before me, forsaking both his Crown and Scepter, should humbly offer
himself to my service, Venus to be my Shee-seruant, Mars my Lacky, and
Mercury mine Apple-Squire.

XXXIX.
AS I was one day playing with the destinies, in the presence of Time, Fortune,
and Nature, upon a difficult happening between us, I was suddenly enforced to
draw my sword: Time, Fortune, and Nature, being dear friends to the Destinies,
stepped between us to take up the matter, and make peace. But I being a
Spaniard, set my right foot foremost, and gave therewith such a spurn to Time,
that I cast him between heaven and earth, and there he hangs still houering
to this instant. Fortune, I sliced her in twain just at her girdle, and threw
the one half of her there where the Sun rises, and the other part where he
takes up his lodging. As for Nature, with my punto reuersso, I gave her such a
deep and incurable wound, as neither Physician, Surgeon, Barber, nor
Apothecary, could ever since undertake to heal it, but every month in the
year that wound breaks forth a bleeding.

XL.
I Had upon a time a quarrel with a French Gentleman, who with despightfull
words, bad me draw my sword: which I refused to do, because I perceived the
Frenchman to look pale, and to be of a very chil-cold complerion. Wherefore,
in mere pity to warm his blood, and set him in an heat, I suffered him to
have some fifty Estoccadoes at me, and as many other violent blows: yet could
he not draw blood, or had the power to hurt me. But for my self, I knew my
choler and courage to be such, as with the very least sillip of my finger, I
could have beaten out his brains, and made him sink to hell.

XLI.
BEing desirous, that Pluto should pay me such ordinary tribute, as other
Kings daily did and do: I took my iourny to hell, where I found Pluto walking
at his pleasure, accompanied with five hundred and forty five Millions, and
thirteen hundred ninety and six thousand Legions of Devils, that usually
attended upon him. So soon as he beheld me a far off, coming toward him, he
came directly to meet me and yield himself as my prisoner. But I laid hand
upon my Sword, and Pluto perceiving me to be offended, and in choler, knowing
(withal) that I was a Spaniard, fled back into the deepest parts of hell,
with all his train frightfully following him, and there made fast the gates
against me. But I being come thither for better obedience, marched on gallantly
step by step, as those of my nation are wont to do: and with a very sneezing of
my nose, I made the gates fly open, and I entered. In a moment, I took there
for my prisoners, great Satan himself, the Prince Pluto, and the fair
Proserpina; all whose hands I bound fast together with a hair of my
Moustachios or beard. Nevertheless, beholding their incessant tears and
lamentations, made with such outcries and wringing of hands: I used the mercy
and magnificencie of a Spaniard, delivered them out of their servile bands* and
so suffered them to enjoy their former liberty.

XLVII.
I Will kill this Villain, his Wife, his Children, his Servants, his Dogs, his
Cats, his Pullaine, his very Lice, Nits and Fleas, or any living creature
belonging to his house, which also I will ruinyte from the top to the
foundation: though Pluto himself, and all the Devils that are in hell, had
solemnly vowed to save them from my fury: And what is my chiefest purpose
herein? Only to constitute such a dread and terror of me, in the hearts of
men, as no one (be he never so bold or courageous) shall at any time hereafter
dare to offend me.

XLIII.
IT was my chance (one day) to be walking abroad, somewhat necre to the
Trenches which were made at Oastend; when suddenly a Bullet, being sent from a
piece of great Ordinance, fell into my mouth, shook two of my foremost teeth,
without any injury or offense unto me. At the instant hour, I grew to be
somewhat incensed with choler, and the Bullet I took into my hand, and casting
or returning it against the enemy, it happened to hit against a Tower in the
wall, which immediately in an instant was driven into smail dust, and slew with
the very fall thereof, about 1555. gallant Soldiers, who (by especial
appointment) were placed there as a Corpse du Guard, and had the charge both of
the Tower and wall.

XLIIII.
Upon a time, I would take a walk into Hell, where I found Pluto, Proserpina,
and Death, all fitting at a Table. They were in such a fearful astonishment,
beholding me in their darkesome dwelling, that I (well knowing their weakness of
courage) without any further delay, leaping up with a Caper after the French
fashion, with the very crown of my Hat or Beauer, broake the roof of hell;
and mounting forth at that breach, the mere noise of my departure thence, was
such, that it made the great City of Lisbone to tremble, and ouerturned 88^.
houses, in the street of Boanistre.

XLV.
BE not you offended, Mistress and Lady of my life, neither let it seem
displeasing to you, that I am sought after, and beloved by so many Brincesses
and Paragons; who but wrong themselves therein, and merely loose their labor
in vain. For I bear affection to no other, but only to your self my sweetest
mistress: because you are endued with beauty far beyond Diana, with good
graces and behavior, excelling Pallas, and with sweet affability more supreme,
then Venus. Al these three Sovereign Goddesses equal not you, to whom I have
freely given my heart, and properly chosen you as mine own. Consider then that
I love you, and forsake not me for any other, in regard that I am more then a
Gentleman. Wherefore, if you marry with me, A swear by the faith of a
Captain, and by the life of the King my Father (for I never heard him called
by any other name) to beget ye the first night such a regiment of Soldiers,
as shall conquer all the world in a moment.

XLVI.
MY self, Hercules, Death, and Love, met all by chance on a day together, in a
place which was appointed for Archery, and each of us had his Bow and Arrows
there ready. We fell to this acord among our selves, that he who with his
Arrow could make the greatest slaughter or execution, should bear away the
amplest recompense of Honor. Hercules began first, and with his Arrow, he
slew all the Panthers, Lions Tigers, Bears, Wolves: al savage Beasts, Dear,
Elephants, Camels, and Bulls. Next, Love took his shaft, and drawing it to the
head, he caused all the Gods, Giants, Amazons, Men and Devils; to fall and submit
themselves under his amorous yoke (my self only excepted, on whom Love could
not attain to any power.) Death being resolved to let loose his Areow, he
killed therewith all the creatures that were upon the earth. Whereupon, I grew
into some displeasure against the^, and being moved in a moity of choler, to
be revenged on them; I crossed mine Arrow in my Bow, determining to let it be my
very last shoot, to avoid all further quarrel and contention, but no sooner
flew mine Arrow from me (being let loose indeed with extraordinary spirit and
courage) but in the very instant, I slew therewith, Hercules, Love, and Death,
and so remained the sole Conqueror.

XLVII.
I Kiss the shoo-sole of your Lady-ship, sole Mistress of my heart; Princess
of this breasts power, Duchess of this arms dexterity, Marquess of my
matchless courage, Countess of my valors capricious conceits, Queen of my
forces Quintessence, and absolute Gouernesse of me and my person.

I am constrained to spit daily on the point of my sword, for fear it should
pass fatally on any person in your presence, or where your virtue may command
my demonorance. This Epitaph is engraven upon his Tomb, whom I last slew, for
not being bare before you.

The Epitaph.
HEerelyeth Martino Alphonso, Galeone, as dead as a Mouse, who fearing to
offend the only gallant man of the World, desired to be blown away with his
breath, because his love was out of date, and he durst no longer live in this
world.

XLVIII.
HE that dares but look on me,
From fear he never can be free;
Knowing my puissance of such might,
That Death himself, I kill outright.
Alone I am, without compare,
To prove my man-hoode, no man dare.
When I hold my Sword in hand,
Renown and Honor I command:
From the Gods is my descent,
And with them must my time be spent.
My Sword and Buckler does suffice,
Against a thousand enemies:
They are as nothing in my sight,
I make the Earth and Gods affright.
What ere he be that dare resist,
He dies, then tarry if he list.
FINIS.

