MARRIAGE DVTIES BRIEFLY COVCHED TOGETHER; OVT OF COLOSSIANS, 3.18, 19. BY
THOMAS GATAKER Bachelar of Divinity and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES, for WILLIAM BLADEN, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Bible in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

TO THE HOPEFVLL YOUNG COVPLE, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. ROBERT COOK Esquire,
and the virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistres DOROTHIE COOK his wife; many comfortable
days in Gods ^ea^e and ^auour to their mutual and eternal good.
RIght lovely and beloved in Christ; ^ungat Epistola, quos ^unxit coniugium:
imo charta non dividat, quos Christ nec^it amor. Hi^ton. fere prefat, in
Proverb.
give me leave to include you both in one Dedication, whom hearty love and
affection has conjoined together, and whom Gods ^^ne ordinance has made one.
At the time of (...) ^^l^mne knitting of you together, there was (...)
important considerations a duty (...) absolutely necessary, yet at such times
not unseasonable. To supply that defect, I make bold now to present you with
some passages of such a subject, as it is like, had then been handled, if
opportunity had served. They are raw notes of a Sermon long since made on the
like occasion: Which finding by me, and willing to embrace any opportunity of
expressing my love there in any degree, where I justly owe so great a measure,
I suddenly reuised and prepared them for the pres^e. And albeit, in the
reuising of them I observed some defects, and could well have been content to
have taken further time and pains for the better polishing, and the more
orderly digesting of them, as also for the special applying of them to your
selves, to whom now they are addressed: yet I supposed it would be much more
convenient and behoouefull, without further delay, while the occasion is yet
fresh, to present you with them as they are, that they might salute a
New-married Couple at the entering in of the New-yeere. An exact treatise, or
large discourse of Marriage Duties (though the Title be such) I hope they will
not expect, that shall understand that they have here but the Substance of one
Sermon, delivered, when it was, within the compass of little more then an
hour, and upon the recollecting of my Meditations afterward, at the request of
some, not much enlarged. And though I doubt not but you may meet with many
profitable Treatises of the like Argument, yet I was desirous you should have
somewhat thereof from my self. The truth of God, I wot well, is the same, and
deserves all due regard, by whomsoever it is delivered. But yet there is some
efficacy added to it, when it is brought us by those whom we specially
affect, and of whom we are persuaded that they do likewise in special manner
affect us. Of this mutual affection between you both and my self, as there
is in diverse respects very great and just ground, so, I hope, there is no doubt
at all made on either side of it. The assurance whereof if it may help to
supply some defects that may be found in this untimely birth, some good fruit,
I hope, by the reading of it may redound to you both. Much I heartily desire
may daily, both by this and by all other good means, to all your friends joy,
your own mutual comfort here, and your eternal happiness hereafter. With
which unfeigned desire I end for the present, and rest.

Your poor kinsman and hearty well-wisher, THO. GATAKER.

MARRIAGE DVTIES.
Coloss. 3.18, 19. Wives, submit your selves unto your Husbands; as it is
c^mely in the Lord.
Husbands, love your Wives; and be not bitter to them.

WIthout Faith, Heb. 11.6. Siuefide po^^^bile non est pla^ere; m^o imp^ssibile
est non a^pplicere. Hern. in Cant. 30.
says the Apostle Paul, it is impossible to please God. And, Iam. 2.26. Fides
enim ab eo quia sit quod dicitur. Aug. demend. cap. 20. Er^o vbi non si^ quod
dicitur, fides non est, Petrus. Cant. cap 74.
Faith, says the Apostle James, Is but dead without works. There be two
things therefore necessarily required of every Christian, Per^ide^ vera and
vitam rectam ducit nos Deus ad salutem aternam. Rad. Ardens in homil. domin.
true Faith and good Life. A man cannot live but by a lively Faith; and Faith
is not lively without ho^y Life.

The Apostle therefore accordingly spends this, as he does Roman Ephesians. etc.
other of his Epistles, Cap. ^. and ^ Romans 1, ad 12. Ephesians. 1. and 2. and 3.
partly in delivering the grounds and doctrine of Faith, Cap. 3. and 4. Romans
12. etc. Ephesians. 4. and 5. and 6.
and partly in directing the faithful for the manner of their Life.

Now because every man ordinarily has 1. Cor. 7.20.24. ^^ca. in qud. ^.
two several Callings, a General and a Special: the General calling of a
Christian; and some Special calling in that particular estate that God has
assigned each one unto: the Apostle gives Rules here, as Ephesians. 4 and 5. and 6
elsewhere, for our behavior in either Chap. 3.1. ad 18. and 4.2. ad 7. Ephesians
4. and ^.1. ad 22. and 6.10. ad 21.
some generally concerning all men generally, as they are Christians, in the
former part of this Chapter: Chap. 3.18. ad 4.2. Ephesians. 5.22. ad 6.10.
some special concerning several persons in their several estates, as they
are inferiors or superiors, tied by natural or civil bands either to other;
in the words of my text, and so forward.

And in this part the Apostle delivers the Duties.

Verse. 18.19.
1. Of Husband and Wife. Verse. 20.21.
2. Of Parents and Children. Verse. 22. etc. Ad cap. 4.2.
3. Of Chapt 4.1.
Masters and Ver^. 22. ad finem.
Servants.
The Duties of Husband and Wife are in the words of my Text. Verse. 18.
the Wives duty in the former verse, Verse 19.
the Husbands in the latter.

In handling whereof we will, observe, first the Order, then the Matter,

Fides radix, opera fructus. Bernon a^t. 30
For the Order, the Apostle is here, as ever usually, exact.

Tota vita infidelium peccatum est; and nihil est bonum absque summo bono.
Prosper in s^nt. ex Aug.
Before, he began Chap. 1. and 2.
first with Faith, and Chap. 3. etc.
then came to Life: because Faith is the Root and good Life the Fruit: and
without the Root there can be no Fruit: in reg^rd whereof it is well said,
that The whole life of the Faithless is nothing but sin, and there can
nothing be good without the chief good. For it is no less true of special
Faith, which is spoken by the Apostle of the general Faith, that Romans 14 1^.
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

He began Verse. 1 ad 18:
first with rules of Life general, and Verse. 18. etc.
then came to Rules special: because howsoever Bonus h^mo, et bonus eni^, An^.
the Heathen man thought that A man might be a good Man and yet not a good
citizen, or he might be a good Magistrate, or a good Master, and yet not a good
Man: yet indeed a man can not be a good Husband, or Parent, or Master, unless
he first be a good Christian: at least not so good as to reap comfort or
benefit thereby himself, or to perform offices to others in that manner as he
ought.

Here likewise Verse. 18, 19.
he begins first with the duties of married persons; and of them Verse. 18.
first with the wives.

First, at the duties of married persons of man and wife the Apostle begins
here, as Ephesians. 5.22, 25
elsewhere; and so proceeds to the duties Verse. 20.21, Ephesians. 6.1, 4.
of Children and Parents in the second place, and Verse. 22. and Chap. 4.1. Ephesians.
6.5, 9.
of Servants and Masters in the third place.

First, Genesis 2.22.
because this society it is the first that ever was in the world: and
therefore as it was (...). Hierodes de nupt.
the first in nature, so it is the first here in order: the Apostle begins
first with that which in course of nature is first.

Secondly, because this is Psalm. 128.3. and 127.3.
the fountain from whence the rest flow: and the streams can not flow pure
and clear unless the fountain be first cleansed and kept clean. The Apostle
therefore wisely begins at the Head-spring, that a good course being settled
in this principal society, it may be the better kept and continued in others
that issue and flow from it.

And this point thus observed may first serve to show what is one maine cause
of much neglect of duty in many families, in children toward parents, in
servants toward Master and Mistres; because the governors are not careful of
mutual duties betwixt themselves, of concord and agreement the one with the
other, of love and fidelity the one to the other, of respectfull and
regardfull carriage the one toward the other. And so neglect of duty and
difference between them is a means to breed a contempt of one or both in
those that should be guided by them: making servants and children to take
occasion of liberty and fail in their duty to them, as they fail in duty
either to other. Yea it is a just judgment often with God to punish the one by
the other: as Rebel^s facta est, qu^a homo ^umun, creatura homini, Aug. contr.
Ep^st. fundam. cap. 37.
rebellion against the Creator by rebellion in the creature; so neglect in
rulers of duties enioyn^d them of God, by neglect of duty toward them in those
that should be ruled by them.

Secondly, it may admonish married folk, that are heads of houses, if they
desire to have things go wel' in the family that they have a special care of
those duties that God has enjoined them in regard either of other. That will
be a means to make duties pass more orderly both from them to others, and
from others to them, as the contrary proves ordinarily a great hindrance to
either. For as in a clock or a watch, if the spring be faulty, the wheels
can not go, or if they move not either other, the hammer can not strike: so
here, where duty fails between man and w^fe it causes a neglect of all
other good duties in the family that depends upon them, yea 2. Pet. ^.7.
of duty often even to God himself in them. And therefore married persons, if
they desire to have duties performed to them by others, they must first
perform what is fit and convenient either to other: remembering that the due
performance of mutual duties to either, shall both make them fitter for the
performance of good offices to others, and others readier in performance of
theirs unto them.

Now in the next place as the Apostle begins with Married persons, Man and
wise; so of the twain here he places Verse 18.
the wives duty in the first place. A course constantly observed both by 1.
Pet. 3 ^.
Peter and ^^b. 5.2^.
Paul, as here lo elsewhere, that they begin first with the wives duty and so
Verse 19. Ephesians. 5.25. 1. Pet 3.7.
pass on to the husbands; and that for two causes.

First to show the inferioritie of the wife in regard of the husband; for we
may observe that the Apostle begins ever with the duty of the inferior:
Verse 20. Ephesians 6.1.
first the childrens, Verse 20. Ephesians. 6.4.
then the Parents: first Verse. 22. Ephesians. 6.5.
the Servants, Chap. 4.1. Ephesians. 6.9.
then the Masters: and so first the wives then the Husbands: the woman's first,
then the Man's.

Secondly, to show where duty is to begin, on the wives part; it is to begin
at the inferior and so to ascend to the superior. For Of^^ium a (...)
d^s^endir.
Love goes downward: duty comes upward. It begins with the inferior
and so goes up to the superior. The wives duty is as the base or ground that
the husband duty is built upon. It is that that must draw duty and respect
from the husband. 1. Pet 3.7.
Likewise, says the Apostle Peter, Let the men live with their wives, etc.
Having spoken of the wives behavior toward her husband before. Not that it is
lawful for the superior to omit his duty, if the inferior be slack or
faulty in the performance of hers, but to show in course of nature whither
should begin to show duty.

And this first serves to admonish the wife to be forward in performance of
such good duties as God requires on her part; and not to strain courtesy and
stand upon terms, as to say, Let him do what he should do, and then I will
do what is befitting me. Would thou have him to do that that is his duty?
there is no way more agreeable to the word and will of God, more consonant to
the course and order of nature, more likely to prove successful and
effectual to that purpose and to have a blessing of God go with it, then the
careful performance of thy duty to him, then which nothing is more forcible
to draw duty from him. In a word the wives maine duty here is subjection, the
man's principally Love; Nulla est mayor ad amorem inu^tatio quam preuenire
amando. nimos q^e aurus est animus, qui dilectionem, si nolebat impendere,
nolit and rependere.

Aug de catech. rud. cap. 4.


and there is nothing more available with a good nature, to extract from it
love and all duties of love, then a willing subjection and yielding issuing
from love in the party to be loved.

Again this shows, if any breach or occasion of offense shall arise between
man and wife, whither is to seek to other: Howsoever the husband in
discretion; (being that he is or ought to be the wiser, and the woman held to
be the weaker; as Genesis 13.8.
Abraham sought to Lot, though being every way Genesis 11.31.
the better:) yet the wife is in duty rather to seek reconcilement: (as the
Apostle impl^eth when he says, 1. Cor. 7 14.
Let her be reconciled to her husband, and as we see it held in all estates,
that the inferior does ever seek and sue to the superior) and so to break
of first on her side that vacancie and intermission of duties that thereupon
has ensued.

And thus much for the Order: we come now to the Matter. Wherein concerning the
wives duty first propounded observe we two things: the maine duty, and the
manner of it.

The maine duty, on the wives part is Submission; or Subjection. That the
Apost^es of Christ both Ephesians. 5.22. 1. Tim. 2.11. 1. Cor. 14.34.
Paul and 1. Pet. 3.1, 5.
Peter exact ever, on her part.

For the reason whereof in general no other need be rendered, then that which
the Apostle Paul propounds in this place, that it is a matter of Comeliness
and Decency.

1. Cor. 14.33.
God is the God as of order and peace, so of Comeliness and Decency: and
therefore will have 1. Cor. 14.40.
All things done in decency and in order: but that the wife should submit and
subject her self to her husband, it is a thing comely, and the contrary
uncomely.

Which point shall further the more plainly appear, if we shall consider,
that the Husband is the superior, and the wife the inferior; that the Husband
is as the head, the wife as the body or the rib.

For the first, there can be no ordinary intercourse and commerce or
conuersing between person and person, but there must be a precedencie on the
one part, and a yielding of it on the other. Now where they be equals, there
may be some question, some difficulty, whither shall have the prioritie, and
they take it commonly, as it falls out, or by turns. But where there is an
apparent inequality, there it is without question that the inferior is to
yield to the superior.

Now here the Husband is the Superior, and the wife the Inferior, as the
Apostle elsewhere proves, both from the Creation, and since the
transgression.

From the Creation, as appears by the Order. Manner, End,
of it.

By the order of it; in that 1. Tim. 2.13.
The man was first created, and not the woman, and therefore the man has the
Ins primog^uitura.
Birthright, as the first borne in the family; in regard whereof God speaks
Genesis 3 16.
of Eve to Adam, as Genesis 4 7.
of Abel to Cain, Thy desire shall be subject to his; and he shall rule over
thee. By the manner of it; in that 1. Cor. 11.8.
The woman was made of the man, and not the man of the woman: Quatuor
generationis mo^li, de l^mo terrae, de c^sta viri, de carne faminae, de semme
vtriusqae. Hieron.
she had her being at first Genesis 2.22.
from him, as their children now have from them: and in that regard 1. Cor. 11
^.
is the woman said to be the image and glory of the man, as man is the image
and glory of God: By the end of it; in that 1. Cor. 11.9.
The woman was made for the man, and not the man for the woman: Genesis 2.18.
She was made to be as an help unto him: and it is a rule general, that
Prastantior ^is quae a (...). Aristot. in topic.
The end is more excellent then that which tends thereunto.

Neither was this Order reuersed but Gene^. 3 16.
confirmed by the Fall: in regard that the woman was as 1. Tim. 2.13.
the latter in creation, so 1. Tim. 2.14.
the former intransgression; as the Apostles words are to be expounded where
he speaks of that point; and so Genesis 3.6.12.
was an instrument to draw the man on unto evil.

Again, the Man is as the Head, and the woman as the body. The 1. Cor. 11.3.
Man is the woman's head; and Christ the man's head; and God Christ's head. As 1.
Cor. 15.27.28.
Christ therefore is subject to God, and the man unto Christ, so the woman to
the man. Ephesians 5.23.
The Man is the woman's head, as Christ is the Churches head. And Ephe. 5.24.
therefore the wife is to be subject to her husband, as the Church is to
Christ: And the husband to rule the wife as the head or soul does the body.
And as it is against the order of nature that the body should rule the head: so
is it no less against the course of all good order, that 1. Tim ^.11.
the woman should usurp authority to her self over her husband, her head.

Yea the place, whence she was taken, may teach as much. Gen 2.21 2^.
She was taken from the side; she was framed of the ribbe. In regard whereof
it is said of Lamech, Gen 4.19.
who first brought in Polygamie, that Vnam c^stans in duas divisit. Hiero^r
quaest. Hebr.
he divided one rib into twain: and of the devil Job. 2.9.
tempting Job by his wife, that he sought to make passage through the Rib to
the Heart. Per costa^ ad ^or. Greg. mor. l. 3 cap. 5.
As it were therefore a thing prodigious and monstrous in nature for the rib in
the body to stand either equal with or above the head: so we may well say
here, that a (...).
mankind woman or a masterly wi^e is even a monster in nature.

The use of this point may be partly for Reprehension, and partly for
Admonition.

For reprehension, to reprove and tax those women that affect mastership;
seek to rule and ouerrule those, whom God has not committed only, but
submitted and subjected them unto; and so violate that order, which God
himself has established in nature: a course that brings commonly, through
the just judgment of God, disgrace and contempt upon both parties, yea utter
ruin o^t of the family and of their whole estate. For howsoever women may
think it an honor to them, yet (...).
it is indeed rather a dishonor. A masterly wife is as much despised and
derided for taking rule over her husband, as he for yielding it to her; and
that not only among those that be godly and religious, but even among those
that be but mere natural men and women. Yea it is the next way to bring all
to wrack. For (...).
where the wi^e makes head against the husband; there is nothing but doing and
undoing, and so all things go backward, and th e whole house runs to ruin,
as by lamentable experience too often appears.

Which may serve therefore, for Admonition, to admonish every Christian woman
in holy wisdom and godly discretion to (...). Philemon Com.
learn to know her place and her part; and to fashion her mind and her will,
her disposition and her practice accordingly thereunto: yea though she be her
self of a greater spirit, and in some respect of better parts, though she
bring much with her, though the maine estate come by her, yet to acknowledge
her husband, as God has appointed him, to be her superior as he is her
husband and her head: (which acknowledgement is the ground of the duty here
urged; as the contrary conceit cutteth of all conscionable carriage in this
kind) that she be willing Mic. 7.9. ^eram Domini.
to wear the yoke and bear the burden that God in his ordinance has imposed
on her: and not only avoid and forbear, but even hate and abhor the
contrary, as a course abominable in Gods sight, odious in man's eyes, and
prejudicial to them both.

Now that this may be the better performed: it shall not be amiss more
distinctly to entreat of such particular duties as spring from the Subjection
or Submission urged by the Apostle on this part.

We must not therefore conceive it, that this Submission consists in a
complementall crowching and courtesing, or the like, as Esai. 58.3, 5. 1 King*
21.27.
hypocrites place religion only in ceremonial obseruances: but rather in a
faithful and careful, in a constant and conscionable performance of such
duties as issue and flow from the inward acknowledgement of that superiority
of power and place, that God has given to the husband in regard of the wife.

And these duties may be referred, or reduced to three heads Reverence,
Obedience, Assistance.


The first duty is Reverence; which comprehends two things, Honor, Fea^e.


First Honor, the Exodus 20 12. D^ut. 5.16. Math. 15.4. M^rk 7.10. Ephesians. 6.2.
general duty of all inferiors required in the fifth precept; (wherein as all
inferiors are comprised under one kind, so all their duty under this one
term) more specially applied to this particular, in Ester, 1.20.
that edict of Assuerus, that all women, high or low, do give honor to their
husbands: and it consists in a reverent and respectfull carriage toward
them: (commended 1. Pet. 3.6.
in Sara her behavior toward Abraham, that thought reverently of him as her
head, Genesis 18.12.
spoke reverently of him as her Lord,) that neither when they are kind and
familiar together, they grow into gross terms; nor if any jar or offense
fall out, they rush into tart and sour words; but take heed of all vnreuerent
and unsavory language of them, of all unseemly and uncomely carriage toward
them; like that of Iesabel to Ahab, 1. King 21 7.
Do thou judge Israel? or of 2 Samuel 6.20.
Mical to David telling him, that he played the fool in dancing before God's Ark: which speech of hers as 2. Sam. 6.16.
it argued a contempt of him in her heart; so it was 2. Sam. 6 23.
justly plagued in her by God with barrenness as a breach of his ordinance,
she had no child for it to her dying day.

Secondly, Ephesians. 5.33.
Fear, not a servile or slavish dread, but a liberal, free and ingenuous
fear; (like that fear that the godly bear unto God:) as the Apostle Peter
implies when excluding the one, he yet 1. Pet 3 2.
exacteth the other: 1 Pet. 3.6.
a fear springing from love, and joined with love; consisting in a desire to
do every thing so as may please their husband and give him contentment, and a
care to shun and avoid whatsoever may d^splease him, or minister coffeehouse
unto him.

Where those w^ues come to be taxed and not unjustly condemned, that regard not
at all their husbands pleasure, but their own self will only: If he will be
pleased, let him: if he will not, choose him; it is a ^ o^e to them, he has
his mends in his hands. This is (...). Contra quam Adagium apud Plutar. (...).
not to cut out the work by the role, but the rule by the work: to make the
wives will the rule of the husbands will: whereas Genesis 3.^6.
God has appointed the husbands will to be the rule and square of the wives
will, not the wives of his. And as Pet. 1.2.1^,
Peter says of servants that they are to apply themselves even to their
crooked masters: so here though the hu^band^ will shall be crooked, so it be
not wicked, the wives will is not straight in Gods sight, if it be not pliable
to his.

What shall we say of them that love to swim, as we say, with the trout,
against the stream, that will do things of purpose to cross their husbands;
what they know that they can not, or will not like of? This is not to cut out
the work according to the rule, but to cut out the work directly against the
rule. Nothing more likely to breed heart-burning between them; and to make a
man carry a stiffer and streighter hand over them: as we see that Pide fabulam
de sole et Bo^ea apud Plut.
a man lets his garments hang loose about him in a calm, which he girdeth
closer to him when the wind is boistrous and high. Such women should remember
that f a meek and a quiet spirit is a thing precious in Gods sight: and on the
otherside a froward and unquiet spirit in a wife is a thing odious and
detestable both with God and man.

The second duty is Obedience; 1. Pet. 3.6.
propounded by Peter in the example of Sara; as S^ra obeyed Abr^ham: and it
has reference to two things Admonition, Advice.
and so consequently consists in being content to be admonished of him, to be
advised by him.

First for Admonition, in being content to be admonished by him: and taking his
admonitions in good parts; and being willing to reform and amend what he
admonishes her of as amiss. Not ready to return a snappish answer again,
and to give one angry word again for another; nor to be pouting and lowering
upon it, (as the manner is of many, when they are told of ought,) for a long
time together, as if they would make him weary of admonishing ought any more;
but hearing it with mildness, and hearkening to it with meekness: remembering
that when the husband admonishes, God admonishes in him; and harkening to
him, she hearkeneth to God in him: as 1 Samuel 8.7. Nen te, sed me.
on the other side contemning him, she contemns God and Gods ordinance in
him. Yea though the husband should chance to blame and find fault without
cause, (as even the best and the wisest sometime may do,) it shall be a wise
and discreet woman's part Pet. 2.^0.
rather to take it quietly and patiently, as if there were just cause of it,
the^ to give any unkind or uncomely language again: remembering that R^nam^^^
est, ^h^ ^^^pa^ agu^^^e^e, ub^ ^^lp^non est. Greg in Epist a^ Au^ust.
It is, as one says we^l, the property of an ingenuous disposition; to
acknowledge a fault sometime, even where there is none: not S^p^^^ator n^n
c^^s, ^u^ ye^ ^^torem (...) ^ate^^s, e^se in^^^us, ^um ment^ris. Aug. de verb.
Ap. 29.
by lying or dissemb^ing, (for that is altogether unlawful:) but by patient
bearing and forbearing, being as ready to alter what is done, as if it had
been done otherwise then it ought.

Secondly, For Adut^e, in suffering her self to be advised of him; in taking
advice of him, and following advice given by him: in being willing 1 Pet. 35 6.
to be directed and advised by him for her self, her attire, her behavior,
her carriage, her company, the marshalling and managing of domestical
affairs. As Genesis 21.9, 10.
Sara would not put away her maid Hagar without Abraham's consent; nor Genesis 27
46, 43. and 28.1, 2.
Rebekkah send away her son Jacob without Isaaks advice. In regard whereof
the husband is called the wives Prove. 2.17.
guide: as the person by whom she is mainely to be directed and guided.

Which yet we are not so to understand as if the wife might not either admonish
the husband on some occasions, or adu^se him in some cases. For what 2 King.
5.3.13 1 Samuel 16.15, 16.
a servant may sometime do; a wife may much more.

But there must be an holy wisdom and discretion used herein. That admonition
be given seasonably, (not as physic in a fit,) as 1. Sam. 25.37.
by Abigail to Nabal; and with due respect and regard of the husbands person
and place. That in advice giving the wife, ever remember what is properly her
part; and therefore move the matter rather by way of question, or as cre^^^
^^uice, as Genesis 27 16.
Rebekka seems to move the master a far of unto Isaak, submit her adu^ce
and op^nion to his judgment and discr^tion, as Ester 8.5.
^ster to Assuerus his. Show her self willing to obey, if he shall think good
otherwise: and withal so carry the matter that even in those things that are
done by her advice to good purpose, her husband be honored and not contemned
either by others or her: that whatsoever is done by their mutual consent, may
seem rather to come from him; as 1. King 21.8.
Iesabel sealed all with Ahabs seal, and Ester 8.8.10.
Ester wrote all in Assuerus his name. For that as the Clariorem sonum reddit
spiritus n^ster, cum illum tuba per longi canalis angustias tractum patentiore
nouissime exitu effudi^. Cleanthu^ apud S enec. Epist. 108.
trumpeters own voice is nothing so loud or so strong, as the sound that it
yields when it passes through the trumpet: so every action in the family
shall gain it self more weight and procure more them both more credit, and
carry more authority with it, when it passes through the husbands hands and
is ratified and sealed as it were with his seal.

And here comes to be condemned the custom of those women that will do all
of their own head, that will have things as they list themselves, and after
their own mind: that refuse and think scorn either to ask of their
husbands advice what to do, or to follow it in such things as they are advised
unto. And so disobedience breeds a contempt of the husband in them, and
contempt in them causes wrath in him, which opens a gap to many grievous
evils. Such must know that in disobeying them they disobey God in them and
provoke him against themselves: besides that they procure nothing unto
themselves but an evil report abroad, and an unquiet life at home.

And therefore a wise and discreet woman ought to choose rather; when the
thing enjoined or advised shall import some difficulty, or carry with it some
inconueniencie; howsoever she may in good terms propound it by way of excuse,
yet if the husband shall persist in his mind that he will have it so; she
ought, I say, to choose rather, and account it better (so long as it import no
evil) to buy her own peace and the peace of a good conscience, to purchase
peace with God and man by meek and quiet observance, then to break or hazard
the breach of either by her peevish resistance.

But of all others the course of those is most vain that will take to
themselves the whole commendation of things done by mutual consent and advice:
and so seek to honor themselves by discrediting their husbands whom God has
commanded them to honor, and whose honor they should account as their own.
For when God says, that 1. Cor. 11.^.
The woman is the glory of the man: and that Prove. 1^ 4.
A virtuous or industrious wife is the crown of her husband; he implies that
the wife should use all the gifts and graces of God bestowed on her for the
honor of him. And on the coutrary she is the contempt and dishonor of him,
when she strives and contendeth to seem wiser then he.

And here by the way let the Husband learn his duty in part, ere we come
directly unto it. For if the wife be to submit and to subject her self unto
him; it to be admonished by him and to take advice of him: then is he to
govern and admonish, to give counsel and advice.

And therefore considering that he is called to be a guide to his wife) he must
labor for holy wisdom and spiritual discretion, that he may be fit and
able to guide and govern in good manner and to good purpose. And he had need
be wise and discreet himself, that is to be guide to another. Otherwise as
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.5. Prove. 2.17.
How is he fit to govern Gods house that can not govern well his own house,
so how shall he be fit to guide another, that is not able to guide himself?

In regard whereof parents also, as they must not be ouerhasty to join their
children in that estate, ere they be come to some staidness: So they must be
careful, (especially where they perceive some want that way,) to further them
with all convenient helps in that kind: that so by their diligent care and
furtherance that may be supplied that is defective on their parts.

Now this then condemns the preposterous practice of some men, that in a
kind either of foolish stateliness or fond remissness will seem to refer
all to the wife 1 Pet. 3.7.
the weaker, without informing or acquainting them with their mind, in what
manner they wish or think fit to have things ordered in the family; and yet
will storm and take on, or grow pettish and impatient, if euerything be not
done to their own mind. Which as it breeds much disquiet and distraction in
the wives mind, when she knows not what will please, but must go all by
guess so it takes away that alacrity and cheere^uln^sse that should be in
performance of such duties, and makes her to go about her business with
hanging of the wings; since it is uncertain, when she has taken all possible
pains, and done her best endeavor, how in the end it will be accepted.

As also it condemns such peevish and froward persons, as if anything be
demanded of them, or their advice asked in ought, are ready by and by to grow
into heat and rage, to complain of and cry out on the folly and vnwisenesse
of their wives, that know not how such and such things should be ordered. For
to what end has God given her thee for a Prove. 2.17.
Guide, but because the woman ordinarily needs the man's advice? As therefore
Mal. 2.7.
the priests lips should preserve knowledge for the people, and they are to
ask the law of him: so the husbands head should preserve wisdom and counsel
for his wife, and 1 Cor. 14.35.
she is to take advice of him. Besides, that things in the family many times
are to be done, not for the best or the wisest simply, but after the husbands
best liking and to his best contentment. And therefore a wise and discreet
husband should rather rejoice that his wife is so careful to know his mind,
and to do every thing to his mind, then contemn her or miscall her for her
carfulness in that kind.

The third and last duty on the wines part is Assistance. For she was made to
be Cen. 2.18.
an Helper or an assistant to her husband: and that especially in two kinds, in
his Travels, and in his Troubles.

First in his labor and in his business; 1 Timothy 5.14.
in domestical affairs, things especially within the house. In regard whereof
the Apostle Paul wills that women be housekeepers, or keepers at home, as we
call them hous-wiues: and the heathen for that one respect among others made
the Snaile or the Torteis (...). Quia taciturna, demipurt^. (...).
an emblem of womanhood. And the Apostle Peter seems to imply no less, when
he wills rather, that the 1 Pet 3.7.
husbands dwell with their, wines, then their wives with them.

Of this kind of affairs that the wife is to be employed in are:

First, 1. Tim. 2.15. and 5.14, 10.
the diligent and careful education of such children as it may please God to
bless them with all.

Secondly, the vigilant and watchful 1 Timothy 5.14. Prove. 31.17.
oversight of the whole family Prove. 31.26.
instructing and admonishing them, as occasion requires; assigning them their
work and allotting them their allowance.

Thirdly, the provident and faithful keeping and preserving of provisions made
and brought in by the man, that they be not imbecilled or made away, that
Prove. 31.11. ne desuiat commtatus.
no waste be made of them, that they be not spoiled and misspent.

Fourthly, a constant and painful endeavor of doing something, as ability,
leisure and opportunity shall give leave, toward the supporting and upholding,
or the raising and advancing of their estate, and the further enlarging of
their means. For Prove. 14.1.
a wise woman, says Solomon, helps to build up the house: and the good
hous-wife, as his mother describes her to him, Prove. 31.15.
rises before day, and sits up late at night: As Prove. 31 15. Dat pensum
puellis. she setreth them their task. so Iumus.
she suffers none to be idle in the house, so Prove 31.27.
she is not idle her self: She thinks not scorn to soil her hands; but
girdeth up her loins, and sets her self to some profitable work: Prove.
31.13, 19.
gets her wool and flax about her, and puts her hand to the wheel, and
her fingers to the spindle, Prove. 31.21, 22, 23.
makes such things as may serve for the apparelling of her husband her self
and her household, or may be of use otherwise about the house: or if no need of
it in the house, Prove. 31.13, 14, 18 14.16.
to sell and make merchandise of; and that no discredit or discommendation at
all to her neither: or if neither of both be needful, Prove. 31.20.
to help to relieve, as good Act 9 39.
Dorcas did, the poor servants of God with.

Where comes to be condemned, first the sondnesse of such parents as join
their daughters to heads before they are able thus to be helpers, yea ost
match them to an head, ere they are able to dress their own head, much less
to afford any good help to their married head.

As also of those that bring them up so in idleness and dissoluteness, that
they are good for nothing when they are married, but to sit in the shop as a
babe on a stall, to see and be seen, or as an image in the house, that has
lims without use; being altogether unfit to do ought about the house, or to
manage any thing that appertains thereunto.

Again, here comes to be condemned the practice of such wives as are
gadders abroad; least acquainted with, or delighting in ought at their own
home: rather in that regard the daughters of Genesis 34.1.
Dinah then G^n. 13.9.
Sarah; whom we know Genesis 34.2.
what befell upon her wandering abroad. And surely as the Apostle joins lit.
2.5.
chastity and home keeping together, as the one a means of preserving the
other: so Prove. 7.12.
the wise man makes such gadding abroad a note of a light and a lewd houswise.

Or such as though they keep within, yet sit idle at home: must have 1 Timothy
5.13.
their gossips come and sit with them to tell tales and news, that they may
not be idle without company: little weighing with themselves, that time the
mean while runs on, and work about the house goes but untowardly forward,
while there is none to ouersee, or look after it.

As also the practice of such as are wasters, spenders and spoilers of their
husbands wealth, and of that they bring in; (...) auribus bina aut terus
dependent yatrimonid. Senec. de benes. l. 7. cap. 9. ct de viz. beat cap 7.
totus census in ter^o. Vise Pro^ert. 3.10.
that therein indeed like the Torteis, carry their whole house on their back,
which though they feel not the weight of, yet makes the husbands back ache,
yea and crack too, breaks the back of their estate: (as Prodiga non sen^^s
per^^untem samine cen^^^m. Iuven. sat. 6.
in that sex commonly there is no ho, when a wastfull humor is once in:) so
far are they from helping to further or advance their estate. Such should
remember the saying of Solomon, that Prove. 14 1.
as the wise woman helps to build up the house: so she is a fool that thus
pulls the house down with her own hands.

Secondly, the wife is to be an assistant and (...) 2.
a yoke fellow to her husband, as in his travels and labors, so in troubles
and crosses, if any befall (...); (as no man's life lightly is free from them:
(...)
No lark without an he^le, nor course of life without some cross or other:)
and that two ways.

By bearing part with him.

And by being a comfort unto him.

First, by bearing part with him. For whereas married persons are subject to
many more crosses and casualties then those that lead a single life, in regard
their charge is the greater: howsoever the women themselves are not exposed to
so many personal encumbrances as men, because their life is more private: Yet,
as the Apostle says of the faithful Christians, that they were Heb. 10.34.
P^ilip. 1.7.
fellow-partners with him in his afflictions, so ought the wife to be with the
husband in those afflictions that befall him. And surely if all Christians in
general, much more married folks in special ought to G^lat. 6.2^
bear either others burdens; If Hebs, 13.3.
all Christians must have a fellow-feeling of one another sufferings, because
1. Cor. 12 26.
they are all members of one body; much more man and wife that are both but
Math. 19 5.
one flesh.

Contrary whereunto is the practice of those wives that leave and forsake their
husbands when they are fallen into troubles: are like swallows and other
sommer-birds, content to reap and enjoy with them, the pleasant fruits of
prosperity, but unwilling to bear and endure with them the bitter brunt and
blasts of adversity; care not, nor regard what their husbands do, or what
becomes of them, what hardness they endure, what misery they abide, so long
as by help of friends or other provisions they are able themselves, to shift
for themselves. Very unnatural are they that have no fellow-feeling of what
their own flesh suffers: unlike Hebr. 4 15.
our Savior Christ, who retains still mane^ compassio c^iam cum
impass^^lita^e. Bern. de gra^. humil.
compassion, though free from personal passion; and though freed now from
feeling, has still yet a fellow-feeling Act. 4.5. M^th. 25.35, 36.42.43.
of those evils that befall Non eget miseria, sed eget misericordia; non eget
deitate pro se, seleger ^ittate pro suis. Salvian. ad ^ccles^^^b^l. lib. 3.
his here. Yea worse then many heathen women, Se Valor. Max. lib. 6. ca. 7.
that have showed worthy precedents on this part and in this kind; and shall
therefore Math. 12.41.
rise in judgment at the last day against all such Christian women as be
faulty this way.

The like is to be said of the practice of such as are a means themselves to
bring their husbands into decay and distress, and so procure trouble to them,
by their inordinate courses and excessive expenses; whereby they cast them
behind hand, and that to their utter overthrow and undoing often times: and so in
stead of helping to bear his burden with him, are a means to bring such a
burden upon him, as neither of them both is well able to bear.

Secondly, by being a cheerer and a comforter; a means of comfort and
cheerfulness to him: as Gen 37.3^.
Jacobs children were to Jacob; and so Genesis 24 67.
Rebekkah to Isaak. And surely if it be the duty of children to comfort their
parents in their heaviness: much more the wives to comfort her husband in like
cases. If Prove. 10.1 and 15.20.
a wise child is a joy to his father: much more will a good and a wise wife
strive to be so to her husband: to be to him as 1. Sam. 16.23.
David's harp was to Saul: as a physician to tend him in his sickness, as a a
musician to cheer him up in his heaviness.

But what a wretched and lamentab^e case is it then, when she that should be a
comfort, proves a discomfort, that her husband may say of her as Job. 16.2^
Job of his friends, A miserable comforter art thou indeed. As in Eve, that
she, that Genesis 2.18.
was given to be an helper to good, Genesis 3.6. (...). Basil. Sell.
should prove a tempter to evil: so here when she that should be Ezech.
24.16. 25.
the joy and the delight of a man's eyes, proves a corrasiue to his heart and
corruption in his bones. And surely as there is no estate more comfortable
where things are wisely ordered according to Gods will and word: so none more
discomfortable, where things are crossely and crooked^y carried. Intestina mala
gravissima.
Inward evils are most grievous: Prove. 12.4.
in regard whereof August. ad Psalm 33 et 35.^^ 45.
one of the ancients compares not amiss an evil and a guilty conscience to
an unto ward yoke fellow: For that is common to either, (then which what can
be more grie^ous?) that that proves with a man the greatest cross, that
should be a comfort to him against other crosses. Such women forget or at least
are far from that, which Solomon says of a good wife, Prove. 31.12.
She will do her husband good, and not evil, all the days of her life: that
which every good woman undoubtedly will endeavor her self unto.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Maine duty on the wives part, namely,
Submission or Subjection, together with the particulars or at least the
pr^ncipall of those that thence issue.

We come now to the manner of the performance of all the former, and that is,
says our Apostle, In the Lord: a phrase used by the Apostle Ephesians. 6.1. 1 Cor.
7.39.
in the like case elsewhere: and it may be taken two ways, as a note of
Direction, or as a note of Limitation.

1. As a note of direction, prescribing the ground and manner of this
submission; that it be done in obedience of God and the commandment of God,
in conscience of the order and ordinance of God.

2. As a note of limitation, describing the bounds and limits of this
submission, assistance, reverence, and obedience; that it extend not it self
to anything against the will and word of God.

In the former sense it seems to be used by the Apostle, where Ephesians. 6 1.
he speaks of childrens duty; in the latter, 1 Cor. 7.39.
where he applies it to widows marriage. And the latter follows upon the
former. For a man can not do ought against Gods will or word out of obedience
to his will and word: it implies a manifest contradiction. And therefore
whatsoever is done in obedience to Gods will must needs so far forth be done
according to, and not against his word or will. The former I take here to be
the direct meaning of the words; the latter by way of consequence is deduced
from it. And so this branch affords two points concerning the duty here
enjoined.

First, that this Submission for the ground of it must be a godly, a religious,
a conscionable submission; perfor^ed not for wor^dly respects, or for 1 Pet.
3.6.
fear of wrath, but as Romans 13.^.
the Apostle says of good subjects, for conscience sake; in conscience of Gods
ordinance, and in obedience to Gods command.

For first, it is 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness alone that has the promises both of this life and the life to
come: and therefore, there is no reward for ought that proceeds not from it.

Secondly; as Luther says well that Promo pracep. to reli quorum omni^on
observantia pracip^tur: Luther.
the first commandment in the Decalogue comprehends the whole: because
therein is the bond that binds us to the obedience of the whole: so it is no
less true that the Apostle James tells us that Iam. 1.27.
religion or godliness, which is the ground and Riligat avimam religio D^o
omnipote^^^ vnde et religio dicitur. Lactant. et August.
bond of all obedience, is to be exercised and practiced through the whole
course of our lives: that as all civil duties are to 1 Cor. 16.14.
proceed from love unto man, so they are likewise to be done in obedience to
God.

Which point serves, First to show a difference between a godly and a worldly
wise, a Christian woman and an heathen, a faithful and an infidel. For an
heathen woman may do all outward duties that a Christian wife does, out of a
natural or carnal love to her husband, or out of a desire of her own ease
and quiet that depends thereupon, or out of other natural and civil
respects, as fear of anger at home, and of evil report abroad: But the
Christian wife does all on a further ground; (though these and the like
considerations also may make her the more careful:) out of obedience to God
and the will and word of God; out of a desire to please God, and to approve her
self and her courses unto God. As the heathen subject serves God for his
Prince, the Christian subject serves his prince for God: so the heathen wife
obeieth God but for man, whereas the Christian wise obeys her husband for God.

Again it may teach women how to behave themselves in these duties that they
may thereby gain as well favor with God, as love with their husbands at home,
and a good report abroad: if they shall do all in obedience of God, if they
shall do all Ephesians, 5.22.
as unto God: as a Christian servant Ephesians. 67.5. 1 Cor. 7.23. Col 3.23.
serves God and not man, so submitting themselves to God, not to man: while
they regard God in their husbands, as Ephesians. 65.6. Colos 3.22, 24.
he does God in his master, and so do all Ephesians. 5.22, and 6.5.
as unto God, because they do Colos 3.22.
all for God, and for conscience of God. Else though they perform all outward
duties, they go no further then heathen: if they do not so much, they come
short of them: and Math. 5.^^.
if they expect and desire to be accepted with God, they must go beyond them
they must not only do all that they do; but do it Deus n^u tam verbis quam
adverbus delectatur ^^uia^ fa^^u^ respi^it, quam modum (...). Melanch. b^nu^,
b^ne Austot. et^^^.
as they should do: do all for God, and then they do it to God. For as Math.
25.40.
they relieve Christ in the poor, when they relieve them for Christ: so they
obey Christ in their husbands, when they obey them for Christ. Not regard so
much what their husbands deserve from them, as what God requires of them: and
as Christian subjects submit themselves Bon^^ (...) quam Dio, ma^i^ propter
Deum. (...). Basil. Ca^.
to good governors as unto God, to evil governors for God, or rather unto
either of them both as unto God and in God: so submit themselves to their
husbands be they good or badde, deserve they well or evil of them, as for
God, and in God, and unto God, in regard of the precept and enioynment of God.
Ephesians. 5.22.
So doing, as the Apostle says, 1. Tim. ^.15.
they shall be s^ued by childbearing, so they shall be saved by Christian
submission and obedience. As Colos. 3.24.23.
the servant that serves not man but the Lord, shall from the Lord receive the
inhe^^tance of a son: so the woman that submits her self to her husband
for God, shall for such her submission be eternally rewarded of God. And this
withal may again serve well to take away that objection of faulty
performance on the other part: If he do not his duty to me, why should I do
min^ to him? True: if thou ought it to him only, or principal^'y to him.
But it is in the Lord, and for him that this duty is required of thee. Him
thou owe it unto, whither thy husband do his or no; w hither he deserve it,
or no, at thine hands. Neither shall his faultiness excuse thy fault, if thou
shall refuse to perform what God has imposed on thee, and so shall fail in
thy duty that thou owe unto God, because man fails in his, that he likewise
owes unto God, whither thou do thine, or no, to him.

Secondly this Submission, for the extent of it, must not be in ought against
God. And therefore when the Apostle makes it general, Ephesians. ^.24.
in all things; it must be conceived by way of opposition between her own
will and her husbands will; (as 1. Cor. 1^.33.
the Apostle is said to please all men in all things, that is, even to the
displeasing of himself: ibid. et Romans 15, 1, 2, ^.
not regarding his own profit, but respecting their pleasure:) not by way of
opposition between Gods will and man's will. For when they cross, Act. 5.19.
God is rather to be obeyed then man: his will is rather to be regarded then
man's will

And the reason is apparent: for 1. This submission is Gods ord^nance; and Gods
ordinance cannot be against God, but for God. 2. The husbands power, as Romans 13
1.
of all superiors, is subordinate to Gods power: and the subordinate power
ought ever to yield to the supreme power.


And therefore first let men look unto it and take heed how they take upon
them to advise, persuade, induce or urge their wives to ought against God and
godliness or good conscience. For by so doing they shall but abuse their power
and place, and lessen their authority and credit, as every one does that
goes beyond the bounds and limits of his office.

As also women must know that it shall be no sufficient excuse for them, if
they shall suffer themselves to be led by their husbands unto ought that is
evil: no more then it was for Genesis 3.12.
Adam to be seduced and misled by Eve: or for 1 Pe^. 3.7.
Ahab to be provoked and egged on by Iezabel unto evil: Neither will it serve
to allege, that 1 King. 21, 25.
the woman is the weaker. But they must consider who it is from whom the man
has his right, his power, and his place, even he that has power equally over
either, and will undoubtedly punish either, if either the one shall persuade,
or the other upon persuasion yield to ought against his will.

Hitherto we have entreated of the former part concerning the wives duty, we
come now to the verse. 19.
latter part concerning the Husbands.

And the Husbands duty is propounded partly in the affirmative, and partly in
the negative.

1. In the affirmative, Husbands love your wives. 2. In the negative, And be
not bitter unto them.
The maine duty required on the man's part is Love: that which the Apostle Ephesians.
5.25.33.
ever inculcateth when he entreats of the Husbands duty:

The equity whereof we may easily conceive, if we shall but consider the
precept of Love and in what terms it runs.

Levit. 19.18. Math. 22 39. Mark. 12.^1. Romans 13.9. Gal. 5.14. ^^m. 2.8.
Thou art commanded therefore by God to Love thy neighbor as thy self. And
what nearer neighbor then thy wife, who is taken by thee into the society and
communion of thy whole li^e, to be a perpetual Malac. 2 14.
companion with thee at board and in bed; to dwell and abide with thee
continually, to converse with thee most inwardly; yea, as our Savior himsel^e
speaks, M^th. 19 5. Ephesians. 5.31. Ge^. 2.21.
to be glewed unto thee inseparably, and that Math. 19.6.
by Gods own appointment and ordinance.

Again thy neighbor, thou art commanded to love Levit. 19.18.
as thyse^fe, But the Apostle goes further and says, Ephesians. 5 28.
He that l^u^th his wife, he loves himself. So that the wife is thy self,
not as thy self only. N^^em. ^.5.
Our flesh, say the poor speaking of the rich, is as their f^^h: and therefore
Esa^. 58.7.
a man should not, says the prophet, turn his face from his own flesh. But
here man and wife they make but Math. 19.5, 6. Ephesians, 5.31.
one flesh: this (...) quasi Eustach, ^^ Etymol.
knot being once knit, they are no more twain, but one flesh, And Ephesians. 5.29.
no man, says the Apostle, ever hated his own flesh; but loves and
cheerisheth it, as Christ does his Church.

Esai. 49.15.
What more natural then for parents to love the children that come of them?
What more equal then for children to love their parents that bred and bare
them? But behold a nearer conjunction between married persons man and wife,
then between children and parents: in regard whereof God says, that a man
shall leave the one, yea, if he cannot help both, he shall neglect the one, to
adhere, and cleave to the other. Genesis 2.21. Math. 19.5. Ephesians. 5 31.
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother too, and shall cleave to
his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

For children indeed are Parsque tui latitat o^pore clausa meo. Ovid epist.
Phy^^on.
part of their parents, because 2 Samuel 16.11
they come out of their bowels: they are part of their flesh, but severed from
them. But man and wife, they are one flesh, conjoined not severed. By original
creation, as 1 Cor. 11.8. Genesis 2, 21;22.
she came of the man, Genesis 2.^3.
she is part of his flesh, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, but
severed as it were now from him: but Caput et corpus ^u^s est Christus. Aug.
Bern.
by nuptial conjunction being joined to him as his wife, she becomes not
only part of his flesh as taken from him, but Genesis 2.24. Math. 19.5.6. Ephesians.
5.31.
one flesh conjoined with him. For as Vuus Adam, et una Eva, in^o una ex ce
costa separatur infaeminam; vursumque quod di^isum suerat, nuptys copulatur^.
Hieron.
body and head, or flesh and soul make one man; so man and wife make one
flesh.

Again children are said to be part of their parents; but parents cannot be
said properly to be part of their children. But here reciprocally the wife is
part of the husband; and the husband is part of the wife: both parts of the
same flesh, because both making but one flesh. Parents are as a fountain or
the body of a river; children as streams derived from it, and flowing apart:
Man and wife are as two springs meeting and so joining their streams, that
they make but one current, vuo tu ^^quis gemmos con iucat cort^^t ramo^,
crescendo ^ungi, p^r^^terque adolescere cernit. Ovid. metam lib. 4.
and run both in one channel, that the water of the one and the other cannot
be severed. Parents are as a stem or a stock; children as grifts or slips
taken from it, and engraffed or planted elsewhere. Man and wife are as Ezech.
37.17.
those two branches in the Prophets hand, coalesceutes.
enclosed in one bark, and so Magues amoris amor: ut ameris, amabi^is esto.
Ego tibi mo^strabo amato^^u^, sine medicamento, sine herba, sieve ullius
venesica ca^^^e, Si vis amari, ama, Hecaton apud Sen. Epist 9. Marce. ut
ameris, a^a. Martial. Epist. 11 lib. 6.
closing together that they make but one piece, and the same fruit comes of
either.

If neerenesse of bond therefore be a good ground of love; there being such a
neerenesse between man and wife, as none between man and man can go nearer:
it must needs bind the husband not only to love, but to love his wife with a
love above all other love.

To make use then of this point.

First, if a man be thus to love his wife, then the wife is no less to love
her husband. For ^ide Be^n, in Cant, 83.
Love, we say, is Loves loade-stone: and there is the like reason for either.
There is no action or affection so reciprocal as love; as between God and
man; so between man and man. For example. If God be angry with us, Que
effendant mulia sunt in ^amtue, nihil ^^ Deo. August.
we are not to be angry with him again: Confidat amari; qu^ se sentu amare:
et qui amari se senti^, non redamare confuna^tur. ^er. de dilig. Deo.
he may have just cause to be angry with us, we can have no just cause to be
angry with him: If God hate us, yet we ought not to hate him: he may justly
hate us, we cannot justly hate him: if he show mercy on us, we cannot show
mercy to him: we stand in need of his mercy, he has no need of our mercy,
for he is subject to no misery: If he be good to us, we can not be good again
to him; for all Psalm. 16 2. Job. 22.2. and 35. 6, 7, 8.
our goodness is nothing to him: But God loves us, and we are to love him
again: we stand bound to love him though he hate us: but are bound in a
double bond to love him, when he loves us: In like manner here: if the husband
be angry with the wife, she is not by and by to be hasty and angry again
with him: if he control her, she is not therefore to control him: but he is
to love her, and she is likewise to love him: yea though he should hate her,
yet ought she to love him: (for she may not fail in her duty, because he
fails in his,) how much more when he loves her is she to love him? For
Prove. 18.24.
love requires love: and Deo nihil accres ^^t, nihil decrescit. Greg. moral.
Tibs, qui semper idem es, nihil accedit. si amando prosicimus ad ^e, nihil
deced^s, sinon amando desic^mus a te Guil^^^ The odor. de amore A Deo benefic^s
(...) poss^^mu^, Dro ben^s. praes^a e^m yo^si^mus. Agust in psalm.
love must requite l^ue. Yea therefore is she to love him, 1 Ioh. 4 19.
the rather to draw love from him. That which the Apostle also Titus 2.4.
sometime expresses, though for the most part he presumes it; Qu^l^n negle^a
quidem of^ensam contra hunt, sed i^^leta gloria^ non mere^tur: et damnant
prava^^atorem nee glorifica^t autorem. Bet^. de praecept. et dispens.
as the love of parents to their children, a thing grounded in nature, as is
also the other: in regard whereof the Apostle Paul has Titus 2 4.
coupled them together. Now as things often inculcated should make us more ca
refull: so things taken for granted should make us more fearful. As the
husband therefore must f see to it that he love his wife, because he is so often
called upon for it: so the wife must take heed how she be faulty and
defective that way, when God takes it as granted; and therefore accounts
them as monsters in nature that are wanting in it; as those that want bowels of
love toward their own birth.

Secondly, if a man be bound to love his wife in this sort, then men must take
heed how they match with those whom they cannot thus love and affect; whom they
cannot thus link their hearts and affections unto. Esai. 48.15.
For Cant. 8.7.
there is no Amor affectu^ est non contractus. Bern. d^ dilig. De^.
affection freer then love: as there is nothing more forcible, so Amor non ^or^
gitur, Ca^siod. non extorquebis amari. Claudia de 4. Coss, Ho^.
nothing that can be less forced. This is a fault in many, who to satisfy
friends, Can. 8.6.
or to advance their estates, or for some other worldly by-respects, match in
that manner; and so cast themselves foolishly into a fearful snare, which
they are never able after to wind themselves out of again. Men and women
therefore are to be admonished here that they look ere they leap: and that
they remember that Deliberan^^ est diu, quod s^atuendum est semel Sen^c.
one had need to deliberate long, and advise well on that which but once can
be determined: to pause thoroughly upon that that but once can be concluded;
that being once concluded concludes them; being once done cannot be undone
again. And those that have already ouershot themselves in this kind, they must
now strive even to enforce their affections; and crave grace at Gods hand, Quod
factum est, infectum esse non potest.
whereby they may be enabled to bring themselves to that disposition, that God
now requires of them. In a word, he that is free, may frame his choice to his
mind but he that has chosen must frame his heart to his choice: Before he
might conform his actions to his affection; now he must endeavor to frame his
affection to his action. Duo summ^ bona* (...) bonum ^nieum: ^ risto^* ethi^.
(...). Basil. Sell. de Abr. ^en* 22.1.2.


Thirdly, If the husband must in this manner love his wife, then must he draw
home his affections from loving any other in that sort. For if such a
singularity of love be here required, then it can be but one that in this sort
is affected. As we reason well, that there can not be two Gods, because there
cannot be (...). Basil. Sell. de Abr. Cen 22.1.2.
two chief goods: so here there ought not to be two wives of two husbands,
because two can not have the principality and chiefety in our love; or rather,
because such love as this is, is or ought to be peculiar and proper to one: But
the branches and streams of love are dispersed among many; whereas Vna costa
decerpta, et vtique ex plurib^s Te^.
the whole current of it runs one way between twain.

This may further be confirmed unto us*

By the law of nature. Gen 2.21.
God at the first took but Vnam costam in duas d^visit. Hie^om.
one rib from the man, (...). Prep^^m (...).
and therefore he, as we said, that Genesis 4.19.
first took two wives, is said to have (...). Proprium v^^^
cut one rib into twain. Genesis 2.22.
He made of that one rib, but one woman; though Malac. 2.15.
he had spirit enough to have made more: Genesis 2.22.
he brought but one wife, Eve, to Adam: Genesis 7.7. and 8.16.18. 1. Pet. 3.20.
he reserved each man but one in the flood: And therefore 1. Cor 7.2
Let every man, says the Apostle, have Perfecta am^c^^a inter pa^es, inter
bines. A^st Eth^e. Parta a^ucorum. Ne^^alum duos soles, ne^ Asia duos reges
Alexand, Datio. (...). Eurip.
his own peculiar wife: and each woman e her husband.

By the analogy of faith* Cant. 6.8.
My beloved is but one; says Christ in the Canticles. Though naturally many
and of many sorts, yet they make but Gal. 3.16.
one seed: they are mystically Gal. 3.28.
all one in him. The Ephesians. 5.23, 24.
wife is to her husband, as the Church is to Christ: Christ has but Vnam
Ca^la(...) s^m^^l Ci^^ur. (...) alte vtru^^ ^^ them, (...) ter in Adam et
spiritu^iter in (b^^la. Turt^ull* de mon^gam. ut (...) Ad^ in earne, (...)
one Church: and he must have but one wife: Choose whither Adam thou will to
imitate, says one of the ancients, the old or the new: the one had bu^ one
wife, the other has but one Church.

The married man therefore is to take heed not only Prove. 5.^^.
of embracing the bosom of a stranger, but of admitting or giving way now to
any raunging affections. He must know that that which was lawful for him
before, is now no more lawful. Not that any sinful act or desire was ever
lawful: but that such desire was not sinful in thee then: as is sinful in
thee now, because it is by God now determined and restrained to an object.

Fourthly, let the husband take heed of being faulty in this duty of love in
this inward and entire affection toward his wife, which the Apostle of Christ
and by him the Spirit of God in so special manner requires and exacteth of
him. Some duties there are though generally required of all, yet in more
special sort of some: and so this duty of love of all in general, but of
married persons more specially: who are therefore more faulty, if therein they
fail. Yea such therefore must take heed not only of ceasing simply to love,
but of Apocal. 2.4.
leaving their first love: of suffering their Love Apoc. 3.15, 16.
to grow lukewarm, not key cold only, that was seruent at the first.
Howsoever as complements abate between friend and friend, the more familiar
they grow; so some kind of daliance between new married folks may after be
less usual: yet their love is to be no less, rather to increase then
decrease; as we see it is in parents toward children, who the longer they
have them, the more they affect them, and the loather they are to leave and
forgo them; though it may be they are not so fond on them, as at first.

And here the better to further the practice of this duty: it shall not be
amiss, taking the same course we did in the former, to lay down some
particular effects and fruits of this love.

The first is 1 Pet. 3.7.
Cohabitation, living and dwelling peaceably and quietly together. Friends we
know love to be often together, and are loath to be sundred, Love as it lincketh
in heart, so it Philip. 1.8. 1 The^^ 3.10.
longs after the bodily presence of them whom the heart is thereby lincked
unto. And it is Psalm. 133.1.
a sweet sight, says the Psalmist, to see brethren dwell together in one: how
much more man and wife? They make but one body; and vnum corpus in duobus locis
sinud esse non potest.
it is against nature for one body to be in two places at once. For the man is
the 1 Cor. 11.3.
head, the woman is as the body: for head and body to be sundered, Ephesians. 5.28.
it is present death unto either. Not that a man may not be absent, yea and
long absent too sometime, from his wife, upon necessary occasions; but that
there be no giving of way to unnecessary. And surely where love is, there
grief will be that occasions of long or often absence should be offered. And
where grief is that such occasions though necessary should be offered; there
will be no taking of occasions, but such as are necessarily offered.

Where comes to be taxed the foolish and preposterous course that is taken
by diverse parents, who match their sons young to wives, and then send them a
travailing: so that they part as soon as they meet, (...). (...).
ere their affections be well fastened; and so often either return with them
estranged on their part, or at return find them estranged on the the other
part; while their Prove. 7.10. (...). (...), ubi cu^^os ab est. Plut^e^^^.
absence has made way for some strangers enticement.

As also the practice of those comes here justly to be condemned, who after
marriage upon every light jar or discontent are ready by and by to sequester
themselves either from other, to break up house and part families and so to
live apart. Take heed, Oh man, how thou M^lach. 2.14.
leauest the wife of thy youth, and breakest a bond knit by thy God: take
heed, Prove. 2.1^.
O woman, how thou forsakest the guide of thy youth, and forgettest the
couen^nt of thy God.

Yea, but will some say, her behau^our is such as can not be endured. And we
may serve God asunder better then we can being together: I am the quiet* in
my conscience, the further I am from her.

To this I answer: First with the Apostle, 1 C^r. ^2^.
Art thou married? seek not to be loosed: 1 Cor. ^.20, 24.
abide in the calling God has called thee in. Thou must keep thy (...).
station that God has placed thee in: as the soldier must keep the place
that his general has assigned him, though it prove an hot piece of service,
yea though he think he might do more good elsewhere. It is but Cor. 11.14.
the devil turning himself into an Angel of light, that persuades thee in
this sort. For Con (...) August.
if cohabitation be of God, then the contrary unto it separation is of Satan.
He that 1 Cor. ^.13.
forbids thee to leave an infidel, an ido^ater, as long as she is willing to
live with thee, and keeps her self loyal to thee, whom will he license thee
to leave?

Secondly, I answer further with the Apostle, (and so come to the second duty
of Love, the Concealing and covering of the wives infirmities, and bearing
patiently with them:) 1 Cor. 13.4.
Love is long-suffring: and 1 Pet. 4.8.
Love covers, much more 1 Pet. 4.8.
fervent love, a multitude of offenses. Charitas amat qu^^ tolerat, tol^^tt
quas amet. Greg in ^zech
There is no man or woman without infirmities, as no life without troubles. And
this is one special act and exercise of love, to love those that we bear, and
to 1 Cor. 13.7. charitas tolerat om^^a.
bear with those that we love: to seek to cover and conceal their
infirmities, though they be many: remembering with all that God has called us,
as to 1 Cor. 7.15.
peace Ioh. 16.33.
in Christ, so to Luke 21.19.
patience Io^. 16.33.
in the world, and to the exercise of patience; which therefore in these cases
men must earnestly crave. Hu^ accommodat Plut. in Tim^l. Si^^nidis i^lud,
(...). Nulla gal^rita sine Cr^sta. Sed and Cra^^tis dictum apud I tert. (...)
(...). Horat.


Where they are also to be taxed that are so far from covering and concealing
the infirmities of their wives, that they delight in nothing more then in
blasing them abroad and that even to strangers. Had they some loathsome soar
about their own body, they would be loath to disclose it, unless it were to
some special friend for advice, or to the Surgion for help: and surely as
loath would they be to disclose their wives infirmities, did they esteem them
as their own flesh, or if, as love requires they should, they held their wives
reputation as dear to them as their own, and they were as tender of her
credit as they are of their own.

Now further if moral defaults must not diminish love, much less natural
defects. If children be sick^y, we are the more tender over them: if any part
of the body be euil-affected, we are the more charie over it. 1 Po^^.
Neither is the weakly wife therefore the less to be regarded; but the rather
to be tendered and tenderly entreated in regard of her weakness, as the more
britle a Venice glass is, the more gingerly we handle it, and the more
tender-edged a knife is, the more chari^y we use it. Gen 29.^^
Jacob may not forbear Leahs company because she is ble^re-eyed: neither must
Elkana love Hanna the less, 1 ^Sam. ^^
because she is barren and bears not; Gen 3^.^^, 20.
neither loved he Rachel less when she grew aged and was now decayed with
years, and broken with bea^ing, then he did when she was fresh at first: (...)
39.3.
no more then he less affected the last child she bare, then the first.

Which condemns their practice that Malac^ ^.14.
cast of the wife of their youth, when she grows aged or diseased: are content
to enjoy the flower of their fresh years, but as favor and freshnes decaieth
in them by age or disease, so abateth their favor and love toward them withal.
Such love shows it self to have bin never well grounded. For had it been
grounded on conference of Gods ordinance and (...).
their own covenant, and not upon natural, worldly, or fleshly respects, it
would continue as Gods ordinance and their covenant continues, and not cease
or abate as such by-respects fail.

The third duty of Love is (...) 2^.^.
mutual Concord and agreement, and to this purpose a condescending to the wife
in things equal and fit. The Husband must not think that, because h the wife
is to submit her will to his will; therefore he is not to regard her pleasure
and contentment: he may say, (...) 3.1^.
That that likes me, must content her: and there is an end. For thy wife is
not with thee as a servant or a slave, but as Ma^ac. 2.14.
a companion, as a Philip. 4.3.
yoake-fellow, standing on even ground with thee, though drawing on the least
side. A master may well make his business be done after his own mind, not
regarding his servants pleasure, because it is his own business, not his
seruant^. But it is not so with thy wife: thou art to regard her pleasure as
well as thine own will: because the business is as well hers as thine. And
surely as 1. Cor. 13.5. Philip ^2.^.
Love seeks the things of others, as well as a m^ns own: yea often before a
man's own; 1 Cor. 10 33.
it seeks an other man's gain with a man's own loss: so 1 Cor. 10.33.
it will make a man regard the will, and pleasure and contentment of another as
well as his own, yea Romans 15.1, 2, 3.
prefer it sometime even before his own. And undoubtedly if thou love thy
wife and accountest her one flesh with thee, the same with thy self; her
pleasure w^ll be thy pleasure, her contentment will be thy contentment; thou will to account it: there will be no true contentment to thee, while thou
perceiuest coffeehouse in her: and therefore wilt not needlessly cross her,
to cause coffeehouse to her.

The fourth duty of Love is (that which the Apostle here expresses in the
negative, and we have put of to this place;) ^ers. ^9.
the ^a^nishing of all Bitterness. And surely if all bitterness must be abandoned
and put away among Christians, much more among Christian man and wife. Ephesians.
4.31.
Let all bitterness, and strife, and wrath, and ^l mor, and evil language be
put away from you, says the Apostle. If De^^ 29.18. Heb. 12.15.
no root of gall and bitterness must be endured among Christians in the Church,
1 Timothy 3.15.
that is the house of God: no more between man and wife in the house or family
^ Cor. 16.^9. Philemon ^^.
that is to be as a Church of God. And therefore among the heathn (...). in
pea^* (...)
the gall of the sacrifice, that was slain and offered at weddings, was thrown
out at doors; thereby to signify, that the married folks should be either to
other as Doves (...) sine (...).
, without gal. And surely if among Christian men 1 Cor. 10.1^.
All things must be done in Love: much more must a^l things be done in Love,
and much Love, between Christian man and wife, that are tied by a double, yea
by a triple band of love either to other; a natural band as Luk 1^.^7. (...).
neighbors and nigh in nature; a spiritual bond 1 Cor. 12.2^. Romans 12.4.5.
as fellow members of the mystical body of Christ Jesus; and a civil, but yet
(...) 4.4.
an holy and Heb. 1^.^4.
honorable bond, as Math. 19.^.
one flesh by marriage. And therefore the husband when he admonishes, he must
admonish in love and loving manner; when he advises, he must advise in love
and loving manner: if he reprove, he must do that likewise out of love and in
loving fort; with as much sweetness and mildness, and with as little severity
and harshnes as may be: but in any wife without bitterness, knowing that there
is nothing more contrary to love then it.

The fifth duty of Love toward the wife is Joy and d^lig^t in her. Prove. ^.15,
13, 19.
Driake, faith the wise man, the w^ter of t^me own ^isterne: Let thy fountain
be blessed: (est^eme^ it as a blessing of God: for so a good wife is indeed, a
good blessing and a great,) and rejoice in the wife of thy youth: Let her be
unto thee as the loving Hand, and the pleasant R^^e^: Let her breasts or her
bosom content thee at ^ll times: and delight continually, or as the word there
is, even * doat on the Love of her. As if the holy Ghost did allow some such
private daliance and behavior to married persons between themselves as to
others might seem dotage: such as it may be was Genesis 26.8.
Isaacks sporting with Rebekka; which Abimelech unawares to them ouerlooked. In
this regard as the wife is said to be unto her husband ^ (...)
his eyes delig^t, and his hearts-ioy and desire: So ^
the b^idegroome is said to rejoice in his bride; as God does in his chosen
Children and in his Church.

And this is a necessary effect of love. For what a man loves most, he
desires most; and what he desires and affects most, that he most delights
in. Which that a man may the better do, he must remember that as every
Christian man may assure himself that ^
his present estate, what eue^ it be, is best and sictest for him: so a
Christian married man is bound to believe and to persuade himself, not that
his wife is the wisest, or the fairest, or the best conditioned woman in the
w^rld; but that she is the si^^est wife for him, that God has allotted him,
and therefore rest himself contented in her and satisfied with her, and live
with as much alacrity and cheerefulnes with he^ as may be. And as parents love
and delight in their children, not because they are fair or wise and witty,
but (...)
because they are their childrenand and therefore how soever seeing better parts
in others, they could be content to change quality for quality, yet they w^l
not exchange child for child: so a man is to love and delight in his wife
even for this cau^^ because s^ee is his wife, and howsoever it may be he could
wish some of her parts b^ttered, yet to rejoice in her as they are.

Wherein those are to be taxed that (...) de cu^^^^.
delight rather in the company of others then of their own wives: (...) Se^ec
(...).
think ^ (...) tu sa^h^itum ^^^^itur.
what they have at home is all too ^omely, and * what is usual with them is
unsavory: like children, that think the bread and butter they get abroad
sweeter and better then that, though indeed better, that they are fed withal at
home: or like queasie-stomacked persons that growing weary of their daily diet,
delight more in some fond tri^le though neither so toothsome nor whole-some.
Such must know that this is an unwarrantable and a preposterous affection in
them: and Prove. 2.^^. ^^. Pet. 37.
such preposterous affections commonly as they argue an evil humor, so they
breed no good blood.

The sixth duty of Love is the allowance of all necessaries that her need
shall require and their estate may afford. It is that honor, as some
understand it, and it may well be one part of it, that is, (...) et ve(...)
^^^^lun. l^^tam.
honest means and maintenance, that the Apostle exacteth for them. For (...)
2*23.
so is the word often taken, and (...) 5.3, 17. ^ ^
under that term does our Savior Christ show it to be comprehended
elsewhere. And surely if (...) 15.4, 5, (...)
he be condemned as worse th^n a^ infidel, that prouide^h not for his family:
then undoubted he that provides not for his wife the chief in the family next
himself, is no bette^ (...) a^ br^st^n man therefore must labor that he may
h^^e wherewith to relieve other; ^^ch more that he may have wherewith to
maintain himself and his (...), that is and ought to be one with himself. In
regard whereof as Psalm. 12^^. (...).
the wife is compared to the vi^; so the husband ought to be as the Elm to
uphold her: and (...) Moon shines with light re^c^ued from the Sun^^e, so i^
she to be furnished with fit supplies allowed her by him. And surely where love
is abounding, there will nothing be wanting that may be for her comfort and
necessary co^tentment, that their ability may well afford.

And here are such to be condemned as being blessed by God with a liberal
estate, carry to strict and ^igardly an hand toward their wiue^; think al lost
that i^ bestowed on the^; to whom God has given an equal interest in the
things of this life with the^. For how has she not all thine with thee,
Quom^^'^ ^ici^ meum et tuum, eumego ipse sim tu^^? Chrysoft. in Ephesians. 20.
when she has thee? And therefore as denying to the poor, whom God has
enjoined us to relieve, what we may spare, and their necessity requiring 1. Cor
7.4.
it gives them a kind of interest unto it, Prove. 3.27.
we deny them their own: so much more in denying her what is needful for her,
Ignav^^^ fu(...) V^rg ^^lo^g ^ ^.
thou deniest her her own, thou with-holdest from her her own; that which the
marriage bond has given her a special right unto.

Again those are here to be condemned, that live, like drones, on their wives
labors, wasting all that is gathered together by their industry. Of whom we
cannot say, that the Moon shines with the Suns light: but the Sun shines
with the Moons light; that is, the husband shines with the spoils of his
wife, Maritus (...) ge^ s^o^^^ u^eris. Mulcul. in Genesis
whom he ought to maintain as the Sun enlighteneth the Moon.

As also those that spend riotously the portion they have with their wives, and
then leave them to the wide world to shift for themselves: like those that
climb and take pains to get nuts, which having cracked and eaten the kernel
out of, they cast the shells vnder-bord.

And generally all that mispend that though earned with their own hands, or
left them by friends, that should maintain house and wife with. Such must know
that they rob wife and children and themselves of what they wast in that
sort, and so are no better then such as rob by the high way side. For it is no
less sin to rob them, then to rob a mere stranger whom a man is more nearly
tied unto then he is to any stranger. And therefore as Prove 28.24.
he that robs his father and mother, so he that robs wife and children, and
says it is no sin, is companion to a destroyer, or So^^u^ esi viro
^^^^rs^^^u^^. Iun. in Exodus 12.23.
next neighbor to a murderer, as m the word used there may well signify

The last but not the least Office of love is the diligent endeavoring of the
wives spiritual good: which if he love her as he ought, he cannot, nor will
not neglect. In regard hereof the Apostle says, that These. 5.25.
husbands must love their wives, as Christ loves his Church; Ephesians 5.26.17.
whose love to his Church tends to this, to sanctify and purify it by water
and the word, to make it grations here, and glorious without spot or wrinckle
hereafter. And therefore this is a special thing that the husband should aim at
in his love and in all duties of love to his wife, to bring her on unto God, or
to help her on in the good waves of God.

1 Cor. 7.16.
How know thou, O woman, says Paul, but that thou may win thine husband:
and 1. ^et. 3.1.
women, says Peter, must so behave themselves, that by their hol^ chu^rsati ^
their husbands may be won And surely if the wife must seek to win her husband
being averse; how much more 1 Cor. 7.16.
the husband to win her in like case; 1 Cor. 14.^5.
whose office it is more specially to teach and instruct her. Or if they be
both won, and in a good way already, they must 1 Pet. 3.7.
live together, says the Apostle Peter, as fe^low-hei^es of salvation: and so,
as fellow-furtherers either of other in the way thereunto. Else what difference
that there be between Christian and heathen married persons, if they be not
furtherers either to other; is in the things of life, so in things tending to a
better life?

Besides, Iam. 1.27.
Faith and the Fear of God and godliness are to be exercised, as well in the
special duties of our several callings, as in the general duties of
Christianity; and to run through our whole life, as the woofe through the web:
and so among other, through all offices of the married estate.

Lastly, 1. Cor. 1^.31
whatso^uer we do, says the Apostle, we must do all to Gods glory. Now then
are things done to Gods glory, when they are referred to a spiritual end, to a
further end then the fruition of some corporal good. And to here married
persons then love and live together to the glory of God, when they have a
further end of their mutual conversation, 1 Cor. (...)
their loving and living together, then their outward ^^lace and contentment
only, or their furtherance in the things of the world and this present life
alone.

But alas how approve they themselves in this kind and their carriage in this
estate unto God, that never dream once of this aim, never aim once at this
end; never have once any thought at all tending this way ^ k He that regards
not the temporal good of his family, is worse then an infidel: he that goes
no ^u^ther, is no better. So those married persons that live together
untowardly, discontentedly, impatiently, in gal and bitterness, in dissentio^
and discord, in want of mutual and natural love, refusing to be helpful either
to other in the things of this life, are worse then infidels. On the other side
those that be never so careful of performing the former duties and of
shunning and avoiding the contrary eui^s, but have no care and conscience of
the helping forward and furthering either other in the good ways of God, they
are no better then infidels, they go no further then they.

In a word to conclude, if Christian m^n are to l observe one another, that
they may wh^t on either other to godliness and good works: then much more
should Christian man and wife so do: that having lived together for a time as
m copartners in grace here, they may reign together for ever as co-heires in
glory hereafter.

FINIS.

