THE IOYFVLL Receiving of the Queens most excellent Majesty into her
Highness City of NORWICH: The things done in the time of her abode there:
and the ^^lor of the City at her departure.

Wherein are set down diverse Orations in Latin, pronounced to her Highness
by Sir ROBERT WOOD Knight, now Mayor of the same City, and others: and
certain also delivered to her Majesty in vvriting: ^arry of the^ turned into
English.



AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henry Bynneman.

To the right worshipful Sir Owen Hopton Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Lieutenante of her highness Tower of London, Ber. Gar. Citizen of London wishes
health and increase of Worship.
Since at my return from Norwich (Right worshipful) you vouchsafed to
imparte unto me your earnest desire to understand the order and manner how her
Majesty was received into that worthy City: I am bold likewise to decipher
unto your worship what occasion offered themselves to me upon the same your
request. First appeared to me the Majesty of my Prince, which beautifieth her
kingdom, as the bright shining beams of beautiful Phoebus decketh forth the
earth: which gladded the hearts of the people there, as they no less labored
to travail forth to view the excellency of their sovereign, than the true
laboring Be enforces her self in the Spring time (when dame Flora first
decketh the soil) to seek their delights, and our profit, amongst the sweet
smelling flowers. Then the abundant clemency of her highness, receiving the
loyal hearts of her loving people in part, as good as their meaning deserved,
so enflamed their former desires, as every spark kindled a bonfire. The
Nobility delighting this Harmony, so endeavored to hold in tune every string
of this heavenly Music, as there seemed but one heart in Queen, Counsel, and
Communaltie. The Mayor, Magistrates, and good Citizens employed their study and
substance to hold on this happy beginning, the Prince had her pleasure, the
Nobility their desire, the whole train such intertainment: As for the time of
her continuance there, Norwich seemed (if any such there be) a terrestrial
Paradise. But when the frowning Friday followed, which called her Majesty
thence, I leave (because I am loath to tell) the dolor that was, to the report
of them that did see it. These all, right Worshipful, upon your demand,
presented themselves unto me to be vttred, and these (I think) are the things
which you desired to hear. And because I doubt not but that there are a great
number of your virtuous mind herein: to satisfy both the^ and you, I have here
set forth what my final capacity could collect (touching the premises) during
the whole time of her abode there. Accept my rude and rash dealing in this my
doing, I beseech you, for that your Worshipful request carries me to my
uttermost limite: wherein, though the sudden chop of an unskillful Car^e^^^r
perhaps disquareth the strong timber of this beautiful (...) yet let the
skillful eye of your worship and other learned Readers (to whom I submit me)
place the same to the best purpose, and hold my good will as recompense of my
fault, and bind me to them, and you for ever. Vale.

Your Worships to command. B. G.

The receiving of the Queens Majesty into her highness City of Norwich.
ON Saturday being the. xvj. of August. 1578. and in the twentieth year of the
reign of our most gracious soueraign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen
of England, France, and Irelande, Defendor of the Faith. etc. The same our
most dread and sovereign Lady (continuing her Progress in Norffolke)
immediately after dinner set forward from Brakenashe, where she had dyned with
the Lady Style, being five miles distant from Norwich, toward the same her
most dutiful City: Sir Robert Wood, then Esquire, and now Knight, Mayor of
the same City, at one of the Clock the same happy day, set forward to meet
with her Majesty in this order: First there road before him well and seemly
mounted, threescore of the most comely young men of the City as Bachelors,
apparelled all in black Sattyn doublets, black Hose, black Taffata Hattes
and yeallowe Bands, and their universal liuerie was a Mandylion of purple
Taffata, laid about with silver Lace: and so apparelled, marched forwards two
and two in a rank. Then one which represented King GVRGVNT, sometime King of
England, which builded the Castle of Norwich, called Blanch Flower, and laid
the foundation of the City. He was mounted upon a brave Courser, and was thus
furnished: His body Armed: his Bases of green and white silk: on his head a
black velvet Hat, with a plume of white Feathers. There attended upon him three
Henchmen in white and green: one of them did bear his Helmet, the second his
Tergat, the third his Staff. After him a noble company of Gentlemen, and
wealthy Citizens in velvet Coats, and other costly furniture, bravely
mounted. Then followed the Officers of the City every one in his place. Then
Master Sword bearer, with the Sword and Hatte of Maintainaunce. Then Master
Mayor, and four and twentye Aldermen, and Master Recorder, al in Scarlet
gowns, whereof, so many as had bin Majors of the City, and were Justices, did
wear their scarlet cloakes. Then followed so many as had bin Sherifs, and were
no Aldermen, in violet Gowns, and satin tippets. Then followed diverse other,
to keep the people from disturbing the array aforesaid. Ths every thing in
due and comely order, they al (except GVRGVNT which stayed her majesty's
coming within a flight shot or two of the city, where the Castle of Blaunche
Flower was in most beautiful prospect) marched forwards to a bridge, called
Hartforde Bridge, the vttermoste lymit that way, distaunt from the City two
miles or thereaboutes, to meet with her Majesty: who, within one hour or
little more after their attendaunce, came in such gracious and Princely wife,
as ravished the hearts of all her loving subjects, and might have terrifyed the
stoutest heart of any enemy to behold. Whether the Majesty of the Prince,
which is incomparable, or joy of her subjects, which exceeded measure, were
the greater, I think would have appalled the judgment of Apollo to define.
The acclamations and cries of the people to the Almighty God for the
preservation of her Majesty, ratled so loud, as hardly for a great time could
any thing be heard: But at last, as every thing has an end, the noise
appeased: and Master Mayor saluted her highness with the Oration following,
and yielded to her Majesty there with the sword of the City, and a fair
standing cup of silver and guilt, with a ^ouer, and in the Cup one hundredth
pounds in gold. The Oration was in these words:

The Mayors Oration.
SI nobis ab Optimo Maximo concederetur optio quid rerum humanarum nunc
potissimum vellemus: nihil duceremus antiquius (Augustissima Princeps) quam vt
tuus ille, qui ita nos recreat, castissimi ocelliradius posset in abditissimos
cordium nostrorum angulos se confer. Cerneres profecto quanta sint hilaritate
perfusa, quam in ipsis arterijs and venulis spiritus and sanguis gestiant: dum
intuemur te huius Regni lumen (vt David olim fuit Israelitici) in hijs tandem
finibus post longam spem, and ardentissima vota exoriri. Equidem vt pro me, qui
tua ex autoritate and clementia (quod humillimis gratijs profiteor)
celeberrimae huic Ciuitati praesum, and pro hijs meis fratribus, atque omni hoc
populo quem tuis auspicijs regimus, ex illorum sensu loquar, quod and ipse
sentio: sic nos demum supplicibus votis exposcimus, vt Maiestatem tuam
beneuolam nobis, and propitiam experiamur: vt nunquam cuiquam populo aduenisti
gratior quam nobis. In illius rei luculentissimum indicium, insignia haec
honoris, and officij nostri, quae nobis cleme^tissimus Princeps He^ricus
Quartus quinto sui Regni anno cum Praetore, Senatoribus, and Vicecomitibus
concessit: (cum antea Balliuis (vt vocant) vltra annalium nostrorum memoriam
regeremur) perpetuis deinde Regum priuilegijs, and corroborata nobis, and aucta
magnifice, Maiestati tuae omnia exhibemus, quae per tuam vnius cleme^tiam (quam
cum immortalibus gratijs praedicare nunquam cessabimus) vicesimo iam anno
tenuimus. Atque vna cum illis, hunc Thesaurum, quasi pignus nostraru^ and
voluntatum, and facultatum, quas omnes, quantae, quantulaeue sint, ad tuum
arbitrium deuouimus: vt si quid omni hoc foelicissimi tui te^poris decursu
admisimus, quod amantissimos, obseque^tissimos, amplitudinis tuae saluti,
Coronae, emolumento deuotissimos non deceat: statuas de nobis, and nostris
omnibus, pro tua clementissima voluntate. Sin ita clauum huius Ciuitatis (Deo
duce) reximus: vt eam in portu saluam Maiestati tuae conseruauerimus, and
populum primum gloriae Dei, and verae religionis, deinde salutis, honoris, and
voluntatis tuae studiosissimum, quantum in nobis est, effecerimus: tum non
libet nobis id a te petere, quod insita tibi singularis clementia facillime a
te ipsa impetrabit. Tantum obsecramus, vt Amplitudinem tuam Deus omnibus and
animi, and corporis bonis cumulatissime bear velit.

The Mayors Oration Englished.
IF our vvishe should be granted unto us by the Almighty, what human thing
we would chiefly desire: we would account nothing more precious (most
Royal Prince) than that the bright beam of your most chaste eye, which does
so chere us, might penetrate the secret strait corners of our hearts: then
surely should you see how great joys are dispeised there, and how the
spirit and lively blood tickle in our arteries and small veins, in beholding
thee the light of this Realm (as David was of Israel) now at length, after
long hope and earnest petitions, to appear in these coasts. Truly on mine
own part, which by your highness authority and clemency (with humble
thanks be it spoken) do govern this famous City, and on the part of these
my brethren and all these people which by your authority we rule (speaking
as they mean, and as I my self do think) this only with all our hearts
and humble prayers we desire, that we may so find your Majesty gracious and
favorable unto us, as you for your part never came to any subjects better
vvelcome tha^ to us your poor subjects here. For most manifest token vvherof,
we present unto your Majesty here, these signs of honor and office, which
we received of the most mighty Prince Henry the fourth, in the fifth year of
his reign, then to us granted in the name of Mayor, Aldermen, and Shirifs,
where as before time out of mind or mention, we were governed by Bayliffes
(as they term them) which ever since have been both established and increased
with continual privileges of Kings: And which by your only clemency
(which with immortal thanks we shall never cease to declare) we have now
these. xx. years enjoyed: and together with those signs, this treasure is a
pledge of our good wills and ability: which all how great or little so ever
they be, we pour down at your pleasure, that if we have neglected any thing
in all this course of your most happy reign, which becomes most loving,
obedient, and well vvilling subjects to perform, for the preservation of
your Crown, and advancement of your highness, you may then determine of us and
al ours, at your most gracious pleasure. But if we have (God being our guide)
so ordered the governance of this city, that we have kept the same in safety
to your Majesty's use, and made the people therein (as much as in us lies)
first, most studious of Gods glory and true religion, and next of your
Majesty's health, honor, and pleasure, then ask we nothing of you, for that
the singular clemency ingraffed in your highness, vvil easily of it self grant
that which is requisite for us to obtain. We only therefore desire, that God
would abundantly bless your highness with al good gifts of mind and body.

Which Oration ended, her Majesty accepting in good part every thing
delivered by the Mayor, did thankefully answer him in these words, or very
like in effect. We heartily thank you, Master Mayor, and all the rest, for
these tokens of goodwill, nevertheless Princes have no need of money: God
has endowed us abundantly, we come not therefore, but for that which in
right is our own, the hearts and true allegeaunce of our Subjects, which are
the greatest riches of a Kingdom: whereof as we assure our selves in you, so
do you assure your selves in us of a loving and gracious sovereign: wherewyth
was delivered to Master Mayor, a Mace or Scepter, which he carried before her
to her lodging, which was in the Bishop of Norwich his Pallaice, two miles
distant from that place. The Cup and money was delivered to a Gentleman, one of
her Majesty's footmen to carry: Master Mayor said to her, Sunt hic Centum
librae puri auri, the cover of the Cup lifted up, her Majesty said to the
footman, look to it, there is a hundredth pound. With that her highness, with
the whole company, marched toward Norwich, till they came to a place called
the Town Close, distant from the City a good flightshot, where the party,
which represented Gurgunt, came forth, as in manner is expressed, and was
ready to have declared to her Majesty this speech following: but by reason of
a shower of rain which came, her Majesty hasted away, the speech not
uttered: But thus it was.

Leave of to muse most gracious Prince of English soil,
What sudden wight in Martial wise approaches near:
King Gurgunt I am hight, King Belins eldest son,
Whose sire Dunwallo first, the British crown did wear.
Whom truthlesse Gutlack forste to pass the surging seas,
His falshode to revenge, and Denmark land to spoil.
And finding in return, this place a gallant vente,
This Castle fair I built, a forte from foraine soil:
To win a Conquest, gets renown and glorious name,
To keep and use it well, deserves eternal fame.
When brute through cities, towns, the woods and dales did sound
ELIZABETH this country peerless Queen drew near:
I was found out, my self in person noble Queen
Did have, before thy face in presence to appear.
Two thousand years welnye in silence lurking still:
Hear, why to thee alone this service I do yield.
Besides that, at my Cities suit, their founder first
Should gratulate most this joyful sight in open field.
Four special points and rare concurring in us both
This special service have reserved to thee alone:
The glory though of each in thee does far surmount,
Yet great with small comparde, will like appear anon.
When doubtful wars the British princes long had wroong,
My grandsire first uniting all did wear the Crown.
Of York and Lancaster, who did conclude the broiles?
Thy grandsire Henry seventh, a king of great renown.
Mine uncle Brennus eke, my father joining hands,
Old Rome did raze, and sack, and half consume with fire:
Thy puissant father so, new Rome that purple whore
Did sack, and spoil her near of all her glittering tire.
Lo Cambridge schools by mine assignment founded first,
By thee my Cambridge schools are famous through the world,
I thirty wandering ships of banished men relieved.
The thronges of banished souls that in this City dwell,
Do weep for joy, and pray for thee with tears untold.
In all these things thou noble Queen do far excel.
But lo to thee I yield as duty does me bind
In open field my self, my City, Castle, Key,
Most happy fathers Kings in such a daughter Queen,
Most happy England were, if thou should never die.
Go on most noble Prince, for I must have away,
My City gates do long, their Sovereign to receive:
More true thou never could, nor loyal subjects find,
Whose hearts full fast with perfect love to thee do cleave.
THen her Majesty, drew near the Gates of the City called Saint Stephens
gates, which with the walls there were both gallauntly and stronglye repaired.
The gate it self was thus enriched and beautified. First y^ Portcullice was
new made both timber and iron, then the outward side of the gate was thus
beautified: The Queens Arms were most richely and beautifully set forth in
the chief front of the gate, on the oneside thereof, but somewhat lower, was
placed the scutchion of S. George, or Saint George his cross: on the other
side, the arms of the City: and directlye under the Queens Majesty's arms
was placed ye Falcon, her highness Badge in due form, and under the same were
written these words, God and the Queen we serve. The Inner side of the gate was
thus beautified: on the right side was gorgeously set forth the red Rose,
signifying the house of York, on ye left ye side white Rose, representing the
house of Lancaster: in the midst was the white and red Rose united,
expressing ye Union, under ye which was placed by descent the arms of the
Queen, and under that were written these two verses: DIVISION kindled strife,
Blist UNION quenchte the flame:
Thence sprang our noble PHAENIX dear, the pearlesse prince of FAME.


And besides that, at this gate, the Waits of the City were placed with loud
Music, who cheerfully and melodiouslye welcomed her Majesty into the City:
and then passed she forward, through Saint Stephens street, where the first
Pageant was placed in form following.

The first Pageante was in Saint Stephens Parish in this manner.
IT was builded somewhat like the manner of a stage, of xl. foot long, and in
breadth eight foot. From the standing place upward, was a bancke framed in
the manner of a free stone wall, in very decent and beautiful sort: and in
the hight thereof were written these Sentences. Viz.

The causes of this common wealth are, God truly preached. Justice duly
executed. Idleness expelled. The people obedient. Labor cherished.
Universal concord preserved.
FRom the standing place downward, it was beautified with Painters work
artificially, expressing to sight the portrature of these several Loombes, and
the Weauers in them (as it were working) and over every Loombe the name thereof,
Viz. Over the first Loombe was written the weauing of Worsted: over the
second, the weauing of Russels: over the third, the weauing of Darnix: over
the fourth, the weauing of Tuft Mockado: the fifth the weauing of lace: the
sixte the weauyng of Caffa: the seventh the weauing of Friudge. And then was
there the portrature of a Matrone, and two or three children, and over her head
was written these words, Good nurture changes qualities. Upon the stage
there stood knitting at the one end eight small women children spinning
Worsted yarne, and at the other end as many knitting of Worsted yarne hose:
and in the myddest of the said stage stood a pretty Boy richly apparelled,
which represented the Commonwealth of the City. And all the rest of the stage
was furnished with men, which made the said several works, and before every
man the work in deed: and every thing thus in readiness, stayed her
majesty's coming and when she did come, the child which represented, Commonwealth, did speak to her highness these words. Viz.

Most gracious prince, undoubted sovereign Queen,
Our only joy next God, and chief defense:
In this small show, our whole estate is seen.
The wealth we have, we find proceed from thence,
The idle hand has here no place to feed,
The painful wight has still to serve his need.
Again, our seat denies our traffic here,
The Sea too near decydes us from the rest,
So weak we were within this dozen year,
As care did quench the courage of the best:
But good advise, has taught these little hands
To rende in twain the force of pining bands.
1. Pointing to the spinners.

2. Pointing to the Loombes

3. Pointing to the works.


From Combed wool we draw this slender threede,
From thence the Loombes have dealing with the same,
And thence again in order do proceed,
These several works, which skilful art does frame:
And all to drive Dame need into her cave,
Our heads and hands together labourde have.
We bought before the things that now we sell,
These slender ympes, their works do pass the waves,
Gods peace and thine we hold and prosper well,
Of every mouth the hands the charges saues.
Thus through thy help and aid of power divine,
Does NORWICH live, whose hearts and goods are thine.
B. G.

FINIS.
THis show pleased her Majesty so greatly, as she particularlye viewed the
knitting and spinning of the children, perused the Loombes, and noted the
several works and commodities which were made by these means: and then after
great thanks by her given to the people, marched toward the market place,
where was made a second devise as follows.

The second Pageant.
THe second Pageant thwarted the street at the entrance of the Market,
between Master Skinner and master Quashe, being in breadth two and fifty
foot of assise, and was divided into three gates, viz. in the midst a maine
gate, and on either side a posterne: the maine gate in breadth fourteen foot,
each posterne eight foot, their heights equal to their proportion: over each
posterne was as it were a Chamber, which Chambers were replenished with
Music. And over all the gates, passed a stage of eight foot broad, made in
the manner of a Pageant, both curious, rich, and delightful, the whole work
from the Pageant downward, seemed to be Jasper and Marble. In the forefront
toward her Majesty, was the Arms of England on the one side the gate, and
on the other side the Falcon with Crown and Scepter, which is her own badge.
The other side was beautified with the arms of England on the one side the
gate, and with the creste of England on the other side. The Stage or Pageant
was replenished with five personages appareled like women. The first was, the
City of Norwich: the second Debora: the third Iudeth: the fourth Esther: the
fifthe Martia, sometime Queen of England. At the first sight of the Prince,
and till her Majesty's coming to the Pageaunte, the Musicians, which were
close in the Chambers of the said Pageant, used their loud Music, and then
ceased: wherewith her highness stayed, to whom the personage representing
the City of Norwich, did speak in these words. viz.

WHom Fame resounds with thundering Trump, which rends the rattling skeis,
And pierces to the hautie heavens, and thence descending flies
Through flickering air: and so conioines the Sea and shore together,
In admiration of thy grace, good Queen thart welcome hither,
More welcome than Terpsicore, was to the town of Troy.
Seafaring men by Gemini conceive not half my joy:
Strong Hercules to Theseus was never such delight
Nor Nisus to Eurialus as I have in this sight,
Penelope did never thirst Ulysses more to see
Than I poor Norwich hungered have to gain the sight of thee.
And now that these my happy eyes behold thy heavenly face,
The Lord of Lords I humbly pray, to bliss thy noble grace
With Nastors life, with Sibilles health, with Craesus stock and store,
With all good gifts of Solomon, and twice as many more.
What should I say? thou art my joy next God, I have none other,
My princess and my peerlesse Queen, my loving nurse and mother.
My goods and lands, my hands and heart, my limbs and life are thine,
What is mine own in right or thought, to thee I do resign.
Grant then (oh gracious sovereign Queen) this only my request,
That that which shall be done in me, be construed to the best.
And take in part my slender shows, wherein my whole pretense
Is for to please you Majesty, and end without offense.
So shall I clap my hands for joy, and hold my self as rich
As if I had the gold of Jude, and double twice as much.
B. G.

FINIS.
Then Spoke Debora
WHere princes sitting in their thrones set god before their sight
And live according to his law, and guide their people right,
There does his blessed gifts abound, there kingdoms firmly stand
There force of foes cannot prevail, nor fury fret the land.
My self (oh peerlesse Prince) do speak by proof of matter past,
Which proof by practice I perfourmde, and foylde his foes at last.
For Iabin king of Canaan, poor Israel did spite,
And meant by force of furious rage to ouerrun us quite.
Nine hundred Iron Chariots, he brought into the field.
With cruel captain Sisera by force to make us yield.
His force was great, his fraud was more, he fought, we did defend,
And twenty winters long did last this war without an end.
But he that neither sleeps nor slackes such furies to correct,
Appointed me Debora for the judge of his elect:
And did deliver Sisera into a woman's hand.
I slew them all, and so in rest his people held the land.
So mighty prince, that puisaunt Lord, has plaste thee here to be,
The rule of this triumphant Realm alone belongth to thee.
Continue as thou have begone, weed out the wicked route,
Uphold the simple, meek and good, pull down the proud and stout.
Thus shall thou live and reign in rest, and mighty God shall please.
Thy state be sure, thy subjects safe, thy commonwealth at ease.
Thy God shall grant thee length of life, to glorify his name,
Thy deeds shall be recorded, in the book of lasting fame.
B. G.

FINIS.
Then spoke Iudeth.
OH flower of Grace, oh prime of Gods elect,
Oh mighty Queen and finger of the Lord,
Did God sometime by me poor wight correct.
The Champion stout that him and his abhord?
Then be thou sure thou art his mighty hand,
To conquer those which him and thee withstand.
The rage of foes Betbulia did besiege,
The people faint were ready for to yield:
God aided me poor widow nerethelesse,
To enter into Holofernes field,
And with this sword by his directing hand,
To slay his foe, and quiet so the land.
If this his grace were given to me poor wight,
If widows hand could vanquish such a foe:
Then to a Prince of thy surpassing might.
What Tirant lives but thou may overthrow.
Persevere then his servant as thou art,
And hold for aye a noble victors part.
B. G.

Finis.
Then Hester spoke.
The fretting heads of furious foes have skill,
As well by fraud as force to find their pray:
In smiling looks does lurk a lot as ill,
As where both stern and sturdy streams do sway,
Thy self oh Queen, a proof has seen of this,
So well as I poor Esther have iwis.
As Iabins force did Israel perplex,
And Holofernes fierce Betbuliel besiege,
So Hamons slights sought me and mine to vex,
Yet shewde a face a subject to his liege.
But Force nor Fraud, nor Tyrant strong can trap,
Those which the Lord in his defense does wrap.
The proofs I speak by us have erst bin seen,
The proofs I speak, to thee are not unknown.
Thy God thou know most dread and sovereign Queen,
A world of foes of thine has overthrown,
And hither now triumphantly does call
Thy noble Grace, the comfort of us al.
Doste thou not see the joy of all this flock?
Vouchsafe to view their passing gladsome cheer,
Be still (good Queen) their refuge and their rock,
As they are thine to serve in love and fear:
So Fraud, nor Force, nor foraine Foe may stand
Against the strength of thy most puyssaunt hand.
B. G.

FINIS.
Then spoke Martia.
WIth long discourse (oh puissant Prince) some tract of time we spend,
Vouchesafe yet now a little more, and then we make an end.
The thundering blaste of Fame, whereof Dame Norwich first did speak,
Not only shook the air and skies, but all the earth did break,
It rend up graves, and bodies raisde, each spirit took his place,
And this alonely word was heard: Here comth the pearl of Grace,
Here commes the Jewel of the world, her peoples whole delight,
The Paragon of present time, and Prince of Earthly Might.
The voice was strange, the wonder more: For when we viewde the Earth
Each Prince that erst had reigned here, receyvde again his breath,
And with his breath, a liberty to hold again his place,
If any one amongst us all exceed your noble Grace.
Some comfort every one conceived to catch again his own,
His utmost skill was trimly used, to have his virtues known.
The plays surpass my skill to tell, but when each one had said,
Apollo did himself appear and made us all dismayed.
VVil you contend with her (quoth he,) within whose sacred breast
Dame Pallas and my self have framde our sovereign seat of rest?
Whose skill directs the Muses nine, whose grace does Venus stain:
Her eloquence like Mercury: Like Juno in her train?
Whose God is that eternal love which holds us al in awe?
Believe me, you exceed the bounds of equity and law.
Therewith they shronk themselves aside, not one I could epsy,
They coutcht them in their caves again and there full quiet lie,
Yet I that Martia hight, which sometime ruled this land,
As Queen for thirty three years space, gate license at his hand,
And so Gurguntius did, my husbands father dear,
Which built this Town and Castle both, to make our homage here,
Which homage mighty Queen accept: The Realm and right is thine:
The Crown, the Scepter, and the sword to thee we do resign.
And wish to God, that thou may reign, twice Nestors years in peace,
Triumphing over all thy foes, to all our Joys encreace. Amen.
B. G.

FINIS.
Herewith she passed under the gate, with such thanks, as plainly expressed
her noble nature: and the Musitions within the gate upon their soft
instruments used broken Music, and one of them did sing this Dittie.

FRom slumber soft I fell a sleep,
From sleep to dream, from dream to deep delight,
Each Iem the Gods had given the world to keep
In Princely wise came present to my sight:
Such solace then did sincke into my mind,
As mortal man on molde could never find.
The Gods did strive, and yet their strives were sweet,
Each one would have a Virtue of her own,
Dame Juno thought the highest place most meet
For her, because of riches was her throne.
Dame Venus thought by reason of her love
That she might claim the highest place above.
The Virgins state DIANA still did praise,
And CERES praysde the fruit of fertile soil:
And PRVDENCE did dame PALLAS chiefly raise.
MINERVA all for eloquence did strive,
They smylde to see their quarelling estate*
And JOVE himself decided their debate.
My sweetes (quod he) leave of your sugared strife,
In equal place I have assignde you all:
A sovereign wight there is that hears life,
In whose sweet heart I have inclosde you all.
Of ENGLAND soil she is the sovereign Queen,
Your vigors there do flourish fresh and green.
They skipt for joy and gave their frank consent,
The noise resounded to the hawtie sky:
With one loud voice they cried al, content,
They clapped their hands, and therewith waked I.
The world and they concluded with a breath,
And wished long reign to Queen ELIZABETH.
B. G.

Finis
HErewith she passed thorough the market place, which was goodly garnished, and
thence through the other streets which were trimly decked, directly to the
Cathedral church, where Te Deum was song, and after service she went to the
Bishops palace, where her Majesty kept ye time she continued in Norwich. All
this was upon Saturday the xvj. of August. 1578.

Upon the Monday following, M. Churchyard brought Mercury in a galla^t coatch
stra^gely apparelled, into the grene yard under the privy or bedchamber window,
out of the which, the Queens Majesty looked: which Mercury, in verse made
for ye purpose, vttred to her highness, that if it were her pleasure at any
time to take the air abroad, there were devises to be seen to pleasure her
Majesty, and according to that promise, on Tewsday following (for before that
day by means of the wether she went not abroad) he performed a very pretty
pleasant show before her highness without S. Benels g^tes as she went toward
Cossie Park to hunt. In which day the Minister of the Dutch church pronouncing
to her Majesty the Oration following, presented the cup therein mentioned,
which I esteem to be worth fifty pounds, very curiously wrought.

Oration ad Serenissimam Angliae Reginam habita. 19. Augusti. 1578. a Ministro
ecclesiae Belgogermanicae Nordouici in loco publico.
MAgna oratoribus qui percelebrat^rum aetate vixerunt fuit laus, Serenissima
Regina, quod Iudicum animos partim suauiloquentia, partim posita rei
personaeque ante ipsorum oculos calamitate, in quemcunque vellent animi habitum
transformarent: Prius membrum non vulgarem nobis ob oculos ponit hominum
facilitatem, quod adeo sequaces dictoque audientes fuerint, vt se linguis duci
paterentur: Posterius magnam vbique apud gentes, quarum Respublica optabili
ordine fuit constituta obtinuit gratiam: long autem maiorem apud cos qui
Christo nomen dederunt: omnium vero maximam apud te o Serenissima Regina,
ecclesiae Christi matrix, cuius animum verbo Dei obsequentem instruxit, non
fucatus hic ^ermo, sed Christi spiritus, pietatisque zelus: ipsissima piorum
calamitas afflictorumque lachrymae, lachrymae inquam Christifidelium te
commouerunt, misera dispersaque Christi membra quibusuis iniurijs obiecta,
mill iam mortibus territa, in tutelam salutemque animi iuxta ac corporis
recipere atque protegere: Ob haec singularia tua in nos pietatis beneficia, and
quod tutore optimo Magistratus in hac tua Nordouicensi vrbe (quam Maiestas tua
nobis ob Christi religionem exulantibus domicilij loco clemeter concessit)
viuimus, add quod populi in nos animum fauorabilem experimur, inprimis Deo
patri, and Domino vnico seruatori nostro Jesus Christo, deinde and tibi
Serenissimae Reginae immortales non quas debemus sed quas possimus agimus
gratias: Porro humile quidem and vnicum tamen nostrum est votum, animi nostri
gratitudinem Maiestati tuae ostendere: Ecce igitur nullum munus, sed animum
nostrum: nullum regium splendorem, sed pietatis posteritatisque monumentum
Serenissimae tuae Maiestati consecratum, hoc autem co gratius maiestati tua
^ore confidimus, quod inculpati pijssimique Iosephi historia Dei erga
Maiestatem tuam bonitas, ad vinum sit delineata, quem nulla astutia, nullum
robur, nulla denique regnandi libido, sed fides constans, Christiani pectoris
pietas, coelestisque virtus, singulari Dei fauore ex sanguinaria fratrum
conspiratione, mortisque metu, ad summam dignitatem, regnique decus euexerunt:
In huius fratres non ^liena videtur prouerbialis illa apud Habraeos sententia,
Inuidia malarum rerum appetitus, and studium variae gloriae hominibus
saepissime occasio sunt sui interitus, tamen quod Iosephi animum attinet, ea
fuit praeditus and temperantia, and fortitudine, vt nimis iniquus simul and
pranus censeri posset, qui eum vel minimo vindicandi affectu accusare velit,
adco Dei prouidentiae and se, and omne vitae suae studium, vitae inquam in
alieno regno discrimen commisit, vt non aliunde quam a solo Dei nutu pendere
visus sit: sed quorsum ista? In te ne haet ipsa aliaque consimilia o
Serenissima Regina, and regni tui ratione omnium oculis conspicua sunt? Haec
inquam esse ecclesiae Christi foelicissimum gaudium, spirituale diadema, and
summum decus, huius vero regni vere Regium splendorem, atque perennem gloriam,
quis nisi mente captus inficias ire potest? Pijssime tu quidem singulari Dei
bonitate animum Iosephi tum in regni tui conseruatione, tum in regno Christi
amplificando imitata es o nutrix ecclesiae Dei fidelissima, solius enim Dei est
nunc per res (prout hominum ^culis sunt subiectae) secundasdisperdere, illum
autem per quaeuis tentationum genera rerumque discrimina extollere: quos vt
vasa suae misericordiae agnoscit, ita etiam and bonitate and spiritus sui tum
consolatione, tum fortitudine ad aeterna vitae foelicitatem prosequitur: Quod
nostrum votum ratum esse, Maiestatem tuam regnique ordinem spirituali prudentia
ac sapientia stabilire, camque in longam aetatem seruare, tuae item Maiestatis
subditos vera sui cognitione magis ac magis imbuere, dignetur bonus ille and
clemens Deus, per merita filij sui Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Amen.

REgiae Maiestati post orationem oblati^^ est monumentum aliquod, in cuius
superficie artificiose sculpta erat historia Iosephi; e^ Genesi.

In circumferentia vero hoc carmen.

Innocuum pietas ad regia sceptra Iosephum,
Ex manibus fratrum, carnificisque, rapit:
Carcere and insidijs sic te Regina tuorum
Ereptam duxit culmina ad ista Deus.
Inscriptio eras in ipsius capacitate scripta in orbem, hoc modo.

Serenissimae Angliae Reginae Elizabethae, ecclesiae Belgicae Nordouici ob
religionem exulantes, hoc monumentum and pietatis and posteritatis ergo
consecrabant. 1578.

In interiore ipsus part erat insigne serpentis in gyrum conuo^^ti, cui media
insidebat columba, cum hoc Christi Elogio: Prudens vt serpens, simplex vt
columba.

The minister of the Duch Church his Oration in English.
THE Orators (most gracious Queen) which lived in the age of them that won
greatest renown; were highly commended, for that they could transform the
Judges minds partly, by eloquence, and partly by setting down before their
eyes the calamity of the thing and person they spoke of, into what disposition
them listed: the first part declares unto us no common facility of men, in
that they were so willing in following, and attentive in hearing, as they would
suffer themselves to be lead by eloquence: the last, obtained great favor
amongst all nations, whose common weal was governed in good order, and far
greater amongst the Christians: but greatest of all with thee O most excellent
Queen, the nourse of Christ his church, whose mind obedient to Gods word,
the spirit of Christ, and zeal of Godliness, and not this profane kind of
speech has instructed: the very calamity of Godly men, and tears of the
afflicted, the tears, I say, of faithful Christians have thoroughly moved thee
to defend and protect the miserable and dispersed members of Christ obiecte to
every kind of injury, before beaten in pieces by a thousand deaths with the
safety and preservation as well of mind as body: for these thy singular
benefits of Godliness toward us, and that we live under so good a tutor
being magistrate in this the City of Norwich, which thy majesty has of
elemencie granted unto us for a mansion place, which were banished for Christ
his religion, and moreover that we find the minds of the people favorable
toward us, first we give immortal thanks, not such as we ought, but such as
we are able unto God the father, and the Lord our only savior Jesus Christ,
and then unto thee most merciful Queen. Moreover it is our humble and yet our
only petition to show unto your majesty the thankfulness of our mind:
behold therefore dedicated to your most excellent majesty not any gift but our
mind, no princely jewel but a monument of godliness and posterity, the
which we hope will be so much the more acceptable to your majesty, for because
the goodness of God toward your majesty is lively drawn out of the
history of the innocent and most godly Josephus, whom neither policy,
strength nor desire of bearing rule, but constant faith, godliness of a
Christian heart, and heavenly virtue by Gods singular mercy, delivered from
the bloody conspiracy of his brethren and fear of death, and brought unto
high dignity and royal kingdom: to whose brethren that prouerbiall sentence
of the Hebrews is very fitly alluded. Envy being the desire of evil things,
and covetousness of transitory renown, is often times the occasion of man's
destruction: but touching the mind of Josephus, the same was endued with such
temperance and fortitude, that he might be thought no less unjust then wicked,
that would accuse him so much as with the least affection of reuengement: so
wholly did he commit him self and all the government of his life, his life, I
say, put in hazard in a strange kingdom unto the providence of God, that he
seemed to hang of no other thing then the only will of God. But to what end
speak I this? Are not these self same things, and others their like (o most
excellent Queen) by the eyes of all men clearly beholden in thee, and the
order of thy kingdom? What man (I say) having his wits, can deny these
things to be the most happy joy, spiritual crown, and cheifest ornament of
Christ's church, and truly of this kingdom the princely beauty and
perpetual renown? Thou surely do follow most hollily, the mind of
Josephus, by the singular goodness of God, as well in preserving thy kingdom, as
in amplifying the kingdom of Christ (o thou most faithful nourse of the
church of God:) for it is in God only to destroy this man by prosperity (as
it seems unto man) and advance another by all kinds of adversity and
human danger: whom he acknowledges as the vessels of his mercy: and so by
his goodness, together with the consolation and strength of his spirit, does
bring them to the happiness of eternal life, which our petition that good and
merciful God grant may be ratified in establishing your majesty and
governance of your kingdom with spiritual wisdom and understanding, in
preserving the same for many years, and in induing your majesty's subjects
more and more with true knowledge of him, for his sons sake our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The Oration ended, there was a certain monument presented to her princely
Majesty, in the upper part whereof, was artificially graven the history of
Josephus out of Genesis.

In the compass thereof was this verse.

To royal scepters, godliness,
Josephus innocent,
Does take, from brothers bloody hands, and murderers intent.
So thee, O Queen, the Lord has ledd from prison and deceit
Of thine, unto these highest tops of your princely estate.
In the inner part of the same, there was the figure of a serpent,
enterfolding it self: In the midst whereof did sit a dove with this sentence
of Christ, Mat. 10.16. Wise as the Serpent, and meek as the Dove.

The Wednesday toward evening, master Churchyard was likewise ready upon the
water with another devise, when her majesty was without the gates toward
mount Surrey, but weather hindered it so, as nothing was then done by him. But
as she returned homeward, within Bishops gate at the Hospital door, master
Stephan Limbert, master of the Grammar school in Norwich stood ready to
render her an Oration: her majesty drew near unto him, and thinking him
fearful, said graciously unto him: Be not afeard. He answered her again in
English: I thank your majesty, for your good encouragement: and then with
good courage entered into this Oration.

Ad illustrissimam Principem Elizabetham Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
reginam etc. Ante fores (...) Nordouicensis, Oration Stephani Limberti
Ludimagistri publici.
AEgyptum fama est inundante Nilo (serenissima Regina,) and aureo Pactoli
flumine quotannis Lidiam irrigari, quaeres in ijs agris maxima faecunditatis
causa putatur: In nos autem atque adeo vniuersam Angliam, qua late patet, non e
Tmolo aut alijs nescio quibus montibus, sed ex illo perenni and vberrimo font
bonitatis tuae, multi maximique pietatis, iusliciae, mansuetudinis, aliorumque
innumerabilium bonorum, prae quibus iam viluit aurum and obsoleuit,
coptos^ssimi riui profluxerunt. Atque vt ex infinitis vel vnum leutter
attingam, propterca quod de pluribus dicere nec est huius loci and temporis,
nec facultatis meae. Insignem illam misericordiam celsitudinis tuae,
Nobilissima Regina, and ad leuandum pauperrimorum hominum inopiam incredibilem
propensionem (qua de plurimis virtutibus nulla deo gratior, (...) vt canit
Homerus, (...)
in summa principe nulla mortalibus admitabilior esse potest) quibus tandem
laudibus efferemus? quam honorificis verbis prosequemur? (...), hoc est,
hospitium pauperu^ celeberrimu^ est apud omnes posteros regiae virtutis atque
beneficentiae monumentum futurum, institutum quidem ab illustrissimo Henrico,
patre celsitudinis tuae, a nobilissimo Edouardo fratre maximis tabulis
consignatum, a tua vero maiestate, quod non minorem laudem meretur,
Cringlefordiensibus fundis and possessionibus egregie nuper auctu^ atque
amplificatu^, vt non tam alients iam ornamentis quam proprijs virtutibus merito
laetari possis. Recordata quippe es pro tua singulari prudentia atque
eruditione, diuinam illam sapientissimi Platonis legem, quam vnde cimo de
legibus libro scriptam reliquit, (...). tantamigitur benignitatem, tam eximiam,
and incredibilem misericordiam tua^, (illustrissima Princeps) quibus
complectemur studijs? quibus officijs, aut qua voce grati animi voluntatem
testificabimur? Cum enim omnes referendae gratiae studio and labor, vel
accuratissimas rations exquisiuerimus, ne vni us quidem huius beneficij, quo
nos augustissimae maiestati tuae obstrictos esse and deuinctos agnoscimus,
magnitudinem assequi poterimus. Superabimur vel ab hoc vno and singulari
merito, nedum sperandum est, vt immenso reliquorum meritorum pelago, quod tum
in omnes tibi subditos public, and generatim, tum in hanc ciuitate^ proprie ac
particulatim exundauit, pares esse queamus. Vere nos iam (...) incolimus, and
in beatis illis insulis de quibus meminit Hesiodus (...) aetatem agimus, qui
non modo frugibus, lana, pecore, alijsque subsidijs humanae vitae, sed multo
magis verae religionis verbique diuini, in quibus animi solis acquiescunt
preciosissimis opibus abundamus. Sunt qui Britanniam alterum orbem
appellauerunt, quod hac aetate nostra dici rectissime posse arbitror, Cum enivi
omnes vndique terrae grauissimis bellis affligantur, and discordiarum iactentur
fluctibus, soli nos, celsitudine tua clanum moderante, in pacatissimo portu
nauigamus, and ab orb malorum disiuncti, in caelu^ quodammodo foelicitatis
sublati videmur. Quod est ergo officij nostri, primu^ deo Opt. Max. gratias
agimus, cuius vnius bonitati omnem hanc, quantacunque est, be atitudinem
acceptam referimus, precamurque vt came nobis propriam and perpetuam esse velit:
deinde celsitudini tuae, serenissima Regina, cuius opera, cura, solicitudine,
and partam hanc nobis foelicitatem and tot annos conseruatam agnoscimus.
Laetamur hoc aspectu tuo, and gratulamur incredibili studio, quod tum ex meo
ipsius sensu loquor, tum omnes qui iam vndique confluxerunt Nordouicenses tui a
me dici postulant. Atque vtinam in haec pectora posses oculos inserere, and
occultos animoru^ nostrorum sinus perlustrare, videres profecto inclusam intus,
quae tantis angustijs erumpere non potest, infinitam molem voluntatis. Fidem
omnem, studium, obseruantiam, quae tantae Principi debentur, vt hactenus
promptissime detulimus, ita studiosissime semper deferemus, and si quando casus
aliquis inciderit (quod Deus omen auertat) vt sacrosanctae maiestatis tuae, aut
istius florentissimi regni vel salus in discrimen veniat, vel dignitas
periclitetur, non solum bonorum omniu^ ac facultatum effusionem, sed laterum
nostrorum oppositus and corporum pollicemur. Rogamus deinde and obsecramus
excellentiam tuam, illustrissima Regina, vt and hoc nostrum qualecunque
officium a summa beneuolentia animoque quam gratissimo profectu^ boni consulas,
and de nobis Nordouicensibus sic existimes, ad lautiores te fortasse subditos
venisse saepe, ad laetiores nunquam.

The Oration of Stephan Limbert, public Scholemaster, to the most magnificent
Prince, Elizabeth of England, France, and Irelande Queen, etc. before the
gates of the Hospital of Norwiche.
IT is reported (most gracious Queen,) that Egypt is watered with the
yearly ouerflowing of Nilus, and Lidia with the golden stream of Pactolus,
which thing is thought to be the cause of the great fertility of these
countries: but upon us, and farther, over all England, even in the uttermost
borders many and maine rivers of godliness, justice, humility, and other
innumerable good things, in comparison of the which, gold is vile and naught
worth, do most plentifully gush out, and those not from Tmolus, or other hills
I know not which, but from that continual and most abundant welspring of
your goodness. And that of those infinite goodnesses I may lightly touch one,
for that neither place, time, nor my faculty does permit to speak of many:
with what praises shall we extol: with what magnificent words shall we
express that notable mercy of your highness, most renowned Queen, and
incredible readiness to relieve the need of poor men, then the which of many
virtues none can be more acceptable unto God, as Homer writes, neither any
virtue in a mighty Prince more wondered at amongst men. This hospital of
poor men is most famous, which will be a monument of princely virtue and
beneficence amongst all posterity, instituted by the most mighty King Henry
your highness father, confirmed with the great seal, by the most noble King
Edward your brother, but by your majesty which deserves no less praise, of
late notably increased and amplified by the lands and possessions of
Cringleforde, that you may not now worthily rejoice so much in others
ornaments, as your own virtues. For you are said for your singular wisdom
and learning, to have studied that divine law of the most wise Plato, which
he left written in the eleventh book of laws. Such your great bounty
therefore, so exceeding, and incredible mercy (O most virtuous Prince) in what
books shall we comprehend? with what duties, or with what voice shall we
testify the good will of a thankful mind? For when we diligently seek all
the most exquisite and curious means of thanksgiving: we cannot so much as
attain unto the greatness of this one benefit, by the which we acknowledge
our selves bound and straightly holden to your most royal majesty. We
shall be overcome, even with this one and singular benefit, so much the less
hope have we then in any point to counteruaile the huge Sea of the rest of thy
benefits which ouerfloweth on every side as well publicly and generally over
all thy Subjects, as properly and particularly upon this City. We certainly
now inhabit, and lead our lives in those most happy Islands of the which
Hesiodus makes mention, which not only abound with all manner of grain,
woll, cattle, and other aids of man's life, but much more with the most
precious treasure of true religion and the word of God, in the which only the
minds of men have rest and peace. There be that call England another world,
which I think may be most true in this our age: For whereas all lands on
every side of us are afflicted with most grievous wars, and tossed with the
floudes of dissension, we only, your highness governing our stern, do sail
in a most peaceable haven, and severed from the world of mischiefs, do seem
after a sort to be taken up into a heaven of happiness. We therefore,
according to our bounden duty, first give thanks unto God Almighty, unto
whose goodness only with thanks we refer all this our happiness, how
great soever it be, and pray that he would vouchesafe to make the same proper
and perpetual unto us. And afterward, unto your highness, (O most gracious
Queen) by whose study, care and diligence we confess this blessedness to be
gotten, and so many years preserved unto us.

We are glad in this beholding you, and we rejoice with desire more than may be
believed, which as I speak of mine own thought, so also all these subjects
of Norwich desire me to say the same in their behalf. And I would to God you
could pearce these our breasts with your eyes, and thoroughly view the hidden
and covered creekes of our minds: then undoubtedly should you behold an
infinite heap of good will closely shutt up within, which cannot break out
of so narrow straights. All the faith, study, and obedience, which are due to
so great a Prince, as hitherto we have most willingly employed, so will we
always most diligently perform the same: and if at any time any chance
shall happen (which fortune God turn from us) that the state of thy blessed
majesty or of this flourishing realm should come in danger, or the
worthiness thereof be in hazard, we do not only protest the effusion of all
our goods and substance, but also the putting forth and brunt of our
strengthes and bodies therein. Finally we desire and beseech thy excellency
(most renowned Queen) well to accept of this our duty, how soever it be,
proceeding from a singular good will, and a most thankful mind, and so to
think of us Citizens of Norwich, that perhaps you have many times com to people
more wealthy, but to more joyful never.

(...) Immediately after the beginning of the Oration, her Majesty called to her
the French Ambassadors, whereof there were iij. and diverse English Lords, and
willed them to harken, and she hirselfe was very attentive, even until the end
thereof. And the Oration ended, after she had given great thanks therefore to
Master Lymbert, she said to him: It is the best that ever I heard, you shall
have my hand, and pulled off her glove, and gave him her hand to kiss, which
before kneeling on his knee, he arose and kissed, and then she departed to the
Court, without any other show that night, but that she sent back to know his
name.

The next night being Thursdaye, there was an excellent Princely Mask brought
before her after Supper, by Master Goldingham in the Privy Chamber, it was of
Gods and Goddesses, both strangely and richly apparelled.

The first that entered was MERCVRIE.

Then entered two Torch-bearers in Purple Taffata Mandilions laid with silver
lace, as all other the Torchberers were.

Then entered a consort of Music, viz six Musitions, all in long vestures of
white Sarcenet gyrded about them, and garlands on their heads playing very
cunningly.

Then two Torch-bearers more.

The IVPITER and IVNO.

Then two Torch bearers more.

Then MARS and VENUS.

Then two Torch bearers more.

Then APOLLO and PALLAS.

Then two Torch-bearers.

Then NEPTVNE and DIANA: And last comes CVPIDO and concludes y^ matter. Thus
when they had once marched about the chamber, MERCVRIE discharges his message
in these words to the Queen.

The good meaning Mayor, and al his brethren, with the rest, have not rested
from praying unto the Gods to prosper thy coming hither, and the Gods
themselves moved by their unfeigned prayers, are ready in person to bid thee
worthily welcome, and I MERCVRIE the God of Merchantes and Merchandise, and
therefore a favorer of these Citizens, being thought meetest and chosen
fittest to signify the same. Gods there be also which cannot come, being tied
by the time of the year, as CERES in Harvest, BACCHVS in Wines, POMENA in
Orchardes. Only HIMINEVS denies his good will, either in presence, or in
person: notwithstanding, DIANA has so countrechecked him therefore, as he
shall ever hereafter be at your commandment. For my part, as I am a reioycer
at your coming, so am I a furtherer of your welcome hither, and for this time
I bid you farewell.


Then marched they about again, and that done, Jupiter spoke to the Queen in
this sort, and then gave her a ryding Wande of Whales ^n curiously wrought.
Fear not oh Queen, thou art beloved so,
As Subjects true, will truly thee defend:
Fear not my power to overthrow thy woe,
I am the God that can each miss amend.
Thou do know, great IVPITER am I,
That gave thee first thy happy Sovereignty.
I give thee still, as ever thou haste had,
A peerless power, unto thy dying day:
I give thee rule to overcome the bad,
And love, to love thy loving Subjects aye.
I give thee here this small and slender wande,
To show, thou shall in quiet rule the Land.

Then Juno spoke, whose gift was a Purse curyously wrought. IS IVNO rich? no
sure she is not so
She wantes that wealth, that is not wanting here,
Thy good gets thee friends, my wealth wins many a foe,
My riches rustes, thine shine passing clear.
Thou art beloved of Subjects far and nigh,
Which is such wealth as money cannot bye.
Farewell fair Queen, I cannot give thee aught,
Nor take away thy good that is so bound:
Thou can not give, that I so long have sought,
Ne can I hold the riches thou have found.
Yet take this gift, though poor I seem to be,
That thou thy self shall never poorer be.

Then after they had marched again about, Mars gave his gift, which was a
fair pair of Knyues, and said. Where force does fiercely seek to foster
wrong,
There MARS does make him make a quick recoyle,
Nor can endure that he should harbor long,
Where naughty wights manure in goodly soil,
This is the use that aids the force of War,
That MARS does mend, that force does seek to mar.
And though oh Queen thou be a Prince of peace,
Yet shall thou have me fastly sure at need:
The storms of strife, and blustering broils to cease,
Which foreign foes, or faythlesse friends may breed.
To conquer, kill, to vanquish and subdue,
Such feigned folk, as loves to live untrue.

These words were graven on those Knyues.

To hurt your foe, and help your friend,
These Knyues are made unto that end.
Both blunt and sharp you shall us find,
As pleases best your Princely mind.
Then spoke Venus, whose gift was a white Dove. IN vain (fair Queen) from
Heaven my coming was,
To seek tamend that is no way amiss:
For now I see thy favor so does pass,
That none but thou, thou only she it is,
Whose bewty bids each wight to look on thee,
By view they may an other VENUS see.
Where bewty boastes, and favor does not fail,
What may I give to thee O worthy wight?
This is my gift, there shall no woe prevail,
That seeks thy will, against thy wills delight,
Not where they will, but where it likes thy mind,
Accept that friend, if loyal thou him find.

The Dove being cast off, ran directly to the Queen, and being taken up
and set upon the Table before her Majesty, fate so quietly, as if it had bin
tied.

Then after they had marched again about APOLLO presented his gift, which was,
an Instrument called a Bandonet, and did sing to the said Instrument this
Dittie, as he played.

IT seems strange to see such strangers here,
Yet not so strange, but strangers knows you well:
Your virtuous thoughts to Gods do plain appear,
Your acts on earth bewraies how you excel:
You cannot die, Love here has made your lease,
Which Gods have sent, and God says shall not cease.
Virtuous desire desired me to sing,
No Subjects suit, though suitors they were all,
APOLLOS gifts are subjects to no King,
Rare are thy gifts, that did APOLLO call,
Then still rejoice, since God and Man say so,
This is my gift, thou never shall have woe.

PALLAS then speaks, and presents her gift, which was a Book of
Wisdom. MOst worthy wight, what wouldste thou have of me?
Thou haste so much, thou canste enjoy no more:
I cannot give, that once I gave to thee,
Nor take away thy good I gave before.
I robbed was by Natures good consent
Against my will, and yet I was content.
A PALLAS thou, a Princess I will be:
I Queen of loss, thou Goddess which haste got:
I sometime was, thou only now art she,
I take, thou gave that luck that was my lot,
I give not thee this Book to learn thee aught,
For that I know already thou art taught.

Then after they had marched again about, NEPTVNE did speak: his gift was, a
great Artificial Fish, and in the belly thereof a noble Pike, which he threw
out before her Majesty. WHat art thou (Queen) that Gods do love thee so?
Who won their wills to be so at thy will?
How can the world become thy cruel foe?
How can DISDAIN or MALICE seek to kill?
Can Sea or Earth devise to hurt thy hap,
Since thou by Gods do sit in Fortunes lap.
As Heaven and Earth have vowed to be thine,
So NEPTVNES Seas have sworn to drench thy foes,
As I am God, and all the waters mine,
Still shalt thou get, but never shall thou lose:
And since on Earth my wealth is naught at all,
Accept good will, the gift is very small.

DIANA presented a Bow and Arrows nocked and headed with silver. Her speech
was this. WHo ever found on Earth a constant friend,
That may compare with this my Virgin Queen?
Who ever found a body and a mind
So free from stain, so perfect to be seen,
Oh Heavenly hew, that aptest is to soil,
And yet doste live from blot of any foil
Rare is thy gift* and given to few or none,
Malist therefore of some that dare not say,
More shines thy light, for that I know but one,
That any such show, to follow on their way.
Thou thou art she, take thou the only praise,
For chastest Dame in these our happy days:
Accept my Bow, since best thou do deserve,
Though well I know thy mind can thee preserve.

Cupido his speech, his gift an Arrow of Gold. AH ha, I see my mother out of
sight,
Then let the boy now play the wag a while,
I seem but weak, yet weak is not my might,
My boyishe wit can oldest folk beguile.
Who so does think, I speak this but in jest,
Let me but shoot, and I shall quench his rest,
Mark here my shafts: This all is made of woodde,
Which is but soft, and breeds but soft goodwill.
Now this is guilte, yet seems it gold full good,
And does deceive blind loving people still.
But here is one is seldom felt or seen:
This is of Gold, meet for the noblest Queen.
Wherefore Dame fair, take thou this gift of me,
Though some deserve, yet none deserve like you,
Shoot but this shafte at King or Caesar: He,
And he is thine, and if thou will allow.
It is a gift, that many here would crave,
Yet none, but thou, this golden Shafte may have.

There was written upon the shafte.

My Color Joy, my Substance Pure,
My Virtue such as shall endure.
Goldingham.

FINIS.
SIr Majesty received these gifts very thankfully, the Gods and Goddesses with
the rest of the mask marched about^ the Chamber again, and then departed in
like manner as they came in. Then the Queen called to her Master Robert Wood,
the Mayor of Norwich, whom first the heartily thanked: and took by the hand,
and used secret conference, but what, I know not. And thus this delightful
night passed, to the joy of all which saw her Grace in so pleasant plight.

The next day being Friday in which day the Course removed, the Streets
toward Saint Benets gates, were hanged, from the one side to the other, with
cords made of herbs and flowers, with Garlands, Coronets, Pictures, rich
clothes, and a thousand devices. At the gates themselves, there was a stage
made, very richly apparelled with cloth of Gold, and crimsen velvet,
whereupon in a close place made thereon for the purpose, was placed very
sweet Music: and one ready to tender her this speech following. The
doleful hour of her departure came, she passed from the Court, to those
gates, with such countenaunces, both of her Majesty's part, and her Subjects,
now dolorous, now cheerful, as plainly showed the loving hearts of both
sides: when she came there, the speech was thus uttered unto her.

Terrestrial Joys are tied with sclender ^ile,
Each happy hap full hastily does slide,
As Summer season lasts but a while,
So Winter storms do longer time abide:
Alas what bliss can any time endure?
Our Sunshine day is dashte with sudden shoure.
Could tongue express our secreate joys of heart,
(Oh mighty Prince) when thou did come in place?
No no God wot, nor can express the smarte
Thy Subjects feel in this departing case.
But gracious Queen, let here thy Grace remain
In gracious wise, till thy return again.
In lieu' whereof, receive thy Subjects hearts,
In fixed Faith continually thine own:
Who ready rest to lose their vital parts
In thy defense, when any blaste is blown.
Thou art our Queen, our rock and only stay,
We are thine own to serve by night and day.
Farewell oh Queen, farewell oh Mother dear,
Let JACOBS God thy sacred body guarde:
All is thine own that is possessed here,
And all in all is but a small reward
For thy great grace, God length thy life like NOE,
To govern us, and eke thy Realm in Joy. AMEN.
B. G.
and spoken by himself, to whom her Majesty said: We thank you heartily.
FINIS.
Then with the Music in the same place was song this short Dittie following,
in a very sweet voice.

WHat vayleth life, where sorrow soakes the heart?
Who fears Death that is in deep distress?
Release of life does best abate the smarte
Of him, whose woes are quite without redress.
Lend me your tears, resign your sighs to me,
Help all to wail the dolor which you see.
What have we done, she will no longer stay?
What may we do to hold her with us still?
She is our Queen, we subjects must obey.
Grant, though with grief to her departing will.
Conclude we then, and sing with sobbing breath,
God length thy life, (oh Queen ELIZABETH.)
B. G.

FINIS.
THen departed her Majesty out of the gates, within a flight shot or little
more whereof, Master Churchyard had another show, which I leave to himself
to utter: because my hope is, he will manifest that amongst the rest shortly.

This finished, her Majesty in Princely manner marched toward the confines
of the liberties of the City of Norwich, which I suppose almost two miles:
before she came there, Master Mayor brake to my Lord Chamberlain, that he
was to utter to her Majesty an other Oration, whereof my Lord seemed to have
good liking: but before they came to the said confines, Master Mayor was
willed to forbear the vtteraunce of the same his Oration, because it was about
vij. of the clock, and her Majesty had then five miles to ride. Nevertheless
he gave to her Majesty both his Orations in writing, which she thanked him
for. She also thanked the Mayor, every Alderman, and the Commoners, not only
for the great cheer they had made her, but also for the open households they
kept to her highness servant, and al other. Then she called Master Mayor
and made him Knight: and so departing, said: I have laid up in my breast such
good will, as I shall never forget Norwich, and proceeding onward did shake her
riding rod and said: Farewell Norwich, with the water standing in her eyes: In
which great good will toward us all, I beseech God to continue her Majesty
with long and triumphant reign over us all. AMEN.

The Majors Oration at her departure, delivered in writing.
QVae venie^tia lata sunt, ea cu^ recedunt solent esse tristiora. Quid enim
(Sum Deus) potuit hic Sol vsquam conspicere beatius, quam nos videbamur
nobis, vel cum hic primum (Serenissima Princeps) Maiestatis tuae splendour
illuxerit: vel reliquo hoc perexiguo sane tempore quo in tua praesentia,
tanquam in omnium rerum falicissima vbertat^ conquteuimus: Sed vae illi rerum
humanarum vicissitudini, quae nihil illibatum, nihil aeternum patitur: ita
voluptas tristitiam trahit, and letitiam nostram dolor no^ excipit solum: sed
acerbissime intercipit: Ita vt, qui nuper accidentem te lautitijs omnibus
excepimus: abeuntem nunc, si id pateretur Amplitudinis tuae and tanti
comitaetus celebritas, pullatis vestibus prosequeremur. Ta^ti d^loris causam si
postules, nescio quid suae Maiestatis personae tuae Deus indidit, quod summa^
tui Reuerentia^ aamirabilis cui^sdam amoris plena^ e^citat, quo fit vt agree
pattamur nos a te devils. Accedit quod vtcunque Amplitudini tuae visi sum^^
(quae tua est clementiae) omne gratitudinis officio satisfecisse: nobis tamen
ipsis nondum satisfecimus, nec vnquam sane satisfacturi sum^s. Longioris tamen
temperis vsuram optaremus, si id co^modum esset, vt si no^ maius, at certe
diuturnius specimen vel obedienciae, velamoris nostri exhiberemus. Sed and
voluntati tuae and vtilitati public^ cedendum est: quam te and velle semper,
and in omnibus spectare satis nobis magno cum emclumento nostro est compertum.
I nunc igitur, i pede farsto, quo tua te virtus vocat. Nes autem vel hoc ipsum
abunde consolabitur, (qu^d and immortales gratias, and perpetua^ rei memoriam
meretur) Te principem post omnium memoriam praesta^tissimam dignatam nostres
lares tam humaniter inuisisse. Postremum hoc eri^, nos hic coram te, quam
Dominus vnxie, atque omni hac celebritate Deum nunc intuentem testari in a^imas
nostra^, nos fidem and obedientia^ in illo, nostram tibi vns inperpetuum
reseruaturos. Tu Religionis nutrix, Reipublicae matter, Principum decu^,
Subditorum solacium, falicissime (nellem dicere) Vale.

The Mayors last Oration Englished.
THose things which at their coming are joyful, when they depart are the
more sorrowful. For what (o mighty God) could this Sun at any time behold more
happy, than we did seem to our selves, either when first (o most merciful
Prince) the brightness of thy Majesty did here shine out, or else in all the
time we rested in your presence, as in a paradise or most happy abundance of
all things. But woe to that chaungeable course of human things, which
suffers nothing vncorrupt, nor any thing eternal* so pleasure brings after
it sadness, and grief does not only suddenly take away our delights, but
most bitterly cut of the same. So that we that lately received thee approaching
with all joys: should follow thee departing (if the renown of your highness
and train would suffer it) with mourning garments. If you demand the cause of
so great sorrow, I know not what part of his Majesty God has endued your
person withal, which does stir up great reverence of thee, but full of a
certain wonderful love, whereby it comes to pass that we hardely suffer our
selves to be severed from your presence. Add moreover, that we seem after a
sort unto your highness (such is your clemency) to have satisfied every
point of gratefulnes: yet have we not, nor ever shall we satisfy our selves
in that behalf. We would wish a longer use of time (if it were profitable)
that we might express, if not a greater, yet a more continual show of our
love and obedience. But we must both yield to your pleasure, and to the common
wealth, for that we know assuredly to our great and singular adu^uncement, you
never cease to seek out and afoord the same to all your subjects. Go now
therefore, go with luckie step thither, whether thy virtue calls thee. And
for us, this shall comfort us abundantly (which deserves both immortal
thanks and perpetual memory) that thou so renowned a Prince, have vouchsafed
so courteously to visit our dwellinges. And finally, we here before thee, whom
God has anointed, and before all this famous assembly, take God (which now
beholds us) to our witness, that we will keep our faith and obedience in
him to thee only for ever. Thou Nurce of religion, Mother of the Common
Wealth, Beauty of Princes, Solace of thy Subiecte^, most happily (oh how I
rue to speak it) Farewell.

Oration St. Limberti quae discessura Principe recitata fuisset, nisi quod sero
iter ingressa est.
SCribit Gellius in noctibus Atticis, Eminentissima Princeps, Phauorinum
Philosophum dixisse, nunc matrem esse diem, nunc esse never came, and hunc
versum longo hominum aeuo probatu^ sermonibus suis vsurpasse, (...). Quem ipse
Gellius ita interpretatur, dolorum ac voluptatum esse vicissitudines, non omni
dic been esse posse, sed isto been, atque alio male. Nihil autem nec venustius
vnquam nec verius dictum fuisse, tum perpetua rerum humanarum volubilit as, and
crebrae mutationes indicant, tum hodiernus dies fidem f^cit amplissimam. Non
enim tam recreauit nos e diuturno me rore atque desyderio laetissimus ille
aduentus celsitudinis tuae, quam isto quem vndiqueiam parari videmus discessu
exanimamur, vtque ^mnium aetatum atque ordinum infiniti plausus and
gratulationes venientem exceperunt: ita nemo est qui non discedentem etiam
luctu and ^achrymis prosequatur. Equidem vt de me ipso loquar, quoniam meus
mihi notissimus est animus, nunquam me duriorem prouinciam sustinuisse
profiteor, quam est haec imposita mihi hoc tempore, no^ solum vt affarar
cruditissimam principem, quod tamen per se arduum est and difficile, sed multo
magis vt hoc tristi and acerbo valedicendi munere defungerer. Quis enim non
vchementer indolueris breuissimo tempore ac veluti (...) vidisse se quod maxim
concupierat, ereptum ante quam eo penitus perfrui liceret? Quam luctuosum est,
lactentes infantulos ab vberibus matrum and charissimis amplexibus diuelli? A
patribus filios quibus vnice diliguntur grauio^i aliquo casu separari? Nullis
tamen mortalibus arbitror naturam tantos amores tantam beneuolentiam, aut in
cos quos procrearunt ingenerasse, aut a^ quibus sunt procreati, quanta est ea
qua nos omnes celsitudinem tuam co^munem, videlicet parentem patriae,
suspicimus, colimus, veneramur. Magna vis est amicitiae and necessitudinis,
quae saepe facit, vt qui vel societate aliqua, vitaeque consuetudine aliquandiu
coniuncti fuerint, ita cohaereant animis and quasi coalescant: vt a se inuicem
distrahi atque disiungi molestissime serant. Hinc Theseasides omnium ore ac
literis celebrata, aliorumque innumerabilium arctissima necessitudo, quos nulla
peris cula, nulli terra marique labores, ab eorum quibus conuixissent
suauissim^ Comitatu depellere potuerunt. Quae autem tanta studia, tanti ardores
animo^um vsquam reperti sunt, qui nostris erga te praestantissima Princeps
synceris minimeque fucatis voluntatibus conferantur? Non satis ostendunt ista
fidem and beneuolentiam nostram, mayor est quam vel cuiusquam eruditissimi
copia, nedum huius ingenij mei mediocritate possit illustrari. Nullas vnquam
res arctiori nexu and maiori concordia, quam animum and corpus natura
colligauit, quod and in vita declarat incredibilis illoru^ conspiratio, sibique
mutu^ subueniendi cura, and in morte grauissima distractio. Nos autem qui
Christianam religionem ac pietate profitemur, multo magis quam illi Decij,
Scaeuolae, Curtij, qui se pro Repub. Romana denouisse dicuntur, and patriam,
and came qua patriae salus continetur etiam vita nostra chariorem habere
didicimus. Quis enim est qui pro ea dubitet mortem oppetere, quae si non esset,
grauiorem morte seruitutem perpeti cogeretur? Neque vero est haec pietas tuorum
animis leuiter infixa, and quasi summo fundata solo, Illustrissima Regina, sed
altis nixa radicibus qua nullis fortunae procellis ac tempestatibus concuti,
nullis subuerti machinis, nullo impetu expugnari potest. Quantum enim facit ad
amoris and fidei stabilitatem, quod sciamus celsitudinem tuam non arbitrio
vacillantis fortunae, sediure haereditario, hoc est (...) dominationem and
imperium obtinuisse, nec Homericum tibi Iouem (...), sed verum illum rerum
omnium opificem and fabricatorem in manu^ tradidisse? ac propterea summam esse
nobis parendi necessitatem etiam diuinitus impositam, ne Gyganteo more (...),
vt est in fabulis, ipfique Deo sceleratissime bellum indicere videamur. Quid
cum perspiciamus quantis quamque diuinis rempub meritis aff^cerit celsitudo tua
vtiam ex innumerabilibus terris ac gentibus quae soli subiectae sunt, nulla,
non dicam, anteferrinobis, sed ^e comparari quidem possit. Non ad illam
parend^legem and necessitatem summam etiam oporter voluntatem accedere? Quid
enim referam vigintiiam totos annos in tanta nos pace, tanta tranquillirate
vixisse, quantam non solum haec aetas nunquam vidit, sed ne omnium quidem
seculorum ac gentium annals vetustatisque monumenta memoriae prodiderunt? Quid
commemorem long velut e specula prospectas tempestates, praeuisa simul and
anticipata censilio grauissima pericula, clandestinas insidias non tam vi quam
art obrutas, omnes denique nefari^s conatus maximo cum applausis extinctos,
nullo aut sane perexiguo mo^um populari? Facerent ista quidem vt qualiscunque
esses, omnem tamen fidem and beneuolentiam maiestati tuae libentissimis animis
praestaremus. I am vero cum mitissimam te and clementissimam principem
habeamus, quae in summa potestate constitut^ ne tantillum quidem ab aequitate
modoque recedis, quis est tam ferus ac ferreus, quem non ad omnem obseruantiam
tantae virtutis inuitarent? Quare si firmissima sit custodia principum fides,
subditorum, quemadmodum prudentissimos sensisse viros accepimus, quid potest
tutius esse and securius excellentia tua, quam tanta tuorum studia muniuerunt?
Extraxi longius orationem meam, Nobilissima Regina, vt paulo diutius frueremur
vsurae incundissimi conspectus tui, quem non fine maxima molestia grauissimoque
dolor amissuri sumus. Sed quia ferenda sors est quae vitari non potest, ne
profectionem tua^ plus aequo remorari videar dum obsequi studeo cupiditati
nostrae, finem dicendifacia^. Tuam vero Maiestate^ quam ex oculis nostris
hodiernus dies eripiet animis tame^ and voluntatibus prosequemur, absentem
semper intuebimur, legibus and mandatis studiosissime obtemperabimus, salutem
denique and incolumitatem tuam quae nostra etiam salus continetur, Deo Opt.
Max. assiduis precibus quam diutissime tuendam and conseruandam commendabimus.

Mr Limberts Oration, which had bin rehearsed at her Graces departing, but
that she set late forward in her Progress.
GEllius in his Noctibus Atticis (most excellent Princess) does write, that
it was the saying of Phaeuorinus the Philosopher, that the day was one while a
mother, another while a stepdame: and that he used this verse, long time
allowed, among men, in his accustomed communication, (...). Which verse
Gellius in this manner expounds: That of sorrows and pleasures there be
changes, that it cannot be well every day with us, but this day well, and that
day ill. And surely, that nothing has bin at any time more gallauntly or truly
spoken, both the continual course of man's uncertain estate, and the often
alterations whereto he is subject, manifestly declare, beside that, this present
day gives evident proof thereof. For, the most joyful coming of your
highness, did not so much recreate and comfort us in our daily desire and
longing, as we are discouraged by this your departing, whereto we see
preparation made on al hands. And as all ages and degrees received your
Majesty, with joy and gladness at your coming: so there is not one but
lamenteth and mourns at your graces going. And doubtless for my part,
because mine own heart is best known to my self, I protest that I never took
upon me a greater charge, then that, wherewyth at this present I am burdened:
not only to speak face to face with a most learned lady and princess, which
notwithstanding is, of it self, a hard and a busy matter: but, which is much
more, that to me is befalle^ the sad and sorrowful office of leave taking. For,
who would not be exceedingly grieved, to see the thing which he principallye
desired, in a very short time, and as it were (...), at an instant taken
away, before he might have thereof full fruition? How lamentable a thing is it,
to pull away sucking babes from the breasts and bosoms of their most loving
mothers? That sons and fathers, through some miserable misfortune, should be
sundered? Yet I notwithstanding am of opinion, that nature has not ingendered
in any man, such large love, and so great good will, no not toward them whom
they have begotten, or of whom they themselves have been begotten, as is the
love and good will wherewith we advance, obey, and reverence your Majesty,
being the mother and nurse of this whole Commonwealth, and Country. Great is
the force of friendship and familiarity, which oftentimes brings to pass,
that they, which either by some kind of fellowshippe, or by an accustomed
condition of life, in tracte of time have bin closely knitte, and so become
both of one mind, and as it were grown together, that hard and scant they may
be separated, and set in sunder. Hereof sprang the faithfulness of Theseus,
commended by the mouth and monumentes of all men: and the entier friendship
of innumerable more, who^ no dangers, nor labors, either by sea or land,
could sequester from their sweet society and comfortable company, with whom
they long had lived. And what desires, or what delights have any where bin
found, that may be compared with the sincere affection, and unfeigned good will,
which we bear to your Highness, most excellent Princess? These are not
sufficient shows of our faith and benevolence, which is much greater, than
that the eloquence of any learned man, or that the slenderness of my wit and
capacity may make it manifest. Nature at no time tied any thing with a
straighter knotte, or set several things at greater agreement, than the soul
and the body: a declaration whereof is, the incredible consent and concord of
the^ both, the mutual care and regard of succouring each other resting in the^
both: and the grievous departing, at the hour of death, the one from the other
remaining in them both. But we which profess Christian religion and
godliness, have learned this lesson, not only to love our country, but also
her highness, in whom the health and safety of our country consists, far
above the valiant Decij, the Scaeuolae the Curtij, which ventured their lives
for the Common wealth of Rome: yea, to love her grace much better than our own
lives. For, what is he that would doubt to dye for her sake, who if she were
not, he should be constreyned to abide a bondage much more bitter than death?
Neither is this faithful love of us your subjects (most excellent Queen)
lightly laid up in our hearts, and scarcely covered as it were in the ground,
but deeply rooted, so that by no storms nor tempests of Fortune it can be
shaken, by no engines overthrown, by no force or violence vndertroden. For how
much makes it for the establishment of faith and love, in that we know your
Majesty has obtained regimente and rule, not at the pleasure and appoyntmente
of wavering Fortune, but by right of inheritance, that is to say, (...): nor
that the Homericall Iuppiter (...), but that the maker and Creator of all
things delivered it into your Highness hands? And therefore a singular
necessity of obedience is laid upon us, even by God himself, least in Giant
guise as it is feygned, we set shoulder against God, and being at defiance with
him most wickedly, bid him battle. When we behold those excellent and
divine benefits, which your grace has bestowed upon the common wealth, in
so much that among many, yea innumerable Countries, and nations under the
Sun, none (I will not say may be preferred before us) but not so much as
one may be compared with us. Ought not then a singular love and good will to
be lincked with that law, and necessity of obedience? For what should I make
rehearsal of full twenty years, wherein we have lived in such peace and
tranquillity, as not only this our age has never seen the like, but as in
old records and aunciente Chronicles of all ages and people, is no where
mentioned? What should I call to memory hurlyburlies foreseen a far off,
as from an espyall: exceeding great dangers, not only perceived by wisdom,
but also prevented by counsel: secret snares, and privy practices
disappoynted, not to much by violence, as by policy: finally, all Treacherous
attemptes, and Rebellious enterprises, with great gladness and reioicing
extinguished, without any tumult at all, or very little (doubtless) ensuing
among the people? These things might make us (although your Grace were
otherwise than you are) perform all duty of faith and love, with most willing
minds to your Majesty. Now, for so much as we have your highness, our
merciful and bountiful Sovereign, who possessing principality and royal
regimente, do not swerve an hears breadth from justice and equity, what is
he for a man so savage and obstinate, whom these so singular and rare virtues
may not allure to all love and allegiance? Wherefore, if the surest safety of
Princes is the faith of their subjects (as we have heard very wise men hold
opinion) what can be more safe, what can be more sure, than your excellency,
which the studies and endeauoures of your people, being so great, have fenced
and fortifyed? I have made mine Oration the longer (most noble Queen) to the
intent we might the longer enjoy your comfortable presence, from the which, to
our great grief and sorrow, we shall depart. But because luck must be borne,
which can not be avoided, least I might seem more than is meet to delay your
Graces progress, whiles I am in hand to please mine own humor, I will make
an end. Concerning your Majesty, whose presence this day will shut from our
sight, we will notwithstanding in your absence behold and reverence, we will
love your Highness with all our hearts, minds, and endeauoures: we will
most dutyfully obey your Graces Laws and Commandments. Finally, your
Majesty's good estate (whereupon likewise our safety depends) we will
commend to Almighty God in our daily Prayers, that the same a long time may
be continued, and also preserved. Amen.

Ad Solemn nubibus obductum die Lunae. 18. Augusti. 1578.
SPlendide Phoebe redi, cur te sub nube recondis?
Innuba Pallas adest, splendide Phoebe redi.
Hasta minax procul est, non Gorgonis or a videbis,
Pallas inermis adest, splendide Phoebe redi.
Scilicet a tanto metuis tibi lumine forsan:
Ne superet radios foemina Phoebe tuos.
Pulcher Apollo tibi ne sit Regina rulori:
Ipse decore tuo vincis, and illa suo.
Euge redux reducem quia pulsa nocte reducis
Phoebe diem: toto est gratius orb nihil.
Haec pepulit tetri tenebras noctemque papismi,
Et liquidum retulit relligione diem.
Euge nigras nebulas radijs quia saepe repellis
Phoebe tuis: paene est gratius orb nihil.
Texuerant remoras discrimina mill Papistae:
Ne ceptum Princeps continuaret iter:
Nec tamen hunc nebulae potuerunt condere Solemn:
Quanuis tu nebulis cedis Apollo tuis.
Ergo iubar nostrum repulisse obstacula cernis:
Sic age, Sol nebulas lumine pelle tuo.
Splendide Phoebe redi, cur te sub nube recondis?
Innuba Pallas adest, splendide Phoebe redi.
Eiusdem.
SVstinet, ornat, habet, regnum, literaria, formam,
Prouida, docta, decens, Juno, Minerua, Venus.
Singula dona trium simul ELIZABETHA Dearum
Prouida, docta, decens, sustinet, ornat, habet.
Esse Deas lusi: Diuinam dicimus istam:
Quamuis nec liceat nec libet esse Deam.
To the Sun covered with clouds, upon Monday, being the. 18. of August. 1578.
IN shadowing clouds why art thou closd? o Phoebus bright retire:
Vnspoused Pallas present is, o Phoebus bright retire.
The threatening spear is floong far off, doubt not grim Gorgons ire:
Unarmed Pallas present is, o Phoebus bright retire.
Perhaps thou art afraid: And why? at this so large a light:
Least that a Woman should excel, thy beams (o Phoebus) bright.
Let not a Queen, a Virgin pure, which is, and ever was,
O fair Apollo, make thee blush: you both in beauty pass.
O Phoebus safe and sound return, which, banishing the nigh^,
Bringst back the day: in all the world nothing of like delight.
She, only she, the darkness drove of Poprye quite away:
And, by Religion, has restord the bright and lightsome day.
O Phoebus, with thy beams, which foylst the clouds both blind and black,
The world, in manner all, a thing of like delight does lack.
A thousand dangers and delays, the Papists had deuisde,
To the end our Princess should abridge, her progress entreprisde:
Yet this our bright and shining sun, cast light through every cloud:
Although in clouds thou art content, Apollo, often to shroude.
Thou see our Sun in comely course, cuttes off each stop and stay:
Do thou the like, and by thy light drive every cloud away.
In shadowing clouds why art thou closd? o Phoebus bright retire:
Vnspoused Pallas present is: o Phoebus bright retire.
By the same.
Her kingdom all by providence, Queen Juno does uphold:
And of Minerua Lady learnd, is learned lore extold:
And Venus fair of countenance, has beauty uncontrolled.
These sundry gifts of Goddesses three, Elizabeth possesses:
By providence her peoples peace, and comfort she increases:
Her learning, learning amplifies: her beauty never ceasseth.
I did but jest, of Goddesses to give them three the name:
This Lady may thou Goddess call, for she deserves the same:
Although she will not undertake, a title of such fame.
Gloria Ciuilis an bellica Mayor. Dialogus.
(...). PO^E. GRaecia Alexandrum, praeclaros Roma triumphos
Caesatis eximij, fortem Britannia Brennum
Arthurumque canit, Permul^os Anglia reges
Edidit inuictos summo quos aequat Olympo.

POLI. Ergo nihil maius? superant haec omnia laude^
Virgineae, semper mirabitur Anglia nomen
ELIZABETHA tuum, famamque ad sydera tollet
Donec brumali concrescet frigore tellus.
Donec and aestiuis candescet solibus ether
Tempora nulla tuae capient obliuia laudis.

POLE. Innumeras Macedo gentes sua sub iuga misit
Et totum qua terra patet fortissimus orbem
Imperio parere suo, virtute subegit
Et doluit quod non alius superesset and orbis
Quem bello peteret, rigidis and sterneret armis.
Quis referat, tua quanta fuit celeberrime Caesar
Gloria, cuitoties deuictis hostibus vrbem
Ingresso, proceres clar^s statuere triumphos?
Aurato quoties, curru deuectus in arcem
Romanae genti spectacula laeta dedisti?
Roma recens Brenni funestis ignibus arsit
Nobilis Arthurus Pictos dare terga coegit
Saxoneasque manus, f^cit iam regia virtus
Anglorum nomen quam formidabile Gallis?
O memoranda mihi bello quae fama paratur.

POLI. Vera quidem narras, nec enim mihi carpere lauds
Tantorum procerum magno discrimine partas
Nec vafre tenebras inducere fortibus ausis
Est animus, Per me constet sua fama cuique.
Sed qui iustitia firmant and legibus aequis
Imperium, Spaertamque suam conamine toto
Exornare student tutis and finibus vti
Quanto maiores illi meruere triumphos?
Iura celebrantur plusquam Mino^ia bell^
Quis non praeponet Solomonia regna paternis?
Praetulit ipse Deus, qui non sua templa Dauidem
Belligerum voluit manibus fabricare cruentis.
Pacificus sacras extruxit filius aedes
Qui iusto sanctoque sui moderamine regni
Clarus, in aeternum memori celebrabitur aeu^.
Quis non ante Numae foelicia tempora ponet
Romuleis bello rigidis? Quae denique possunt
Singula si lustres conferri secula nostris?
O memoranda mihi quae gloria pace paratur.

POLE. Sed me laurea delectat.


POLI. Me mitis oliua,


POLE. At pulchru^ multis dominari ge^tibus.


POLI. Esto
(...).

POLE. Fortis memorabile nome^
Magnanimique ducis toto clarescit in orb.

POLI. Exiguas quantum stellas radiantia Phoebi
Lumina, sublustres tenebras lux alma diei:
Ciuilis tantum superat prudentia Martem.

POLE. Vis dirimat nostram Critici sententia litem?
Non etenim lingua tecum contendere pergam
Cui pugnae est assueta manus.

POLI. Placet, ergo loquatur
Et statuat finem Criticus certaminis huius
Ambiguas docte nouit componere lites.

CRITI. Quisque suo trahitur studio, non omnibus idem
Est animus, iuuat hunc tranquillae pacis, at illum
Martis and horrifici delectat gloria belli,
Sed mea iam breuiter quae sit sententia dicam.
Foelix quilongo cruciatus membra dolor
Post multos noctu gemitus, suspicia luce
Amissas tandem vires animumque recepit.
Sed tamen hic quanto foelicior esset habendus
Languida si nunquam sensissent corpora morbum?
Cur geritur bellum laetae nisi pacis amore?
Quaesi consilio poterit, fatisque benignis
(...) seruari, bella facessant
Perpetuae mayor pacis quam gloria Martis
Si modo labe caret maculis nec spargitur vllis.

Stephani Limberti Carmen.

(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
W. G.

Ad Ciuitatem Norwicensem de Aduentu Serenissimae Reginae ELIZABETHAE.
ERgo tibi antiquae lauds, and auita resurget
Gloria Norwice, and veteris spe^ reddita famae est:
Namque tuos Regina lares faelicibus intrat
Auspicijs, clarumque tuae Iubar intulit vrbi.
Magnum numen habes, quo nil augustius vsquam
Sol videt, aut ingens maius complectitur orbis.
Illa suis magnum verae pietatis amorem.
Restituit, sanctamque fidem sine fraud dolosa
Reddidit aeternis e fontibus: illa tumentem
Aequantemque Deo semet Regumque Tyrannum
Fregit, and Inferno damnatum carcere mersit.
Perge pijs Animis dignasque euoluito grates,
Aduentumque sacrum Diuinae Principis altis
^udibus illustra, vocesque in sidera mitte.
Nempe facis: video motus vultusque tuorum
Feruoresque auidos, plaususque and anhela flagrantum
Pectora, sincerasque praeces, atque vndique vulgi
Laetitiam ingentem: neque enim haec sacra frequentant
Soli primates vrbis, lectusque Senatus,
Quin etiam populus, pueri, innuptaeque puellae
Exultant Animis: adeo vox omnibus vna est
Aduentasse decus Reg^i, atque hac vrbe coruscum
Illuxisse Iubar, magnamque in secula famam
Norwico partam, nullus quam carpere liuor
Aut violare potest, nostris non eximet aetas
Mentibus, aut nigra condet sub nube vetustas.
Macte animis, n^tat ista deus, meritumque laborem
Laudat, and obsequijs vestris studioque fideli
Attribuet longos, optatae Principis Annos.
Gul. Goldingham, Mag. Artis.


