A delicate Diet, for daintiemouthde Droonkardes. Wherein the foul abuse of
common Carowsing, and Quassing with hearty draughtes, is honestly admonished.
By George Gascoyne Esquier.

Tam Marti quam Mercurio.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones. Aug. 22. 1576.

To the right Worcester shipfull his synguler good friend, Jews Dyue of Broomeham,
in the County of Bedforde, Esquyer, George Gascoigne wysheth continuance of
Gods favor.
SIR, you may possibly condemn me of great ingratitude, who (having combred
the whole world with my thryftlesse works) have yet never remembered to
present you with any of them: And in deed your great friendship would
rather challenge at my hands, the pre-eminence of such pleasures, together
with the redoubling of greater good will, as God shall please to enable me.

But Sir, when my wanton (and worse smelling) Poesies, presumed first to peark
abroad, they came forth sooner then I wyshed, and much before they deserved
to be lyked. So that (as you may since perceive) I was more combred with
correction of them, then comforted in the constructions, whereunto they were
subject. And too make amends for the lost time which I misbestowed in writing
so wantonlie: I have of latter days used al my travail in matters both
serious and Moral. I wrote first a tragical commedie called The Glass of
Government: and now this last spring, I translated and collected a worthy
piece of work, called The Droomme of Doomes day, and dedicated the same to my
Lord and Master: And I invented a Satyr, and an Ellegie, called The Steel
glass: and The complaint of Phylomene. Both which I dedicated to your good
Lord and mine, the Lord Greye of VVylton: These works or Pamphlets, I esteem
both Moral and Godly: whereof although I presented you no Coppies, yet am I
not therein so blamefull as unhappy. Surely I must needs allege that I had
very few Coppies thereof my self: and yet of those few, I had one ready to
have sent you, the last time that my Brother John Dy^e was in the Cittye.

But at the very instant of his departure it was not ready: So that I failed
thereby of my determynation, and remain at your courtesy for the acceptance of
this just excuse, whereunto I hope the rather to persuade you, by presenting
this small pamphlet called, A delycate Diet for Droonkards, unto your name and
patronage, the which I beseech you to accept as a pawn and token of my
contynuing good will, I know you, and the world has always esteemed you, for
a pattern of Sobryetie', and one that does zelously detest the beastly vice of
droonkennesse: This small work is therefore so much the meeter to be
dedicated unto you: I present it, both for that respect, and for mine own
discharge: and therewithal the Coppies of the works before named: I did often
reveal, but never prevailed, in the errande which my brother John committed to
my sollycytyng when we last were together. I pray you accept my good will in
all things: and soon after Mgihelmas (by Gods leave) I will see you. The God
of our Forefathers continue his mercy and grace to us all, now and ever.

From my lodging in London, the. 10. of August. 1576. Your bounden and assured
George Gascoigne.

A delycate Diet for Dronkardes.
Whiles I trauayled in Translation, and collection of my Droomme of Doomes
day: and was busyed in sorting of the same (for I gathered the whole out of
sundry Pamphlets:) I chanced at passage, to espy one short Epistle, written
against Drunkenness. And though the rest of such Treatises, as I found in the
same Coppie, did carrye none express name of their several Aucthours: yet
this Epistle was therein entytuled: An Admonition of Saint Augustine the
Bishop, for the eschewing of Droonkennesse.

Which Epistle, both for the credit of the Aucthour, and for the tytles sake I
thought good to peruse: fynding the same compendious, and eloquent, as the same
Aucthour did commonly write.

But when I had thoroughly considered it, and therewithal had some
consideration of the huge enormyties, and shames which daily follow that
sin: yea, when I had fullye advised me, how commonly it is now a days
exercised amongste us: and how slily it steals into this Realm through
continual custom of cheering, and banqueting: I thought it should not be
unprofitable, nor any way unpleasant (unless it be to such as can not abide
to hear of virtue, for fear least they might be ashamed of their vice) to
add some Aucthoryties and examples for the more speedy extyrpation of this
monstrous plant, lately crepte into the pleasant Orchyardes of England.

And surely it is time (yea more then time) that we should foresee, and learn
to avoid, those Bermaydes of myschiefe, which pype so pleasantly in every
Pot, that men be thereby allured to sail into the Islands of all evil. And
there (being justly depryued of Gods grace,) are transfourmed into most ougly
shapes of brute Beasts.

And least I seem over suddenly to leap into my matter, and over rashly to
rail before good proof of reproof, let me set down this for my general
proposition, That all Droonkardes are Beasts: yea, let me not shrink to
affirm that not only, all common Droonkardes are Beasts, but even the wysest
counselor, the grauest Philosopher, the cooningest Artificer, the skylfullest
writer, and the most perfect of all sorts and Estates, if they chance at any
time to be infected, and contamynate with this Beastly vice, shall be (in that
doing) very Beasts also.

Mary, as there are on earth sundry sorts of Beasts, so seems it that this
Sorceresse (Drink) does also in her transformed Crewes, observe a wonderful
varyetie: For some men delyghting in her only for pleasure, and good
fellowship (as they term it) do no further exceed then into a certain
iocunde mirth, and dallyaunce: and yet therein also they chance most commonly
to give no small cause of offense. Then, this sort of Droonkards, I can best
compare unto Apes, whose peeuishe property, is to be delyghted with every
fond toye, and tryfle: and whose busy nature can seldom or never be
exercysed, without hurt or dommage.

Another sort of men, stepping a foot further, do fall unto brawlyng and
quarrellyng: not unlike to the Bears and Boares of the For rest, whose chief
delyght consists in pertycular combat with their own kind.

Another sort (of a more mallicious nature) will lie in wait (in their
droonkennesse) to entrap their companions with some disceypt. And such I
accoumpt (for all their cunning) transfourmed into Foxes, and wyly Wolves* What
should I speak of the Lecherous Droonkarde, who (like a^ Goat) will spare
neither Sex, Age, Kyndred, nor companion, in the fylthy heat of his lewd
concupyscence. Or of the proud Droonkarde, which (Peacocklike) does iet in
every street: Neither ashamed to show his vile vanytie, nor yet never abashed,
till he fall down in the channel, as the Peacocks pride is abated when he
looks toward his feet.

To conclude, they are all either boggishly drunk, and then lie vomitting and
belching with great grief, and greater offense, or else they become Asses, and
sluggishly consume in sleep, that Golden time which is lent us to use and
bestow to the honor of God, and for our own avail.

So that (as I said) I dare take in hand to defend this proposition, that
All Droonkards are Beasts. And since God has made none other so notable
difference between Man and Beast, as that he has endewed the one, and
deprived the other of reason and understanding: I thought meet both to
translate the foresaid Epistle, and also somewhat of my self, to write as an
Inuectyue, against this so perryllous a Thief, which so robs and despoyleth
men of the most precious Jewel and treasure which God bestows upon them. And
to begin with the Epistle of S. Augustine, the words thereof are these.

ALthough, my deerly beloved, I hope yt you through the grace of Christ, will
fear Droonkennesse, as you fear the pit of Hell: and that not only you will
drink no more then is convenient, but also that you will not compel or allure
any other to drink more then will suffice: yet shall you take in good part
this council of mine, because it can not be chosen, but that some will be
ne^ligent, and are not able to keep them selves sober. But you which do
always banquette soberlie, and temperately, take not this as spoken to your
reproach: for it is necessary that we do sometimes rebuke dronkardes.

Then whereas (well-beloved brethren) Droonkennesse is a great evil, and an
odious sin unto God: yet is it so grown in use, with many men through the
whole world: that with such as will not understand Gods commandments, it is
now taken to be no great sin: so that they mock and scoff in their
banquettes, at such as can not bear many Cups, and are not ashamed to bind
men by an envious knotte of friendship that they shall drink more then
behooves. But he which compels another man to make him self dronken by
often bybbing: it were less evil for that man, if he should wound his flesh
with the sword, then that he kill his soul by droonkennesse: And because our
bodies are earthly, eue^ as when there has been some over great dashe or
glut of rain continuing long, the earth is soaked and resolved in mire, so
that no tyllage can be made in the same: In like manner our flesh being made
droonken, can neither receive the spiritual tyllage, nor yet the bread and
food, which is necessary for the soul. And as all men do desire to have
sufficient and competent showers of rain in their fields and closes, so that
they may be able both to exercise tyllage, and to enjoy the plenty of their
fruits and increase: so in this field they should drink but so much as
^ehoueth: least by excess and droonkennesse, the very earth of their body,
(being as it were turned into a very Fenne and Quagmyre) may better serve to
breed Woormes and Serpents of vice and sin, then it should be able to
bring forth the fruits of charity. For all Droonkardes are even such as
Fennes and Marshes seem to be in all respects: you are not ignorant
(well-beloved) what grows in Fens: for whatsoever grows therein, brings
sorth no fruit, therein breed Serpents and sundry kinds of Worms, which do
bring more horror and dread, then increase of victual: Eue^ such are
Dronkardes, being fyt for no profit, or commodity: for oftentimes in their
droonkennesse they know neither them selves, nor any body else: neither can
they go, stand, nor speak any thing that pertayneth unto reason: yea,
oftentimes they are not ashamed to cramme up their stomachs, even to vomitting,
and quasse (out of al measure) by Cups of assise and measure: then he which
can get the vpperhande, desires praise of his foul and filthye fault.

But they which delight therein, do go about wonderfully to excuse themselves,
saying: I should use my friend but discourteously* if as often as I bid him to
my house, I gave him not as many Luppes as he would call for: But let him be
no friend of thine, which wyil make thee his enemy, and which is enemy both
to thee and to him self: if thou make both thy self and another man droonken,
thou may have that man thy friend for a time: but thou shall have God for thy
perpetual enemy. Then consider wisely, whether it be commanded that thou
should separate thy self from God, to join in league with a Droonkard.

And to conclude, do thou neither compel any man to drink, nor bind any man by
oaths to drink: but leave it unto his thoyse to drink as much and as little
as he lysteth: that if he will needs make him self droonken, he may perish
alone, and not both of you be cast away.

Let those which be incontinent and p^odigall in bybbing, consider with
themselves, if they be not to be judged worse then brute Beasts: for whereas
brute Beasts will drink no more then that which shall suffice them, they will
yet drink four times more then behooves: and that which might have served to
refreshe their bodies three or four days, with reasonable contentacion, they
strive to spend and rather to cast it away in one day: yea, would to God that
only the drink were cast away, and not they themselves also should perish:
But if we eschew this at any time, peradventure the Droonkards are offended,
and do murmr against us.

Well, though there want not such as will be so offended at us, yet by Gods
grace there will be many which (hearing this wholesome counsel) shall be
delivered from this so grievous an enormitie and sin: and they also which are
moved and angry with such as speak against their yoakefellowe* and lemmane
droonkennesse, and let them give me leave to pr^nounce this sentence with open
mouth: That whosoever delights in droonkennesse, And does not earnestly
repent and amend the same, but does remain in his droonkennesse, without
co^trition and reformation, shall doubtless perish for ever and ever: for the
holy ghost does not lie by the holy Apostle, saying: The Droonkardes shall not
enheryte the kingdom of God: And therefore as many as be Droonkardes, shall
do better, not to be offended with you, but with themselves: and let them with
the help of God, shake them selves out of the dyrte of dregs, or out of the
fylthe of droonkennesse, whiles there is yet place and time to repent: and make
all the haste that they can (by Gods help) to rise again. For droonkennesse
(even like unto hell) whomesoeuer it overcomes,) unless worthy repentance
do follow, and amendment also bear it company,) it does so stoutly challenge
them unto it self, that it suffceth them not (at al) to return out of the
dark pyof hell, unto the light of Charit tie, or sobriety.

Wherefore (brethren) whiles I put you in mind of these things, I do absolve
and discharge my self before God: and whosoever contempneth to hear me, and
is prone and prompte to bybbing, or will swear and compel other men at his
banquets to drink, shall be guilty at the day of judgment both for himself,
and for other men: Bea* and (that which is more abhominabe) some of the Clergy
which ought to forbid this, do them selves also constrain many to drink more
then is expedient for them. Well, let them begin to amend and correct them
selves, and then let them chastise others, that when they come before ye
Tribunal seat of Christ, they encurre not the danger of punishment for other
men's drunkenness, but rather that they may deserve to a^raine everlasting
reward, whiles they amend them selves, and cause not to chastise and correct
others also.

And this above al things I beseech you, and by the dreadful day of judgment,
I conjure you, that as often as you banquette among your selves, you do
banishe and spew out of your Feasts and meryments, (even as it were the poison
of the Devil himself) that filthy custom, whereby th^ee and three do use
without all measure, to drink either against their wyls, or at the least wit
hout any appetite to drink: for that unhappy and mischeuous custom, does yet
smell of the smoke of Paganism: and whosoever uses it, or suffers it either
at his own table, or any other company, let him not doubt, but that he makes
him self a sacrifi^e to the Devil, since therefore proceeds that not only
the body is weakened, but also the Soul is thereby wounded and slain:
Wherefore, I beseech God of his mercy, that he vouchsafe to enspire you with
such grace, that this so shameful and lamentable an evil and wickedness, may
become such an hortour unto you, as that you suffer it never to be committed,
but that you convert that to help and refresh the poor, which should have
been cast away in superfluous droonkennesse. And this by the help and grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the Father and the holy ghost, lives and
reigns God, world without end. Amen.

Hitherto the words of S. Augustine, in such sort as he wrote the said
Epistle: whereunto I mean now to add this short Treatise following, to the
same end and purpose that the said Augustine did write the same Epistle: And
yet do confess a truth, It is commonly seen, that as in all actiuities, or
common sorts of exercises, we strain curtsie, and refrain to show our
cunning, immediately after that any excellent man has dealt in the same before
us: least thereby we might sooner defect our own weakness, then better and
amend the doings of others: (yet when Apelles was present, meaner Painters
would not prease to take pensyl in hand: neither would Marsias well vaunt of
his gain in commendation, by striving to warble upon the Harp* which Apollo
had erst laid aside) so it may seem no less wonder, that I being a simple
writer generally, and perticularly (for Divinity) altogether unskillful,
would presume to take pen in hand, after so holy a Father as Augustine, so
profoundly studied, and so well adorned with skyll to endight, both pleasantly,
and pythily*

But for that my purpose and enterprise is not to contend in cunning, but
rather to consent in doctrine, not to strive in curiosity, but to agree in
uniformity, nor to hunt for particular praises, but to labor for a general
profit, therefore I am bold (in so honest a cause) to do my best: Beseeching
the Reader, neither to regard the vnpleasauntnesse of my Style, nor the
nakedness of my simplicity: but only to consider the necessity of my
reprehensions, constrained by the extremity of this beastly vice, which
Augustine in his time did so sharply rebuke.

And surely if our common custom therein practiced, did not much more exceed
in the superlatiue degree, then the shortness of this his Epistle before
rehearsed, does minister occasion of further treaty, I could have been better
contented to have kept scilence, then thus to have sowed a patche of
Chainlette, in a garment of Satin: One comfort (I must confess) I have
conceived, that I can speed no worse in this small travail, then a number of
learned and Godly teachers have done before me. Who calling and crying daily
against this horrible, and beastly custom, have the deaf ear turned unto
their spiritual admonitions, and are constrained (with great grief of mind)
to leave this swyni^^^ sort of people, wallowing in the dyrt and mire of their
most execrable droonkennesse. Such is the very nature and property of sin
generally (but of this sin especially) that where it once gets ye maistry
and vpperhand by continual custom, it hardneth the heart, blinds the eyes,
amaseth the understanding, bewitcheth the senses, benoometh the members,
dulleth the wit, provoke unto beastlynesse, discourageth from virtuous
exercise, makes lovely to seem loathsome, hasteneth crooked age, fostereth
infirmyties, defyleth the body openly, and wou^deth the soul unseen.

This is that Circe, or Medea, which can Metamorphose, and transform men into
ougly misshapen monsters, yea* the gallauntest peers, in^o senseless Stocks.
and mightiest Monarkes into brute Beasts. For was not Noah Genes. 9.
(even the chosen servant of God) through this beastly vice, so Metamorphosed,
that he lay in his ^ent uncovered, and showed thereby the secreets which shame
and nature forbid us to disclose? But what punishment fell upon his youngest
Sons posterity therefore? even a perpetual bondage and servitude, and in
like manner, what should we accoumpt Loath and his Genes. 19.
Daughters but Beasts, who in their droonkennesse, committed abominable incest
in the sight of God? Or what prevailed unto Sampson, the marvelous Judges. 16.
force and strength wherewith God had blessed him, to overcome so many enemies
in battle, (when wallowing in concupiscence, which is a cosen to this
loathsome vice) he bewrayed unto Dalyla the secreets of Gods mysteries, and so
became a mocking stock unto his enemies? of amighty Champion, he became a
mylksop: of a Giant a Gnat, and of a Patron and defendor, a Babe and a
weakling, ready to crave defense of others: suffering his eyes to be plucked
out of his head, and his body to be led about as a common skorne and pastime
for the Philistines.

Holofernes, in all the pomp of his Judith. 12. 13. 14.
pride, and in the very midst of his huge host and army, (being brought
droonke a bed) left his head in pawn with those whom he thought to have
subdued, and so discomforted his soldiers by the soddaine terror of his death,
that the poor Citizens of Bethulia, (whose people they erst determined to
have deuowred) could now boldly issue out of their walls, and put them to
shameful flight and slaughter: O wonderful exchange, the stout Chaptaine which
in his own blind imaginacion, thought himself strong enough, (with his
host) to have subdewed the whole world, was (through the shame full defe^^of
this beastly vice) conquered in the midst of all his force by one weak
woman's hand: I might rehearse sundry famous examples out of the holy
scripture, sufficient to terrify and withdraw any Christian mindfrom this
horrible and beastly abomination. But as I have partly begone with the best
and principal authority, so will I yet recite some examples out of Heathen
Authors, who wrote of the ages passed, and then consequently descend unto our
own age present: in which this enormity does so far exceed that (if dead
men might be called again) the Forefathers should not want sufficient cause to
woder at our impudency, who having not the cloked excuse of ignorance, and
lack of instruction, which the Heathen mi^ht (after a sort) aledge in defense
of their defects, are not ashamed to pro^^de and to surpass all ages, in so
loathsome and beastly a transgression: whereas in all Moral virtues, we can
nevertheless be content to come far behind them.

Alexander the Macedonian, who by his valiaunce and prowess, in less then
twelve years, conquered and subdued, Ill^ria, now called Slauonia, the City
of Thebes, with the Territories and Countries adjoining: yea al Greece, Asia,
Persia, and India, with the East parts of the whole world: being settled in
peaceable possession of his dominions, gave himself over unto vanity and
pleasures, and at the last to excessive droonkennesse: whereby he became so
obious unto his people generally, that they privily conspired his death, and
executed the same: So that they having respect to the excellency of his
singular virtues, and there withal weying that his overthrow came chiefly by
this detestable vice: I can not better term him then a mighty man,
transfourmed into a brute Beast. Apitius not contented to distemper his own
body continually with wine and delicate fare, and after much and great
consumption thereof, to find an hole in his bags. as big as five hundredth
four score and three thousand, fifty and four peun^s sterlings, did yet
infect the whole City of Rome, with poiso^ of y^ same abomination: which in
times past bad been a perfect Myrror of temperance to other Nations: but in the
end he beas^ly and most ungodly, did wilfully drink poison, and destroyed
himself, fearing lest the remnant of his substance would not minister
sufficiently unto the plotforme or foundation which he had laid in this
abominable bybbing, banqueting, and quassing: and what shall I name this man,
but a beastly Metamorphoser, both of himself and of others? Lucullus a famous
Roman, both for learning and skyl in Martial feats, after a number of great
victories, and exceeding Fame got by temperaunce in justice, and pollitique
government, did give him self over unto such an Epicures life, and soonke so
deep into the gulf of this odious enormity, that in th, end he lost his wyts
and memory, and with all his substance was like a child, committed unto the
charge and direction of others: and was not this a plain Metamorphosis? What
should I rehearse the Histories of Lucius verus, Marcus Bibulus, Sergius, and
sundry other Romans? who wallowing and delyghting in this beastly vice,
Metamorphosed themselves most monstrusly. For we must not think that the
ancient Poettes in their most famous works; did dyrectly mean as the
lytterall text of their Fables do import: but they did Clarkly in figures, set
before us sundry tales, which (being well marked) might serve as examples, to
terrify the posterity from falling into sundry vanities, and pestilent
misgouernments: and thereupon, they feigned yt Medea, Circe, and such other
could Metamorphose and transform men into Beasts, Birds, Plants, and
Flowers: meaning thereby, that whoseuer is so blinded in sensuality, that
forgetting his intellectual reasons, and the better part of his understanding,
he follow the appetite and concupiscence of nature, he shall without doubt
transform him self, or be transformed from a man to a Beast, etc. For what
greater imperfection can we allege in the most brute and savage Beasts, then
to follow sensual appetyte, unto al vain apparaunce of delyghtes? Nay, rather
we must confess that Beasts do by a natural enstincte observe a certain
mediocritie, in many things which do by extremity turn into vice: The
Beasts and Cattle. with Fowls, Fishes, and other such creatures, void of
reason: do yet covet or desire the act of generation, but only at certain
times prefixed, when nature does thereunto kindle and prouooke them. But men who
challenge a perfection above all other creatures, do beastly and more then
beastly, and abhominably delight therein, (nay, provoke and pamper the daily
excess thereof) to the weakening of their bodies, offending of their devout and
well disposed brethren, and high displeasing of almighty God:

The Beasts, etc. never or seldom do surcharge their stomach with more meat
then they may well digest, but men do cramme them selves with Cates, until
they be constrained to vomitte: Beasts, when they are stirred or provoked to
wrath and anger, do yet presently pass over the malice, without intent of
revenge: But men can reteyne a malice, years and ages: whereby the
destruction of sundry worthy famyllies has ensued. And now to touch our
purpose more perticularly: Beasts are satisfied with drinking once or twice a
day at ordinary and accustomed hours, but men are not ashamed to sit bybbing,
quassing, and tossing of pottes, whole days and nyghtes: So that a just
accoumpt of their lives being called, they may seem neither borne to do none
other thing, or else to have so guilty misspent their time, that the most brute
and senceles Beasts, are able to accuse them of sundry huge enormities.

By these and sundry other reasons, I thought not impertynent to name this
detestable vice of droonkennesse, the Circe or Medea, which Metamorphoseth, and
transfourmeth men into most ougly and monstrous shapes and proporcio^s: whereof
I have brought forth some examples out of holy scriptures, and others some out
of the Neathen Aucthors, which wrote the factes and gouernmentes of the famous
Romans.

But now if we consider our own age (yea our own Nation) the very chief
cause which made me prefume to add this small treatise, unto the Epistle of S.
Angustine, we shall find by too true experience, that we do so much exceed al
those that have gone before us, that if they might seem as men transfourmed
into Beasts, we shall rather appear as Beasts misshapen and changed into
Deuyls. And in this accusation, I do not only summon the Germans (who of
ancient time have been the continual Wardens of the Droonkards fraternitye
and corporation,) but I would also cite to appear our newfangled English men,
which think skorne to leave any new fashion (so that it be evil) untried or
vnfollowed. For now a days what Merchant, what Artificer, nay, what botcher,
or boongler, in any occupation, can be contented to enuite his friend to
dynner, or supper, unless he do his best, to give him a Cap of Magis (as they
term it) and beguile both the Coffer of their store, and the treasure of their
soul, with counterfeyts names to cloak their beastly inventions: Wherein I
note the vice so much the more dangerous, since they cannot deny, that they
are daily thereof both admonished and reproved by sundyr learned and godly
Teachers and Preachers: who painfully and zealously do exhort them from this
Quassing. Carowsing, and tossing of Pots.

But what amendment follows in many of us? surely I tremble to write it, and
it greeueth me sufficiently to think thereon, that in steed of reformation,
they scoff and taunt amongst them selves, in their banquets, saying: Friends
we are forbidden to Quasse, or to Carowse, and therefore let us use none other
drynking but a hearty draught: And having thus (in their own frantike
imaginations) cloaked their deuyl^she and damnable intent, they proceed ^ntyll
this new found hearty draught, be found flue times worse then their former
Nuassing and Carowsing: O gross blindness of heart: can impudent men think
so to deceive the almightye God, which sees the secreets of al hearts? no
surely, For he which dwells in heaven shall laugh Psalm. 2.
them to scorn: yea, the Lord shall vex them in his sore displeasure. Let us
but consider this one thing: in what ciuyll Realm or dominion, where the
people are taught and exercised in the commandementes and counsels of God
(England only excepted) shall we see the vnthriftye Artificer, or the
labourer, permitted to sit bybbing and drinking of Wine in every Tavern? or
what woman (even amongst the droonken Almaines) is suffered to follow her
Husband unto the Alehouse or Be rehouse? But it were folly to stand so much
upon these mean personages, who for lack of wit or good education, may
easily be enclyned to things indecent.

I would (for God) that our gentry, and the better fort of our people, were
not to much acquainted with Quassing, Carowsing, and drinking of hearty
draughtes, at many merry conuentions: would God that we learned not (by the
foreleaders beforenamed) ^^for your ^aistreesse and best beloved sake, pledge
me this Cupfull. etc.
to charge and conjure each other unto the pledge, by the name of such as we
most honor and have in estimation: Ah las, we English men can mock and
scoff at all Countries for their defectes* but before they have many times
mustred before us, we can learn by little and little to exceed and pass them
al, in all that which (at first sight) we accoumpted both vile and vyllanous:
The Spanish codpeece on the bellye: the Itallyan waste under the banch bones:
the French kuffes: the Polonian Hose: the Dutch Ierken: and the Turkey Bonnet:
all these at the first we despised, and had in derision. But immediately (Mutate
opinione) we do not only reteyne them, but we do so far exceed them: that
of a Spanish Codpeece, we make an English foo^eball: of an Itallyan wast, an
English Petycoate: of a French ruff, an English Chytterling: of a Polonian
Hose, an English bowgette: of a Dutch Ierken, an old English Habergeone, and of
a Turkey bonnet, a Copentank for Caiphas: In like manner we were wont (in
times past) to contempne and condemn the Almaines and other of the low
Countries, for their beastly drinking and quassing. But now a days (although
we use it not daily like them, for it seems that they are naturally enclyned
unto that vice) yet, when we do make banquets and merymentes; as we term
them, we surpass them very far: and small difference is found betwirt us
and them, but only that they (by a custom. rooted amongst them, and become
next Cose^ to nature as beforesayd) do daily wallow in a gross manner of
beastlines, and we think to cloak the filthiness thereof by amore honorable
solemnitye, and by the cleanly title of courtesy. The Almaines with their small
Kenish wine are contented: or rather the^ fail a cup of Beer may entreat
them to stoop: But we must have March beer, dooble dooble Beer, Dagger ale,
Bragget, Renish wine, White wine, French wine, Gascoyne wine, Sack, Hollocke,
Canaria wine, Vino greco: Vinu^ amabile, and all the wines that may be gotten:
Yea wine of it self is not sufficient, but Sugar, Limons, and sundry sorts of
Spices, must be drowned therein* to minister matter unto our vain delights and
to beguile our selves with ye bait which drunkenness does therein lay for us.
And all this must be covered with the cleanlye name of curtesy, and friendly
entertainment.

But give me leave (O Droonkards) to ask you this question, if by this
curtesy, and friendly entertainment of yours, a friend which is constrained
thus to pledge you, do chance to surfeyte, and to fall thereby into such
distemper, that he dye thereof: what kind of courtesy shall we then accoumpt
it? or what friendship can be found in such entertainment? yea, if he escape
surfeyting or danger of death, (which is seldom avoided in them that use
drinking vnmeasurably) yet if his former good fame and credyte be thereby so
much touched, that his grauest friends take just occasion to reprehend him, and
to withdraw their good wyls from him: shall he not have just cause to
condemn this curtesy as cou^terfayt, and curse this feyned friendship? At the
least, though his worldly friends wynke, and temporal death forbear him a
while, let him yet not think to escape the just judge meant of God, who
punishes the abomination of iniquity, unto the third and fowrth generation.
And in these three points, especially have I considred the enormity of this
sin: For that it weakeneth and endaungerth man's body daily, it impayreth his
credit openly, and wounds his soul secreetly. So that for mine own
particular opinion, I could wyshe that ( Italian or Spaniard like) we did
altogether banishe from our banquets, the common curtesy of drinking one to
another at all: not that I would see me thereby to condemn it (of it self)
if it be but temperately used, but because I find that the pleasantness of
the drink, and the infirmity of our nature do beget one draught upon another,
so that beginning with courtesy, we end with madness and beastlynesse. And
well wrote he which said, that the first Cup quenched thyrst, the second
enduced mirth, and rejoicing in heart, the third voluptuosnesse, the fowrth
droonkennesse, the fifth wrathfulnesse, the syxt contenciousnesse, the seventh
furiousness, the eight sluggishnesse, and the nynth, extremity of sycknesse.

But with us, nine dranghts: yea, nyneteene draughts: nay, sometime nine and
twenty do not suffice. And whereas the Forefathers gave no further warrant,
then for the second draught, and seemed to think that (passing further then
that) concupiscence straight ways crept in, we are not abashed to break their
bounds, and make concupiscense but a tryfling fault in comparison of our
beastly excess. For first to speak of sickness and infyrmities, what knows
be which takes the Cup in hand to drink unto another, whether he have as much
delyght to pledge, as he has to drink unto him? or whether the constitution
of his body, will so well away with excessive drynking, as his own will? then
must it follow, that if the Pledger be not of like disposition, the Bryncher is
guyltie of alluring unto sin: And if he were as forwardly disposed as he,
yet at the least he must be guyltie in styrring him to continuance thereof:
In like manner, if the Pledger be inwardly sick, or have some infyrmitie,
whereby too much drink (or drynking, when nature does not desire it) do
empayre his health, and shorten his life, then does the Bryncher seem to be
guyltie of his death: Yea, though he be of a lustye dysposition and
constitution of body, (considering the sundry sicknesses which grow upon
surfeytes) the Bryncher does at the least, put a naked Sword in a mad man's
hand: and is culpable both of his own transgression, and of his fellows
fault: this is then one branch of this droonken courtesy.

But to speak of empayring the credit both of himself, and his companion,
what greater shame can be showed, then to weaken reason and understanding,
which are the pryncipall gifts that we receive of God? to lee^ the power, to
guide or govern our hands? feet? tongue? and other members, which are lent
us of God, to serve him with honor? to bleare our eyes? puff up our face? and
to cast our heayre? which are the ornaments of nature, to be used unto the
glory of our creator? to build a kingdom for lust and concupiscence? to
chase virtue from our company? to bewraye secreetes? to become our enemies
jesting stock, and our friends cause of lamentation? to run headlong into
every peril, to begin like Apes, and to end like Asses? to give occasion of
strife like wrathful Boares, and to yield unto the slaughter like weaklings
and Calves? To conclude, I know nothing that may more impair man's credit,
then of a reasonable soul to become a brute and senceles Beast: and this is
the second branch of this courtesy and friendship which we use in drynking
and Duassing: Now finally to prove that it wounds man's soul, is evident, in
that almighty God has as well by his Prophets, as also by his Apostles, so
often and so manifoldly reproved and forbidden the same. And we must fyrmely
believe, that whosoever does wyttingly tra^sgresse the counsels or
commandments of almighty God, contained in his holy word, does manifestly
wound and hurt his own soul: in that he does aggreuate his original
imperfections, and render himself more and more culpable of Gods judgments.
For the Prophet Esai in his fowrth Chap. has these words: VVo be unto them
that rise up early to follow droonkennesse: now this word (VVo) in the holy
Scriptures is commonly taken for a grievous curse and threatening: but the
Prophet does proceed more plainly, saying: In their feasts are Harps and
Lutes, Tabrets, Pipes, and wine: but they regard not the Lord, and consider
not the operatiou of his hands: therefore comes my folk unto captivity,
because they have none understanding: their glory is famished with hunger, and
their multitude (or plentye) dried up with thyrst: therefore gapeth hell (says
he) and opens her mouth maruailous wide, that their glory, multitude, and
wealth, with such as rejoice therein, may descend into it: And again in his.
xxviii. Chapt. speaking of the proud Potestates, he says: VVo be unto the
crown of pride, even unto the droonken people of Ephraim, whose great pomp is
as a flower, etc. And speaking against false Judges and Teachers, he says:
They are out of the way, by reason of wine, yea, far out of the way, through
strong drink. And Solomon in his Proverbs has sundry passages against this
loathsome vice: as in the. xx. Chap. he says. Wine makes a man scorneful,
and strong drink causes a man to be unquiet: who so delights therein shall
not be wise. And in the. xxxi. Cha. he says: O Lamuel, it is not for Kings, it
is not for Kings (I say) to drink wine, nor Princes strong drink: least
they by drinking forgette the Law, and pervert the judgment of all poor
men's children: The Prophet Amos in the sixth Chapter, reproving the Princes
of Israel, for wallowing in vain delyghtes, reckeneth on the abomination of
a Droonkard, in these words: They drink wine in Bowls (says he) and annoint
them selves with chief oyntmennts, but no man is sorry for the affliction of
Joseph. Micheas also in his second Chapter, taunting and reproouing the
chyldishnesse, and ignorance of the people, says: If a man lie falsely:
saying, I will prophecy to thee of wine, and strong drink, that were a meet
Prophet for this people. And the Prophet Abacuc in his second Chapter,
seems to join the proud man and the Droonkard together, where he says:
Yea in deed the proud man, is as he that transgresses by wine, therefore
shall he not endure: because he has enlarged his desire as the hell, and is
as death: And in the end of the same Chapter he says: VVoo be unto him that
gives his neighbor drink: thou ioynest thy rage, and make him droonken
also, that thou may see their priuities: thou art filled with shame, for
glory: drink thou also, and be made naked, the Cup of the Lords right
hand, shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be for thy glory.

But to conclude this proposition, although I might here allege, very many
other textes of holy Scriptures, which do expressedly reprove this loathsome
abomination, I think it sufficient to recyte the words of Paul, in the sixth
Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, where (amongste sundry other
vices) he pronounces plain sentence against Droonkardes, saying: That they
shall not inheryte the kingdom of God: And in his fyfth Chapter to the
Galathians, and to the Ephesians, he repeateth (in manner) the self same
words. This is then the third branche of the fruits which grow by this
beastly vice, even the wrath of God, and loss of the heavenly habitation.

Now if these aucthorities, examples, counsels, and commandments, seem not
sufficient to terrifye us from falling into this swynish and filthye
abomination. I can do no more. but pray unto God, that some better learned,
and more eloquent then I, may (by assistance of his holy spyrite) be made able
to set down such wholesome lessons for the avoiding thereof, that the excess
and custom of the same, may generallye throughout all Christendom, and
especially here in England, be reformed: And the plagues and punishments by
him threatened and pronounced (by his clemency and mercy) may be withdrawn and
remytted: So that in all cleanesse and pureness of heart, we may praise his
name: To whom with the Son and the holy Ghost, be all dominion, power and
glory, now and for ever. So be it.

FINIS.

