A Particular and true Narration of that great and gracious Deliverance, that
it pleased God of late to vouchsafe unto the City of Geneua, namely upon
the.xij. of December last in the year 1602.

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed for George Potter and Richard Canter, dwelling in the
Popeshead Alley near the Exchange. 1603.

A true Narration of that great and gracious deliverance which God gave unto
the City of Geneua the.xij. day of December last, in the year. 1602.
SInce the year. 1528. that Geneua was freed from the government of their
Earl, al Christendom knows that sundry, diverse, and great enterprises have
bin practiced and attempted against the said City, and that by great persons:
some whereof inhabited the City, and some were Strangers.

And this attempted, to be performed one while by Traitors within, another
while by Enemies without: and the same both ouert and covert. Some whereof set
themselves only against the Ecclesiastical government, other some against the
Pollitique: and others seeking the overthrow of both. God notwithstanding
always preserving it as the Aple of his eye, in so much that as Israel
heretofore did upon good respect say, Many a time have they fought against me
from my youth up. Psalm. 129.1.2. So Geneua may at this time well confess, From
my youth upward they have attempted against me a thousand mischiefs; but yet
they have not been able to overcome or destroy me.

Yea, Geneua has often times found to be true the saying of David. Psalm.
34.19. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivered him out
of them all.

Yea, Geneua may testify unto us that to be true, which the Prophet says in
an other place: He that dwells under the defense of the most high God, shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Psalm. 91.1. especially it may profess
it more at this time, then at any time heretofore: It having a fresh (by
experience) tried, that the Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite
heart, and will save such as be afflicted in spirit. Psalm.34.18.

For, the Duke of Sauoy having resolved to surprise the Town of Geneua, by
scaling the Walls: that he might the more easily attain unto it, some few
days before, sent Master Rochette chief Presedent of the Senate of Chambery
to the Magistrates of Geneua, to let them understand that he was resolved to
live in peace with them, since it has pleased the French kings Majesty to
have comprehended them in the treatize of peace betwixt him and the King: and
that they might be sure that he would observe it inviolable in every point.

Nevertheless the Duke of Sauoy (an old and heinous enemy unto Geneua) did
depart from Thurin on Tuesday the.vii. of December, and arrived at a Town
called La-Roche, distant from Geneua four of their Leagues: where he had
three thousand men, some Spaniards, some Italians, and some French and
Sauoyers: who on Saturday the.xi. of the same month the same night, having
called unto him their chief Captains and Leaders, did discover unto them his
enterprise, exhorting them to behave them selves valiantly: out of the which,
he made choice of three hundred of the brauest and resolutest of them, to give
the assault.

From thence they marched toward the City of Geneua at one of the clock
after midnight, where they arrived about two of the clock in the night: the
Duke himself stayed some quarter of a League from Geneua.

Then Monsieur Dalbigny, who was his Lieftenant general (and the chief of
this enterprise) demanded, ministered, and received their Oath: That they would
live and die in this execution: he promising to be the first, to do the like
with them.

Moreover, he made them to promise, that they should not defile any Maiden or
Woman: nor fall to pillage, till they had received the signal from him.

This ended, they approached the Walls of the City, being favored with the
darkness of the night, a thick mist, and sharp wind, and caused his men to
cast into the Towneditch certain Faggots: on the which they raised three
Ladders, in a rank tied together. (It was in a place distant some fifty Paces
from the Sentinel, betwixt the Newgate and the Money-gate.) The first (being
about threescore in number) all Shot, entered the City. One of them feigned
himself to be the rownd, and went toward the Sentinel for to kill him: who
feeling himself hurt, slipped down from the Terrasse (which is a Hill of
earth) who being also favored with the darkness of the night and thick
mist, came into the City by the Gate (called Tartase) which is commonly open,
because it is within the Walls, and gave the Town the Alarm.

The Citizens hearing it, armed themselves straight ways: so that in an
instant, all places, bastions, and passages were filled.

But howsoever they used all diligence, it was impossible for them to hinder
the entrance of some three hundred of the Enemy, (which were as has been
said) all Captains and Commanders, men of authority and courage, armed from
top to too: as they understood afterward by the confession of certain
Prisoners.

The Enemy placed themselves in order upon the Walls of that quarter, in a
place distant from the Corpse du Guard some two hundred Paces, endeavoring to
possess the Newgate, and so to give entrance by their Petart unto their Men,
which stayed without at the Bridge-foote.

Coming near unto the said place with their Petart, he that carried it, and
should have fyred it, was killed by an Ambuscado.

The Gate (where there were but twenty and five men of the City) was lost and
won again three times: yet the Enemy was finally constrained to retire, by
the means of an Italian Captain called Brandano, coming from the Towne-house
of the City with some thirty Citizens: who with a great fury and courage,
fell upon them.

The Enemy seeing themselves thus put back, did seek to get the Gate called
Tartase: from whence they were repulsed by the means of the Corpse du Guard.
From thence they returned toward the Mony-gate, intending to force it, but all
in vain: for the Portcullis was let down, and the Chains up, and five
hundred Citizens were appointed to guard the heart of the City.

In the mean time, those of the City assaulted their Enemies through the
houses which were near unto the Walls of the City: but the Enemy gave
great resistaunce, and came still up by the Ladders, to the number of three
hundred: whereby their courage increased much, and fought valiantly; crying-out
as loud as they could (but especially a Trumpetter standing upon the Walls)
Viue LE'spaigne, viue Sauoye: God save Spain and Sauoy: the Town is won.

They forced two Houses near the Wall with two Petarts, and many of their
chiefest Men thereby entered the Houses, meaning thereby to gain the place
called La Monnoye: but suddenly they were constrained to retire, with loss of
men: For one hundred and fifty Harcobussiers, Musketters, and Pike-men of the
City, were sent to succor them: yea, the Women came with Halbards and
Swords, all resolute to die, or to repulse the Enemy, ere he should wax
stronger: which thing succeeded well. For the Enemy having perceived that by
the discharging of a Canon, that was on the Bulwark of the Newgate, being
charged with Chains and Nails, one of their Ladders being broken, and
betwixt thirty and forty of their men (which were coming up) sore maimed,
were greatly astonished, and none of them durst afterward come up: Those which
were got into the City, were also much amazed, and began to fly, hearing the
sound of the Retraite, running down with more haste then they came up: a part
of them did fall headlong down into the Ditch: the rest, being an hundred,
or sixscore, were either killed, or sore hurt: except thirteen, who being
taken alive, refusing to confess any thing, were hanged the same day,
notwithstanding their offering of great Ransom.

The fight dured from three of the clock to five.

At the break of the day the Enemy retired to Bonna and Roche.

Monsieur Dalbigny was at the foot of the Ladder, making show to come up: but
seeing al succeeded not well, feygned to have a qualme come over his stomach,
and so retired himself.

Amongst the prisoners that were hanged, were Messieurs de Sonas Schaffardon,
and Dartinac: their sentence was, that having in open peace attempted against
the City, they were not to be esteemed as Prisoners of War, but as Robbers
and Martherers: and that therefore they deserved death. Then was there a
Galhouse of purpose set up on the Bulwark of the Newgate, whereon they were
hanged in the afternoon the same day.

The dead (besides these thirteen) were about four score, besides those which
were drowned in the Ditch: and many sore maimed.

Among the dead, was the son of the Marquess De Lullin, the son of the
Marquess De Trefort, Monsieur de Cornage and de La Tour, Liue-tenant and
Aancient-bearer to Monsieur Dalbigny.

The heads of all the dead men were cut off, and set on Poles upon the Walls
where they first entered: their bodies were cast into the Rhosne.

The Enemy retired themselves to a Village called Etrenblieres, distant some
League from Geneua, carrying many of their dead and maimed men: amongst the
which were the Baron De La Valdisaire, General of the Footmen, and many others
of Command: and being arrived at Roche, and making a reuiew of their men, found
betwixt three and four hundred of them wanting.

The Duke caused four Captains (being Spaniards) to be hanged, for not
executing their charge, in assaulting of the town on the other side: which
being done, he himself rode post to Thurin.

Those of the City lost some sixteen men: amongst whom, was Monsieur Canal,
one of the Priuie-counsel, being three score and ten years old, Captain
Vandell, Mark Cambiago, Peter Cabriol, Masster Nicholas, Masson, Bandieres,
Debolo, and some others: and some twenty hurt.

The City was presently relieved with three hundred Swytsers of Berna, being
their neighbors and confederates, looking daily for more: Praising the Lord
for this great and wonderful deliverance: a singular continuance of his mercy,
that he laughing at their complots, had taken the cause of his people into his
own hands: and as a just Judge, discomfiting their Enemies, has made them
sink down into the Pit, which they had prepared for those that know the Lord,
and trust in him. Let therefore Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord is
mercy and great redemption.

OF all this Narration there is a double use, and he that has a sanctified
heart, shall (no doubt) profit by it therein.

First, we may see what affiance or trust is to be given to the words and
promises of the Popish and Spanish faction: of the which, the Sauoyard is not
one of the least limbs or members: and that should move us not to be so
ready to rely or rest upon their fair words and speeches, as some would
have us, but to carry our selves (if not suspicious of them, yet warily with
them: and the rather, because it is a received maxim amongst them, and as one
would say, an ouerruled case) that Faith is not to be held with Heretics,
such as they (unjustly) hold us to be.

Secondly, we may behold that great regard, and more then fatherly care that
the Lord has to preserve and defend them, that with godly sincerity and
singleness of heart, walk in the obedience of his whole truth: and that
should on the one side provoke us to be more zealous of his glory, then in
these cold and careless days many men would have us, and we are in deed.
And on the other side, it should stir us up with confidence of heart, and
assurance of hope, wholly to depend upon him: who, though for the trial of our
Faith, the proof of our Patience, the punishment of our Sins, and sundry
other causes, best known to his own Wisdom, he appoint us to be sundry
ways exercised, yet will together with the temptation, make an issue out of
the same, and provide a way for us to escape, as shall be most for his glory,
and our good: And this should be no mean comfort unto us, in the days of our
tryalles and tribulations.

FINIS.

