A New years Gift, dedicated to the Popes Holiness, and all Catholics
addicted to the Sea of Rome: preferred the first day of January, in the year
of our Lord God, after the course and computation of the Romanistes, one
thousand, five hundredth, seauentie and nine, by B.G. Citizen of London:

In recompense of diverse singular and inestimable Relics, of late sent by the
said Popes Holiness into England, the true figures and representations
whereof, are hereafter in their places dilated.

JACOB. 4. Vnus enim est Legislator and Iudex qui potest perdere and liberare.

Iura dat vnus, oues cuius clementia sparsas Colligit, and miserum discipat ira
gregem.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Bynneman. Anno Domini. 1579.

Ad Archipapistam
IF in the sight of Saints and men, Ingratitude be naught,
If friendly acts, with friendly me^, in friendly wise be wrought:
If interchanged Gratitude, be natures sole desire,
If good for good in man and beast, dame Duty do require:
If enterlaced Love be it, that joys the haughty mind,
If Bounty be the only badge, to virtuous wightes assignde:
If mutural trade in traffic aye, be still maintained so:
Ingratitude to Virtue then, must needs be greatest foe.
Who then can take a benefit, and not requite the same?
What virtue great did ever die without reward of fame?
Why should we then forget our selves, to him that is so kind?
Awake for shame, and at the least return a thankful mind.
Is it not much, that he should think to raise thee from thy fall,
And have a care to see thee safe, which is the Lord of al?
Oh humble then, thy haughty heart, cut of thy crooked scope,
Return again, and yield thy self unto the holy Pope*
Whose fatherhood has great regard, to win, that else were lost*
Who spares neither day nor night, nor any worldly cost,
To send a heap of heavenly things from royal Rome to thee.
Do turn the book, pervse them well, and mark the^ what they be,
And buy them whiles they may be had, and way not of the charge,
Their grace is great, their power is strong, their warrant very large.
For, health of mind and body both, they bring, and fear thy foe:
Each thunder, lightning, rage, and storm, they quickly overthrow.
And what annoyaunce is in man, they take it quite away.
And this is true, if al be true the Pope himself does say.
Be thankeful then unto the Pope, cast of thy care of wealth,
And gladly give thy glistering gold, to buy this happy health.
For so before thy corpse be cold, thy soul shall scale the sky.
And thou thy self shall be a Saint, or else the Pope does lie.
Then neither wey the Queen, nor laws, but cleave unto ye Pope,
And thou shall be his sacred son, adopted by the rope.
As Story was, and many more (I trust) shall be again,
Which God vouchsafe the obstinate, for Christ his sake, AMEN.
The Contents of the Book.
A Preface to the Reader, which shows the reason of the writing of this
Book. The Argument of a Book or Letter sent to Cardinal Poole. A Preface to
this Book, made by the Authoure thereof. The Book or Letter which was sent to
Cardinal Poole. The manner and means of the Popes beginning. The proof
thereof. Another touching the charity of the Pope. The lives of two Popes,
viz. Alexander the second, and Gregory the seventh. Exceptions against them.
A comparison betwixt Christ, and the Pope. The Popes Wares or Merchandise. Leo,
a child of noble house, and well brought up, grew wicked by being Pope. Pope
Vrbans present to the Emperor of Gretia. Lenuoy of the Author upon the said
four Popes. The poisoning of King John. The holy Maid of Kent. The exposition
of her miracles. How great enemies the Pope and his Legates have bin to
Christian Realms, and how he has bin expelled. Diverse letters Inuectiue
against the Pope.
A PREFACE.
THis little Book ensuing, was addressed to Cardinal Poole in Anno. 1537.
which when I had read, and well perused (knowing the impression almost
spente) I deemed it worthy a new imprinting, because it was written by two
ancient Fathers, and learned Divines, who vouched their authorities from the
sacred word of God. Alas, that Arroga^cie, which is mother of al mischiefs,
and direction to most heresies and treasons, the denial I mean of the
supremacy of the Queen, far surpasses all other Heresies and Treasons, and
without repentance, brings destruction of body and soul. Howbeit (the more
to be lamented) it is over rife in England, for it is not only ye opinion of
diverse old men, but of many young me^, which are destitute of learning, void of
grace, and ignorant of knowledge, and yet hold opinion, that the Pope is, and
ought to be the supreme head. What blind sort of evil disposed Papists be
they? nay rather, what Romish Rebels are they? which (contrary to the word of
God) had rather have a foreign Pope their head, than our most dread and
sovereign Lady, the Queens most excellent Majesty, whose Subjects
naturally we are, under whose obeisance we are borne, under whose protection
we live, and under whose mighty power (next God) we rest defended from all
foreign Enemies, in such sort, as by the laws of God, by the laws of
Nature, and by the laws of the Realm, we are bound to obey her, and none
other. These things considered, I can not but marvel how those Papists dare
so presumptuouslie extol that enemy of Christ, the Pope, as to call him Gods
Vicar on earth. What Pope has coniured them? or what Devil has bewitched
them, that they are so mightily affected to the Pope? and so slenderly regard
their natural liege Lady the Queens Majesty? Sure I am, that by denying the
Supremacy, they have brought themselves into Praemunire, and from thence grow
into farther mischiefs, from whence their holy Father the Pope, with all his
College of Cardinals, can not deliver them. And what else comes of this
Papisticall Religion, but murmuring, contention, strife, sedition, rumors,
lewd practices, and privy conspiracies, to put discord amongst them that live
in peace, and lastly open Rebellion, if they were able to bring it to pass?
For want of which ability, they now use Prophecies, Coniuration,
Nicromancie, Piromancie, and Calculation, whereto they attribute great credit.
They seek out Witches and Sorcerers wheresoever they may be found throughout
Christendom. Their determinations and elusio^s they hold in great priee, and
with their devilish crafts, they seek to delude thee, and all the Subjects of
the Queens most excellent Majesty. Wherefore, I wish all men to beware,
how they keep company with Papists: for even as the Lepres infect others
with their foul disease: so do the Papists infect many, with their
pestiferous evil council, and worse example. They resemble likewise the
venomous Toade: for as the foul Toade can not abide the sweet taste of the
fruitful Uine, so can not they abide the true taste of the doctrine of our
savior Christ, the flourishing Uyne of eternal life, but wrest the sacred
Scriptures, to serve their turns, preferring the Pope above Emperor and
Kings, falsehoode before truth, darkness before light, ignorance before
knowledge, a Mass no Communion, a Dirge no Sermon, a Concubine no Wife, Bulls
and baggages, before the sincere word of God. The figures of these are set
out at large in this Book, as in perusing thou shalt find.
And our English fugitive, runnagate Papists, which are beyond the Seas,
send into this Realm of England, Bulls, Pardons, Beads, Latin Primers,
Papisticall Books, Superaltares, Pictures of Saints, hallowed Graynes,
Crosses, Agnus Dei, with Saint John's Gospel in them: and three or four
drops of Balm, Font water, and of a hallowed Candle, done by the Pope, does
make all these holy Relics: so as (I think) if the paring of the Popes
nails were sent into England, it would be thought no small jewel amongst the
Papists. But let this pass, and see now what our home Papists send them
again. I weep to write: they cause, that many Gentlemen, and some of great
Worship, do send their sons to Doway, to the University of Louaine, to
Rheynes, to Paris, yea, and some to Rome, to nuzel them in Idolatry, and root
them in Papistrie. And great are the sums of money, which yearly go hence
for the finding and maintayning of those young Gentlemen: and far greater is
the charge which relieueth the Papists that are there, for the number is
great, and they are very liberally and bou^tifully rewarded out of England by
the Papists here: For many Papists sell their lands, and employ their great
sums of money in bank, contrary to the express word of God, The Jews
entered in the time of King William the Conqueror in Anno. 1067. and were
expelled in the reign of K. Edward the first. 1291.
as the Jews did in the time of King William the conqueror, and employ the
foul increase or usury thereof, to the relief of other Papists beyond sea.
Moreover, their Bulls, pardons, and such other needless, or rather damnable
baggage, trash, and trumperies, are over dearly bought, although indeed they
be nothing worth, nay worse than naught. For in the reign of Queen Mary, I my
self did know a Gentlewoman, that gave.xx. pound for a Bull that she might not
come to Church, yet was she as Catholic as the best of that sort: but the
matter was, for that the priest of the parish and she were fallen out. Truly
that Bull was a fit Make for a Cow, or her charity, and as well worth.xx.
pound, as an Owl is worth an ounce of fine gold: and even of that value be the
rest of his Bulls, pardons, and sanctimonies, and granted upon as great
considerations. For it is bruted by the Papists, that the traitorous varlet
Felto^ is canonized for a Saint at Rome, and so was Thomas Becket, a Prelate,
as traitorous, as Felton the Papist was: but Felton obtained the Popes great
grace, for the setting up of a Bull, which then was newly brought into England,
and for his reward, was fair hanged, drawn, and quartered (and had no more
harm:) yet that Bull begat many Calves, both Bull Calves, and Cow Calves,
which it is high time to wayne, for they make such a bleating, that no man
can take rest, or live quietly by them, unless peradventure they receive the
Bulls reward. And if it be true that Felton is Saincted, then is it for his
Treason sake. And what Traitor then would not love such a Pope as can make
Saints of Devilish Traitors? or who can but fear such a Pope, as can make
Devils of Saints? for with his holy pardons (if he lie not) he makes
Saints, and with his terrible curses (if he say true) he makes Devils, so as
Saints and Devils are at his pleasure. And the Pope can do more than this
too, for he can send Souls to Heaven, and take Souls out of Purgatory, for
that (as he says) is the bayting place by the way to Heaven, or to hell. And
what is that the Pope can (not) do? forsooth nothing at all: for as great is
his authority and power in making of Saints, as a Cobblers skill and art is,
to make Mappes of the whole World: And I believe there are as many Saints in
Heaven made by the Popes, as there are black Swannes swimming in the Thames.
But for all the Popes magnificence, and superabundant authority, I had rather
be a Collyer at Croyden, than a Pope at Rome, for in my judgment, it is better
to have a black body like a Collier, than a black Soul like a Pope, for
unless the Pope wash himself clean in the blood of Christ, with the drops
and tears of repentance, only trusting in the merits of Christ's Passion
(which he can not allow sufficient to salvation) he shall never see the joys
of Heaven, but in post have he must needs go to his second Sea and patrimony
in Hell, to the black feend Lucyfer his fellow companion for Pride, and whose
faithful Uicar he approves himself here: for as all men know, in Hell there
is no redemption. Now I conclude and demand, what foolish senseless Papists
are, they that believe the Pope can help them, where he can not help himself?
for we believe in God, who says, Subditi estote omni humanae ordinationi
propter Dominum, sieve Regi tanquam praecellenti. etc. Be subject to all humane
ordinance for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, Pet. Epist. 1* Cap. 2*
or to the most excellent. etc. making the King to be most excellent under God,
by which words of Saint Peter, it is manifest that Peter did not challenge to
himself any primacie: why then should we yield it to the Pope, that only
chale^geth (and yet wro^gfullie) to be the successor of Peter? No no, it is the
right, and next God, belongs to our most dread sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty (whom God long preserve) and to none other, through all, or any her
Highness Realms or Dominions. And again, by special provision or Praemunire
Anno. 16. Rich. 2. ca. 5. it is set down, that such as purchase or pursue in
the Court of Rome Bulls, Instruments, or such like, shall be out of the
Queens protection: yet, notwithstanding that both the Laws of God and Man are
against it, Papists will be Papists, speed as they speed may. Whereto I
pray thee (gentle Reader) have a special regard, and amongst the rest, mark
our double faced Papists, which Ianus like, in Court, and elsewhere, do
make their boast to be the Queens Majesty's faithful subjects, comparable
with the best Protestants: but when it commes to the trial and touchstone, to
know what they think of the Supremacy, then they cleave to the Pope, having
no fear of God, no love to the Queen, nor no dread of justice: for in denying
the Supremacy, they take from the Queens Highness her Majesty, regal
authority, and the due obeisance which she ought to have of her Subjects* and
most trayterouslie they renounce their faith, loyalty, service, and obedience,
which they owe to her excellency, so as they make themselves quick
sacrifices to the Devil, and manifest Traytoures to ye Queen. For to say the
truth, Papists were the cause of the last Rebellion in the North, which was
the overthrow of the auntiente house of Westmerlande, and the death of the
Earl of Northumberlande, and many other, as Norton, Markamvielde, and others,
which have steyned themselves with Treason, and undone their houses for ever.
There were also at that time many Bayliffes and Constables, to the number of
three hundred or upward hanged, which well deserved it, in that they
commanded men in the Queens name, to go to that Camp, the Camp where the
Rebels lay. But Northern men may say, that evil is that camping where the
Gallows winnes the Goal. These things will not be forgotten in the North
parts these hundredth years. And therefore take heed Papists, and think
that Northern men will not Rebel, for they have paid for their learning. You
may not vaunt as you were wont to do, saying, you were sure that all the
North would take your parts, for if you make your reckning so, you reckon
without your host, for neither Lords nor Lurdeynes can raise them, without
commandment from the Prince. Therefore (good Subjects) vouchsafe to read
this little Book, whereby you may learn to obey the Queens Highness truly,
and to detest the Popes feigned holiness utterly.

This little Book or Letter, was written in Anno 1537. and in the thirtith
year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord of famous memory, King HENRYE
the eight, at what time Reginalde Poole was made Cardinal, for Cosma and
Damian, by Paul the third, Bishop of Rome: so as the Papists can not mislike
it for the novelty, for it carries some antiquity, and was written above
forty years sithence. Thus for my part, I fare like him which has found a
Purse or Capcace of another man's, and then like a plain true dealing man,
makes inquiry who is the owner of it. Even so do I cause this little Book
to be new Printed, that the right owners may be known. And sithence they be
dead long ago, that the Queens good Subjects may have it amongst them, as
the authoures meante it in their life time. And thus I end, praying God to
endue her Majesty with perfect health and all felicity, long and
triumphantly to reign and rule over us, and to turn the hearts of Papists,
and to make them all good Subjects, to the glory of God, and strength of the
Realm. Amen.

w. w.

The Argument of the foresaid Book or Letter commended unto thee.
The Aspiring mind, causd Reynold Poole to swerve,
And to become a Traitor to the King,
Troth tryes it out, and law and justice bring
Unto his mates such death as they deserve:
He quakes for fear, and through the Seas does carue
To Rome, and there is by the holy Pope
Made Cardnall, and obteynes a larger scope.
With might and main Poole then the Pope does serve,
And says the King may not be supreme head:
Two learned men which do lament his fall,
Send him this Book, that folly to forbid.
Yet he (God wot) regards it not at all,
But like an Ass, does for a Scarlet hatte,
Forsake his God, his King, and Country flat.
( B.G.)

B. G. To the Reader.
THou see (right gentle Reader) in the fourteen short lines last before
written, the argument of the Book or Letter which was written to Cardinal
Poole, which my right Worshipful and approved good friend, when he had
perused, and ioyed to see and read, desired greatly to perticipate his
benefit unto thee, chiefly because the weed which at that time choked the
minds of the subjects of the triumphant King of immortal memory, Henry the
eight, our late Sovereign Lord, touching the Supremacy, now eftsoons
breaks forth, to the intolerable annoy of the dear and loving subjects of
our most dread, natural, and sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God,
Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defendor of the faith, and in earth
of the Church of England and Ireland next and immediately under Christ, the
sole, and alonely supreme head, the daughter and undoubted heir of her said
late father, King Henry the eight. But what have I said? Supreme head in earth,
of the Church of England and Ireland next under Christ? Yea forsooth, what make
you then of the Popes holiness may be your demand: I answer, that I make of
the Bishop of Rome (so far forth as he be a Christian, and the servant of
God) the like and as large account for his circuit (though not with so great
duty, because I am an Englishman, and not of his Dioces) as I make of any
Bishop in England within his jurisdiction, under our said Sovereign Lady,
so long as the same Bishop of Rome keeps him within his compass, and
acknowledges himself subject to the King of that Territory: but so far
forth, as he stands harlot like upon the type of his worldly pomp, I take
him to be that Antechrist, which Paul calls the man of Sin, and child of
perdition. You may further ask me, how if the Pope himself be King there? I
answer, that how if, with how if not: for if Christ, whose Uicar on earth the
Pope claymeth to be says, John. 18. My Kingdom is not of this world: the Pope
(if he be not Antechrist) can not have kingdom in this world. Me thinks I see
the Papist smile in his sleeue (for in deed he is a smooth faced fellow) at
this my simple conversion, saying, that I have framed a goodly argument, that
is, because the Kingdom of Christ is not of the world, therefore the Popes
holiness may not be a King in Christendom, as if it should be said, because
ye Kingdom of HENRYE the eight reached not over Europe, therefore ELIZABETH his
right heir, may not be Queen of England and Ireland. Let me smile with him
again (I pray you) for I will yield him that Kingdom in Christendom, which
Christ did wear the earthly Crown of: let him likewise yield to every King
royalty in his own Kingdom. That I will yield it, the Papist laugheth
again, and so must I to, for in deed, for me to yield to the Pope a
terrestiall Crown in earth, and for the Pope to yield unto me a celestial
Crown in Heaven, have both like warrant, and like folly, and may be equally
laughed at, if damnable things include jest: for I, without treason to my
Prince, can not think the one, nor he, without Treason to Christ, grant the
other: for Christ has reserved the Spiritual Supremacy of his universal
Church unto himself, and the terrestiall government of his people to earthly
Princes, under whom they are governed, and tried as gold in the furnace: and
happy is that land and people, which have a godly Prince on earth, to bear
the sway, and have Supremacy here next under God: and amongst the happyest,
we Englishmen most happy, in our gracious Queen ELIZABETH, whose life and
Supreme gouernemente, I beseech the almighty Lord long to continue over us.
And the same God, for his Christ's sake, has bestowed that supremacy on our
Queen within her own Realms, which the Pope falsely chalengeth, through all
Christian Regions. For there is no power but of God, and therevppon Saint
Peter says in his first Epistle to the Romans, the second Chapter, as in
the former Preface is alleged, Be ye subject to all humane ordinance for the
Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as to the most excellent. etc. Now
if the King be most excellent, who may be his supreme? If Peter (whose
successoure the Pope claymeth to be) does put it from himself to the King,
how then can the Pope without shame, challenge it? sithence in the spirit of
truth, Peter (foreseeyng the Pride of the Pope) seemed, before any Pope was, to
forewarne of the incomprehensible Pride of the same Pope.

Thou may ask of me, by what authority the Kings of the earth hold this
supremacy? I say, the words of Saint Peter grant it. Thou say again,
that text is often alleged. I answer, this little Book following will
show thee many other authorities, and to that purpose it is imprinted again.
But because thou shalt not run empty so far, let me demand of thee a
question or two. Who delivered to the Israelites the Law of God? Aaron the
Priest thou will say, and true. Of whom did Aaron receive it? of Moses
thou know. And of whom did Moses take it? even from the holy hand of
Almighty GOD. When Idolatry fell amongst the Israelites, who redressed it?
not Aaron I warrante you, but Moses? who directed the Ark of God I pray you?
no Priest of them all I assure thee, but King David himself. And thus from
time to time, and at all times, the King from the hand of God, and the Priest
from the King, receives authority. Vnus est enim Legislator and Iudex, qui
potest perdere and liberare. For there is one Lawgiuer, which can destroy and
save. He will not vary, his word is permane^t. He has appointed al earthly
power to the Kings of the earth, and their hearts are in his hand. Then read
this little book, and be fully satisfied in the premises. But because the
gravity of the Authors, only admonish an Archtraytor to renounce his folly,
and again, to become subject to his liege sovereign Lord, whose bounty the
traitor had largely felt, and whose liberalitye he had with treachery
requited: I summon thy deep judgment, perfectly to ponder both the one and
the other, and to satisfy thy self in that, which the touchstone of truth,
the sincere word of God, shall be thy warrant in, and give me leave, sithence
my calling claymeth not so sage direction, to touch his Papacy, and the
paltrie thereof, in playner terms, without Praemunire: for I promise thee, I
will observe the lymits of humanity, to my uttermost endeavor, and will not be
long in that I will write, read them as thou likest, and way the^ as thou will, always remembering, yt the mark thou must hit, is set and fully expressed
in this book, and the rest is but a work gathered by a less skillful
workman, only set down, because an old matter shall not come out, without some
new addition. I make no argument of my work, because I will not stand long
upon any one thing: neither do I will thee to read more than thou well likest
of, because ye old work is it, which only is commended to thee. But if thy
gravity will permit thee, thou shalt find in some of my pamphlets matter to
delight thee, and yet not digressing from the pretended purpose. If from the
same y^ falsehood of the Pope be any thing at al detected, my labor is not
lost. If Christ be at all glorified, I have won a conquest. If thou accept
it, I have to thank thee, and am hereafter at thy request, to do for thee what
I can. In ye mean space I commend thee to the almighty, and pray thee and
all men to rest humble peticioners to the everlasting God, to length ye
prosperous reign of our most merciful Queen his servant and our supreme
sovereign on earth, in perfect health of body and Soul, twice natures course
to rule and reign over us. AMEN.

A LETTER WRITten by Cutbert Tunstall, late Bishop of Duresme, and John
Stokesley, sometime Bishop of London, so acknowledged and confessed by the said
Cutbert, about 14. days before his departure out of this his natural life, in
presence of the most Reverend Father in God, Matthew the^ Archbishop of
Caunterbury and others, which letter was sent by the same two Bishops, to
Reginald Pole Cardinal, being then at Rome, and sometime Archbishop of
Caunterbury.
FOR the good will that we have borne unto you in times past, as long as you
continued the kings true subject, we cannot a little lament and mourn, that
ye neither regarding the inestimable kindness of the Kings highness
heretofore showed unto you in your bringing up, nor the honor of the house
that ye be come off, nor the wealth of the Country that ye be borne in,
should so decline from your duty to your Prince, that ye should be seduced
by fair words and vain promises of the Bishop of Rome, to wind with him:
going about by all means to him possible, to pull down and put underfoot
your natural Prince and Master, to the destruction of the Country that has
brought you up, and for a vain glory of a red Hat, to make your self an
instrument to set forth his malice, who has styrred by all means that he
could, all such Christian Princes as would give ear unto him, to depose the
Kings highness from his kingdom: and to offer it as a pray to them yt should
execute his malice, and to stir, if he could, his subjects against him, in
stirring and nourishing rebellions in his realm, where the office and duty
of all good Christian men, and namely of us that be Priests, should be, to
bring al co^motion to tranquillity, all trouble to quietness, all discord to
concord, and in doing the contrary, we show our selves to be but the
ministers of Satan, and not of Christ, who ordained al us yt be Priests, to
use in all places the legation of peace, and not of discord. But since that
cannot be undone that is done, second it is to make amends, and to follow ye
doing of ye prodigal son spoken off in ye Gospel: who returned home to his
father, Luke. 15.
and was well accepted, as no doubt ye might be, if ye will say as he said, in
knowledging your folly, and do as he did, in retourning home again from your
wa^dering abroad in service of them, who little care what come of you, so yt
their purpose by you be served. And if you be moved by your conscience, that
you cannot take the king our Master as Supreme head of the Church of England,
because ye Bishop of Rome has heretofore many years usurped ye name
universally over all the Church, under pretense of the Gospel of Matthew, Mat.
18.
saying: Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. Surely that text, many
of ye most holy and ancient expositours, wholly do take to be meant of the
faith then first confessed by the mouth of Peter, upon which faith, confessing
Christ to be the son of God, the Church is builded, Christ being the very
lowest foundation stone, whereupon both the Apostles themselves, and also the
whole faith of the Church of Christ, by them preached through the world, is
founded and builded, and other foundation none can be, but yt only, as S. Paul
says. Fundamentum aliud, etc. No other foundation can any man lay, 1. Cor. 3.
besides that which is Christ Jesus. And where ye think yt the gospel of Luke
proves ye same authority of ye Bishop of Rome, Luke. 22.
saying* Rogaui pro te Petre, vt non deficiat fides tua, and tu^ aliquando
conuersus, confirma fratres tuos. Peter I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
should not fail: and thou being once converted, confirm thy brothers. Surely
that speaks of the fall of Peter, known to Christ by his godly presence,
whereof he gave him an ynckling, that after the time of his fall, he should not
despair, but return again and confirm his brethren, as he ever, being most
fervent of them, was wont to do. The place does plainly open it self, yt it
cannot be otherwise taken, but this to be ye very meaning of it, and not to be
spoken but to Peter. For else his succescours must first fail in the faith,
and then convert, and so confirm their brethren. And whereas ye think that
this place of ye gospel of John. Pasce oues meas, Feed my sheep, was spoken
only to Peter, which words make him shepherd over all, and above all: S.
Peter himself testifies the contrary in his canonical Epistle, where he
says to all Priests: Pascite qui in vobis est gregem Christi, 1. Petri. 5.
feed the flock of Christ which is among you, which he bad them do by the
authority that Christ had put them in, as follows, Et cum apparuerit
princeps pastorum, percipietis immercessibilem aeterne gloriae coronam. And
when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive the incorruptable
crown of eternal glory. The same likewise Saint Paul in the Acts
testifies, saying: Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, in quo vos posuit
spiritus sanctus, Act. 20.
regere Ecclesiam Dei, Give heed to your self and to the whole flock, wherein
the holy Ghost has set you to govern ye Church of God. Wherein the original
text, the word signifying Regere, to govern (...), the same word that was
spoken to Peter, pasce, feed, for it signifies both in the Scriptures. And
that by these words he was not made and constituted shepherd over all, it is
very plain by the fact of S. Peter which durst not enterprise much
conversation amongst the Gentiles, but eschewed it as a thing unlawful, and
much rather prohibited than commanded by Gods law, until he was admonished
by the revelation of the sheet full of diverse viandes mentioned in the Acts
of ye Apostles, where if Christ by these words. Pasce oues meas, Feed my
sheep, had given such an universal governance to Peter, then Peter being more
fervent then other of the Apostles, to execute Christ's commandment, would of
his own courage have gone without any such new admonition, to Cornelius:
except peradventure you would say, that Peter did not understand the said
words of Christ, for lack of the light, which these latter men have obtained
to perceive, and thereby understand the words of Christ to Peter, better than
Peter himself did. And strange also it were, to condemn Peter, as an high
traitor of his Master, after his ascension (as he in deed were worthy) if his
Master had signified unto him that ye Bishops of Rome, by his dying there,
should be heads of all the church, and he knowing by these words, Pasce oues
meas, Feed my sheep, notwithstanding his Masters high legacy and
commandment, yet would flee, as he did from Rome, until his Master
encountering him by the way with terrible words, caused him to return. And
because this history peradventure might not weigh against an obstinate mind to
ye contrary, what shall we say to ye words of S. Ambrose, declaring and
affirming as great and as ample primacie to Paul, as to Peter, upon these
words of Paul? Qui operatus est Petro, etc. he yt wrought for Peter, etc. Thus
he writes. Petrum solum nominat, and sibi comparat, quia primatum ipse
acceperat, ad funda^dum ecclesiam: se quoque pari modo electu^ vt primatum
habeat in funda^dis Ecclesijs Gentium. Et paucis interiectis. Ab hijs itaque
(videlicet apostolis) qui inter caeteros clariores erant probatu^ dicit Paulus
donum quod accepit a Deo, vt dignus esset habere primatum gentium, sicut
habebat Petrus in praedicatione circumcisionis. Et sicut dat Petro socios viros
egregios inter Apostolos, ita sibi iungit Barnabam, qui diuino iudicio ei
adiunctus est: gratiam tamen primatus sibi soli vindicat concessam a Deo, sicut
and soli Petro concessa est inter Apostolos, deteruntque sibi inuice^ dexteras,
etc. Et Paulo post. Quis auderet (inquit Ambrosius) primo Apostolo resistere,
nisi alius talis, qui fiducia electionis suae sciens se non imparem, constanter
improbaret quod ille sine consilio fecerat? Which may thus be englished: He
names Peter only, and compares him to himself, for he received a Primacie
to build a Church, and that he in like sort was chosen to have a Primacie in
buylding the Churches of the Gentiles. And shortly after it follows. Of the
Apostles, he says, his gift was allowed which he had received of God, that he
might be found worthy to have the Primacie in preaching to the Gentiles, as
Peter had in preaching to the Jews. And as he assigned to Peter for his
companions, which were the chosen men amongst the Apostles, even so also does
he take to himself Barnabas, who was joined unto him by Gods judgment: yet
did he challenge still to himself alone the prerogative of Primacie which God
had granted him, as to Peter alone was it granted among other of ye Apostles.
So that the Apostles of the Circumcision gave their hands to the Apostles of
the Gentiles, to declare their concord in fellowship, that either of them
should know that they had received the perfection of ye spirit in the
preaching of the Gospel, and so should not need either other in any matter. And
shortly after, who should dare resist Peter ye chief Apostle, but an other
such a one, which by the confidence of his election might know himself to be
no less, and so might reprove boldly that thing, which he inconsideratly had
done, etc. This equality of dignity of Paul, which S. Ambrose affirms by
Scripture to be equally committed to Peter and Paul* Saint Cyprian and Saint
Hierome do extend to all the Apostles. Cyprian saying thus: De simplicitate
clericorum.
Hoc erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio
praediti, and honoris and potestatis. Undoubtedly, all the rest of the Apostles
were the same that Peter was, endewed with like equality of honor and power.
And Saint Hierome thus: Cuncti Apostoli claues regni coelorum accipiunt, Contra
Iouiniu^
and ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo fundatur: All the Apostles received
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and upon them as indifferently and
equally is the strength of the Church grounded and established. Which Saint
Hierome also as well in his commentaries upon the Epistle to Titus, as in his
Epistle to Euagrius, shows that the Premacies long after Christ's ascension
were made by the devise of men, where before Communi clericorum consilio,
singulae Ecclesiae regebantur etiam Patriarchales: By the common agreement of
the Clergy every of the Churches were governed, yea the Patriarchal Churhes.
The words of S. Hierome be these. Sciant ergo episcopi se magis ex
consuetudine quam dispensationis Dominicae veritate, Cap. 1. super. Titum.
presbyteris esse maiores: Let the Bishops understand, that they be greater
than other priests, rather of custom, than by the virtue and verity of the
Lords ordinance. And in his Epistle to Euagrius he has ye like sentence, and
adds thereunto: Vbieumque fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, sieve
Constantinopli, etc. Wheresoever a Bishop be, either at Rome, or at Eugubin, or
at Constantinople, etc. he is of all one worthiness, and of all one
priesthood. And that one was elected which should be preferred before other, it
was devised to the redress of schisms, least any one challenging too much to
themself, should rent the Church of Christ. These words only of Saint
Hierome, be sufficient to prove, that Christ by none of these three texts
(which be all that you and others do allege for your opinion) gave to Peter
any such superiority, as the Bishop of Rome by them usurps. And that Peter
nor no other of the chief Apostles did vendicate such Primacie or
superiority, but utterly refused it, and therefore gave pre-eminence above
themselves to one, that though he be sometimes called an Apostle, yet he was
none of the xij. as Eusebius in the beginning of his second book called
Historia ecclesiastica, does testify, alleging for him ye great and ancient
Clearke Clementem Alexandrinum, saying thus: Petrus, Iacobus, ac Johannes, post
assumptionem saluatoris, quamuis ab ipso fuerant omnibus pene prelati, tamen
non sibi vendicarunt gloriam, sed Iacobum qui dicebatur Iustus, Apostolorum
Episcopum statuunt: Peter, James, and John, after Christ's ascension into
heaven, although they were by him preferred well ny before al other, yet they
challe^ged not that glory to themselves, but decree^ that James, who was called
Iustus, should be chief Bishop of the Apostles. By these words it is clear,
that James was ye Bishop of the Apostles, not because as some men do gloss, he
was elected by the Apostles, but because he had thereby Primacy and honor of a
Bishop in Jerusalem, above the rest of the Apostles. And one thing is
especially to be noted, and also meruayled at, that the Bishops of Rome do
challenge this Primacie alonely by Peter, and yet Saint Paul, which was his
equal, or rather superior by Scripture in his Apostolate among ye Gentiles*
whereof Rome was ye principal, suffered at Rome where Peter did, and is commonly
in all the Church Roman, joined with Peter, in all appellations and titles of
pre-eminence: and both be called Principes Apostolorum, the chief of the
Apostles. Upon both is equally founded the Church of Rome, the accounting of
Bishops of Rome many years agrees thereunto. For Eusebius says, Lib. 3. Cap.
21.
that Clemens tertius post Paulum and Petrum, pontificatum tenebat: That
Clement was ye third Bishop after S. Paul and Peter: reconing both them as
Bishops of Rome, and yet therein preferring S. Paul. With like words saying of
Alexander Bishop of Rome, ye Quinta successione post Petrum atque Paulu^,
plebis gubernacula sortitus est: Alexander obtained ye gouerna^ce of ye people
by succession, ye first Bishop after Peter and Paul. Irenaeus also, as Eusebius
recyteth, Lib. 5. Cap. 6.
says Fundata and aedificata Ecclesia beati Apostoli, Lino officium
episcopatus iniungunt. After the Church was once founded and builded, they
charged Linus with the office of ye Bishopric of the holy Apostle. Whereby
appears, yt they both jointly constituted him Bishop of Rome, and received
only their Apostleship enjoined unto the^ by Christ. And therefore if ye Bishops
of Rome challe^ge any pre-eminence of authority by Peter, they should as well, or
rather by Paul, because they both sou^ded it, and both there preached, and both
there suffered: resigning that Bishopric to Linus, and all at once. And if ye
will peradventure leave to the former preaching there by Peter, which by
Scripture cannot be proved, yet then at the least Saint Paul and his
successors in Epheso, should have like Primacie there, because he founded first
that church, though Saint John after that did buyld it: as witnesses Eusebius,
saying: Ecclesia quae est apud Ephesum, a Paulo quidem fundata est, Lib. 3.
Cap. 23.
a Iohanne vero aedificata: The Church which is at Ephesus, in deed was
founded of Paul, but it was builded of Saint John. And so Peter should have no
other Primacie in Rome, but as Paul had in Epheso, that is to say, to be
counted as the first preachers and conuerters of the people there to the faith
of Christ. And as well might all the Bishops of Ephesus, challenge the Primacie
of all Nations, both Gentiles and Jews by Saint Paul Apostolum Gentium, their
founder, as the Bishop of Rome by Saint Peter, Apostolum tantum Circumcisionis,
in case he were the first founder, challenging Primacie over all. But
undoubtedly this Primacie over all that the Bishops of Rome of late do
challenge, was not allowed nor yet known nor heard off amongst the ancient
Fathers, though they had the church of Rome in high estimacion, as well for the
notable virtuous deeds, that the Clergy there did show and exercise abundantly
to their neighbors, as witnesses the said Eusebius, Lib 4. Cap. 23.
alleging the Epistle that Dionisius Alexandrinus wrote to Sother Bishop of
Rome, testifiyng the same. As for ye City of Rome, was the most ample and
chief City of all the world, witnessing Saint Cyprian, saying: Plane, quoniam
pro magnitudine sua debeat Carthaginem Roma praecedere, illic maiora and
grauiora commisit: Certainly, because that Rome ought for her greatness excel
Carthage, therefore there he committed the greater and more grievous offenses.
Which Saint Cyprian also when he had done certain acts, yea, and made
certain determinations and statutes unto the Bishop of Rome, he did not submit
them to his reformation, or judgment, but only signified his own sentences,
to like him also. And yet adding thereunto, that if any Bishops, meaning as
well of Rome as of others which were of the contrary opinions to him, would
otherwise think or do, he would not then his sentences should be to the^
prejudicial or compulsorie, but to follow their own wits and customs, Tum
quod vnusquisque Episcoporum habeat sui arbitrij libertatem, tum quod
vnusquisque praepositus rationem sui actus sit Domino rediturus: Partly for
that every one of the Bishops has liberty of his own will: and partly for
that every governor shall make an account to God of his own deed, as it
appears plainly in his Epistle to Stephanus and Iulianus. And in the third
Epistle to Cornelius, toward the end, speaking of the refuge that one
Felicissimus a Nouatian after the condemnation in Africa made to Rome, he
impugneth such appeals, saying: that Quia singulis pastoribus portio gregis
est asscripta, quam regat vnusquisque and gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino
rediturus, statutu^ est ab omnibus nobis, aequumque pariter ac iustu^ censemus,
vt vniuscuiusque causa illic audiatur, vbi est crimen admissum. Forasmuch as
every pastor has his flock by portion committed to him, which every one
ought to rule and govern, and must give account to the Lord of his
administration, it is decreede of us all, and we think it both meet and
just, that every man's cause and plea, should there be heard, where the crime is
committed. This holy and excellent Clarke and Martyr S. Cyprian, would never
have either impugned their refuges to Rome, from their own primates, or so
obstinately holden and mainteyned his determinations in the counsels of
Affrike, contrary to the opinion of the Bishop of Rome, and to their customs,
without any submission by word or writing, if the primacie over all (which the
Bishops of Rome do challenge and usurp) had been grounded upon the plain
Scriptures, as you with some others do think. And it is to be supposed also,
that he would in all his Epistles to them, have called them Patres or Dominos.
Fathers or Lords, as superiors, and not always Fratres and collegas, brothers
and fellows in office, as but his fellows: which yet more plainly does appear
by the Acts of the Counselles of Afric in Saint Augustines time, by the
which it is evident, that though the faith of Christ, was by the Romans first
brought into Afric as Saint Augustine does confess, Epistolae. 10.2.
yet it was not read nor known, that the Bishops of Rome used or challenged
any exercise of souereignetie in Afric unto this time. And yet then he did
not challenge it Iure diuino, but Praetextu definitionis cuiusdam canonis in
concilio Niceno: That is, by the right of Gods word, but by the pretense of a
certain canon supposed to be in the counsel of Nice. Which article could
never be found, though it were then very diligently sought for through all the
principal Churches of the East and South: Vide duas Epistolas ad Bonifacium pp.
1. to concilioram. Fol. 307.308
But only alleged of Julius Bishop of Rome, out of his own library. And
you may be well assured, that if these in Scriptures had made for it, neither
the Bishop of Rome would have left that certain proof by Scriptures, and
trusted only to the testimony of an article of that counsel doubted on
unlikely to be found. Nor yet Saint Augustine with his holy and learned
company, Did. 16. viginti.
would have resisted this demand, if it had been either grounded upon
Scriptures, or determined in that or other counsel, or yet had stand with
equity, good order or reason.

Howbeit, the largeness and magnificence of buildings of that City, and
ancient excellency and superiority of the same, in temporal dominions, was
the only cause that in the Counsels (where the Patriarchall seas were set in
order) the Bishop of Rome was lotted in the first place, and not in any such
constitution made by Christ, as appears well by that that Constantinople
being at that time of this ordering of the Patriarchall seas, by the Emperors
most amply enlarged, being before a small town, and of no renown, and by
them most magnificently builded, and advanced worldly with all titles,
prerogatives and privileges temporal like unto Rome, and therefore called
Noua Roma, New Rome, was therefore advanced also to the second sea and place,
Antiochia in the East, where Saint Peter first took the chair before he came
to Rome, and Christian men had there first their name given them. Yea, and
Jerusalem, which was the first Mother City of our faith, and where Christ
himself first founded the faith, rejected with Alexandria, to the third,
fourth, the fifth places, because at that time they were not in so high
estimation in the world, though in the faith of Christ all they were
auncientes, and some of them Mothers to Rome.

Truth it is, that the Bishops of the Orient, Hist. trip. Li. 4 cap. 16.
for debates in matters of the faith, amongst themselves made suits to the
Bishop of Rome, but that was not for ye Superiority of jurisdiction upon them,
but because they were greatly divided. And those countries, as well Bishops
as others, much infected with the heresies of the Arrians, whereof the Weast
was in a manner clear. And among the Orients, none were counted indifferent to
decide those matters, but where all suspect of affection for one cause or
other: wherefore they desired the opinions of the Bishops of the West as
indifferent, vntangled with affections of any of those parts, and incorrupted
with any of the Arrians, as appears by the Epistles of Saint Basil written
in all their names for the said purpose. In the which also it is especially to
be noted, that their suite was not to the Bishop of Rome singularly, or by
name, but as the titles do show to the whole congregation of the Bishops of
Italy and France, or of the whole West, and sometime preferring the French
Bishops, saying, Gallis and Italis, and never naming the Romans.

And for a clear proof that the ancient Fathers knew not this primacie of
one above all, we need none other testimony, but their determination in the
counsel of Nice, that Alexandria and Antiochia, and universally all other
primates, should have the whole governance of their confine countries,
likewise as the Bishop of Rome had of his Suburbicans. And this determination
proves also, that your three Scriptures meant nothing less, then this primacie
over all. For God forbid that we should suspect that counsel as ignorant of
those plain Scriptures, to the which since that time all Christendom has
leaned, as the anchor of our faith. And if you like to read the ancient
ecclesiastical histories, there you may see, that Athanasius and other
Patriarchs did execute that primacie, as in making, consecrating, and ordering
of Churches, Bishops and Clerks in their countries, East and South, as the
Bishops of Rome in that time did in the West and North. And if ye would yet any
thing object against any of these witness, then for to eschew contention, and
for a final conclusion, let the Bishop of Rome stand to his own confession
made many years past by his predecessor Agatho, to the Emperor Constantine,
Heraclius, and Tiberius, in his Epistle written to them in his name, and in the
name of all the Synods which he thought to be under the sea Apostolic,
wherein soon after the beginning of the Epistle, he comprehends them all
under ye name of the Bishops dwelling in the North and West parts of their
Empire. So yt there, in his own Epistle, he confesses all his subjects or
obedienciaries, to he only of the North and West, and so appears evidently
by his own confession, that neither by Gods law nor man's law he had to do
with any person of the East or ye South. And this his high souereintie over all
challenged, as you and others say, by Scripture, as by his own confession
quailed and brought to a little and straight angle. And this Agatho was not a
man unlearned, as appears by the Acts of the sixth Synod,
Constantinopolitane in the iiij. act, wherein is written at large, and
expressed the said epistle and confession. And before the Primacie of Peter,
which ancient Doctors speak off, that was only in preaching and teaching the
faith of Christ, which he first among all the Apostles, and first of all
mortal men, did express with his mouth. That Primacie did so adhere to his
own person, that it was never derived neither to any successor, nor to other
Apostle, but chiefly to himself: for all other professing after the same,
speak it after him, who had professed it before. Moreover all the Apostles, as
Saint John says, Apoca. ^1.
be fundaments in the heavenly Jerusalem, and not Peter only. Moreover Cyprian
affirms, as is aforesaid, yt all the Apostles were of equal dignity and
power, which all ancient authors likewise do affirm. For Christ gave the
Apostles like power in the Gospel saying: Ite, Mat. 28.
docete omnes Gentes baptizantes eos, etc. Go and teach all Nations baptizing
them, etc. And Saint Paul as is said before, knew no other Primacie given to
Peter to preach in any place, but among the Jews, as he himself had among the
Gentiles: as he writes to the Galathians, where Saint Ambrose, as is
aforesaid, affirms the same. And that the mother of all Churches is
Jerusalem, as before is said, and not Rome: the Scripture is plain, both in the
Prophet Esaias: De Syon exibit lex, and verbum Domini de Jerusalem: Esa. 2.
Out of Syon shall the law proceed, and the word of the Lord out of
Jerusalem. Upon the which place Saint Hierome says: In Jerusalem primum
fundata Ecclesia, totius orbis Ecclesias seminauit: Out of the Church first
found in Jerusalem, sprung all other Churches of ye whole world. And also in
the Gospel, which Christ before his ascension commanded his Apostles to
preach over all the world, beginning first at Jerusalem: so that the Bishops
of Rome universal power by him claymed over all, cannot by any Scripture ^e
justified, as if ye have red the ancient Fathers expositions of the said
Scriptures, as we suppose you have since your letters sent hither concerning
this matter, and would give more credence to their humble and plain speaking,
than to the latter contentious and ambitious writers of that high, and above
the Ideas of Plato his subtilytie (which passes as ye write) the lawyers
learning and capacitiy: we doubt not, but that ye perceive and think the same.

And where ye think that the king cannot be taken as supreme head of the
Church, because he cannot exercise the chief office of the Church in
preaching and ministering of Sacraments, it is not requisite in every body
natural, that the head shall exercise either all manner of offices of the
body, or the chief office of the same. For albeit the head is the highest and
chief member of the natural body, yet the distribution of life to all the
members of the body, as well to the head as to other members, comes from the
heart, and is minister of life to the whole body as the chief act of the
body. This simlitude yet has not his full place in a mystical body, although
the Scripture speaking of king Saul, 2. Reg. 15.
says: Cum esses paruulus in oculis tuis, coustitui te caput in tribubus
Israel: When thou were but of small reputacion in thine own eyes, I made thee
head amongst ye tribes of Israel. And if a king amongst the Jews, were Caput
in tribubus Israel: hoc est hominum videntium Deum per vmbram, tempore legis,
multo magis Princeps Christianus caput est in tribubus Israel, hoc est vere per
fidem videntium Christum, qui est finis legis: The head in the tribes of
Israel: that is, of men which see God by a shadow in the time of the law, much
more is a Christian king head in the tribes of spiritual Israel, that is, of
such which by true faith see Christ which is the end of the law. The office
deputed to the Bishops in the mystical body, is to be as eyes to the whole
body, as almighty God says to the Prophet Ezechiel: Eze. 3.
Speculatorem te dedi domui Israel. I have made thee an ouerseer over the house
of Israel. And what Bishop soever refuses to use the office of an eye in the
mystical body, to show unto the body the right way of living, which
appertains to the spiritual eye to do, shall show himself to be a blind
eye: and if he shall take other office in hand than appertains to the right
eye, shall make a confusion in the body, taking upon him an other office, then
is given to him of God. Wherefore if the eye will take upon him the office of
the whole head, it may be answered unto it: It cannot so do, for it lacks
brain.

And examples shows likewise, that it is not necessary always that the
head should have the faculty or chief office of administration, you may see
in a Navy by Sea, where the Admiral who is captain over all, does not meddle
with stering or governing of every ship, but every Master particular must
direct the ship, to pass the Sea in breaking the waves, by his stering and
governance, which the Admiral the head of all, does not himself, nor yet has
the faculty to do, but commands the Masters of the ship to do it. And
likewise many a captain of great armies, which is not able, nor never could
peradventure shoot or break a spear by his own strength, yet by his
wisdom and commandment only, he atchieueth the wars, and attayneth the
victory. And where ye think that unity stands not only in the agreeing in
one faith and doctrine of the Church* but also in agreeing in one head: if ye
mean the very and only head over all the Church our Savior Christ, Quem
pater dedit caput super omnem Ecclesiam, quae est corpus eius: Whom the father
has set over all the Church, which is his body, wherein all good Christian
men do agree, ye say truth. And if ye mean of any one mortal man to be head
over all the Church, and that to be the Bishop of Rome, we do not agree with
you. For you do there err in the true understanding of Scripture, or else ye
must say, that the said counsel of Nyce and other most ancient did err,
which divided the administration of Churches, the Orient from the Occident, and
the South from the North, as is before expressed. And that Christ the
universal head, is present in every Church, the Gospel shows, Mat. 18.
Vbi duo vel tres congregati fuerint in nomine meo, ego in medio eorum sum:
Where two or three be gathered together in my name, there I am in the midst of
them. Mat 28.
And in an other place: Ecce ego vobiscum sum, vsque ad consummationem seculi:
Behold I am with you, until the end of the world. By which it may appear
Christ the universal head every where, to be with his mystical body the
Church: who by his spirit works in all places, (how far soever they be
distaunt) the unity and concord of the same. And as for any other one
universal head to be over all, then Christ himself, Scripture proves not,
as it is showed before. And yet of a farther proof to take away the scruples,
that peradventure do to your appearaunce rise of certain words in some
ancient authors, and especially in Saint Cyprians Epistles, as the unity of
the Church stood in the unity with the Bishop of Rome, though they never call
him supreme head, if you precisely weygh, and confer all their sayings
together, ye shall perceive that they neither spoke nor meant other thing, but
when the Bishop of Rome was once lawfully elected and intronizate, if then any
other would by faction, might, force, or otherwise, (the other living and
doeyng his office,) enterprise to put him down, and usurp the same
Bishopric, or exercise the others office himself. As Nouatianus did attempt
in the time of Cornelius, that then the said Fathers reconed them good
Catholics that did communicate with him that was so lawfully elected, and the
custom was one Primacie to have ado one with an other, by congratulatory
letters, soon after the certeintie of their election was known to keep the
unity of the Church. And they that did take part or maintain that other
usurper, to be Shismatiques because that usurper was a Schismatique for that,
Quia non sit fas in eadem Ecclesia, duos simul esse episcopos, nec priorem
legittimum Episcopum sine sua culpa deponi: That it is not lawful for two
Bishops to be at once together in one Church. Nor that the former Bishop
being lawful, ought to be deposed guiltless, without his fault be proved.
And this is not a prerogative of Rome Church, more than of any other
cathedral, special, patriarchall, or metropoliticall Church, as appears in
the third Epistle of the first book, and in the eight of the second, and of
the fourth book of S. Cypriane to Cornelius. Whose words and reasons, all
that peradventure might seem to conclude the unity of the Church in the
unity of the Biship of Rome, because they were all written to him in his own
case, may as well be written to and of any other Bishop lawfully chosen and
possessed, who percase should be likewise disturbed by any factions of
ambitious heretics, as the Bishops of Rome then were. And where ye think ye
name of Supreme head under Christ given, attributed to ye kings Majesty,
makes an innovation in ye church, and perturbation of the order of the same:
it cannot be any innovation or trouble to ye church, to use ye room that God
has called him too, which good Christian Princes did use in the beginning when
faith was most pure, as Saint Augustine ad Gloriam and Eleusium says. August.
Epist. 162.
Ait enim quidam: Non debuit Episcopus pro consulari iudicio purgari: quasi
vero ipse sibi hoc comparauerit, ac non Imperator ita quaeri iusserit, ad cuius
curam de qua ratione^ Deo redditurus esset, res illa maxim pertinebat One there
is which says, that a Bishop ought not to have been put to his purgation
before the judgment seat of the deputy, as though he himself procured it
and not rather the Empeyour himself caused this inquiry to be made, to whose
jurisdiction, (for the which he must answer to God,) yt cause did especially
perteine. Chisostome writes of that imperial authority thus: Laesus est qui
non habet parem vllum super terram, summitas and caput est omnium hominum super
terram. He is offended that has no peer at all upon the earth, for he is the
highest potentate, and the head of all men upon earth. And Tertulianus ad
Scapulum says: Colimus ergo and imperatorem sic, quo modo and nobis licet, and
ipsi expedit, vt nomine^ a Deo secundu^, and quicquid est a Deo co^sequntu^
solo Deo minorem, hoc enim and ipse volet: sic enim omnibus mayor est, dum solo
vero Deo minor est. Ide^ in Apologetico de Imperatoribus capite. 30. loque^s
ait: Sciunt quis illis dederit imperium, sciunt qui homines, qui and animas
sentiunt, eum Deu^ esse solum, in cuius solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt
secundi, post que^ primi ante omnes, and super omnes Deos. We so honor and
reverence ye Emperor, in such wise, as is lawful to us and expedient to him,
yt is to say, as a man next and the second to God, of whom is derived all the
power he has, but yet inferior to God alone, for so is it his pleasure to
have it. For thus is he greater tha^ all men, while he is inferior but to God
alonely. And the said Tertulianus in his book Apologetical, speaking of
Emperors: They know who has given to the^ their government, they know what
men they be themselves, and understanding they have of man's souls, but so yt
they perceive yt God is he alone, under whose only power they be, and take
themselves as second to God, after whom they be the chief before other, and
above all the Gods: Theophilactus ad Romanos super ilud: Omnis onima
potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit. Romans 13.
Ait apostolu^ hic vniuersos erudire, sieve sacerdos sit ille, sieve Monachus,
sieve Apostolus, vt se principibus subdat. Let every soul be subject to ye
higher powers. Hoc est, Etiam si Apostolus sis, Etiam si Euangelista, etia^ si
Propheta, aut quisquis postremo fueris: Non enim subuertit pietatem haec
^ubiectio. Et non simpliciter, Parcat inquit, sed subdita sit. That is*
although thou art an Apostle, although an Evangelist, although a Prophet, or
whatsoever thou art, be subject, for this subjection overthrows no
godliness. And he says not only, let him obey, but let him be subject. And
if the Apostles be subject to princes, much more al bishops and Patriarchs,
yea, ye bishops of Rome and all other. And it is written in the Cronicles:
Dixit David Salamoni: Ecce diuisiones Sacerdotum and Leuitarum in omne
ministeriu^ domus Domini, assistent tibi, and parati erunt. 1. Par. 28.
Et David constituit principem ad confitendu^ Domino, 2. Par. 16.
Asaph and fratres eius. Et, Constituit Iosaphat in Jerusalem Leuitas and
Sacerdotes, and principes familiarum ex Israel, 2. Par. 19.
vt iudicium and causam Domini iudicarent habitatoribus eius, praecepitque eis
dicens: Sic agetis in timore Domini, fideliter and cord perfecto, etc. David
says to Solomon: Behold, 2. Par. 16.
the Priests and Leuits divided in companies to do all manner of service that
pertains to the house of God, shall assist thee and be ready. And in the xvj.
Chapter, David did appoint chiefly to thank the Lord, Asaph and his brethren,
etc. And Iosaphat the king, did constitute Leuits and Priests, and the ancient
heads of Israel, that they should judge the judgment and the causes of the
Lord, toward all the inhabitants of the earth. And he charged them, saying:
Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and in a perfect heart.
Rex constituit turmas Sacerdotales and Leuiticas, vnumque^que in officio suo.
Et sequitur, Ezechias praecepit populo vt darent part^s Sacerdotibus, qui dedit
consequenter decimas. Et sequitur quod ad regem cum Azaria Sacerdote pertinet
omnis dispensatio domus Domini, and eorum qui ad eam attinent. Et in fine:
Fecit ergo Ezechias vniuersa quae diximus in omni Judah, operatusque est bonum
and rectum and verum coram Domino Deo suo, in vniuersa cultura ministerij domus
Domini, iuxta legem and ceremonias, volens requirere deum suum in toto cord
suo, fecitque and prosperatus est, Josias quoque constituit Sacerdotes in
officijs suis, mandauitque plurima. etc. Furthermore, Ezechias did appoint ye
Priests and the Levites in their order to wait by course, every man according
to his office, whether Priest or Leuit, for ye burnt offerings, and peace
offerings, and to minister and to thank and to pray in the gates of ye lodge of
the Lord. And Ezechias gave commandment to the people dwelling in Jerusalem,
that they should give their portions to the Priests and Levites, that they
might attend on the law of the Lord. And that by the precepte of Ezechias the
king, and of Azarias the Bishop of the house of the Lord, all things were done,
to whom perteined all the dispensation of the house of the Lord. And in the
end it is said. Ezechias did all those things in all Jury, he wrought that
which was good, right and true before his Lord God, in all the furniture of the
ministry of the house of the Lord, according to ye law and ceremonies,
desirous to seek his Lord God withal his heart, as he did, and prospered
therein. Josias also did ordeine Priests in their offices, and commanded many
things. By all which it may appear, that Christian Kings be souereigns over the
Priests, as over all other their subjects, and may command the Priests to
do their offices, as well as they do other: And ought by their supreme
office, to see that all men of all degrees do their duties, whereunto they he
called, either by God, or by the King. And those kings that so do, chiefly do
execute well their office. So that the kings highness taking upon him as
supreme head of the Church of England, to see that as well spiritual men as
temporal do their duties, does neither make innovation in the Church, nor yet
trouble the order thereoff: But does as the chief and the best of the kings
of Israll did, and as all good Christian kings ought to do. Which office good
Christian Emperors always took upon them, in calling the universal counsels
of all countries in one place, and at one time to assemble, to the intent all
heresies troubling the Church, might be there extyrped: calling and commanding
as well the Bishop of Rome, as other Patriarchs and all Primats, as well of the
East, as of the West: of the South, and of the North, to come to the said
counsels. As Marlianus the Emperor did, in calling the great counsel of
Calcedon, one of the four chief and first general counsels, commanding
Leo, then Bishop of Rome, to come thereto. And albeit Leo neither lyked the
time which he would for a season should have been deferred: nor yet the
place which he would have had in Italy, where the Emperor by his own
commandment had called it to Calchis in Asia, yet he answered the Emperor,
that he would gladly obey his commandment, and sent thither his agents to
appear there for him. As does appear in ye Epistles of Leo to Martian the
Emperor.xli.xlvii.xlviii. and in the xlix. epistle to Pulcheria Empress. And
likewise desires Theodosius the Emperor to command a council of Bishops to
be called in Italy, Epist. 81.
for taking away such contentions and troubles, as at that time troubled the
quietness of the Churches. And in many more Epistles of the same Leo, it does
manifestly appear, that the Emperors always assembled general counsels by
their commandments. And in the sixte council general it appears very
plainly, Action. 4*
yt at that time ye Bishops of Rome made no claim nor used title to call them
self heads universal over all ye Catholic church, as there does apere, In
subscriptione seu saluatione synodica suggestionis antedictae, which is thus ad
verbum: Pijssimis Dominis and serenissimis victoribus and triu^phatoribus,
dilectis filijs Dei and Domini nostri Jesus Christi, Constantino Magno
Imperatori, Heraclio and Tiberio Augustis, Agatho Episcopus, seruus seruorum
Dei, cum vniuersis synodis subiacentibus concilio Apostolicae sedis. In the
superscription or salutacion of the aforesaid synodicall preamble, which is
thus word for word: To the most godly Lords and most noble victors and
conquerours, the well-beloved children of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ: to
Constantine the great Emperor, to Eraclius and Tiberius Caesar's, Bishop Agatho
the servant of the servants of God, with all ye conuocations subject to ye
counsel of the Sea Apostolic, sends greetings, and says, expressing what
countries he reckned and comprehended in that superscription or salutacion. It
follows that these were under his assembly, which were in the North and East
parts. So that at that time the Bishop of Rome, made no such pretense, to be
over and above all, as he now does by usurpation, vendicating to himself the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, by which he reigns in the hearts of all
faithful people, and then changes it to a temporal kingdom over and above
all kings, to depose them for his pleasure, preaching thereby, Carne^ pro
spiritu, and terrenum regnum pro coelesti, in damnationem, nisi resipiscat
suam: The flesh for the spirit, an earthly kingdom for an heavenly, to his
own damnation if he repent not. Where he ought to obey his Prince by the
doctrine of Saint Peter in his first Epistle saying: Subiecti estote omni
humanae creaturae, 1. Pet. 2.
propter Deum, sieve regi quasi praecellenti, sieve ducibus tanquam ab eo missis,
ad vindictam malefactorum, laudem vero bonorum: Be ye subject to every man's
ordinance, for the Lords sake, whether to the king, as to the chief, whether
to the dukes, as sent of him to the punishment of the evil doers, and to the
praise of the good. Again Saint Paul. Omnis omnia potestatibus sublimioribus
subdita sit, Romans 13.
with other things before alleged. So that this his pretended usurpation to be
above all kings, is directly against the Scriptures given to the Church by
the Apostles, whose doctrine, whosoever ouerturneth, can be neither Caput nor
Infimum membrum Ecclesiae.

Wherefore, albeit ye have heretofore sticked to the said wrongfully usurped
power, moved thereto (as ye write) by your conscience, yet since now ye see
further, if ye list regard the mere truth, and such ancient authors, as you
have been written to off in times past, we would exhort you, for the wealth of
your soul, to surrender into the Bishop of Romes hands, your red hat, by
which he seduced you, trusting to have of you, being come of a noble blood,
an instrument to advance his vain glory, whereof by the said hat he made you
participant, to allure you thereby the more to his purpose. In which doing ye
shall return to the truth, from which you have erred, do your duty to
your sovereign Lord from whom ye have declined, and please thereby almighty
God, whose laws ye have transgressed. And in not so doing, ye shall remain in
error, offending both almighty God, and your natural sovereign Lord, whom
chiefly ye ought to search to please. Which thing, for the good mind that we
heretofore have borne you, we pray almighty God of his infinite mercy, that
you do not. Amen.

AT LONDON Imprinted by H. B.

The manner and means of the Popes beginning.
Like as
THe Iuie budde which from the beak of Iay
Falls to the ground, a thing of moment small,
By some kind means at first is clad in clay
Then takes root, and after ginnes to scrall,
In groueling wise, upon the slipprie ground,
And smoothly so with leaves and tenders soft,
Holds on the course, till some strong tree be found,
Through whose stout help it may climb up alofte:
Thereto it commes, and at the lowest foot
Takes hold of bark, and body does embrace:
And feeling then increase of sap and root,
Does still climb up, and windeth to the face
Of that same tree, and girds it in so fast,
As Iuie lives, but tree is killde at last.
Even so the Pope
By warrant small, or none at all to find
In sacred writ, in humble flattring wise,
At first did seek to please the hawtie mind,
Of Christian Kings, by whom he sought t'arise:
And cleaving so, unto that mighty stay,
Lift up himself into his stately throne,
And by degrees has got the rule and sway
Of all the world, and subject is to none.
Not so content, does counterchecke the Lord,
Whose Vicar sole on earth he claymes to be.
To Christian Kings, no rule he will afforde,
For all is his, and none must rule but he:
And so the prop, whereby he got his strength,
He would confound, and overthrow at length.
Even like a Pope.
How prove you that?
Thus:
COnstantinus which the Monarchy did hold
Of Christendom, an Emperor full good,
Gave to the Pope, who then might be controlde
A sort of lands, which did exalt his blood.
But warely yet (preventing Prelates pride)
Did call his gift, the patrimon of Church,
Till afterward the Papists do decide
That title, and to give the troth a lurche,
They by that spark do kindle first their fire,
Whereby they claim dominion of the Weast,
And then likewise to place the Pope the higher,
They seek which way to breed the Prince unrest.
And Iuie like, would wrap in homage band,
The mighty Prince which gave him first that land,
In subtle wise.
For Steuchus writes in flattry of the Pope
Against Valla, that The Emperor did give
To Rome, the lands of all the Western scope:
And he himself, even whiles that Pope did live,
Did grant the Pope to be the greater state.
And thereupon is ordered by decree,
Rome to be chief, and have no earthly mate,
And that the Pope must rule, and none but he,
In matters of Religion forsooth,
Nor other King he will not there vouchsafe,
Because his sacred sword each wrong must smooth.
And thus both swords (you see) the Pope will have,
And Iuie like, paste shame, does pull adowne
The Empire great, that gave to him renown,
In wonted guise.
Once is no custom.
Then another, touching the Charity of the Pope.
ALexander the third of that same name,
Succeeded Adrian that was callde the fourth,
Whom Fredrike erst, that Emperor of fame
Lovde well, and gave him gifts of greatest worth:
But Wealth made Pride, and Pride did cause the beast
To swell in mind, and bear himself so high,
As of the rest he made the Emprour least,
And thought himself an ace above the sky.
Good Fredrike then repenting of his deed,
Thought good t'abase, a beast that so could rage,
And thrust him out of Germany with speed,
The Prelates pride, and peoples wrath t'asswage.
The Priest does storm, and swears he will requite
Th'Emprours act, with sword and cruel spite,
If he were Pope.
And Pope he was, and then immediately
The smothring heat thrust forth a frantike fire,
His cursed Bulls Of Excommunication.
against this Prince do fly
With roughest rage, to quench the Popes desire.
The Pope does cause th'Italians to rebel,
And for to build the City of great fame
Of Alexandria, because he would expel
The Prince himself, and took the Cities name.
Not so content, at Venice afterward
Th'Emprour is, where Pope (through passing pride)
Alonely not vilependes the Prince, nor sparde
In word and deed from modesty to slide,
But caused him full humbly to kneel down,
And with his foot stroke off the Royal Crown,
When he was Pope.
The vvorst is said.
The lives of.ij. Popes, vz. Alexander the second, and Gregory the seventh.
THen hearken to the best, which I will wright plainly, because the fewer
exceptions shall be taken, and also because in one Glass thou maiste see the
lives of many, Popes, or at least, the mischiefs which abound in many of
them. And yet I will but briefly touch the black virtues of one Pope, to wit,
Gregory the seventh, which before was called Hildebrandus, by his nation an
Hetruscan, by his Country of Senensis, by his sect a Monk of Cluniacensis. But
to show him the playner, I must begin with his Predecessor Alexander the
second, whom the same Hildebrand did both elect and overthrow, thereby to make
himself Pope.

THis Alexander the second Pope of that name, by his country a Millionese,
Presumption.
and Bishop of Lucensis, was named (before he came to ye Papacy) Anselmus, who
by the wily subtlety of ye said Heldebrand (the rather thereby to get the
Papacy to himself) was in his absence from Rome chose^ Pope there, without
either good will or knowledge of the Emperor. By reason whereof, the Lumbards,
by consent of the Emperor, (being present himself at ye asse^blie) at Basil
did cou^tremau^d ye said Pope Alexander with a new Pope, whose name was Cadol,
and Bishop of Pamensi^, who with a great army goes to Rome, and after he had
fought a battle or two, was with his army put to flight again. Then Henricus
the Emperor, to take away that Scisme, sent thither with his authority Otho
the Archbishop of Colyn, who at his coming to Rome, did greatly travel to
avouch the right of the Emperor in the election of the Pope, and greatly
blamed Alexander, for that without the Emperors consent, he would be elected.
Then Heldebrand (a man borne to the destruction of many) ye more puffed up with
pride, through ye late obtained victory, interrupteth ye Archbishops Oration,
and sharply defends ye Bishops deed, alleging yt the election appertayned to
the clergy. Otho (peradventure in that matter) regarding more ye Bishops than
the Emperor, easily yields, and requires yt a Synod might be assembled at
Mantua, for the appeasing of this Scisme, in the which Synod, it was
constituted by Alexander, that no Mass ought to be heard, which was said by
any Priest that had a Concubyne: which thing seemed very strange, for that
thereby no man almost through the whole jurisdiction of ye Pope was like to
hear a Mass. Then he willed that all Bishops, Priests, and Decons, which were
married, should be deprived of their benefices. Nevertheless, he permitted that
priests sons (by the consent of the Bishops authority) might take orders. He
decreed, that the Pope should be elected alonely by the Cardinals: and did many
other things in the behalf of the Clergy and Monks. He commanded also that
Alleluya should be omitted from Septuagesima till Easter. Bishops.
In these days Bishops were made more mighty than Princes, and endeavored to
command and prescribe laws unto kings. They wrung out Tithes with great
rigor. And the Christian religion of their Uicars was this: they made no
scruple to set all nations together by the ears, so they themselves were
thereby preferred to Bacchus and Venus. Well, upon the sudden (as Cardinal
Benno reuealeth) this report of Alexander brake forth, that where Alexander
(says he) now at the last does understand that he by the guyle and
subtlety of Heldebrande, and of the Emperors enemies, Conscience accuses the
Pope.
was elected and enthronized: he has even now between the times of the
solemnization of the Masses, uttered this speech unto the people, viz, that he
would not sit in the Apostolyke Seat, without the license of the Emperor, and
openly uttered, that he would write to the Emperor to that effect. Which when
the Brande of Hell, (Heldebrande I would say) understood, he could scarcely
withhold his hands till Mass was done: but so soon as Mass was ended, he
raged with violent hands upon Alexander, and carried him to the Altar, to a by
corner (where before his Pontificalibus or Bishops roabes were fully from his
back) he did bobbe and buffet him cruelly, and taunted, and checked the silly
Pope, because he had respect to the Emperor, and sought his favor. And
therefore the said Heldebrande presently decreed, that from ye day forward the
Pope should have no better allowaunce, than five shillings of the coin of
Lucensis. And from thenceforth Heldebrande himself received to his own use,
the whole revenue of the Church of Rome (poor Pope Alexander still in prison)
and thereby gathered together a mass of money innumerable. And afterward, in
the year of our Lord one thousand threescore and fourteen, the silly
miserable Pope Alexander, yet remaining under the servile yoke of Heldebrande,
in a certain evening (peradventure not vnpoysoned) gave up the ghost. The
self same hour Heldebrand, by ye force of his soldiers, without consent of
Clergy or people, is enthronized, in doubt, least through delay, some other
might be elected. To the election of which Pope, not any one Cardinal
subscribed. To which election when the Abbot of Cassimensis came, Heldebrande
said unto him* my brother, thou have hastened to slowlye. And the Abbot
answered again: And thou (oh Heldebrande) haste h^^d thee over hastily, in
that thou against the Canons have usurped the seat Apostolic, before thy
master the Pope is buried. But Heldebrande thus enthronized, how he lived, in
what sort he removed the modest Cardinals, which should have bin both stay and
testimony of his life and doctrine, how miserably he perplexed them, with how
many Heresies he infected the world, with how much perjury and intolerable
treasons he enriched himself, a number of men could scarcely write. But the
innocent blood of the christened lambs of Christ, which by his bloody means
and tyrannous authority was shed, cries yet revenge against him. Thus much
says Benno.

Now sir, this courteous Gentleman is now Pope, and called Gregory the
seventh, howbeit, a Sorcerer, Inchaunter, and devilish Iuggler still, by which
means, and by his wonderful tyranny, he obtained his Apostolic seat. The
manner of his creeping up to that dignity was thus: The manner of his creeping
He at first left his Monastery, and came to Rome, and there crept into the
special favor of Laurentius the wicked Cardinal, of whom he diligently
learned Witchcaft and Necromancie, which Sorceries the same Laurence in his
youth sucked amongst others out of that Sathanical monster Pope Siluester the
second of that name. There was singular friendshipppe between this
Laurentius, Theophilactus, Johannes, Gratianus and Heldebrande, and they were
chief Prelates or Cardinals of the Romish Sinagog: through whose help
Heldebrand being very subtle, brought every thing to pass even as pleased
him, and specially, when the same Theophilactus was Pope, who was called
Benedictus the ninth, in whose time the said Heldebrand renewed again every
mischief which in any former Popes time had bin practiced. He had one
especial Sathanicall elusion, Ellusio.
for when he li^ted (as Benno does witness) to shake his gown sleeue, he
would make sparcles of fire to fly out thereat, by which diuelishe miracle
he so blinded the eyes of the simple people, as they deemed it a special token
of singular holiness. And because (says he) the Devil could not persecute
Christ openly amongst ye Pagans, he craftily subverted his name in a false
Monk, under color of Religion. Good Authors write, The Pope a poysoner of
Bishops.
that this Heldebrand, by the help of Gerardus Brazantus, poisoned six or
eight Bishops, thereby to have the more plain passage to the Papacy, yet
amiddes all these mischiefs, this well-disposed Prelate carries his craft so
cunningly, as it was not once suspected, that Heldebrande desired to be Pope.
For before he had the name of a Pope, he only for the most part was y^ Popes
instrument, by wicked inuentio^s to devise by little and little those
mischiefs, which in his own Papacy he established with effect. This notable
Hypocrite, under pretense of Religion and godliness committed every kind of
unjust, detestable, and wicked villainies. He accused his Lord and Master
Alexander ye second, for that he sought the aid of Caesar against his
enemies, saying in dirision: It is meet (forsooth) that he, according to the
Cannons, should hold the Pontifical dignity, which contrary to the same
laws, desires succoure from a profane Prince: and therefore upon his own
authority, he not only deprived the Pope of his Papacy, but cast him into
prison, and there secreatly murdered him, and usurped his place before he was
buried. He imparted both his substance and secreat advise (as Benno says)
unto Brasutus, and one Iudeus, his familiar friends, through whose means and
persuasion, many men wincked at his wickedness. For those bribed persons
(before Alexander the late Pope was in his grave) even trumpet-like sounded
abroad, that Peter the Apostle had chosen Heldebrande, and thereupon
inthronized him Pope, by the name of Gregory the seventh. And this was done.
1000. years after the destruction of Jerusalem, in the which time, these
Uicars of Satan began openly to challenge to themselves the name of God, and
the office and virtues of Christ Jesus, very God, and very Man. For in this
year, in the declaration and election of this Gregory, it was proclaimed, that
the true Uicar of Christ was created Pope. And this Gregory also took upon
him those things which are written of Christ in the second Psalm. He changed
the laws of Christ and the omnipotente God the Father, in forbydding the
marriage of Priests, and spoiling Princes of their kingdoms. This Gregory was
original of the discord and battle betwixt Gog and Magog mentioned Apoc. 20.
than the which was never any conflict more pernicious or wicked, Vrbanus, a
wicked Pope.
whose example Vrbanus one of his familiars did follow. Of this Gregory, Benno
further declares the history ensuing. Upon a time (says he) when Gregory
came from Albania to Rome, he forgot to bring with him his usual and
accustomed Book of the black art, without ye which Book, he seldom or
never went forth to any place: which thing, A suddayne passion of the Pope.
when in his iourneying he had called to memory, even at his entrance into ye
gate called Lateranensis, he half amazed, called hastily to him a couple of his
most familiar friends, and the accustomed and faithful ministers of his
mischiefs, those he straytely charged to fetch him the same Book with all
speed possible, urging them extremely, that they should not presume to open
that Book by the way, nor seek to discover the secrets thereof by any devise.
This straight charge so much repugned their affections, as how much the more
strongly he forbad them, so much the more their desire kindled, to search the
mysteries of the same Book. They go, and in their return, they unclasped the
same, and diligently perused the detestable precepts of that devilish art:
and thereupon the pretty knaves, and offspring of Satan, came suddaynely about
them in horrible multitude, which when the two young men (almost out of their
wits) perceived, with much ado at last they revive again, and as they
themselves did afterward declare, ye evil sprightes were very instant upon
the^, saying: To what purpose did you call us up? Wherefore did you trouble us?
command us quickly what we shall do, or else will we extend our violence
against your selves, if you deteyne us here any longer: which when one of
the young men with no small fear heard, he said, The walls of Rome thrown
down by the Devil.
Cast down to the ground speedily those walls, poynting with his hand to the
high walls of Rome, not far dista^t from them, which the wicked Sprites in a
momente performed. The Nouesse Coniurers, making many Crosses in sundry
places of their bodies, trembling and shaking with horrible fear, were so sore
astonyed, as hardly they could find the way to Rome, unto the Arch^oniurer
their master. Thus much of that matter writes Benno. His Papacy also
scarcely yet begun, he practiced even in his entrance thereof, to rack and
wrest the Cannons, which other Popes, his predicessours, by his own politic
counsel had before ordained, concerning Simonie, and single life: not to the
end that he might abolishe the wicked sale of spiritual benefices, but that
under pretense of honesty, he might take from princes their authority, in the
bestowing of Ecclesiastical lyuings, and that thereby al Bishops should be
brought under the servitude of the Sea of Rome, which, concerning the right of
their election, were more subject to the Prince, than to the Pope. And for y^
Henry the Emperor was then the mightiest of all Princes, this proud varlet
deemed it best, at the very first, to assay the first fruit of his Tirannical
exercise upon him. And therefore called a counsel together at Rome in Larino
(Laterino I would say) touching those matters: But Caesar occupied in the
wars, could not be present at the contentions of the Synod: the Pope
therefore notwithstanding the inevitable let of this renoumed Emperor, An
horrible device of the Pope, thereby to destroy the Emperor his liege Lord.
so stomaked his absence, as he neither spared treason nor murder, still
stirring up civil battles in many places, with other innumerable kinds of
calamities. But chiefly laying snares for the Emperors life, he put in
practice diverse his cunningest means how to destroy him, and amongst the
rest, concluded upon this pernicious determination, to be accomplished in the
Temple it self, even at the time of public prayer. Cardinal Benno thus
expresses the History. The virtuous Emperor (says he) did often times use
to go unto Saint Mary's Church which stands upon the hill called
Auentyne,^to pray. This viperous Heldebrande being fully persuaded by his
wicked espials, of the Emperoures accustomed order therein, commands good
view to be taken of the place where the Emperor commonly used to stand, sit,
or kneel, in his devotions. That known, he allured (for money) a certain
villayne (a holy counsel of a Pope) secretly to place stones of huge weight,
in the windbeames of the Church, directly over the Emperoures head, that by
that means, and the direction of the traitor, they might even in the midst
of the Emperors Prayers, fall upon him, and dash out his brains. But God, who
in miraculous sort defends his people, and when him pleases, conuerteth the
treason to the subversion of the Traitor, thus finished this tragedy: The
vagabond varlet hireling is nimbly occupied about the accomplishment of his
business, and places the murdering stones, as best seemed to him to serve
the purpose, and because he would be sure to have such stuff as should
perform his practice, he loadeth himself with one stone of more weight than
he could well govern, and far greater than the seeling of the Church could
bear, by reason whereof, before he could bring the same to his appointed
place, the waynescot brake, and so the stone with the miserable Traitor fell
down to the pauements of the Church, and was with the same stone crushed in
pieces from top to toe, a wonderful example of Gods just judgment to such
Regicides. The matter and misfortune at first was strange to ye beholders: but
when ye Romans understood this enterprise, and the wickedness thereof, they
fastened a cord to one of ye legs of ye bruised, disme^bred, and traiterous body,
and caused the same carcass to be drawn through the high streets of ye City
three days together, to the terrible example of all others. The charitable
clemency of the Emperor toward a Traitor which sought his destruction
Yet nevertheless, the Emperor of his accustomed cleme^cy commanded that the
dead body should be buried. Again, the same Benno thus writes, that one John,
Bishop of Portua, a man to whom Heldebrand was accustomed, above all other, to
reveal the secret cogitations of his heart, being in the Pulpitte in
Saint Peter's Church in disburthening of his conscience (as it were) revealed
diverse horrible things, before a great audience, and amongst the rest, this for
one. There was (said he) so detestable a thing by us and Heldebrand committed,
as for the doing thereof, we were all worthy to be buried quick: And thus it
was. Heldebrand thirsting the death of the Emperor, A notable blaspemie
against Christ, done by the Pope.
Paganlike sought divine answer in form of Oracle at the Sacrament of the
body of our Lord Jesus, touching the death of the Emperor (as the Pagans were
wont to do of their Idols) and because the Sacrament answered not, he fell in a
rage, and in the same this rage, did throw it into the fire, notwithstanding
that the Cardinals which were present, resisted to their uttermost, in
forbidding him the fact, and thereupon immediately, without lawful accusation,
canonical assembly, or order in judgment, he excommunicated the Emperor,
notwythstanding that he was ouerobedient to that Pope, and severed the Princes
of his Kingdom from him, and by privy conspiracies, wroughte by sundry
secret Traitors, sought the death of the good Emperor: but God (maugre the
Pope) always defended him. Oh monstrous strange Treason, proceeding from the
Sanctuary, yea, and from him that will have the name of high Priest, and
seem to govern the Church, and direct the elder Judges whatsoever. Compare
this with the Popes proceedings now toward the Queens Majesty.
And further, the same Heldebra^d, by terror and threatenings, commanded, that
none should be so hardy, to defend the Emperoures cause, nor in any wise to
bear favor or good will toward him, wresting the Scriptures violently, to
corrobrate his falsehoode. But so soon as this Devil incarnate did arise out
of his Judicial seat, wherein he had excommunicated the Emperor, the same
his throne, which lately before was new built of most stout and strong timber,
suddaynely by the Providence of God, was terribly shiuered in many places, by
the which each man conceived, and evidently did see, how that wicked decree of
laws had by the same his presumptuous excommunication sowed most terrible
Scismes in the Church of Christ. But when he saw that his deceytefull devise
took no success, he began to use open violence and hostility against
Caesar: and the Emperor being thus excommunicated, the Pope absolueth all men
from their oath of fidelity (as they term it) and sent the Crown of the
Empire to Ralph Duke of Swethland, Note howo Ralph speedeth afterward.
with this barbarous verse engraven in the same. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
Diadema Radulpho, which may be thus Englished, Christ gave to Peter the
Diadem, and Peter gives it Ralph. By reason whereof, Henry was sore troubled
in his mind, and laid aside his royal ornaments, and then he accompanied
with his wife, and his young son, in a cruel sharp Winter, traveled woolward
by dangerous passages toward Rome, humbly to crave pardon at the Popes hand,
where he stood at the City gate, without meat or drink, from morning to
night (a pitiful spectacle both to Angels and men) bearing the opprobrious
scoffs of Heldebrand his Harlots and his Monks, The Emperor and his wife, and
yo^^g son, way^e three days t^ come ^o the speech of the Pope.
with most lamentable affliction three days together, and yet his suit was no
greater, tha^ to be brought to the speech of the Pope: but he might not be
suffered once to enter into the gates. At the third days end, the Emperor
making his petition somewhat more earnestly, obtained a spightefull answer,
which was, that the Pope (that detestable Antechrist) had not yet any leisure
to talk with him. Henry yet taking all things patiently, gave his diligent
attendance without the gates, suffering in the suburbs many discommodities,
for the Winter was sharper, than accustomably it is want to be, and every thing
almost frosen, entreating for pardon, and at length, that is to say, upon the
fourth day, at the earnest request of Mathilda, a Countess, which (as the
story says) the Pope loved very well, and of the Abbot and Monks of
Cluniacensis, and of Adellaus the Earl of Sabaudia, the Emperor had access
to the Popes holiness, of whom he humbly desired pardon, and into whose
hands he offered his Crown, howbeit the Pope would neither pardon him, nor
absolve him from excommunication, unless he would first auow to make
satisfaction in the Synod for his offense (which was none at all) according to
the Popes decree, and perform other unlawful, and unreasonable conditions. To
all which unreasonable requests of the Pope, Henry yielded, and promised to
perform, and yet could not be restored to his Kingdom. But herein somewhat
differs Sleydan, for he in ye third Book of Monarchies says, that Caesar
Henry was again in favor with Heldebra^d, but the Peers of Italy were mightily
offended, that ye Emperor with so great dishonor and shame had yielded
himself to him, which invaded ye Papacy by devilish coniurations, and defiled
all things with bloudshead, and adultery. The Pope and Cardinals did not a
little swell in pride in this respect, that they had brought Henry the Emperor
under their yoke, and thereupon took encourageme^t to attempt greater matters.
But Henry (assuring himself in ye strength and spirit of God) revenged these
things presently by force of Arms, and after long conflict, subdued Rodulphus
in ye field, whose right hand was cut off in that battle: The reward of an
intruder.
whereupon Rodulphus commanded, that all the Bishops and authors of this
conspiracy should be brought before him, in whose presence, he caused ye same
his dismembered right hand to be laid before him, and thervpo^ uttered these
words: I confess (says he) that I am well and rightly dealt withal, for this
is the hand with the which I gave my faith, troth, and loyalty, to my
sovereign Lord Henry, but by your instigation, I have oftentimes vnluckilie
waged war against him, and violated my faith, and therefore have received
this just reward of my perjury. I appeal therefore to your consciences,
whether you have led me the right way or no: let me therefore be example unto
you, and return you again to your King, and perform your former faith, and
I my self will go to my fathers: and at that instante, Rodulphus departed
this life, after whose death, they (by the Popes commandment) created another
Emperor, whose name was Hermannus Saxo, Earl of Lacelburge, which second
Emperor also (by the ordinance of God no doubt) was in beseeging a certain
Castle in Germany, slain by the hand of a woman, which tumbled from the top
of one of the Towers a mighty stone upon him. But yet for all this, the
unspeakable malice of that savage Tirant could not be restreyned, for he yet
raised against the said most godly Emperor the third Traitor, whose name was
Egbart, a Marquess, and Cousin to the said Henry, which Egbart was apprehended
in a certain Mill, and by the Cesarians themselves miserably murdered.

Thus still the living Lord defended his servant against the Pope, that envious
Uicar of Satan, unto whose pleasure, his irremoueable mate Mathilda the
Countess, The chastity of the Pope.
called the Daughter of S. Peter, all this while was wholly addicted, and
clearly did forsake the Marquess of Estensis her husband, whereby it came to
pass (as Lambertus Hirswaldensis writes) yt al men mistrusted incest betwixt
the^: and the common fame was, that Mathilda was the Popes altar by stealth,
and had unlawful company with him, and yet notwithstanding, this Pope did
forbid honest wedlock ^n Priests. The Abbot of Vspergensis, called Conradus de
Bichtenaua, in his Chronicle, writes thus much more of the Pope: It is
manifest (says he) that Heldebrand was not chosen Pope by God, but by guile
and gold intruded himself into the Papacy: for he overthrew all
Ecclesiastical Prelates, disturbed the Kingdom of a Christian Emperor,
pretended the death of a peaceable Prince, defended perjured persons,
maynteyned malice, raised discord, stirred up contentions, made diuorcements,
and utterly abolished whatsoever seemed good amongst godly people. This Pope
(oh notable hypocrite) was ye first Sathanical father, which by
excommunication, deprived Ministers of their wives, and filled the world with
all kind of vicious love, in so much as that famous City, which is
spiritually called Apoc. 11. the Roman Church, became afterward by his mean
very Sodom and Aegipt, by disordred Venus, and wicked Idolatry. And
marvelous Tragedies were made through Italy, France, Germany, and England,
touching the said Pope, which in this place were ouertedious to rehearse, for
this his ordinance was greatly misliked of by many learned men of that time, in
that there was in Germany and France (besides those which were in England and
Italy) above four and twenty Bishops married, and so for the most part, were
all the Clergy of their Dioces, and they all stoutely defended their wedded
estate. These were the Popish acts of that devilish monster. He commanded the
Clergy, under pain of excommunication, to take the vow of chastity: he
forbad the Monks to eat flesh: charged the Christians to fast the Sabbath:
he decreed offerings to be made in solemnization of Masses. Liberius Arrianus
(as one Heretic loves to prefer another) was canonised, The Pope canonizeth
an Heretic.
and his feast (as Benno says) kept Holyday. By him were Priests wedlocks
always renounced, by his commandment tithes were paid to his sacrifices, and
upon his controlment, the King of Polonia lost his Crown. This Heldebrand
condemned the opinion of that godly man Berengarius, concerning the sacrament,
and (as it is said) first practiced ye transubstantiation. By his judgment, if
a lay man possessed Tithes, he committed sacrilege: if he took upon him to
give benefices, he was an Heretic, and he that so received them of a lay man,
was guilty of Idolatry. And at length, he made his leaden sword so strong,
that by force thereof, he from thenceforth kept down the steeled scepter of the
Empire. These things, and many more like to them, the Papists at this day put
in ure.

After long forbearance, Henry ye Emperor armed himself against the wicked
practices of Heldebrand, and in the year of our Lord God.1083. in the Synod
at Brixis, and laid his lewd dealings to his charge, The Pope put from his
Papacy, and an other placed by the Emperor.
and worthyly put him from his Papacy, and substituted another Bishop in his
place, whom he called Clement the third, and sent his power to Rome, whereby he
expelled Heldebrande out of the City, which done, he led Clement into Saint
Peter's Church, arrayed in his Bishops roabes, and there created him Pope, and
brought the City to such penury, that they were constrained to entreat for
peace. But Heldebrande which was foresaken and rejected of the Romans, fled
to Salerna, because he would not come in Caesar's sight, which was done in
the year of our Lord 1086. where he ended in banishment miserably his
tira^ous life, wherein he had slain by sword, famyne, poison, and other kinds
of death, so great a number of men.

Howbeit, the Papists make their boast, that this minister of Satan did many
notable miracles after his death: and after that (as Sigebert witnesses) a
certain Priest, which died in Saxon, had seen him tormented in Hell. Antonius
and Vincentius do both say, that this Heldebrande in the hour of his death
called unto him a certain Cardinal, and did confess that he had grievously
offended, for that he by the Devils enticemente had raised vproares,
discord, hatred, and open wars amongst men: and he commanded this Cardinal to
go unto Henry, to ask pardon of him, for the offenses which the said
Heldebrande had committed against him.

A Comparison betwixt Christ and the Pope.
Those that wright against this Monster, are,
Hugo Candidus Cardinal of Prenestyne. Walramus Bishop of Niemburgh. Venericus
Bishop of Vercella. Rolandus Priest of Permensis. Sigebertus Gemblacensis, and
diverse other.
And Benno numbreth thirtene Cardinals, which sharply did reprove him.

And I my self dare express against the said Pope, the fifth Chapter of Esaias
the Prophet, who in the figure of Christ and his Uineyarde, sees and
foretells the abominations of Rome, the sincke and puddle of all
wickedness: of the which Chapter I will express thee some part, the whole
Chapter thou may read when thou will, for (God be praised) the Queens
Majesty has laid that Book of salvation open to all men to read. And
these that follow are part of the sentences of that Chapter. Viz.

Therefore comes my folk into captivity, because they have no understanding.

Their glory is famished with hunger, and their pride is marred for thirst.

Therefore gapeth Hell, and opens her mouth marvelous wide, that their
pride, boasting, and wealth, with such as rejoice therein, may descend into it.

Thus has man a fall, and is brought low, and the high look of the proud
shall be laid down.

But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy is
praised in righteousness: Then shall the sheep eat in order, and the rich
man's lands which were laid waste, shall the strangers devour.

Woe be unto them, that draw wickedness unto them, with cords of vanity
and sin, as it were with a Carterope*

Woe be unto them that call evil good, and good evil: which make darkness
light, and light darkness: that make sour sweet, and sweet sour.

Woe unto them that are wise in their own conceit, and think themselves to
have understanding.

Woe be unto them that are strong to sup up wine, and expert men to set up
drunkenness.

These give sentence with the ungodly for rewards, but condemn the just
cause of the righteous.

Therefore like as fire licketh up straw, and as the flame consumes the
stubble: even so their root shall be as corruption: and their blossom shall
vanishe away like duste: for they have cast away the Law of the Lord of
hosts, and blasphemed the word of the holy maker of Israel:

Therefore is the wrath of the Lord kindled. etc.

IF these exceptions and every other, in the said fifthe Chapter of the
Prophecy of Esaias, touch not Rome directly, and the Popes holiness properly,
I am far from my purpose: but comparing the Pope and his doings with our
undoubted savior Christ, we shall find the one directlye repugnaunte unto
the other, and then finding them contraryes, it must needs follow, that if
Christ be Christ, then the Pope himself is Antichriste. For CHRIST in his
death and passion assures to us Salvation: Whereas the Pope alludeth the cause
of our salvation, to consist in his Masses, pardons, pilgrimages, beads, and
baggages. Two absolute contraries, and therefore as the one is most excellent,
and sufficient to salvation: so the other is execrable, and the direct passage
to damnation. For thy greter comfort therefore, compare them together in this
sort, and let the infallible troth of Gods eternal word, be vmpire in the
cause. Viz.

IF that be true, which can nor will not lie,
If that be false, which was nor can be true:
If cone for the other taken do lead awry
The minds of men, and make these mischiefs new:
If troth bring bliss, and falsehood carke and care,
Is it not good to know them as they are?
Let troth have then a blameless passage free,
And let Gods word, be ballaunce of the cause:
This little book will then declare to thee,
How far the Pope, dissenteth from the laws
Of God, and seeking honor, gold, and gain,
Naught dreadeth God, nor fears eternal pain.
A flourish fair, alone he seeks to make,
And under white, to shrowde his color black:
And then by craft, and for his profit sake,
The sincere word of God by force to rack:
So as the simple may not thereof deem,
But be deceiude, and think them as they seem.
As Zeuxis work, the lively birds deceivd,
Which peckt for grapes upon a painted wall:
Even so the Pope, if he be once receivde,
Will lead awry the wisest wit of al:
For Zeuxis skill in paynting was not such,
But that in craft the Pope has twice so much.
That so let sequel short express the case,
Let Truth be Tutche to try the gold from dross:
Take now a time his farthell to unlace,
Great is the gain, and none at all the loss:
For treasons so shall die, or not increase,
Cut off the cause, and then the effect will cease.
Compare the Pope (which chalengeth to be
Christ's Uicar here, and over all the earth)
With Christ our Lord, and they so well agree,
As light with dark, and blisfull life with death:
Then, if from Christ directly he do ierre,
Let Christ be Christ, and give him leave to err.
The words of Christ.
JOHN. 14.
I Am the way to Heaven by path direct:
Why seekst thou then to Heaven an other way?
I am the truth, my word without suspect:
Why then in vain, ghost thou more vain astray?
I am the life to mine, most certain sure,
That never fails, why puttst thou more in ure?
MATH. 12.
Come hither all that sinned have to me,
My bloody wounds are in my fathers sight,
Discharge your loades, your burdens lay on me,
The law is dashte, and you are claymed quite:
What man of flint from such a Lord will starte,
As buys his foe by bleeding at the heart?
And true it is, since he is Truth alone,
And none could quench the fathers wrath but he:
And clayming all, he wills the death of none,
But by his death, from death has set us free:
Oh hearken then, and come when he does call,
No Popish pelf, but Christ has bought us all.


Yet hear one of the Popes vvayes to safeguard, for he has a great many:

Viz.

This is the true Copy of the holy writing, that came down from Heaven by an
Angel to Saint Leo Pope of Rome, Some of Heldebrands Angels.
and he bad him take it to King Charles, what time he went to the battle of
Roncewall: and he said, what man or woman that bears this wrighting upon
them with good devotion, and says every day three Pater Nosters, and three
Aues, and one Creed, that day he shall not be overcome with his enemies,
neither bodily nor ghostly, nor with Thieves be robbed nor slain, nor with no
pestilence be vexed, nor with no thunder be slain, nor with no lightning be
brent, nor with no fire be troubled, nor with water be drowned, nor with no
wicked Sprightes be combred, nor he shall have no wrath with Lords nor Ladies,
nor falsely be damned with no false witness, nor taken with no Fayries, nor
with no manner of Axies, nor with no Falling evil be smitten. Also, if a woman
travel with child, lay this wrighting upon her, she shall have easy
delyuerance, and the child right shape and Christendom, and the Mother
purification of holy Church, through the virtue of these holy names of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And these be the names. A notable medicin both for body,
soul, health, life, and goods.
Jesus Christus Messiah Sothor Emanuel Sabbath Adonay Vnigenitus Maiestas
Paraclitus Saluator noster Agios iskiros Agios Adonatos Jasper Melchior and
Baltazar Marcus Mattheus Lucas Iohe^s



Also this writing saues a man from wicked cumbrance of evil fellowship, and
from biting of any woodde Dog: Sancte Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, orate
vt illa me protegant and defendant, a morte perpetua liberemur. Amen. Quare
fremuerunt gentes. etc.

This tale (I trow) does somewhat touch the quick,
And as it came from Heaven, so is it true,
For wrytings come from thence (you know) as thick
As men make nuttes: this matter is not new:
And more is done in Heaven, than we may know,
Believe the Pope, and read another scrowe.
Haec est epistola Sancti Saluatoris, quam Leo Papa transmisit Carolo Regi,
dicens, quod quandocunque aliquis eam super se portauerit, in die, vel etiam
qua eam legerit, vel viderit, non occidetur ferro, nec igne comburetur, nec
aqua submergetur, nec malus homo, nec alia creatura ei nocere poterit. Haec
sunt verba: Crux Christi est armae mirabilis Crux Christi sit semper mecu^ Crux
est quem semper adoro Crux Christi est vera salus Crux Christi superat gladium
Crux Christi soluit vincula mortis Crux Christi est veritas and via Super
Crucem Dominicam aggrediar iter meum Crux Christi pedit omne malum Crux Christi
dat omne bonum Crux Christi aufert poenam aeternam Crux Christi salua me Crux
Christi sis super me, ante me, and post me quia antiquus hostis fugit vbi vidit
te Crux Christi salua, custodi, guberna, and rege me, Thomam, portantem hanc
notam diuinae Maiestatis tuae Alpha and Omega Primus and Nouissimus Medium
Finis Principium primogenitus Sapientia Virtus.

Which may be thus Englished: This is the Epistle of Saint Savior, which Pope
Leo sent over to King Charles, saying: that whenever any man caryeth the same
about him in the day, or else in what day soever he shall read it, or shall
see it, he shall not be killed with any Iron tool, nor be burned with fire,
nor be drowned with water, nor any evil man or other creature may hurt him.
And these are the words: The Cross of Christ is a wonderful defense, The
Cross of Christ be always with me, The Cross is it which I do always
reverence, The Cross of Christ is true health, The Cross of Christ
overcomes the sword, The Cross of Christ does loosen the bonds of Death,
The Cross of Christ is the Truth and the Way. I take my Journey upon the
Cross of the Lord. The Cross of Christ beats down every evil, The Cross
of Christ gives all good things, The Cross of Christ takes away the pains
everlasting, The Cross of Christ save me. Oh Cross of Christ be upon me,
before me, and after me, because the ancient enemy cannot abide the sight of
thee. The Cross of Christ save, keep, govern, and direct me, Thomas, bearing
this note of thy divine Majesty Alpha and Omega first and last midst and
end, beginning and first begotten, Wisdom Virtue.



This thing that thus the Cross of Christ does show,
Must needs prevail and take the full effect:
The argument is strong, there is no man I trow,
The Cross of Christ that will or may reject,
But which is meant? his dome, his death and smarte?
Or else the Cross which man did make by art?
Know mortal man* the Cross was made of wood,
The like whereof is yet upon the ground:
But our safe port, consists in the blood
Of Jesus Christ, the mean which God has found,
Again to get which Adams fall had lost,
Not else to win for any worldly cost.
If so, then take these trifling toys as vain,
And trust to Christ which bids thee come at call:
Christ seeks thee, the Pope does seek his gain,
And will for gold make chaffre of us all.
Let Pope be Pope, and trust in Christ alone,
For Cross of life, besides his death is none.
But yet read this next Iuggling trick I pray thee, and take it for thy
labor, It was never devised so cheap, nor heretofore sold for so little
money. Hoc carmen nunquam dicetur, sed super hominem, Mulierem, and puerum
feretur, pro latronibus.

VAdo and venio ad vos cum amore Dei, cum humilitate Christi, cu^ sanctitate
beatae Mariae, cum fide Abraham, cu^ iusticia Isaac, cum virtute David, cum
potestate Petri, cum fiducia Pauli, cum verbo Dei, cum potestate Gregorij, cum
oratione Clementis, cum flumine Iordanis. per. per. c. p. 9. L. e. g. a. q. q.
est. p. t. i. K. a. b. 9. L. K. 2. a. x. T. 9. t. b. a. m. 9.2.4.2.1. b. p. x.
c. 9. K. que. A. 9.9. p. o. qq. 3. Vince Pater, vince Domine vince Alpha and w.
Adonay Jesus autem Transiens per medium illorum ibat. In nomine Patris and
filij etc.



Which may be thus Englished. I Do go, and I do come unto you with the love
of God, with the humility of Christ, with the holiness of blessed Marie, with
the faith of Abraham, with the justice of Isaac, with the virtue of David, with
the might of Peter, with the constancy of Paul, with the word of God, with
the auctority of Gregory, with the prayer of Clement, with the flood of
Iordane, per. per. c. p. 9. L. e. g. a. q. q. est. p. t. i. K. a. b. 9. L. K.
2. a. x. T. 9. t. b. a. m. 9.2, 4.2.1. que. p. x. c. 9. K. que. A. 9.9. p. ^.
qq. 3. Oh only father oh only Lord oh only beginning and end: our Lord and
Jesus passing through the midst of the^ went In the name of the father and of
the son etc.

This charm at any time need not be said,
But man or wife, or child that bears it,
Of these at al, need not to be afraid,
The charm it self will thereof set him quite.
Thus has it virtue, more than I can tell,
Or else the effect thereof is very small.
But if you read and mark it very well,
The show is gay, and blasphemous withal.
But prating Prelates, which proll and pry for pence,
Wey God nor Devil, so gain may grow from thence.
Yet another. Hoc scriptum inuenit Joseph Aromathia super plagam lateris Jesus
Christi, digitis Domini scriptum, cum tolleretur Corpus d^ Cruce: Quicunque hoc
super se portauerit, mal^ morte non morietur, si in Christo crediderit. Et in
omnibus angustijs cito liberabitur. Nec timeat aliquod periculum huius mundi.
etc.

Thus in English: Joseph Aromathia did find this writing upon the wou^d of the
side of Jesus Christ, written with the fingers of God, when the body was taken
from the Cross: whosoever shall carry this writing about him, A good
Parentesis or fair shadow, to a foul lie.
shall not die any evil death (if he believe in Christ) and in all perplexities
he shall soon be delivered, nor let him not fear any worldly danger at al.

And this is the writing as follows. FOns Alpha and Omega figa figalis
Sabbath Emanuel Adonay O Rentone Neger Sahe Pangeton Common A g l A neray Eloy
Ihe Marcus Matheus Lucas Johannes Titulus Triumphalis Jesus Nazarenus Rex
Iudeorum. See how the faith which we should repore in the blood of Christ, is
transported to a piece of Crossed Papacy.
Ecce dominicae crucis signu^, fugite parts aduersae, vicit Leo de Tribu
Iudae, Radix David. Alleluya, Kirieleison, Christ eleison, Pater Noster, Aue
Maria, Et ne nos: and veniat super nos salutare tuum.

Oremus.



Here have thou seen my friend, four noble things,
The first came down from heaven unto the Pope,
Which he must yield to Charles that noble king,
Therein to put his comfort, life, and hope:
For he, and his, and all that bear the same,
Are thereby quit from dolor, sin, and shame.
An Epistle is the second writing flat,
Sent to the Pope by Savior the Saint:
So long as Charles does bear, or reads that,
No foe, nor fire, have force to make him faint:
No water drown, no lance, nor sharpest knife,
Nor Iron tool, have power to hurt his life.
The third, a charm should seem of great effect,
Preserving aye both man, and child, and wife,
From naughty thieves, and persons to suspect,
That would impair their bodies, goods or life:
Such strength it has, thou needst not it to reed,
But bear the same, it will perform the deed.
The fourth thou see, the place where it was found,
By whom, and when, and what the virtue is,
A place of life, a place that does abound
With streams of grace, of joys, and perfect bliss:
That writing to, as suredly was there,
As now the Pope himself is present here.
If then thou will be clear from force of war,
If fires flame, nor waters rage shall dread:
If neither thief nor Iron tool shall scarre,
Thy journey once: Then stick not this to read:
For sure, they must be perfect strong and true,
Or else the Pope is worse than Turk or Jew.
A Turk? nay worse. A Jew? a helhounde sure,
That thus would wash the blood of Christ away:
The Devil himself durst never put in ure,
The flock of Christ so foully to betray,
As to deface the merits of his death,
And make us trust in trifling things on earth.
If Christ affirm, that he is life alone,
If other way to heaven there cannot be,
If other truth besides his truth be none,
What is he then, but may this mischief see?
A frantic man with pride bewitched still,
For money sake, the Saints of God will kill.
And yet for that I would not credit crave,
Without just cause, note what this Leo was,
Iaphetus writes (my words you shall not have)
A thing right strange, and how it came to pas:
A noble child, brought up in virtuous hope,
Was made a wicked man by being Pope.
These are the words of Iaphetus. LEo the tenth, by his Country a Florentine,
of the most noble stock of Medices, and called before he was Pope John de
Medices, was sometime of Saint Mary's in Dominica. He was placed by the
Cardinals (beyond all expectation) in the place of Julius deceassed. He was
from his infancy diligently brought up, and instructed in learning, and had
most learned teachers, chiefly Angelus Politianus, a man right skillful both
in the Greek and Latin tongs, and did afterward love learned me^ above all
measure. In the thirtenth year of his age, he was made Cardinal, by
Innocentius the eight, and the eight and thirtith year, he was made Bishop of
Rome. This Leo, of his own nature was quiet and mild, but for ye most part
ruled by troublesome and cruel persons, at whose pleasure, he arrogantly
suffered many things to be done. And being given to the delicious ease of his
body, he pampred his flesh in sundry delights and desires of voluptuous
pleasures. In his delicate banquets, to make him more pleasant at the table, he
greatly respected Musitions and Wine: but he persecuted the Kingdom of God in
Luther and others (like a second Caiphas) with continual hatred. For at a
time, when Cardinal Bembos proponed a certain question of that joyful
message of God, he wretchedly answered, How greatly that fable of Christ
has bin beneficial to us and our coat, it is evident enough to all the
World. The most wicked verlet did here most plainly express himself to be
that Antechrist, which Paul calls, the man of Sin, and child of perdition.
He sent forth pardons no less large than foolish, to extorte money at his
pleasure, for the maintenance of his Harlots and Bastards, and dispersed an
innumerable number of prolling Friars, to carry his trashe through all
Christian Realms.

Did Peter thus? is this the way to feed
Christ's little flock, whereof he took such care?
No no God wot, this ravening Wolf in deed
Will rend them quick, and eat them as they are:
A Tigre fierce, a lump of raging sin,
That seeks to spoil, that Christ by death did win.
What man or beast, what feend of Hell could say,
The Gospel pure a fable but to be?
But that the Lord would by his mouth bewray
This Antichrist, that all the world might see
A Devil in flesh: which would for money sake,
Himself, and all the world to Hell betake.
But since of monstrous things we speak, proceed:
A monster foul begets as foul a whelpe,
A monstrous word at first, and now a deed
In monstrous sort, does spring to be his help:
He prolles and pries, still farther gain to win,
And gets him mates, to help his mart therein.
Whereupon Conradus Grebelius vvriteth against Caietanus in this sort.
Germanos, decimas tunc cum extorquere pararet,
Qualem Oratorem iussit adire Leo?
Demisit quendam, labor esset dicere qualem,
Nimirum, verbum est dicere sat, Monachum.
Thus in English: When Leo did purpose t'extorte the tithes of Germany,
What Orator did he command into that place think ye?
One did he se^d, but pain it were, what one for to express,
Yet at a word I will declare, forsooth a Monk, no less.


And further Conradus says: Tot aureorum nummorum millia, Sampson Franciscanus
ille Mediolane^sis, per eas, in varijs terris collegit, vt mu^dus super eo
prodigio valde admiraretur. Supra. 1200000. enim ducat orum summa^ erat, quos
vno die pro Papatu emendo obtulit. In English. Sampson that Monk of Saint
Fraunces of Millaine, Avarice in a Monk.
gathered by those trumperies so many thousands of gold in diverse Countries,
as all the world greatly wondered at that monster, for he proffered above the
sum of twelve hundred thousand Ducats in one day, to buy the Popedom.

A mass of money here was lewdly got,
And yet more lewdly would have bin imployde,
A myching Monk, and eke a myser hot,
Which many souls through falsehood had destroyed,
Would now be Pope, through Simonie you see, Symonie.

As such there have bin many more than he.
Leo (says Conradus) did make one and thirty Cardinals in one day, by the
which he scraped up a huge sum of money: The Pride and rauine of the Pope,
controlled with the gentle admonition of God.

The chaste Pope had proper children.


and fore-tokens of most horrible things to follow, were seen in the self
same day. In the year of our Lord.1520. when Solimon conquered the Rhodes by
force of Arms, even upon Christemasse day when Leo should go out of his
privy Chamber, to say his first Mass in the morning, a certain house
builded most beautifully of Marble, fell suddenly down at his back, and slew
a number of his guarde. By this foretoken, God signified to the Pope, that he
should shortly perish for his cruel and wicked offenses. For he had
wonderfully enriched his bastards, and exalted them (by doing manifest injuries
to others) to most high promotio^s spiritual and temporal. For he made
Iulianus, who was accounted but his Nephew by the Sister side, Duke of Mutius,
and Laurentianus Duke of Vrbyn, and married the one of them with the Sister of
Carolus Sabaudus, and the other with the Duchess of ^olon. And he deprived
the Duke of Vrbin of his Dukedom, Tyranny.
thereby to place the one of them in his stead. And he endeavored the like
against the Duke of Ferrary, but prevailed not, howbeit, he made Julius his
Nephew a Cardinal.

In the year of our Lord God.1521. the first day of December, so soon as he
had heard that the Frenchmen were vanquished, slain, taken prisoners, and
banished out of Italy, An impassible joy conceived in bloodshed, was the death
of the Pope.
by the Emperoures subjects, and his power, in the midst of his pottes, being
merry, and laughing beyond measure, he gave up the ghost, and in a good
mind, when he believed not that there was Heaven or Hell after this life.

Whereupon Actius Sennazarius pleasantly writes thus. Sacra, sub extrema, si
forte requiritis, hora,
Cur Leo non poterat sumere? vendiderat.
In English. And if thou ask, why Leo could not take the sacred ryte
In his last hour? the reason was, that he had sold the^ quite.


A pretty jest (if serious things be gamesome) Ma^mon has delivered to
Belsebub his patrimony, the judgment apperteyneth to God, and there I leave
it.

Of another Pope.
Vrbanus quintus ad Grecorum Imperatorem misit tres Agnus dei, cum versibus
infrascriptis.

BAlsamus, and munda Cera, cum Chrismatis vnda
Conficiunt Agnum, quod munus d^ tibi magnum.
Font velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum
Fulgura de sursum depellit, omne malignum
Peccatum frangit vt Christi sanguis and angit,
Pregnans seruatur, simul and Partus liberatur.
Dona defert dignis, virtute distruet ignes,
Portatus, mundae de fluctibus eripit vndae.
In English: Vrbanus the fifth, sends to the Emperor of the Gretians, three
Agnus Dei: with the verses that follow.

Balm, wax and water of the Chrisme an Agnus Dei make
Which worthy Iem of my free gift, to thee I do betake.
For as it is of water made, and sanctified by speech,
So in effect, as Christ's blood, the virtues thereof reach,
Each lightning to suppress, and drive away each sin,
It helps the child wife, and does yield her child succes therein:
It gives to the worthy man reward, and quenches fire,
It saues the wight that bears the same, from waters rage and ire.


On the back side of which Latin verses, (which were lost from an
Archpapist) I find these conclusions written: viz. From lightning and thunder,
From fire and water,
A woman in travel,
From all evil spirits.


And also these two verses are written upon the back side thereof, which I
think not incident to that matter, for that heretofore I have heard them
properly alluded in an other sense. The verses are these, and concern Marriages
I suppose.

Prima dies grata est, secunda and aduena gratae,
Tertia grata parum, quatridiana fetat.
They may be thus Englished: The first day is honorable, the second
commendable,
The third tolerable, the fourth abominable.


Good Reader here I have with long discourse
Laid forth these Popes even somewhat plain to thee,
Thereby the better to direct thy course
In playnest wise their packing parts to see,
Digest it well, and wey the thing aright,
And then (no doubt) thou will detest them quite.
Their trinkets here I bring unto thy show
As if it were into a Market place,
Peruse them well, and view them all arowe,
And fancy those, wherein thou find grace,
And fancied once, do take them for thy hyre,
Accept my pain, I do no more require.
A description of certain of the Popes vvares and merchaundize of late sent
over into England,
1 SVperaltare, is a quadrant or stone, four square of Marble, and has at
every corner, and in the midst, a Cross, and is hallowed: these stones are
portible, and scrue to say Mass on in any secret place, where there is no
Altar, and to that purpose are they sent over into England.

2 This Cross represents the Cross of Christ, and the very Cross it self
once hallowed and bestowed in secreate place, where it may be honored, or
else carried about man, woman, or child (and being strengthened with the Epistle
of Saint Savior) saves and defends them which bear it, from al manner of
peril, both bodily and ghostly, as Pope Leo the tenth promises.

3 IHS. This pendent, with the charm aforesaid, beginning Vado and venio ad
vos. etc. written and enclosed within the same, and borne about man, woman or
child, defends them from thieves, and all other dangers in travail, either
by water or land.

4 The Agnus Dei, was sent to the Emprour of Grecia by the Pope, and has as
great virtue as the blood of Christ it self, it is composed of Balm, Uirgin
wax, and Font water, it suppresseth thunder, lightning and tempest, and
helps women in their travail, and saves the infant etc. and now is
conveyed into England with promises of like effect.

5 Bulla, is a patent from the Pope, whereof there are sundry, some yield a
vile sort of his blessings, some a good sort of his curses, some his desperate
excommunications and communications: but all sorts are sealed with lead, the
true impression of which seal follows under the last figure, which is.15.

6 This figure of a pierced contrite and torn heart, was cut out in fair
white paper, wherein was folded a little Iette beadstone, and in the midst of
the heart, lengthwise, was written, Bauariae granum benedictum, and directed
with these words: To his loving friend E.D. with grant of five hundredth
days of pardon.

7 A pair of hallowed beads of that proportion, sent from a Catholic friend
to an ancient Gentlewoman in England, the beads were of Box, with promise of
safety to the receiver, who did purchase them.

8 A pair of beads of the like number, but less beads, ^ent likewise from
one friend to another, with promises of larger success, than has fallen out
(God be praised therefore) the beads seem to be dark brassel, or bright
Ibonie.

9 A Crucifix with Mary and John, under which are written these words: Haec
tres mihi spes, These are my three hopes, as if Christ alone were not of
sufficient value.

10 An other Agnus Dei which is hollow, and has the gospel of S. John written
in fine paper, and placed in the co^cauitie of the said Jewel, and works
wonders in the defense of such as wears them: in so much, as it defe^deth them
from all perils whatsoever.

11 The figure discloseth it self: For he knows not whether Christ or Mary
be of greater power, and therefore stands in doubt which way to turn
himself.

12 Are one set, or ten great Iet beads, and they promise so many hundred
days of pardon, as they are recorded over in, that is, for every one day wherein
they are repeted, every one beade yields one hundredth days of pardon.

13 These four little beads which seem to be upon a string, were hallowed
by the Pope as all the rest were, but they specially were put in a piece of
paper likewise hallowed, in which paper is written as follows. viz. Of these
four grains, two are for Master G.L. and the other two for Master I.B. sent
the^ by Sir P.S. who also requested of the receivers to have said a Pater
noster for his fathers soul, another for his mothers, and the third for
himself: with which, if also they will add one for me, who am partly causer
of the sending of them to the^, I (P.S.) hope to requite it: every grain
yields a thousand days of pardon. The other loose beads were sent to other
friends to like purpose, but how much affiaunce both the sender and receiver
do attribute to these baggages, were both too long and too shameful to write,
but at the least they yield more days of pardon in one year, than there be
natural days in two years.

14 These are likewise hallowed grains, sent over, with promise of infinite
days of pardon to al those which will buy them.

15 The Popes common Seal to al Bulls.

To which purpose.

Christ with his blood has bought us, not with gold:
The Pope for gain both Christ and us does sell.
My life (says Christ) to save your lives was sold:
My trashe (says Pope) will keep you all from Hell.
Lament your sins (says Christ) and follow me:
My pardons (says the Pope) must set you free.
My Kingdom is not of this world (says Christ)
Let him that would be chief be made your thrall.
Upon the earth (says Pope) I am the highest,
The fulness of my power includes all.
Now if the Pope and Christ do thus agree,
How can the Pope (on earth) Christ's Uicar be?
Legatus and Apostolus are one,
In sense, (I mean) they differ but in tongue.
Christ had but twelve apparently is known:
The Pope (forsooth) has such a shameful throng,
As every King he can salute with one,
And yet he wants not a beast at home.
And of the twelve that Christ's had here on earth
One (traitorlike) was ever glad of gold,
And he began: and since Christ's precious death
(Even Iudas-like) these Prelates aye have sold
The merits of his agony and smarte,
And say our health consists in their art.
Well, Christ's Apostles were poor Fishermen,
And taught the world the sacred word of life,
And for their pains were whipped now and then,
Some stoande to death, and some were kilde with knifes
His Saints were slain, for that they blamed sin,
They preached Truth, and spent their lives therein.
The Popes are Lords and mates with every King:
They come from him that never felt no want:
They take good gold for all the trash they bring:
They must have store, they care not who have skant:
His Saints are such, as seek their Princes spoil,
Their countries sack, and conquest of the soil.
Show one such I pray you:

The Diu'lish Monk that poisoned King JOHN,
Does prove (alas) this Tragedy too true:
The Maid of Kente, may well come forth for one,
That sought to change our Honey into Rue:
But as they sought, so God that is most just,
Did yield them meede, and will do still I trust.
And how? The Monk.

THe hearts of Kings are in the hand of God,
Their rule and power are lent them by the Lord:
The Tyrant stout is but his scourge and rod:
The godly Prince also he does avorde
Where he does please: and straightly has appointed,
No violent hand to touch the Lords anointed.
This Monk forsooth that Simon Swynsted hight,
A Swine in deed, and quite deuoyde of grace,
When that King John had brought this Realm in plight
From Rebels rage, to somewhat better case:
In doubt the King (who in that Abbey lay)
Should touch their state, deuisde this wicked way:
I will (quod he) vnplace this cruel King,
And rid his life, though I do die therefore: A desperate Monk.

For why (says he) it is a worthy thing
For one to die, to save a number more:
I can but die, and die I will herein,
And kill my self, a Martyrs name to win. A stinking Martyr.

Then goth he to the greasy Abbot straight,
And breaks to him the treason in his thought, Talis pater qualis filius.

Who weeps for joy, and now concludes the baight,
Whereby (alas) this Regicide is wrought.
The Monk will die to kill his liege and King,
The Abbot eke absolues him of the thing.
And thus (absolvde) the Monk and Abbot part:
Forthwith the Monk does to a garden go,
And there begins experience of his art:
He takes a Tode, and beats and pricks it so,
As that same Tode, through rigor of the pain,
Casts up his gorge, wherewith the King is slain.
The same he puts into a cup of wine,
And to the King he commes with smiling cheer,
My Liege (says he) here is a draft so fine,
As like to it, thou never drankest year: The falsest heart shows fairest face.

I will begin, accept it at my hand:
This washaile shall be joyous to thy land.
The Monk therewith did drink a hearty draught,
And humbly gave the rest unto the King,
Who drank the same, whereby his death he caught:
A wicked deed and lamentable thing,
A miser Monk with smooth and smiling show
To kill a King, the Lords anointed so.
This deadly drink on either side thus taken,
The Monk unto the Farmorie does go,
His guts do swell, his belly breaks in twain,
A death too good for him that lived so,
To slaye himself, thereby to kill his King,
A traytrous deed, and detestable thing.
The King also a three days after that
Gave up his life, to live with God above.
The Abbot and the Monks which ioyed thereat
Concluded then, that for the constant love
The murdrer bare to them in doing this,
Their Popish aid should bring his soul to bliss,
And granted by decree, in Chapter Court
Three other Monks continually to sing
For his sweet soul, that did prevent the hurt
Of them and theirs, by poisoning the King:
So as by massing mean the Devil must miss
The earthly Devil, which durst accomplish this.
Lo, double murder is absolved here:
A Thief does kill himself his King to slay:
The holy Monks herewith not only bear,
But make a mean to take this sin away.
Though God does say full plain: Thou shall not kill:
The Pope does say again: He did not ill.
If God and Pope herein not disagree,
Then air and earth are both in nature just.
But from such Popes the faithful flock are free,
Which in the death of Christ alonely trust.
Triumph oh God, beat back thy foes again,
And grant our Queen long days and good to reign.
AMEN.
IF other men be of my nature and conceit, then surely in reading this short
repetall of the destruction of king John, they are in double wise perplexed:
the first, for that a noble king, after many battles fought with foreign foes:
many conflicts with his nobility (set against him by the Pope:) many cursses
and excommunications pronounced against him by the Pope himself: should now
at last be murdered, by a foul, fat, false, flattering Monk. And the
second, for that the same Devil incarnate, must to the delusion of the world,
and to make a path way to teach the practice of Prince murthur, be in a manner
defied, or at least so zealously dealt withal, as if he had bin a worthy Martyr
of Christ, and died by the Tyranny of some Prince in the humble defense of the
faith of Christ. But these perplexities and many more, are, and must be
patientlye put up, where the preposterous orders of the Pope are in place.
But (God be praised) we are clear from them, and so I beseech the Lord to
continue us. But when I had deepelye perpended, how straightly the omnipotent
Lord forbids murder, I could but tremble, at ye arrogancy of the Abbot,
that durst absolve the same, and chieflye before y^ deed was done, as though
he might have said: In despite of him which forbids murder, I will dispense
with murder. Of what sect was this Abbot think you? certainly he was no
Barnardine. Well, because thou shall not stay long, I will tell the of what
coat he was: forsooth a Caian, and if thou ask me what a Caian is, I must
express them thus. They are the Heretics that worship Cayne, saying, that he
was made of the one virtue or power, that is, of the Devil, and Abel of the
other. These Caians say, that Judas was a good man, and his act a benefit to
mankind: for he perceiving how much the passion of Christ should prevail,
delivered him to the Jews, that by his death man might be redeemed. They
affirm, that the old law was naught, and deny the General resurrection:
Of which religion no doubt this Abbot Swinesheade (this Abbot of Swinsted I
should say) was: for had he either feared the law of God, or believed the
Gospel of Christ, he would never have consented to the detestable deed of the
Monk, nor so grossly have absolved (or rather committed) such execrable
murder. But being a Cayan, and made of the one virtue and power, as Cayne was,
he might dispense with Monk Simon, as the Caians do with Judas. For seeing
there might be a benefit to the Monks by the poisoning of king John, why
should not the Abbot ( Iudas-lyke) deliver the king his master into the
hands of the Monk to be poisoned, so well as Judas delivered his master
Christ into the hands of the Jews to be crucified? The reason is like, and
sure they be Saints alike, and therefore I leave Saint Cayn, S. Judas, S.
Abbot, and S. Monk, to that one virtue or power, whereof the Caians affirm
their Cayn was made: And I commend poor murdered Abel, and king John
poisoned, unto Christ crucified, in whom and by whom I hope of joyful
resurrection to eternal life, by the only merits of Christ his death and
passion, to the which god bring us all. AMEN.

And touching the holy Maid of Kent, I will shortly rehearse her tragedy, and
thus it was.
ABout the time of Easter in the seauententh year of the reign of K. Henry the
eight, it happened a certain maiden named Elizabeth Barton, then servant to one
Thomas Kob of the parish of Aldington, twelve miles distant from Canterbury
in the County of Kent, to be touched with a great infirmity in her body,
which did asce^d at diverse times up into her throat, and swelled greatly,
during the time whereof, she seemed to be in grievous pain, in so much as a man
would have thought, that she had suffered the panges of death it self,
until the disease descended, and fell down into the body again.

Thus she continued by fits the space of seven months and more: and at the
last in the month of November (at which time also a young child of her
masters lay desperately sick in a Cradle by her) she being vexed with the
former disease, The beginning of her diuinations, and yet a troth by chance.
asked (with great pains and groaning) whether the child were yet departed
this life or no: and when the women which attended upon them both in their
sickness, answered no, she replied that it should anon: which word was no
soonrr uttered, but the child fetched a great sigh and withal, the soul
departed out of the body. This her divination and foretelling, was the first
matter, that moved her hearers to admiration: But after this, in sundry of her
fits following, although she seemed to the beholders to ly as still as a dead
body (not moving any part at all) as well in the traunces themselves as other
the panges passed also, she told plainly of diverse things done at Church,
and other places, where she was not present, which nevertheless she seemed
(by signs proceeding from her) most liuelye to behold (as it were) with her
eye. She told also of Heaven, Things before taught her by her co^federates
Hell, and Purgatory, and of the joys and sorrows, that sundry departed
Souls had, and suffered there. She spoke frankely against corruption of
manners and evil life.

She exhorted to repair to the church, hearing of Mass, confession to
Priests, prayer to our Lady, and Saints, and to be short, made in all
points, confession, and confirmation of the Popish Creed, and Catechism,
and that so deuoutely and discreetely (in the opinion of the Recorder of this
History) that he thought it not possible for her to speak in that manner. The
mark she shot at.


But amongst other things, this one was ever much in her mouth, that Here
began the Pageant.
she would go home, and that she had been at home, whereas (to understanding of
the standers by) she had never been from home, nor from the place where she
lay: whereupon being (in the time of another trance) demanded where that
home was, she answered, Here began the Pageant.
where she saw and heard the joys of heaven, where Saint Michael weyed
souls, where Saint Peter carried the keys, and where she her self had the
company of our Lady at Court of street, and had heartilye besoughte her to
heal her disease, who also had commanded her, to offer unto her a Taper in
her Chapel there, and to declare boldly to all Christian people, that our
Lady of Court of Street had relieved her from the very point of death: A
sweet preparatiue to to a new Pilgrimage.

A lie at first dash, for there were no belles in the steeple.


and that her pleasure was, that it should be rong for a miracle. A sweet
preparatiue to to a new Pilgrimage.

A lie at first dash, for there were no belles in the steeple.




Which words when her master heard, he said that there were no Belles at that
chapel, A ready answer.
whereunto the maiden answered nothing, but the voice that spoke in her
proceeded, saying. Our blessed Lady will show more miracles there shortly, for
if any depart this life suddenly, or by mischance in deadly sin, if he be
vowed to our Lady heartily, he shall be restored to life again, to receive
shrifte and housel, and after to depart this world with Gods blessing. She was
informed immediately after dinner, of the best dishe that the Hermit should
have to supper.
Besides this, she told them what meat the Heremyte of that Chapel of our
Lady at Court of street had to his supper, and many other things concerning
him, whereat they marvelled greatly.

And from that time foreward, she resolved with her self, to go to Court of
street, and there to pray and offer to our Lady: which also she did
accordinglye, and was there delayde of her cure for a certain season, but yet
(in the mean time) put in assured hope of recovery. During which mean
while, the fame of this marvelous Maiden was so spread abroad, that it came
to the ears of Warham the Archbyshoppe of Canterburye, who directed thither
Doctor Bocking, Master Hadleigh, and Barnes, three Monks of Christ's Church
in Canterbury, father Jews and his fellow, two obseruant Friars, his
Official of Canterbury, and the Parson of Aldington, with commission to
examine the matter, and to inform him of the truth. Papacy hydeth Treason,
and adua^ceth Traitors.
These men apposed her of the chief points of the Popish belief, and finding
her sound therein, not only waded no further in the discovery of the fraud,
but gave it great countenance, and joined with her in the setting forth of the
same: so that at her next voyage to our Lady of Court of street, she entered
the Chapel with Aue Regina Coelorum in pricksong, accompanied with these
Commissioners, many Ladies, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen of the best degree, and
three thousand persons besides of the common sort of people (as my Author
says.) There fell she eftsoons into a marvelous passion before the Image of
our Lady, The weak maid is now a strong hypocrite.
much like a body diseased with the falling Evil, in the which, she uttered
sundry metricall and riming speeches, tending to the worship of our Lady of
Court of street (whose Chapel there she wished should be better maynteyned,
and to be furnished with a daily singing Priest) tending also to her own
bestowing in some Religious house (for such (said she) was our Ladies
pleasure) and to the advancement of the credit of such feigned miracles as the
Author hereof reports.

This done, and understood to the Archbishop, she was by him appointed to
Saint Sepulchers, a house of Nonnes in Canterbury, where she labored sundry
times of her disease, and continued her wonted working of miracles, resorting
often (by way of trance only) to our Lady of Court of street, who also ceased
not to show hirselfe mighty in operation there Miracles in show and not in
deed, as shall be showed how in the end of this story.
lighting Candles without fire, moystning women's breasts, that before were dry
and wanted Milk, restoring all sorts of sick to perfect health, reducing the
dead to life again, and finally, doing all good to all such as were measured,
and vowed (as the manner was) unto her, at Court of street.

Thus Elizabeth Barton was advanced from the condition of a base seruante, to
the state of a glorious Nonne: The Hermit of Court of street was enriched by
daily offering: She was made a Nonne, you see the cause why.
Saint Sepulchers got the possession of a holy Maiden: God was blasphemed:
the holy Uirgin his Mother mishonored: the silly people were miserably mocked:
the Bishops, Priests, and Monks in the mean time, with closed eyes wincked,
and the Devil and his limbs with open mouth laughed at it.

And thus the matter stood sundry years together, until at length the holy
Maiden (not contenting her self within her former bounds of hypocrisy)
stepped into matters which touched the Kings Majesty Henry the eight of
immortal memory, and the state of the Realm, so deeply and so peruersely,
as tended to the overthrow of all together, as commonly the Popes practices
do: whereupon by his highness commandment, her doings were once again
examined (not by men given over to believe illusions, Hypocrisy is found out,
when sincerity pursues her.
but by such as had the prudent power of proving Sprightes,) and then was
manifestly found, apparently proved, and by the offenders themselves
confessed, that the weakness of the Maiden, and the rigor of her infirmity
at first, caused her to speak in the time of her trance she knew not what (as
familiarly we see many sick folks in the extremity of their sickness do)
and that Richard Master Clearke, Ri. Master was the man which told her what
should be done at the Church and Hermitage always before hand.
Parson of Aldington aforesaid, did persuade her, and brought her in belief,
that the marvelous words which she spoke in her trance, proceeded of the
inspiration of the holy ghost, and that she was greatly to be blamed, if she
would hide, or dissemble the wonderful works of God showed in her: for before
this his said instruction, she said constantly, that she could not remember,
that she spoke any such notable words in her trances as was reported to her
by the said Richard Master, but after that instruction, she not alonely
found courage to forge, feign, and counterfeit such manner of traunces, and
crafty speeches, as the said Parson told her that she used in her sickness,
but also imagined what might best serve the turn of her, and her
confederates, Now waxed she cunning.
and that would she in dissimuled traunces utter, and what she uttered, that
would they deliver abroad as verities revealed by the holy Ghost: and at
last, by the counsel of Edward Bocking Monk, professed in the Monastery of
Christ's Church in Canterbury, and Doctor of Divinity, the said Elizabeth
seeming to be in the ecstasy and extremity of her sickness, in a manner
distract in a trance, said amongst other wonderful words, that she should
never take health of her body, till such time as she had visited the image of
our Lady, being in the Chapel of Court at street aforesaid: and that our
Lady appeered unto her, and showed her, that if she came to the said Chapel
at the day to her appointed, Another lie, for she was not healed at her
coming, nor at all by miracle, but by Physic, as appears in the Statute
Anno. 25* Henrici. 8.
she should be restored to her health by miracle (where in deed she was
before that restored to her perfect health by diet and Physic, and by the
course of nature, which expelled the matter being cause of her sickness in
the mean times, whiles the said Parson of Aldington was with the said
Archbishop of Canterbury in advancing her credit as aforesaid: whereupon, the
said Edward Bocking, and Richard Master, councelled and procured the said
Elizabeth to be brought and conveyed to the said Chapel of our Lady, and
there openly in the presence of the people (which were above two thousand
persons) she used and experimented such like traunces and alterations of her
face, and other the outward sensible parts of her body, This lie wrought
wonders by the help of her ghostly father.
as she used in the extremity and ecstasy of her said sickness: she declared
that she then and there received her health by miracle of our Lady, whose image
was in ye said Chapel, and that it was the pleasure of God, that the said
Edward Bocking should be her ghostly father, and that she should be a
Religious woman, as she was taught by the said Edward Bocking, and R. Master.
And within a while after the demonstration of such false, feyned, and
dissimuled traunces, she appeared to the people to be suddaynely revealed from
her sickness and afflictions, by the intercession and means of the Image of
our Lady, being in the same Chapel, A dead black made a live woman, as the
blind man received his sight by miracle at S. Albanes.
by means of which false feyned hypocrisy, dissimuled and cloked sanctity,
so conspired, and craftily ymagined by the said Edward Bocking, and Richard
Master, the said Elizabeth was brought into a marvelous fame, credit, and
good opinion of a great multitude of people of this Realm. And to increase
the fame of the said false feyned hypocryte, the said Elizabeth afterward,
by the council and procurement of the said Edward Bocking, entered into the
religion, and became a Nonne professed in the said Priorie of Saint Sepulchers
The holy Nonne scarce honest.
to whom the said Edward Bocking had commonly his resort, not without
probable, vehemente, and violente suspicion of incontinencie, pretending to be
her ghostly father by Gods appoyntmente, and by conspiracy twixte him and her,
caused her still to persist and abide in the practicing of her said false
hypocrisy, and dissimuling traunces and raptes, and that she should surmise to
the people, that when she was in such dissimuled alteration of her sensible
parts of her body Blasphemy.
that she was then rapt by Almighty God, from the affections of this world,
and told by the holy spirit of God, many things that should follow to the
world, for punishmente of sins of the Princes and the people. And that she
should say, that she was much provoked and tempted, as well to the sin of
the flesh, She felt her self a woman, yet honest enough she says.
as otherwise, by her ghostly Enemy the Devil, at diverse and sundry times, in
diverse and sundry fashions, and yet nevertheless, that she by the grace of God
was preserved, and steadfastly resisted such temptations. By occasion of which
counsel and procuremente of the said Edward Bocking, the said Elizabeth by
continuance of time, took such a courage upon her, that she falsely feigned, and
said that she had many revelations of Almighty God and his Saints, with
heavenly lights, heavenly voices, heavenly melodyes and joys, and specially
in a Chapel of Saint Giles in the said Nonnerie, Sweet pastime in S. Giles
his Chapel in the night time.
to the which Chapel she oftentimes resorted, to receive visions and
revelations, as commanded by God (as she falsely reported) and specially by
night, saying, that the Dorture door was made open unto her by Gods power,
uttering the same as well to the said Edward Bocking, as diverse other
persons, by which her false feyned revelations, and cloked hypocrisy, she was
reputed amongst diverse people of this Realm, to be a very holy woman enspired
with God, where indeed she had never vision or revelation from God, as she
has plainly and openly confessed her self. And therefore her stealing forth
of the Dorture by night (which was once or twice weekelie) was not for
spiritual business, I believe herein she said true.
nor to receive revelations of God, but rather for bodily communication and
pleasure with her said ghostly father, and other her friends, which could not
have so good leisure and opportunity with her by day. And for a perpetual
memory of the said feigned and dissimuled hypocrisy, and false revelations of
the said Elizabeth, the said Edward Bocking, Richard Master, and John Diring a
Monk in the said Monastery of Christ's Church aforesaid, made, writ, and
caused to be written sundry Books both great and small, both Printed and
written, concerning the particularities of the said false and feyned
hypocrisy and revelations of the said Elizabeth, or the defense or great
praise of the same, amongst the which, one Pamphlet, containing four and
twenty leaves (penned I wot not by what doltish dreamer) Printed by Robert
Redman, entitled, A marvelous work of late done at Court of street in
Kente, and published (as is pretended) to the devout people of that time, for
their spiritual consolation, was one, in the which was found the very first
beginning to have bin as aforesaid, so far as the premises tend any thing
at all to the credit of the said Elizabeth Barton: but the rest amongst a
number more, were found out by the great wisdom of the said late King
HENRY, and his politic Counselloures, for the better safeguard of the said
King, and tranquillity of his Realm and Subjects, the subversion and
destruction of the which, The mark which the Pope and Papists did, and do
shoot at to overthrow.
was all that this feyned hypocrisy pretended, of the which I will yet
rehearse a Pageante or two more, and make an end.

There is further amongst the said false and feyned revelations (surmised by
the said Elizabeth, and put in writing in diverse Books, by the false
conspiracy, means, and procurement of the said Edward Bocking, Richard
Master, The Devil did often visit her.
John Dering, and other their accomplices) expressed, that the Devil should
appear to the said Elizabeth in diverse fashions, sometimes like a man
wantonly apparelled, sometimes like a Bird deformed, and sometime otherwise:
and that Mary Magdalene should often appear to the said Elizabeth, and
reveal to her many revelations, and at one time, should deliver to her a
Letter written in Heaven, The Angel which brought the writing to Pope Leo from
Heaven, brought this to the holy Maid of Kent.
part whereof was limned with golden letters, where in deed the selfsame
Letters were written by the hand of a Monk of Saint Augustines in
Canterbury, named Hawkherst, and so approved and confessed.

There was also written, and contained amongst the said false and feyned
miracles and revelations, that when the Kings highness was at Caleys, in the
enteruiew between his Majesty and the French King, and hearing Mass in the
Church of our Lady at Caleys, that God was so displeased with the Kings
highness, that his grace saw not in the time of the Mass the blessed
Sacrament in form of bread, Good subjects I warrant you.
for it was taken away from the Priest (being at Mass) by an Angel, and
ministered to the said Elizabeth, being there present and invisible, and
suddaynely conveyed again, and rapt thence by the power of God into the said
Nonnerie, The woonted guise of the Pope against such Princes as advance the
Gospel of Christ.
where she is professed, with many other false feyned fables and tales,
devised, conspired, and defended by the said Elizabeth, and her said
accomplices, to the utter reproach and peril of destruction of the Kings
person, his honor, name, and fame, meaning thereby to bring his Majesty into
a grudge, and evil opinion of his people, and so to cause a general
insurrection, to the utter subversion of this noble Realm.

But God, which holds the enemy of Man, and Prince of darkness, the
Devil himself, and father of falsehode, in such compass, as he can not
pass one hears breadth beyond his limittes, checketh now the reine of these
most wicked imaginations, in such sort, as they are quite overthrown in
their own devises, maugre the Pope, and all their Popish comforters, and
according to due deserte, every offendour punished, as the quality of their
offense deserved: for every device was deciphered, the hipocrite and her
comforters bewrayed, the deceived people fully satisfied, these dangerous
deceyuers worthily executed, and the Devil their master quite and clean
confounded, and that triumphant King HENRY the eight, lived and reigned many
years after in his regal Throne, with great conquest over his Enemies, and
to the utter overthrow of the Pope himself, and all such false Dreamers, and
dyed the Seruante of GOD in fair age, when it pleased the Almighty to end
his fatal file, in perfect memory, and quiet death, and leafte behind him,
amongst other his famous Children, our dredde and sovereign Lady Queen
ELIZABETH, to tread down the Pope, and all his Papisticall* and fantastical
practices, and to rule and direct this her Realm, and her loving subjects
thereof, in the right and true Religion of our Savior Jesus Christ, with
such quietness in gouernemente, and such defense from forrayne foes, as no
man living has seen, nor any Chronicle records the like, wherein I beseech
the Lord long to continue her, to the glory of GOD, and overthrow of
Antechrist.

And now to the merry miracles of the holy Maid of Kent.
BY protestation first I warn thee note,
Some Papist Priest bewitched in the Pope,
By cunning help did make this crafty coat
To hide the troth, and had or was in hope,
To have therefore the custody and gain
Of some lewd Saint, to counteruayle his pain.
And gain thou know will make the careless man
To stretch a string, and countermand a truth,
And Papists do, and have done what they can
By Masking means, to bring this Realm to ruth.
What lets them then to make or sell a lie,
So they themselves have secret gain thereby?
But yet I think he was a merry man,
For every wonder breeds a pretty jest,
Of which my self so plainly as I can
Will show thee part, guess thou but at the rest:
For tempted sore the Maiden says she was,
And Women weak must sometime yield alas.
The first Miracle. Candels were lighted without fire. Sainst Giles Chapel.

THe Candle meant is even her tender heart
Which Edward Bocking set on flaming fire,
For he must play the ghostly fathers part,
And shrift was such, as they did both desire.
The place was apt, they took their times by night.
I think I have resolvde this riddle right.
The second Miracle. Women's breasts were moystned, which before were dry
and wanted milk.
The Lady which at Walsingham did stand,
Had grace also to work the like effect: The Lady of Walsingham and the
holy Maid had virtue alike.

For in her time a thousand in this land.
Did seek to her that sickness to correct,
And seeking found, and had their full desire:
By Pylgrisme, Priest, by Monk, or else by Friar.
The third Miracle. The sick were restored to perfect health.
It follows still to ratify the same,
The breast has milk, which else had still been dry,
Such women then had greatly bin to blame
If they praisde not their Pilgrimage pardie,
The cause whereof was not to gather wealth,
But for to have, which there they had, their health.
The fourth Miracle. The dead was restored to life.
The pensive soul, which was full sad at home,
And dead through care, by means of watching eye:
Did by this cloak abroad, as Pilgrysme rome,
And found the mate, which in the heart did lie.
And thus, the heart which was stark dead before,
To life again this Maiden did restore.
The fifth and last Miracle. Finally, al good was done to those which were
measured and vowed to her in Court of Street.
The vow and measure made to her you see,
Did never fail to find a perfect meede,
For maid, or wife, or widdowe that it be,
That co^mes to her, are certain for to speed:
The well of life so mightily did spring,
As they were spedde in every kind of thing.
If she were wife, her husband was not sad,
That barren bed had brought him forth a child:
The wanton wife could laugh with heart as glad,
To see the man so willingly beguilde:
The Widow and the Maid cannot mis^eeke,
Since they do find the very thing they seek.
And where before they served but for droyle,
Hereby they find a much more better luck,
They lay aside their labor and their toil,
And sit full soft to give an infant suck:
A thousand ways young women may do wursse,
Than change their toil, to be a Merchaunts nursse.
And thus, all good you see was fully done,
To those were vowde and measured to her,
The riddle is resolude, thou needst not run
A further course, nor once thy compass stir,
An Oracle to find of more effect,
For troth is troth, and void of all suspect.
FINIS.
THe reasons which lead me to this construction of ye premises, are great, and
many, which are evident to every man, that minds to see the same, for who so
will bestow the labor to read the statute, made Anno 25. Henrici octaui,
entitled, An act concerning the attainder of Elizabeth Barton and others,
which under color of Hypocrisy, dissimuled Sanctity, and false fained
Miracles, traitorously intend to destroy our sovereign Lord the King, and to
deprive him of his Realm and dignity royal. Cap. 12. shall see such
abominable practices done under pretense of sanctity, as were to much to be
expressed here. And peradventure, such as will plainly lead him to further
co^structions, than here were comely to express: for surely (except the life
of Saint Dominicke, which is in Legenda aurea, wherein is expressed both the
cure and manner of curation of a young Nonne, so beastly as would loath any
honest ear to hear) I did never hear any thing, that was more abominable,
nor further repugned the laws of God and nature, than the life and practices
of this abominable Nonne, which for humanity sake I cease further to write
off, knowing that I am already tedious herein, as well to the Catholicall
Christian, as to the preposterous Papist.

Thus have I passed over each thing promised in the contents of this Pamphlet,
saving certain Letters inuectiues against the Pope, which now shall be
performed by Gods grace, although for ye better introduction thereof, I am
driven to enter commons with Pope Boniface, called for his virtue sake, the
eight Nero. And thus it is.

Pope Boniface was worthilye called the eight Nero: of whom it is rightly
said, he came in like a Fox, he reigned like a Lion, and died like a dog.
For succeeding, or rather inuading after Celestinus, he behaved himself so
imperously, that he put down Princes, and excommunicated kings, such as did not
take their confirmation at his hand. Diverse of his Cardinals he drove away
for fear, some of them as Schismatikes he deposed, and spoiled them of all
their substance. Phillip the French king he excommunicated, for not suffering
his money to go out of the Realm, and therefore cursed both his and him, to the
fourth generation. Albertus the Emperor not once or twice, but thrice sought
at his hands to be confirmed, and yet was rejected, neither could obtayn,
unless he would promise to drive the French king out of his Realm. The
factious discord in Italye, between the Guelphes, and Gibellines, which the
part of a good Bishop had been to extinct, A good consideration.
so little he helped to quench the smoke, that he of all other was chiefest
firebrande to increase the flame: In so much, that upon Ash weadensdaye, when
Porchetus an Archbishop came and kneeled down before him to receive his
Ashes, Pope Boniface looking upon him, and perceiving that he was one of the
Gibellines part, cast his handful of Ashes in his eyes saying: Memento homo
quod Gibellinus es etc That is, remember man that a Gebelline thou art, and to
ashes thou shalt go. This Pope moreover ordained first the Iubiley in Rome,
in the solemnizing whereof, the first day he showed himself in his
Pontificalibus, and gave free remission of sins to as many as came to Rome
out of all the parts of the world. The second day (being arrayed with
imperial insig^es) he commanded a naked sword to be carried before him, and
said with a loud voice, Ecce potestatem vtriusque gladij: That is, lo here
the power and authority of both the swords. etc.

By this said Pope Boniface, diverse constitutions extrauagants of his
predecessors, were collected together, with many of his own newly added
thereto, and so made the book called Sextus decretalium. etc. By whom also
first sprang up pardons and indulgences from Rome.

These things thus premised of Boniface the Pope, now will I come to the cause
of the strife between him and the French King: concerning which matter, first
I find in the history of Nicholas Trivet, that in the year of our Lord.
13^1. the Bishop of Oppanaham, being accused for a conspiracy against the
French King, was brought up to his Course, and so committed to prison. The Pope
hearing this, sends word to the king by his Legate, to set him at liberty.
The French king not daring to the contrary, loses the Bishop: but when he
had done, he discharged both the Bishop and the Legate, commanding them to
avoid his realm. Whereupon Pope Boniface reuoketh all the graces and
privileges granted either by him or his predecessors before to ye kingdom of
France: also, not long after, thundreth out the sentence of his curse against
him. And moreover he cites all the prelates, al divines, and lawyers both civil
and common, to appear personally before him at Rome, at a certain day, which
was the first of November. Against this citation, the king again provides,
and commands by straight proclamation, that no manner of person should
export out of the realm of France, either gold or silver, or any other manner
of ware or Merchandise, upon forfeyting all their goods, and their bodies at
the kings pleasure: providing withal, that the ways and passages were so
diligently kept, that none might pass unsearched. Over and besides that, the
said French king did defeyte the Pope, in giving and bestowing prebends and
benefices, and other ecclesiastical livings, otherwise than stood with the
Popes profit. For the which cause, the Pope writes to the foresaid king, in
form and effect as follows.

Boniface, Bishop and servant to Gods servants, to his well-beloved son
Philip, by the grace of God King of France, greeting and Apostolical
blessing.
BOniface the servant of Gods servant, etc. Fear God, and observe his
commandments. We will thee to understand, that thou art subject to us, both
in spiritual and temporal things, and that no gift of benefices or prebends
belongs unto thee: and if thou have the keeping of any being vacant, that
thou reserve the profits of them to the successors: But if thou haste given
any, we judge the gift to be void, and call back, how far soever thou
haste gone forward. And whosoever believes otherwise, we judge them Heretics.


Unto which letter of the Pope, King Philip makes aunsvvere again in manner
and order as follows, which is thus:

Phillip by the grace of God King of France, to Boniface not in deeds,
behauing himself for Pope, little friendship or none. TO Boniface bearing
himself for chief Bishop, little health or none.
Let thy foolishness know, that in temporal things, we are subject to no man,
and that the gifts of prebendes, and many benefices, made, and to be made by
us, were and shall be good, both in time past, and to come: And that we will
defend manfully the possessors of the said benefices: and we think them that
believe or think otherwise, fools and mad men.

Given at Paris this Wednesdaye after Candlemasse. Anno* 1301.

Thus much for France I have thought sufficient to express, although there
are more to find, and common to every view. And now for SCOTLAND, I will
only set down an Oration made by a Scottishe Bishop to the King of Scotts,
373. years since, in these words.

How be it sundry things presentely occurreth, which affrayeth me to show
such matters as are preiudial to the common wealth (yet most noble Prince) when
I consider thy humanity, faith, and constancy, given to nothing more, than
defense and wealth of thy lieges, I cannot cease for the action of common
liberty, to show the sooth. For since the tyranny is intolerable, which
is exercised by Kings or Princes descending of lineal succession to their
kingly heritage: much more is the tyranny insufferable, when it is exercised
on us by men of vile and obscure lineage. Therefore if the sundry and manifest
wrongs done to us these many years by-gon, had come by the Popes mind, they
were to be suffered in some manner. But since li^mers of vile and obscure
lineage, which are promoted to benefices for their horrible vices, have not only
interdicted our realm without any commission, but have spe^ded in their
corrupt vices, the money that they gathered in our country by the Popes
authority, for raising of armies against the Turks, I think their cursed
avarice should have no further place amongst true people, specially amongst us,
because they have our simplicities and meekness in conteption. Three years
passed ye complained the injuries done by Cardinal Guallo, when he held your
realm interdicted, and many of all your Prelates under curssing, because they
would not answer him money to sustain his lusts. Moreover, this Guallo was
so perilous a fountain of all iniquity and vice, that how be it he was
sent to treat concord betwixt Englishmen and Scotts, yet by his ^uarice he
gave such occasion of battle, as both the realms (had not their hatred been
the more hastily pacify (...) invaded each other to their utter destruction.
And since (...) these things be apparent, what needs them to be remembered, to
your displesure? Moreover, after we were exonerate of Guallo, came in his place
another Legate, of no better life but rather worse: For when he had gotten
large money for redemption of prisoners, and raising of new armies against
the Turks, he spends it all in his insolence, and feigned that it was stolen
by thieves and briggens. Therefore sithence we have experience of so many
wicked and heavy damagies done to us, by these two Legates before rehearsed, we
shall be reputed miscreant fools to admit the third. For it is not to be
believed, that this new Legate shall be of better conditions than his fellows
were before. And if any man shall demand me what is to be done in this
matter, I say, neither this Legate, nor yet any other Legate in time coming,
should be received within this realm, because the same is heriot and wasted
of money by their continual exactions. If any of you have superfluous money,
you may rather dispose it to poor folk* than to such corrupted use of
vicious Legates. Finally, these words are so apprysed by ye counsel, that this
Legate was not admitted, to come within the realm of Scotland.

King Alexander the third would not receive the Legate of Pope Clement the
fourth within his realm, but commanded to show his message on the borders. He
would not receive certain statutes made by him in his voyage, right profitable
for the governance of the Scots, to whom king Alexander answered, The Scots
would not receive any statutes but such as were commanded by the general
counsel. For aye the more precepts said he be given, the more transgressors
be found. Anno. 1271.

Thus in what estimation the Scotts (this long ago) held the Pope and his
Legates, this short Oration sufficiently shows. And now of England.

IN the.xxix. year of the reign of King Edward the first, in a certain
declaration made against Pope Boniface the eight, by a singular learned man,
these words amongst other were uttered. I propounde also (says he) that ye
said Boniface is wrapped in infinite manifest heinous sins: his mouth is full
of cursing: his feet and steps are swifte to shed blood: he utterly
teareth in pieces the Churches which he ought to cherish, wasting wickedlie the
goods of the poor, and making much of wicked men that give him rewards,
persecuting the righteous, and among the people, not gathering, but scattering,
bringing in new sects of destruction that have not bin heard of, blaspheming
the way of truth, and by robbery, thinking himself equal to the Lord Jesus
Christ, which is blessed for ever. And being most covetous, thirsts for
gold, coueteth gold, and by some devise, gets gold of every people, and
utterly not regarding the worshipping of God, with feyned words, sometime by
flattering, sometimes by threatening, sometimes by false teaching, and all to
get money withal, he makes merchandise of us all, envying all things but his
own, loving no man, nourishing war, persecuting and hating the peace of his
Subjects. He is rooted in all unspeakable sins, a contrary and strife
against all the ways and doctrines of the Lord. He is truly the abomination
of the people, which Daniell the Lords Prophet described. Therefore I
answer, that laws, weapons, and all the Elements ought to arise against him,
which thus overthrows the state of the Church, for whose sins, God
plagueth the whole world. And finallye, nothing remains to him being so
insatiable, to satisfy him withal, but only the insatiable mouth of Hell,
and the fire which cannot be quenched, continuing for ever.

And thus (gentle Reader) saying as Pasquillus said: Roma vale, vidi, satis est
vidisse: reuertar.
Quum leno, aut meretrix, scurra. cinoedus ero.


Which may be thus Englished: Oh Rome farewell, the sights I see suffize: I Will
back again.
But when I will be baud, or whore, or scolde, thine am I then.


I take my leave of thee, and of all these ancient matters, and pray thee to
hold the same opinion of Rome, which Friar Mantuan, a Poet of later time
held, and properly uttered in these two verses following, viz. Si quid Roma
dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum,
Verba dat. Heu Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat.


In English thus: If Rome yield aught, they are but toys, she takes glistring
gold
For words: alas, Rome now by coin, her royal reign does hold


And amongst those gifts of Rome, I will for thy farewell yield thee one more
of the Popes benefits, which perchance may pleasure thee, if thou never use it.
It is forsooth a medicine to staunch blood by words. And I will tell thee how
thou shall come best cheap by it: but first to ye words, which are these:
L^ngius miles perforauit Lancea latus Christi, and continuo exiuit sanguu
redemptionis et aqua baptismatis In nomine Domini cessat sanguu iste In nomine
spiritus sancti amen and after say S. Ihons Gospel: In principis erat verbum,
and verbum erat apud Deum, and Deus erat verbum etc: and this will suffize, so
thou do it in order, wherein I will tell thee thy readiest and best cheap way,
because I see thou art affected.

Turn back again to the place in this book, where the Popes wares are
desciphered, and under the number of 10. thou shalt find an. Agnus Dei which
is hollow, that must be bought (get it as good cheap as thou can, for I will
have nothing for my counsel) then must thou get written in fine parchment
or paper by the hand of some devout religious man, the Gospel of S. John, and
ye charm aforesaid, but take heed that he be well contented for his labor,
or else it avails not. This writing must he put into the Agnus Dei, and
close it up again, and wear it about thy ne^ke by a string of purple or
crymson silk: and so soon as thy nose bleedeth, clap it to the Gospel, and
then if it bleed, trust me no more. Vale.

Conclusio.
We see the bird full brave abroad, and free from every ill,
Is brought to baine through Fowlers fraud by sweet ^^co^ding quill:
The honey harlots sugared speech so snares the mind of man,
As wisest wits, in wantons web, is tangled now and than.
Bur beaten fish can safely swim, and by a piercing look
Foresee the fraud of fishers ^rie, and shun both bayte and hook.
So he that stirs his beaten ba^ke, by compass, card, and skill,
At last obtaines his wished port, and holds himself harmless still.
No fish nor foul by craft nor skill, nor youth by female frauds
Have bin deceivde, as all the world has bin by Romish gaudes.
An apple or an egg, may call a child to Butchers boule,
The Pope by baggage, beads, and bulls, has bitte^ many a soul,
His blyssyngs e^st have made us blyth, who has not feared his curse,
His buzzing bees have bleard our eyes, whiles falshod filled their purse.
What Devil bewitched worldly wits, yt none estate could escape,
But gave their goods (as if it were) for mowing of an Ape.
Nay worse, for happy had we bin, if none but coin were lost:
We left our God and followed Baal, and bought ye Devil with cost.
Shake off therefore this costly course, and bea^en now beware,
Of fisher, fouler, fox or Devil, the Pope has craftiest snare.
Foresee therefore in time, his Cha^ibdes and his Scill,
The compass of the word of God auoydes the dangers still:
And brings thy beaten bark, from storms to port in perf^^e test,
Where through the blood of Jesus Christ, his saints for aye arc blessed.
To which, when yt our noble Q. has livde the age of No^
And beaten and quite conquered Baal: God se^d hi^ soul with joy.
And grant each subject still to see, that under Chris^i^ earth,
For England is no supreme head, but Queen Elizab^th.
^end loyalty and love in all, confound her foes, and ^^en
shall Babylon be overthrown: which gra^^^ oh God. Amen.
FINIS.
B.G.

Alia Conclusio.
THe wa^dring wight that succor seeks in dangers deep distress,
As Hecuba when greedy Greeks did ransackt Troy possess,
Is feign to try such foraigne friends, as league of former love
Yeeldes cause to trust, but fortune lends, to glad, and spoils to prove,
For in the end young Polidore, King Priams son was slain
By fathers friend, woe worth therefore the love that lokes for gain.
Then England seek thy Prince to obey, and ask no foraigne aid,
Shake off in time the shauelings sway, whom truth has now bewrayd,
The Qu. by nature, law, and right, vpholds her royal crown,
Whose grace and mercy mixed with might, has won so large renown
That Subjects true do deem them sure, that foes are forced to quake,
Change Bulls for bliss, from doctrine pure, run not to Lerna lake.
FINIS.
quod B.G.

Certain of the Popes Merchandise lately sent over into England.
1
Superlatare

2
3
4
4
5
Bulla

6
Bauarie granum benedictum.

7
8
9
9
10
10
11
POSITVS IN MEDIO O VO ME VERTARNESCIO
ST NICHOLAVS

CRISTESIS M^^^^ROPITIVS

MARIA SIS MIHI PROPITIA

12
13
14
15
INNO CENTIVS pp. 1111

15
SPASPE




