THE LIFE AND DEATH of Lewis Gaufredy: A Priest of the Church of the Accoules
in Marceilles in France, (who after he had given him self soul and body to
the Devil) committed many most abominable Sorceries, but chiefly upon two
very fair young Gentle women, Mistress Magdalene of the Marish, and Mistress
Victoire Corbier, whose horrible life being made manifest, he was Arraigned
and Condemned by the Court of Parliament of Aix in Province, to be burnt alive,
which was performed the last day of April. 1611.

Together with the 53. Articles of his Confession.

To which is annexed, a true discourse of a most inhumaine murder, committed
by four women Witches, upon a young Gyrle, of about ten years old, who
were all executed the 28. of June last past.

Translated and faithfully collected out of two French Copies, the one Printed
at Paris, the other at Roane. Anno. 1612.

LONDON,

Printed by Tho. C. for Richard Redmer, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Star, at the west end of S. Paul's. 1612.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF LEWIS GAVFREdy a most notorious Magician.
AA



IN Marcelles, a Town in France, one Lewis Gaufredy (borne in Beauuerer Les
Colmars) lived many years in very good repute, being there beneficed in the
Church of the Accoules, where such was his wordly excess of prosperity, that
notwithstanding his Ecclesiastical function through a settled pride now raised
to the height, and a beastly and strong luxurious appetite formerly bred and
now reigning and raging also in him, he became merely sensual? He had an aged
Uncle also well known both in Marcelles, and other places thereabouts, of as
pernicious manners as himself, who was no small back to his impieties, who
happening to die very rich, as well in Lands and revenues, as in Gold and silver,
Books and other moueables, which this miscreant (being indeed the next heir)
no sooner claimed, but was as soon possessed thereof Now being thus overmuch
enriched, what else could be unto him greater contentment then to take his
ease, and as he could permit himself any leisure for such purposes, he would
sometimes for recreation sake betake himself to that Library, formerly his
Unkles, where amongst other books (not much opponent to his obscene liking) he
happened to light upon two most damnable and Diabolical, the one of Cor:
Agrippa, and the other of Tolle^ wherein this mad brain took such singular
delight, that he ceased not till he had read them clean through: But such
reading befits none but those, who deny the power of the supreme and universal
Governor, and that renounce the Celestial inheritance promised to all those
who are Registered in the sacred Record of the everliving. To bury therefore in
unprofitable silence the prodigious Acts committed by this execrable and
inhumane wretch in his destowring and Rape, of one Mistres Magdalen of
D^^a^douls, so called of ye Marish, would be an endless torment to my soul,
together with other his allurements, sorceries, Incantations, and
abominations, wherein this perfidious wretch spent the most flourishing part of
his youthful spring time: who forgetting the Obligation wherein he stood bound
to his Creator and Savior (without any regard or pity of his own soul)
plunged himself so deeply into the Infernal Gulf of the Coniurations and
Inuocations comprehended and contained in the said books of Toliet and
Agrippa, that in pronouncing and often repetition to himself of what he there
read, the vowed enemy to all mankind appeared and approached near unto him,
demanding upon what occasion he did inuoake and call upon him, or what his
desire was? the fearful sight of whom (albeit the appearance was in a
beautiful humane shape) did drive this horrible blasphemer unto such an
affrighted Ecstasy, that for a time he was and continued as one distracted:
accursed wretch, more happy had it bin, that even in that distraction thou
had lost thy being, then so diabolicallie to revive to die again: and dying,
to draw with thee (ensnared by thy subtlety) so may silly souls, the number
whereof is best known to God alone, pity it was that hell did not then
swallow thee up, or the Earth devour, or fire from heaven consume thee. But
who can reach* unto the depth of Gods al-seeing providence? whose arms are
stretched out, and whose arrows are keen, when he pleases to be avenged on
his Enemies? Thou wast not thus long suffered but to Gods greater glory. This
said distraction continuing but a while, this caitiue re-assuming his former
senses, forgetting all duty or respect unto his Creator, and rejecting all
soul saving considerations, after no long debatement between the Devil and
himself, he couenanted (woeful covenant?) that for the space of forty years
he might enjoy the full fruition of his detested ambition, in holding the
place, prerogatives, liberties, and honors, of chief and principal Confessor,
that he might have power and means to know carnally all women or maids
whatsoever on whom his pernicious and lustful eyes should but reflect, and
that his charming tongue might flow with eloquence, and that notwithstanding
these, he might be still reputed grave and religious: to these may be added
those ensuing Articles of his own confession, to which the Devil
condescending, This firebrand of perdition gave himself body and soul,
together with all things else to him appropriate to the said Devil from
thenceforth for ever, hidiously renouncing God his faith, Heaven, and the
euer-blessed fellowship of all the holy Angels and Saints of God: who can read
this, or who can hear it, but their hair must stand on end! their hearts
tremble? Ah treacherous caitiffe, whence could thou derive that power and
title, so lightly to pass over and to confirm the contract and sale of thy
body and soul, to him, who for requital, will pay thee with grief upon
grief, torment upon torment, and that not for a moment only, but perpetually.
Beware therefore all ye whose souls are luxuriously affected, and whose hearts
are swollen big with pride, whose ambition pierces the very heavens, coveting
as did those aspiring Angels, to be as Gods, for by these and such like baits
and snares, that wily deceiuer intangleth, insnareth, and catches many
millions of souls, crafty fowler, silly fowls, now more precious then the
richest Iemmes, but by and by as stubble for the fire, buying their too late
repentance at so dear a rate as eternal desperate despair, for so it fell
out with him, who so soon as he was possessed of that devilish Library, as one
ravished in conte^plation thereof, he delighted in nothing more then the
practice of his Charms and Incantations, but after the contract between the
Devil and himself, he was able (as afterward himself testifies) by only
the breath of his mouth, to inflame with lust all those on whom he was pleased
to breath, wherewith he so bewitched Mistress Victoire Corbier, yt she was
constrained to lust after him immeasurably, which he effected in the month of
April last past. Before the discovery of these his impudent villainies, he was
exceedingly reverenced, and very much respected by the Marcellian Vulgar, yea
in all places wheresoever he came, as well for the religious appearance he
carried, as also for the great learning was known to be in him: for such was
his fluence of speech, that he could so tickle and charm the ears of his
Audience, that it contented them perpetually to hear him, so mellifluously did
he honey them, who were abused poor souls in their attention, and falsely
deluded with his Eloquence: which occasioned that he was then reputed for a
most religious and devout Priest, serving for a precious Antidote against the
poysonsome infection of sin, as their shallow understandings believed for
firm truth, who notwithstanding shortly after had knowledge of his diabolical
commerce. He held (notwithstanding he was in the Devils hereditarie possession)
all his Presbiterall functions, so that amongst others, he being one day in a
solitary place, there happened to come unto him on Mistress Magdalen of the
Marish, requesting him to hear her confession (who was then utterly ignorant
of his fatal relinquishment of Religion) which at that time was granted her
by the abominable Impostor.

This poor innocent maid therefore, humbled at the feet of this Uulture, and
requesting his counsel and advise for reformation of her former errors and
transgrestions, heard no other persuasions to come from this Devilish seducer,
but clean to shake off the zeal and desire that thee had to be reconciled to
God; and further intimated unto her, (with painted and colorable speeches, not
fit to be once mentioned amongst Christians,) that it she would live the
rest of her life happily, he would be the means that she should obtain and
enjoy whatsoever pleasure she could desire or wish for. In this his
persuasion, the profane dog breathed upon the countenance of this poor
afflicted maid, who in that moment was inchaunted and entangled in the snares
of this sacrilegious villain. Surely Hell it self had placed in the body of
this tyrant, some ghastly and unclean spirit, to be as an Instrument and
guide to this accursed Inchaunter.

Oh Heavens! Is it possible that such a hell-hound should be permitted to live
amongst men? who enraged with an Infernal Fury, draws and allures such
silly souls unto him, as are not well grounded and confirmed in Faith; as we
may plainly perceive in this silly soul: who being caught by the deceitful
ginnes of this disloyal Apostate, forsaking her God, and giving credence to
the words and proferd promises of this accursed Impostor; she also (as he
formerly had done, and thereto now persuaded her) gives herself soul and
body to the Devil, whom at that instant she saw in the form of a man.

In which course of his, that they of Marcelles could not in so long space,
discover the Tragical trecheries of this their so wel-beloued flatterer, whose
Charms and enchantments procured, that they esteemed him their spiritual
minion, was wonderful: for so excessive was their bou^dles affection, that to
have exempted him from legal punishments, they would have (most of them) parted
with all their wealth. Blind Marcellians, that could think it possible for
one man by his private studies, to attain to such perfection in all humane
sciences, and in so short a moment, the like whereof, the best Learned, by
their many years industry, could never attain unto: neither could be
without his aid, who continually ceased not to reveal those things unto him,
wherewith he fed the greedy expectation of those, whose conversation he
most desired. Nor but that in the public view of a whole Court of Parliament
in Province, he was in particular accused and convinced of these ensuing
Articles, and thereof being condemned, was put to death in Aix, a Town near
thereunto They would not yet retain any belief, concerning his offenses: But
now too late these Judicial proceedings have enforced you to assure your
selves, concerning his abuses and delusions, wherewith ye were blinded, in
cherishing and pampering him so tenderly, whose quarters rather would have
adorned the Gates of your City, which may be accounted happy, in being at the
last cleansed of so dangerous and fearful a plague.

But let us return again unto the said Mistress Magdalen of the Marish, who^
though she had freely given her self, (by the cursed allurements of this
accursed Curre) to the Devil, and by his further persuasions, diverse times
more fully confirmed the said contract; receiving diverse marks of the Devil,
in several parts of her body. A thing testified by the Fathers and Doctors of
S. Maxim, and expressed in the sentence or death, denounced against the said
Gaufredy, she was notwithstanding so incessantly afflicted, both in body and
soul, when she considered the danger of her ruin, that posting in the
perturbation of her wavering self conflict, she retires her self to a
Religious man, desirous to reveal her sin: acknowledging unto him, that it
was such a sin as could not almost be forgiven* the Tenor whereof, much
astonished this Religious man. For which cause, he labored her to confess
what that sin might be: but she fearing the rigorous hand of secular
Justice) made answer unto him, that she would willingly tell him, upon
condition that she might first obtain pardon from the chief president of the
said Town of Aix, which he (fearing that she had entered into some practice or
complotted some Treason against his Majesty or his estate) denied her,
persuading her, how she might well obtain this pardon after a little time, but
that first it was necessary for her to make known wherein she had offended:
his persuasions could not prevail with her, till such time as he did
condescend to her desired pardon.

Now the matter known, and he undertaking to procure her pardon, forthwith
hastened to Marcelles to the Court of Parliament, where giving advertisement of
what had passed, to the Lord President, and declaring unto him what words the
said Magdalen had used, inferring how for the service he ought to the Kings
Majesty and public Justice, considering the wonderful detriment that France
had sustained in former times, by such traiterous Paracides and blood suckers,
as she had brought forth, he was come in that manner. The Lo: President delayed
not to send with this Religious man many officers to Marcelles, At whose
coming, he fained to be possessed of her pardon, which she believing, was
ravished with incomparable joy, which was no sooner conceived, but as suddenly
it vanished away, for she no sooner appeared or presented herself to his Uiew,
but the Officers atte^ding him, conveyed her presently to the said Parliament
of Province whence she was by the commandment of the said Lo: President,
clapped up close in a Dungeon, whither afterward was also committed Mistress
Victoire Courbier, but so as neither could have conference with any. Not long
after which imprisonment, report was made to the said Lo: President, that the
said Magdalen of the Marish (being shut up in a place so disconsolate and
miserable, would have murdered her self, which to prevent, she was forthwith
caused to be brought before him in presence of all the chief counselors, and
Assistants of that Court, whether being come, woefully blubbered with her
continued tears, and almost dead with sorrow: astonished to behold those, who
by their just doontes, punish crimes committed: she was examined by a
Counselor Commissioner, reputed thereunto by the said Parliament and hereupon
sworn to deliver nothing but truth: when, calling to mind what she had
perpetrated, fear and trembling surprising her without ye usual inforcements
of rack and forments, she openly confessed, how she repairing to the before
said Master Gaufredy, requesting him to examine and clear her conscience, he
in manner aforesaid, was the cause and original of her utter overthrow and
perdition. Upon which her confession a warrant (by the instance of the Kings
Atturnie General) was sent out for the bodily apprehension of the foresaid
Lewis Gaufredy Priest, who being accordingly apprehended, was committed to the
said common gale of Aix in province, till such time as it was convenient for
him, to make his open appearance in the said court, whether he was very
speedily called, and as exactly examined of the crimes imputed unto him, both
by the foresaid Magdalen and Mistres Victoire Corbier But herein behold the
deceitful potencie of that old and subtle deceiuer the Devil, who had
fortified this his champion with such seeming Innocence, and enabled him so
much beyond all vulgar exspectation, that the whole Bench were not able to
convince or cast him: which thing being well considered by one of the most
ancient Commissioners, who perceiving much subtlety in his answers moved by a
fervent zeal to boult out the truth, he earnestly requested the residun of
those Noble Commissioners to join with him in prayer unto ye all-searching eye
of the omnipotent, that he for his own glory sake would vouchsafe them power
and means to discover the falcities and illusions of this pernicious
miscreant. Which ended, the said Grave Counselor, now better armed then
before, to encounter with this grand Champion of Satan, let fly at him, so
sacred an admonition, seconded with so terrible a commination, that all his
former shifts, and glosings (now broken staves of defense) so failed him, that
the re^^ue of his answers and allegations were so variable, (being nothing now
but fearful stamerings) that his own words served for testimony sufficient
to convince him, which upon a little farther arguing, caused him to confess,
as follows.

A Confession, made by M. Lewys Gaufredie, a Priest of the Church of the
Accoules in Marceilles, Chief of all The Magicians, between Constantinople
and Paris.
IT is about some 13. or 16. years since I began to read on a Magic Book,
which I had from an Uncle of mine, about the same time, and during these
entercourses, the Devil appeared unto me in humane shape, apparelled like a
Gallant Fellow. At the first confcontment I was affrighted, and then I was
possessed with two very badde affections, which I had affected of long time
before; One was of Ambition, to live in great reputation in the world, but
especially amongst honest men; and the other was, a certain disordinate
affection, to enjoy the company of some special Maidens.

The aboue*mentioned Devil (surnamed Lucifer) said thus unto me in my
chamber, betwixt him and me; what should I give thee, to enjoy on the other
side, that which I would desire of thee? I being glad of such an offer, made
answer, whatsoever he could wish from me, only that he would ask it; and I
would willingly give him the same.

He then replied, why give me thy self, and all the goods which thou
possessest: I made answer, that I would willingly give my self unto him, with
all other goods, which any way touched, or concerned my particular: but as for
the validity of the Sacraments, which I administered to others, that I would
not grant him; whereunto he agreed: being contented with my former offer; and so
we couena^ted together, and came to an agreement, he required foam solemn
promise of me, which I set down in writing as follows.

I Lewys Gaufredy renounce all my goods, as well spiritual as temporal, which
any ways may be conferred upon me, on the behalf of God, the Uirgin Marie;
and all the Saints, both he and she of Paradise: and more particularly, from
my Patron, Saint John Baptist, S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. Francis: and so give
my self, both body and soul, to you Lucifer here present, with all the goods
which I shall ever possess, (excepting the validity or the Sacraments, in
regard of them, that at my hands shall receive the same;) And hereunto I do
subscribe and witness. See here me? the Tenor of the promise.

This being done, I demanded wherein he would satisfy

I confess that I kept the abouenamed book of Magike,

I confess how I took extreme pleasure to read on the

I confess that two or three days after the said premise, the Devil
returned, (as formerly he promised) and then

I confess that the Diu^ll brought me a scedule, signed

I confess that I breathed on about a thousand Maids Your Daughters have ^s
much as they can well carry about them; without fur^her expressing my self.

I confess that I familiarlie frequented the house of Monsieur de la Palud, a
Gentleman of Marceilles, and by reason of my great reputation, I was very
welcome thither. He had three Daughters very exceeding fair, well brought
up, and merueilous devout: I had a desire to enjoy one of them, called Mistress
Magdalen, but her mother looked narrowly to her, so as I could have no means to
come to the sight of her, and therefore I first breathed on her mother, to the
end that she might bring her to my chamber, and be confident in me whiles I was
in her house, the which I easily obtained: so as being oftentimes in company
with the said Magdalen, I kissed her, and more also.

I confess furthermore: that I breathed on many women,

I confess that the first time that I would enjoy Mistress Magdalen, I laite my
hand on her forehead, and there where the Graces had lodged her Uirginitie, and
she avouches the words I then spoke.

I confess, that I breathed on this Damsel many

I confess that three days after, I gave her to a Devil, Fimodes, to assist,
serve, and preserve her: and to heat her the more in my love, when I saw her
so transported with joy and delight therein, and even to bend her knees to my
desires, I thus debated with her.

Magdalene the height of my desires, and she for whose sake, I have so often
called on the internal powers, I will marry thee to the Prince of Devils,
Beelzebub by name: She freely consented there unto: And then I caused him to
come in form of a Gentleman, which being done, I said so Magdalen how it was
requisite, that she must make a promise to Beelzebub the Devil, the which I
set down unto her in manner as follows.

I here protest in the presence of God, of all the celestial M. Lewys
Gaufredy, and of the Devil Beelzebub here present, that I absolutely renounce
with all my heart, all my power, and all my might, God the Father, God the
Son, and God the holy Ghest; the most holy mother of God; all the Angels,
but especially my good Angel, the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his
blood, and all the merits thereof; my part in Paradise, all the good
inspirations that God may hereafter put into me, all prayers that have been, or
may be made for me; I further protest, that I absolutely give my self, body,
soul, force, and power, to the Devil, and you, withdrawing my self presently
out of the hands of God, that I may entirely fall into the hands of the Devil.
In Testimony whereof, I do sign and subscribe the same with my blood.

Magdalen says, that M. Lewys Gaufredy, in the presence Beelzebub, pricked her
with a slender thin Bookin he had, made like a needle, in the joint of the
right hands little finger, that so he might come to blood, wherewith to
subscribe the said promise.

I confess further, that I made seven or eight promises

I also confess, that the Devil detained the iurisoiction and custody of all
the above said promises, as well from Magdalen as from my* self, to carry
them, whether he would, and when he thought good.

I likewise confess, that the Devil said unto me, that if I terror, that I
should fall down dead to the ground.

I also confess, that I kept all the said promises in my Aix, which was the
second time that I went thither to speak with the Fathers, Michaell, Iacobyne,
and Antonie Capuchin, when I came back to my chamber, I burnt the said book
of Magic, not upon any intention to amend my life, but rather for fear to be
found possessed therewith, the Ashes of which book, are yet in my chamber, for
the covenants* I was much astonished when I found them not, because the devil
had carried them away, even as I told those Fathers.

I confess moreover: that the first time we go to the

I confess that when this devil marks, one shall feel

I further confess, that I was marked at the Sabbath, Magdalen there to be
marked. She is marked in the head, in the heart, in the belly, in the thighs,
in the legs, in the feet, and in many other parts of her body: she has
also a needle in her thigh that she feels not, which I see him put in, and
when the needle enters, you would say, that one pierced a piece of parchment.

I also confess, that there are many sorcerers, inchaunters,

I confess also, that the said marks are made for a protestation and vow that
they shall always continue good, and faithful servants to the devil
throughout the whole course of their life.

I confess in like manner: that I have been abroad at at la Baume de Rolla^^^
La, Baume de Loubiers, and that twice, or thrice, I desired to go to Saint
Baume And* thither once I went expressly, to cause the devil to bring back
Magdalen, and to carry her through all the woods of Saint Baume.

I confess in like manner: that when I would go to

I declare and testify: that at the entry into the Saboth,

I confess, that as soon as we are entered into the Sabbath, Francis.

I also confess, that I have been often at the Saboth Magdalen and called her to
swallow down Caracters out of a spoone, by the ministration of devils, and so
others for my self, the more to enrage her, in my love.

I also confess, that at Saboth I had knowledge of her, Freefeland.

I confess, that I have abused many Maids, whom I

I confess also: that the devil is the true Ape of the

Also I confess, that they baptize in these Saboths, and

I further confess: that at Baptism they use water,

I confess moreover: that the form and prescription

I confess moreover: that there was twelve Priests at

Also I confess, that whenever I was at the Saboth,

I likewise confess, that at the beginning of Mass, every

I confess, that the candles which are burnt during

Also I confess, that the Priest which says Mass is carried

I confess, that the bell which rings to Mass, at the Sanctus and the Sacre,
is of horn, the clapper being of wood, to make it sound.

Further I confess, that wheresoever mention is made

I further confess, that they offer and consecrate unleavened

I also confess, that many crusts and pieces are consecrated,

I confess: that they pronounce on high, the words of

I confess, that they use to consecrate blood in a vessel,

I further confess: that every one takes of it in their

I confess, that all the crosses which are made during

Further I confess, that when one says: Agnus dei, Domine non sum dignus:
every one being enraged in heart, cry out, like desperate me^, Addressing their
words to the Devil, O Master, be ever our help and aid.

I confess furthermore: that every one is bound to communicate,

I confess, how there be certain Enchauntors, who are

I also confess that when one says: Ite Missa est; They Depart you all, in
the Devils name.

Further I confess, that all the Usurers, Enchaunters, Magicians* are bound
when any Child dies, which was baptized in the sabbath; to go disenterre, and
bring the same to the sabbath, there to be eaten by Devils.

I confess that when any dies at the sabbath* all the Devils, Enchanters, and
Magicians, request him to stand firms to the Devil, and when he is dead, they
all carry him together to the Sea, or some River, wherintoo they throw him,
from the top of some Rock, or else they close him up in same Cave, there to
preserve him.

I confess also: that the Devil never left me, except it Capuchines Church;
and their he would stay for me at the Church door.

Lastly I confess, that it is about 14. or 15. years ago, since I gave my
self to the devil, body and soul, renouncing all that which any ways I
might hope for, from the mercies of GOD.

Upon which his confession, his Indictment was framed, and perfected at the
suit of the Attorney general* and the said Magdal^n and Mistress Victoire
Corbier, brought face to face before him; who justifying their accusations, a
Judgment was pronounced against him, as hereafter; in the ensuing Extract, of
the Records, and of the proceedings herein, may ap pear; but Mistress Magdalen,
and Mistress Victoire Corbier, were returned to the foresaid common Iayle, where
they yet remain, to be disposed of.

An Extract of the Records, of the Court of Parliament of Aix.
THe Court having considered the criminal Enditement and Proceedings
thereupon, by the authority of the same Court, and at the demand of the Kings
Attorney General, plaintiff; in a case and Crime of Rape, seduction, impiety,
magic, forcerie, and other abhominatio^s, against M. Lewys Gaufredy, borne in
Beauueres les Colmars a Priest, beneficed in the Church of the Accoules within
the Town of Marceilles, defenda^t: and Prisoner, within the public prison of
the Palace

The verbal Enditement of proofs and manifestations, of the possession of
Magdalen of Demandoux, called of the Marrish; held possessed with wicked
spirits, observed and discerned in her person, from the first of January last,
to the Ian. 1.
fifth of February, in S. Bean e; by Friar Sebastian Michell, Feb. 5.
Doctor of Divinity; Uicar general of the Reformed congregation of Friars
Preachers, and Prior of the Royal Convent of S. Maxim: duly approved and
testified by other Fathers, by a Relation dated the twenty of the said month.
Feb. 20.


A deliberation of the Court, containing a Commission, to M. Antonie Seguiran,
Counselor of the same Court, to inform upon the Actions of the said
accusati^^^ and to sease upon, and cause to be conducted to the Pri^^ of the
Feb. 19.
Palace, the said Gaufredy* on the 19: of the said month.

Charges and Informations taken by the said Commissarie, and verbal process,
and the seazure and conduction, of the said Gaufredy.

Another deliberation of the said Court, containing a Commisson to M. Anthony
Thoron, Counselor also of the same Court, to hear the said Magdalen, to
inform upon the Acts and Evidences brought in by the Kings Attorney general
and to frame hereout an Enditement, against the said Gaufredy, jointly
together with M. Gra^deau* Uicar to the Archbishop of Aix, on the eighteenth
of the same month. Feb. 18


The Audience, Deposition, and Confession of the said Magdalen, touching her
said Rape, seduction, and subornation, in that which concerned Incantation,
Covenants, and Promises, made to wicked Spirits, with other abominations,
mentioned in the verbal Enditement; the one Feb. 21
and twenty of the said month.

An other Registrall information, taken by the said Feb. 23
Commissarie, the three and twenty of the same month.

The Testimony of M. Anthony Merindol* Doctor of Physic; and the Kings
Professor of the University of the said Town of Aix touching the accidents,
with extraordinary and wonderful motions, concurring in the person of the
said Magdalen during the time of his Administration, before the manifestation
of her possession, on the Feb. 24.
four and twenty of the said month.

A Report made by Iacques Fountain, Lewys Grassi, and the said Merindol; all
alike Professors and Physicians, together with Peter Bon-temps, Surgion*
Anatomist; a Professor also in the said University, by the said Commissaries
order, upon the quality of such extraordinary Accidents, as interchangeably
fell out in the head and brain, of the said Magdalen, with the reasons
thereof* Also upon the qualities* causes, and reasons, of some insensible
marks (...) ^er body, and by herself revealed, as also upon the deflouring,
and loss of her virginity* the six, and seven and twenty of the said
month* and the fifth of March Feb. 26. and 27.
last; Interrogatories and Answer of the said Gaufredy, on the six and
twenty of February, and fourth of March March. 4. and 5.
last.

Another Decree of the said Court; that the said M* Anthony Thoron,
Commissioner, formerly deputed, shall frame and continue the absolute points
of the same Enditement, March. 4.
of the fourth of March.

A verbal Accusation by personal contestation, between the said Magdalen*
and the said Gaufredy, of the March. 5.
fifth of the said month.

A Relatin of the marckes found upon the said Gaufredyes body, conformable to
the declaration of the said March 18.
Magdalen, of the eighteenth of the said month of March.

A Publication of the same Report, together with a meeting of the said
Physicians and Surgeons, deputed thereunto, by the said Commissaries.

The reexaminations and correspondencies of other testimonies of the said
eighteenth (...) of March* March. 18.


An other Registrall informa^^^n, taken in the Town of M^rceilles the fifth,
sixth, and seventh of April last. April. 5. 6. and 7.


The Audience of Mistress Victoire Corbier pretended to be Enchaunted by the
said Gaufredy; upon the effect and cause of the disturbance and indisposition
of her understanding, her unmeasurable, and luxurious love and affection,
toward the said Gaufredy; bearing date, the same sixth April. 6.
of April.

Second Interrogatories, propounded to the said Gaufredy, upon the Evidence of
the said information, containing a Confession, that he did bewitch the said
Victoire, in breathing upon her: of the twelfth and sixteenth of the April.
12. and 16.
said month of April.

A verbal Enditement, out of the voluntary Confessions, made by the said
Gaufredy, of other enormous crimes and Offenses imputed to him: of the
fourteenth and fifteenth April. 14. 14
of the said month.

The reexamination of him, on the same day, being the fifteenth of April,
afternoon. April. 15*


Letters of the Uicar, to the Bishop of Marceilles, to Master Joseph Pellerot,
Provost in the Metropolitan Church of this town of Aix, Uicar also to the
Archbishop of the said Aix, in his name, place, and stead, to determine and
proceed, against the said Gaufredy, his Diocesan even as the Bishop himself
might have done, if he had been April 17.
there present, of the seventeenth of the said month.

A procurement made by the said Gaufredy, before the said Provost, in the said
quality of Vicaria^ to the end to April* 15.
sue for restitution of cedules therein mentioned, to the qualities therein
contained, of the ninteenth of the said month.

An ordinance by the said Counselor, and commissarie, and by the said Master
Pillerot, as well as he was Uicar to ye said Bishop of Marcelles, as also as he
was Uicar to the Archbishop of Aix, that the said Magdalen should be reexamined
upon her (...)itions, any audiences, and again confronted (...) said Gaufredy.

Other and second concessions, made by himself, and April* 22. and 23.
absolutely reiterated the two and twenty, and three and twenty of the said
month of April, conformable in every point to the former.

Another relation of the said Docters in Physic and surgerie, upon the
Abolition of all the marks of the said Magdalen, the reestablishment, and
vivification of all her ^. 23.
parts, referred to the precedent report, of the three twenty, of the said
month of April. Uerball information, of the interruptions, and extraordinary
accidents, happening upon the confession of the said Magdalen, the torture and
torments by her inwardly suffered, with words uttered out of her mouth, over
and above that contained in the said interrogatories, and answers, the
testimony of the abolition, the reestablishment and vivification of the same
marks, happening on the day and feast of the passover, during the celebration
of Mass. A judgment out of the objections, and conclusions, of the Kings
Attorney general, after the hearing of the said Gaufredy in the chamber, and
the Commissaries report deputed thereunto.

Hereupon the Court, has and does declare the said Gaufredy, confessed,
attainted and convicted, of the said crimes objected to him, for remedy, and
justice whereof, they have and do condemn him, to be committed into the hands
of the executioner of high Justice, to be lead and conducted through all the
streets, and places usually frequented within this town of Aix, and before
the great gate of the Metropolitan Church of Saint Savior, in the said town
of Aix, to perform humble and reverend penance, bare head, and bare foot, an
haltar about his neck, holding a burning torch in his hands, and there on his
knees, to require pardon of God, the King, and public justice, this being
performed, to be lead into the preachers place, within the said town, and
there to be burnt, and consumed a live, at a stake, which to that end, shall
there be set up, while his body and bones, be reduced and brought to ashes, the
which shall afterward be scattered in the wind, all and each of his goods,
and chattels, forfeited and confiscate to the King. And before his execution he
shall be put both to the ordinary, and extraordinary rack, to turn from his
own mouth, the truth of any other his accomplices.

Decreed in the Parliament of Province, sitting at Aix, and published at the
bar, and in the hearing of the said Gaufredy in the Concergerie, or public
prison, who at the same instant, was put to the rack, or torture ordinary and
extraordinary, there being present, the Commissaries deputed, and about five
(...) clock in the afternoon, he was executed to death, having before been
degraded, by the Lord Bishop of Marcelles his Diocesan, within ye Church of the
Friars Preachers in Aix, before the said Lords Commissaries, according to the
form and tenure of the present judgment.

Signed: Maliuering.

You have heard briefly the progress of the damnable life and deserved death
of so famous a Coniurer, the like whereof has not lived these many ages: whose
acts are here mentioned but in part but worthy (for example sake more amply
by a better pen) to be expressed, yet rather then his memory should be quite
extinct, accept these Ruder lines which an unpracticed author as best he could
presents the world withal, desiring not as most would do his own applause,
but that they would be moved hereby to site the occations of those Evils herein
portraied, which God for his great mercies sake in Christ our Savior, Grant
unto all good Christians.

Amen.
A true discourse, of a stealth and murder, committed by four women witches,
upon a young maid about ten years old, who were executed in the town of
Haure-degrace, one of them being drawn upon an hurdle, and holding in one hand
a whip, and in the other, the knife wherewith she performed the murder, and
after her hands were cut off, they plucked the flesh from of her arms and
pappes with burning pincers: the other performing most humble penance, were
also drawn upon hurdles, and then hanged, and let fall into the fire: on the
eight and twenty day of June. ^6^1. faithfully translated.

THese are the times, when cruelty is put in practice, by the force and power
of sorcerie, for we daily see evident effects hereof, as may be discerned in
his latter and accursed devise practiced upon a young maid, about some ten
years of age, the which I will not fail, to diuulge and make known unto all
men knowing well, that the little labor I shall herein take, will yield them
no less contentment, then such an argument and subject can deserve. And
therefore I request every one, that he will be as patient to bestow the reading
thereof, as I am in the writing and publication of the same, seeing this
Tyranny deserves as well to be listened unto, as to be written and composed:
for I know it will strike grief and sorrow into their hearts, that will but
patiently vouchsafe the reading hereof, where ending my introduction, to begin
my report: I humbly pray God that it will please him, to give ever one a
discreet understanding with amendment of life, entreating likewise the reader
to hold me excused, though I set it not down in such exquisite, and fluent
phrase: as perchance some other would.

Now shall I be able to express this strange cruelty, without distilling
tears from mine eyes (apt to put me in remembrance, of such a wickedness,
whenever I do but take my pen in hand* or how can it be, that any one in
reading this tragical subject, should not consider and weigh my hardines and
courage, though but in the very hearing, of these murderous and miserable
attempts of the world? alas! I suppose not any one of you, would be exempted
from harkening to them, and that you will be ready with me* to pray unto the
celestial Monarch, that it would please him of his mercy, to give an end, to
all sorcerous acts, and Incests, which daily vere and afflict Gods Saints upon
the earth, as well in preventing poor human Creatures of their continual
provisions, and nourishments, as further in bereaning, and untimely taking from
them their lives.

Even as we may more clearly understand, by these four Sorceresies or rather
in deed Tygresses, or hagges, who committed this outrage, upon a poor young
maid, who little thought her last hour had been so rear, or that these
witches, had determined to use upon her, so brutish a Tyranny: but indeed what
man, or woman, would ever formerly have dreamt of such an accident, more then
this fillie maid did, who was then walking along an hedge, gathering of black
berries, being in company with some other little children, and specially with
a little brother of her own, when these sorceresses thus plotted her
perdition: alas! most accursed Sorceresse, thy miscreant heart, was even then
possessed with a devil, when by thy bewitching tongue, yt did induce this
poor Gyrle to follow thee to a place, where thou meantest to commit this
butchery, and yet was her fortune more hard, when you gave her little brother
a piece of money, a great Blancke, to the end he should return to the place
from whence thou had stolen her, for then came all thy poison and venom to a
full head, when she poor soute entering into thy house, thou gave her
virginity to an ouglie Ruffian, who no ways considering the evil that would
thereof ensue, violated and robbed her of the robe of her pudicitie:

And yet thou then shewedst a far more hellish cruelty, when with thy
treacherous hand thou did begore thy knife in her Blood* thinking by this
murder, to have saved thine own life But alas! yet did thou worse then all
the rest, when thou drewest her little heart out of her breast, together with
her Liver, to mingle them with her blood: with which you thoughtest to bring to
an end thy Sorcerie.

Ah inviolable heart! Ah treacherous hagge; thou thoughtest* GOD was not of
power to discover thy malice, but most justly you were revealed by Innocents,
who by Gods permission, went along, and conducted this young Gyrle, to the
place, where thou and thy accomplices, put her to death: True it is, that thou
were not convicted upon their accusation, for being imprisoned, thou could
not be made to confess the truth, and therefore at that instant, thou were
delivered.

But God the Author of all Truth and Justice, would not suffer thee longer to
live, after ye perpetration of so fearful a murder and tyranny, but stroke
into them such a fear, as both you and thy co^plices would needs fly away, and
to that end selling daily thy moueables, that afterward you might make an
escape, and save thy life, and so by this means thou were discovered, even by
thine own neighbors, and justly accused; when yet once more to cover thy
dissimulation, thou causedst the flesh of this poor innocent Gyrle to be burnt
and consumde in an hot Oven, to the end, thou might cast the ashes
afterward into the water, or perform some other Devilish tricks therewith.

For thou can not deny the selling of her blood to a Sorcerer: by which
(...)* would do hurt to the Fruits of the earth, and more to man's body; and
that thou were taken in the manner, even like a Thief, that meant to rob his
neighbor, that did but watch for his coming. Of all the which, the Justice
being the sec^d time advertised; you were then convinced: And yet this Infernal
Ympe, would not for all this reveal the truth, neither permit that any body
should go into the house, to seek for the Gyrle; but they rather barricadoed
themselves to stand out. When public Justice (not wtstanding their resista^ce)
condemned them to be worthy of death, and guilty of the offense: For entering
violently into the said house, they opened the Oven, where they then found the
Ashes and Boanes of this poor Maid, within a poake provided for that purpose,
that so they might be cast into some corner, and the murder by them
committed, by this means covered: But all these matters coming to light, she
was put into close Prison, and she that committed the murder, and caused the
young Maid to be defloured, was condemnd to be drawn upon an hurdle through
the Town, holding a Torche, and the knife in her hand: and then the same being
cut off, her Arms, Thighs, and Pappes, were plucked asunder by mammockes,
with hot pyncers. And lastly, her body was thrown alive into the fire.

The names of the chief of them, was Michell the toothles: wife to John
Brunet, some threescore years of Age, of the parish of Blouuille; The other
three, were Marguerite Gallon, Jane Guerin, and Susan Mercer; who were likewise
drawn upon an Hurdle, through the Town, in their smockes, and having suffered
the Tortures extraordinary, they were first hanged, and then their bodies
burnt, for consenting to the wicked practice of this Sorceresse*
notwithstanding their Appeal to Roan. And thus you have heard an end of their
Devilish lives.

But now consider the grievous laments that the sorrowful mother of this
unhappy Gyrle made, for the loss of her child, which (of such a sudden)
was taken and and from her presence) which had never come to pass, but that
Procession then going about in her parish, she was stolen away, and no
knowledge could be had of her in the world; which was an occasion, that she
grew almost into despair, neither could she continue still in a place, but
franticklie went running up and down, here and there, leaving no place
unsearched, to learn some tidings of her: But all her hope being lost, and
finding no body that could give her any notice of her, she in the end killed
herself: For being in this manner trouble some to all her neighbors, they
could not but be moved and became as sorrowful as she herself. Wherefore
they labored to make her forget her sorrow and grief: But could not possibly
effect it; but she rather mournd still the more, and sobd for her Child,
saying:

Alas! my dear Neighbors, if you have hid her in any place let me know it, to
the end I may be quiet, and have her body; and then I alone will lament her
death. And thou my sweet Boy (speaking to her young son) Tell me where you
leftest thy Sister? Lead me good love to the place, that so I may meet with
some honest men, that may direct me. O woe and alas! well may I curse the
hour, when I suffered thee to straggle from me, I would to God I had been
then in my grave!

The little Child who was yet but young, and therefore could not tell, nor
show the place whether he had led his Sister, nor decipher the Sorceresse
that had stolen her away; yet by signs he showed his sorrowful mother, the
place where they were gathering Hedge-berries together, when (the accursed and
unknown Hagge) gave him a little piece of silver, to the end he should leave
her, and that her self might thus have the better means to compass her
intent, and dispoyle this poor Gyrle of her virginity, by delivering her into
the hands of a foul Ruffian: when this wretched Mother, (knowing the
innocence of her own Child) debated thus to her self; Alas* What boots it
me to ask of him, Where is thy Sister, my good chicke? Ah* but what do I
mean to wander thus up and down? What make I so long time in this place? Oh
merciful God, surely some villainous Rogue may peradventure have taken thy
virginity, and afterward, further tainted himself with thy blood. But what is
this I say? who could have so barbarous an heart? I cannot believe it fell out
with her in such sort; when returning again to her self, she said. What may I
then suppose is become of my child? why heeres no place where she could do her
self any hurt? And thus her parents searched all over, but could hear no word
of her, nor meet with other satisfaction, then to lament the loss of their
silly young Daughter, who peradventure had already, undergone the rage and
cruelty of this hellish Megara. And for the space of one or two days, they
could not remain pacified, but continued in this Inquisition, while they met
with a child, who had conducted her along to that part and place, where the
miscrea^t creature cut her throat. But they durst not be so bold at that
instant to go thither, without taking some advise thereupon; fearing least
some greater inconvenience might arise thereupon. The blood of this poor Maid
began now to calll for vengeance at Gods hands: and then God permitted, that
the murder committed upon her should be manifested as it was.

For having obtained a Warrant from the Justice, they apprehended at the same
instant, the shameless Sorceresse, but she being resolved on all mischief,
would not confess her fault, but was stout and obstinate in her denialls: So
that her delivery was wrought, to the charge and cost of the innocent maids
Parents, procured by the rest of that diabolical crew; which wrought their
greater sorrow and discomfort then before, being now void of all means to
discover the truth, or to come to the knowledge of their Childs ruin, though
bitter grief never left their hearts, whenever she came into their
remembrance: this matter seeming wholly to be blown over, and no further
speech nor talk hereof used.

This murderesse, at that very time had not yet committed the butcherie, as
afterward her self confessed: but the Gyrle was close shut up in a chamber,
whether this Sorceresse, with the rest of her adherents presently went, and so
amongst them presently cut her throat. Alas poor heart, she being no ways
able to resist their violence, said: Alas, my good mistresses, Alas, Kill me
not for Gods sake, save my life, and suffer me to go and see my Mother once
again, and I vow unto you, no body shall know, what has been done unto me in
your house. But then they all laid hold upon her, and held her, while this old
witch cut her throat with a great Knife, and not content therewith they plucked
the heart and liver out of her belly, and steeped them in her blood, that
afterward they might give them to a Sorcerer, who had bought them of them,
consuming the rest of her body within an Oven, putting the Ashes thereof into
a poake, as before I declared unto you.

Now this damnable consort, thought themselves out of all peril, and danger,
but it fell out quite contrary; for they were all taken, upon the instant,
that they meant to have fled the Country. And notwithstanding all former
discharges, they were bewraied and accused by their neighbors: They being the
second time attainted and convicted; For finding the Ashes and Bones of this
innocent maid within the Oven; they were carried to the Town, and presented
to the Justices, when clearly perceiving the truth of so pitiful an
Accident, all men lift vy their eyes to heaven, their hearts being replenished
with unmeasurable grief, All the standers by weeping most bitterly, and
exclayming, how unworthy a thing it were, that this murder should escape
unpunished Nay rather, that they should not be put unto some extraordinary
cruel and torme^ting death; so as to death they were all condemned, and
endured those pains and tortures, which we formerly declared unto you: But
alas! what good got y^ sorrowful mother by this? could this mittigate or
appease her woe? can this give again unto her the life of her child? alas,
alas! notwithstanding this Infernal hagge suffered Condign punishment, for
the revenge of her Childs death, yet did not this wipe out of her heart, the
remembrance thereof, nor the grief which daily afflicted her, when she saw but
the place where her child was violated, and most unhappily murdered. And you
the rest of her Friends, and Kinsfolks, can you ever forget such an opprobrie:
can this damsel ever slip out of your remembrance, whom you so dearly
loved? no certainly, for then your hearts should be too much destitute of
common humanity: In like manner all you men, and women, that were present at
their deaths, will you not always carry in mind such a butcherie and
Tyranny, will you not ever remember the day of their punishment? you mothers
also which have children, subject in the like case* to the like peril and
danger as happened to this woman, would you not lament? ah would you not grieve
for the violent death of your own blood? I verily think your hearts would be
surprised, with as great bitterness and affliction, as hers was after the
rapture of her child, next which is more, the remembrance of the very day when
you came to the knowledge of her death would torment you. For my part I know
not one in the world, that would fail in so kind and natural an office, and
therefore I neither blame father or mother in this point, (except the mother in
regard of her too vehement sorrow which caused her desperately to kill her
self) for who can preserve themselves from miserable afflictions, except by
the special grace and goodness of the celestial mouer, who preserues and
keeps this our life, and conducts it to the place of its salvation. He, he it
is, that (...) vouchsafe us his saueguard, and no other. If therefore, we ever
loved his sanctity and holiness, and never heard of a more lamentable, and
pitiful spectacle then this was, we ought always to bear and carry it in
mind: For who would have thought that a maid only of fourteen years of Age,
the daughter of Marguerite Gallon, could have had the stomach and boldness,
to deliver this Maid of ten years old, and to sell and betray her into the
hands of others; for so small a sum of money, she receiving in all, but
(three and twenty souz:) a base piece of Coin.

Surely I cannot think she could perform this villainy without her mothers
consent, and yet her self alone was in the greatest part the cause of this
hard Accident, which likewise did not remain unpunished: For she endured and
suffered the like death and punishment as her mother did: she, as her mother
before her, deserving the fire before her death. But thus this Innocent maid,
whom she sold to this accursed Enchanteresse, cruelly lost her life, to all
the peoples great grief in general, and every ones high coffeehouse. You
see therefore, how this Prodigy came to be discovered, and how a silly
Damzell was destroyed, through the bloody cruelty of most miscreant
creatures, who thought their unjust malice, would never have come to light. But
GOD not permitting them long to survive, suffered likewise that they should
come into the hands of divine Justice, the which (by his Providence, did
condemn them, and the punishment of a most cruel death, they have suffered
and endured, although nothing so terrible as their enormious impiety deserved.

Where finishing this our present discourse; Let us pray unto GOD, that it
would please him, to bring to an end this worlds unhappiness, and to divert
all the impious desseignes and practices of the wicked: drawing them rather, by
his Divine providence, to repentance and conversion from their sins; to the
end that those benefits may be preserved and blessed upon the Earth, which are
most requisite and necessary for us, for the use and peregrination of this our
Temporal and Transitory life, whereof (...) by these Fiendes of Hell (through
their mere (...) ^^priued) which without Gods special ^^rmission, in liewe of
our leaude lives, they could never effect.


