A BOOK OF SUNDRY DRAVGHTES, Principaly serving for Glasiers: And not
Impertinent for Plasterers, and Gardiners* be sides sundry other professions.

WHEREUNTO IS ANnexed the manner how to anniel in Glass: And also the true form
of the Furnace, and the secrets thereof.

LONDON Printed in Shoolane, at the sign of the Faulcon by Walter Dight, 1615.



The Author to the willing practisers of glazeing, and anneiling in Glass.
AS the principal beauty, and countenance of Architecture, consistes in
outward ornament of lights, so the inward parts are ever opposite to the eyes
of the beholder, taking more delight in the beauty thereof, being cu^ningly
wrought, then in any other garnishing within the same. To which purpose, is set
down in this, variety of draughts, some, ordinary and plain, others, curious
and pleasant, and although, it may seem to those that are expert in glazeing,
that some of these draughts are needless, being so plain and in use, not
deserving in this sort to be published, yet notwithstanding here I do in
friendly courtesy admonish, that it is most needful, giving choice to the
builder, both for price, and draught of work, which by no understanding can
the Glazier so sencibly demonstrate his freat, as by showing his examples of
draught, for by such show, the builders shall understand, what to make choice
off, for whose ease and furtherance only, I have published this practice of
glazeing, knowing the expert master is not unfurnished of these usual
draughts, though each workman have not all of them.

And for the further benefit of the practiser, there is hereunto annexed
dyapring on each draught, either to be wrought or left, as it shall please the
builder, most pleasant to all that are willing to have the same: Therefore have
it not in light regard* for the use thereof, will give you great delight, and
worthy to be practiced, as a special ornament to building, and will beautify
the Glaziers work, be they never so expert.

So by observing the order and rules here set down, the master or workman
shall not only see a plain way, to imitate and follow those draughts, in
glazeing and painting on glass: but the simplest, and vnskild prentice, shall
reap full and perfect understanding thereby: praying the Almighty, to bless
your labors in following the same.

Wa: Gedde.

THE MANNER TO DRAW THE SQVARE.
Directions how to make your Square.
First then concerning the square, which although it be common to sundry
artificers, each one having his own form and devise, in drawing of it, some
by devision of half circle, some by other rules: there is herefore set down a
more perfect and readier way for any work in draught, and also if need be, to
try the square rule thereby: for certainly, glass work of all others*
requires most an exact square, for the distance, of one hair out of square,
will deface the whole work, and bring it out of all frame.

The ordering of the square.
To draw this square: First you must draw your line draught so long as your
work requires, marking right thereon with your compass, three points of alike
distance, next, devide your compass larger, setting the one point on the
figure 2. and with the other draw a quarter circle betwixt 4. and 5. after,
remove your compass to the figure 3. and draw a cross circle over betwixt 6.
and 7. and wheresoever the just middle of the cross appears, mark the same
with the point of the compass, as you may perceive in the character, by the
figure 8. lastly, draw a draught, betwixt the figure 1. and the cross point
by the figure 8. and thou shall find a perfect square to conduct thee all thy
draughts. As on the former side is showed.

The devision of measures, in glass draughts*
To make this more plain to the practiser, the square draugh^ for the most
part passes on three several devisions, the first, on a declining, or
collateral square, others, on even squares, and the third, interlaced with
both: This declining devision and setting this work thereon, must begin after
the form you perceive here on his devision, and may be extended, in any
quantity you please: the perfect draught of this work, and how it shall stand
in glass, you shall find it in fol. 38. and other draughts also agreeable to
the same measure, in sundry other places, as in fol: 16. 27. 47. and others.

It is also to be understood, that the shadowing, and darkning, set down in
all those freats and draughts, demonstrates the diapring, which is for the use
of those that desire to have their work beautified with the same, and the
plain draught, is the convoy, and course of the lead, which dyapring, must
only be in gray, or blew color, as is largely set down amongst the rules of
color.

Begin this at the figure 3.


Of even square devision.
There be a number of draughts, wrought by this even dire^^ square, which is
most perfect of any; to set this work right, ye must begin your first losing,
at the figure 4. and so run out i^ any quantity you will, as this devision
will show you: the perfect, and full draught hereof, as it must stand in
glasse-worke, you shall find in fol: 43. with sundry other draughts of the
same measure, as in fol: 40. and in other places.

Begin at the figure 4.


Of even cross devision.
This shows a plain draught with a double circle, and even over cross
measure, beginniug his set at the figure 7. This whole perfect draught, as it
is to be wrought in glass, you shall find in fol: 72. with sundry other
draughts also of the same devision, as in fol: 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82* and
others.

Begin at the figure 5.


Of a declining cross draught.
This Interlaced double circle, with double declining cross devision, must
begin his setting, at the figure 8. and his whole draught stands in fol: 86.
and also others of the same devision, with double circle, as in fol: 83. 82.
80. 76. and other places as may be perceived.

Begin at the figure 6.


Of interlaced devision.
This interlaced devision, yeildeth very pleasant draughts, exceeding close,
and strong: the setting of this work on his devision, must begin at the figure
5. and from thence to follow out to the full quantity that your glasse-worke
requires: the principal draught hereof, you shall find in fol: 47. with
sundry other of the same measure, as in fol: 12. 27. 32.

Some other square draughts are here set down of greater difficulty, but as
they are somewhat more painful in working, so are they more pleasant, and
will make a delectable show: which works must have his right devision, on the
glass table drawn with black, which will conduct the setting perfectly,
making the most curious draught in this book, easy, and plain to be wrought
in glass.

Begin at the figure 7.


Of compass works, or draughts.
These draughts following, with their devision, are differing from the other:
some there be of single compass draught, others double: some be square, and
co^pas decli^ing cross draughts, and even cross and withal interlaced.

First then this single circle of this devision, as you see here set down, is
a very fine draught in glasse-worke, and the setting thereof, must begin at the
figure 6. and the whole draught as it must show in glasse-worke, you shall
find in fol: 74. and in sundry other draughts of the like devision, as in fol:
87. very easy to be wrought, making exceeding pleasant work.

Begin at the figure 8.


Interlaced cross draught.
This as you perceive is even cross and declining draught, intermixed,
exceeding pleasant in glasse-worke: hi^ begi^ning of setting of your work is
at the figure 9. and the principal whole draught is to be found in fol: 71. as
also a great many more of the same devision, in diverse other places.

Other sorts there be of these circle works, of greater difficulty, but the
devision thereof on thy glass table, must be thy help to make it easy, as is
before mentioned in the square draughts

Begin at the figure 9.


HERE BEGINS The first part of square draughtes Formed upon direct, and
collatterall lines: which fitly may be applied to sundry uses.

And now newly published BY WALTER GIDDE.

1615.



1.
2.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66


HERE Follows Sundry sorts, of Circuler, or Compass Draughtes for Glazing:
And will fitly serve for diverse uses.

Newly Published by Walter Gidde*



67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103


THE MANNER, How to Anneile, or Paint in Glass: THE true receptes of the
colors, The ordering of the Furnace, and all the secrets there unto belonging.

1616



THE TRVE FORM, OF THE Furnace, for the Anneiling in Glass, withal the
Instruments belonging thereunto.


THE MANNER HOW to erect the Furnace.
TAKE freestone, or Brick, and proportion it four foot square, and three
foot high and two foot and half in each square: And at either corner which
is marked with the letter A. leave an open hole, to let out the smoke, when
need shall require: which holes you shall cover, with pieces of bricke-bats.
And in the middle of the top of the Furnace, around hole made, four inches
over as ye see it marked with letter B. which hole you must always keep coverd
with a turffe or Charcole, and renew it so often as the fire does consume it
away: And note that this hole does serve to give vent to the smoke, and to
keep in the heat: for this hole is right over the mouth of the Pan where the
glass lies.

This Pan, marked with the letter C. must be made of fine clay, fit to endure
the fire and placed on an Iron trevet, in the midst of the Furnace, so that
the fire may have place to give heat, both under and above the pan.

This Pan wherein the glass is put, must have an open square in the side, five
inches high, and three inches broad, as you see marked with the letter D. and
the like open place must be made in the side of the furnace, right opposite to
the open square in the side of the pan, where the pieces of glass do lie, called
the proof pieces, which pieces, are to be taken in and out at your pleasure,
whereby you may know when your wrought glass is thoroughly enameled, and of a
fair coullour.

How you ought to prepare and put your Glass into the Furnace.
TAKE Chalk that is clean, and beat it small in a Mortar, or else grind it
well on a painters stone: then sprinkle some of it in the bottom of the Pan,
before the fire be put in the Furnace: then lay a plye, or lain of glass that
is wrought thereon, the^ sift on more chalk and then lay another tire, or
lain of glass: So by beds of chalk and glass, you may lay on as much
prepared glass as the Pan will hold one rewe above another, but remember that
between every rewe of glass you do sifte on chalk, that the wrought glass may
not touch one another. Then take little pieces of glass, and touch the^ with
the same coullour that your wrought glass is of, and put them in at the
passag, at the side of the Furnace, betwixt the beds of wrought glass, and
then begin to make a reasonable fire under and about the Pan until you
think, that the glass has taken a fair coullour.

Now to know when your glass is perfectly ready; take a pair of tongues, and
draw out one of those little pieces of glass, called the prooffe piece, and
hold it betwext you and the light: if the cullor show fair, and stick fast
upon the glass, then you may be sure that the work under is well and
perfectly anneiled, because it has had the greatest strength of the fire: But
if you doubt that the colors be not sure, then rub with a rough stone or a
knife, one of the proof pieces, and then if the cullor come of, then you must
let it continue longer in the fire, while you put the next piece to the proof.
Note further that the proof hole in the side of the Furnace, marked with the
letter D. must have a stone that will abide the fire fitted to it, such a one
as you see marked with the letter F. which stone serves to take of, and put on
so often as you make trial of the proof pieces.

Also you must have an earthen pot, such as ye see marked with the letter E.
wherein you must have a readiness some soft clay to fasten the stone again, so
often as you shall have occasion to remove it? But the holes in the top of
the furnace you must not stop with clay, but only with pieces of brick bats
so that the smoke may have vent out.

THE RECEIPETS, FOR THE true making of Colors for Glass.
To make a fair Black.
TAKE the Scales of Iron and Copper, of each a like weight, and put it in a
clean vessel that will endure the fire, till they be red hot, then take
half as much Ieate, and stamp them into small powder, then mix them with
Gumwater, and grind them fine upon a painters stone and so draw with it upon
your glass.

To make a Green coullour.
TAKE Vertegrease, and grind it very well with Turpentine then put it in a
clean pot, and when you would use it warm it at the fire.

To make a fair red.
TAKE Sanguis draconis and beat it well in a Mortar, and after strain it
thorough a linning cloth, with a little Aquavitie, and so use it.

Carnation.
TAKE two ounces of Tyn-glas, and six ovnces of Ieat, half an ounce of gum, ten
ounces of red Ocker, and grind them very well together, and so use it.

Blew.
TAKE beads of blew glass, and beat them into poulder, in a brazen mortar, and
half as much of goldsmithes blew amaling that shines through, and grind them
together with gum-water, and so use it.

Yellow.
TAKE a quantity of fine silver, and cut it in small pieces, and put thereto a
little Antimonium beaten to poulder, and put them to-geather in a melting-pot,
and set them on the fire well covered round about with hot embers the space
of an hour, then take it from the fire, and pour it into the bottom of a
clean earthen vessel that will abide the heat thereof: after it is cold beat
it into fine poulder, and grind it on a Painters stone, and when it is well
ground, take six times as much Ocker as the Silver weighes, and seven times as
much old earth that has bin scraped off from enamaled work: after that, let
it be well ground, then put all this together in apot with gume-water, and
stir it well about and so use it.

To make a Gray couller.
TAKE Iron scales, alittle Cristall, and sum small quantity of Ieate, grind
these well together upon a painters stone, the more Ieate ye take, the sadder
the coullour will be, andlikewise the more crystal you put to it the lighter.

To Diaper upon glass.
TAKE Cristall, beaten to poulder, and grind it well upon a painters stone
with Gumwater, and so use it: It will apeare a pretty light coullour,
different from the glass: Keep this coullour in a little Pot, and when you
will use it, stir it well about.

Another fair red Color.
TAKE a quantity of red glass beads, and half as much of Goldsmithes red
Enamaling, and prepare it as you did the blew coullour before.

FINIS

