The Proclamation and Edict of the Archbishop, and Prince Elector of CVLLEYN.

Declarynge his occasion and earnest intention, to bring in the free exercise
of the preaching of the Gospel, and peace and liberty to true Christian
Religion.

Proclaimed at BON, in the year of our Lord, 1583.

Imprinted at Antwerp, in Tanners street, at the Sign of the Gylden Bible, by
PAVLE BRAECKVELT, 1583.

With the consent and Privilege of the the Lords of the City of Antwerp.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones and I.S. the.18. of March. 1583.

Aucthorised and allowed.

The Copy out of the high Dutche.

The Christian Edict and Proclamation, of the Archbishop and Prince Elector of
Culleyn: concerning his Princely intention to bring in the holy Gospel. Given
at BON, the.xvi. of January. 1583.
WE Gebhart by the grace of god elected, and accepted Archbishop of Culleyn,
Archchauncellour of the holy Empire through all Italy, and Elector: Duke of
Westphalen and Ingrene. etc: do let and give to wit and understand unto all
and singular Archdeacons of our Jurisdiction, Country states, Earls, Knights,
States and other persons, subjects unto us: and to all others that shall have
occasion to use our grace and favor, and to every of them, jointly and
severally. That since we received the state and place of our Archbishopricke
and Prince Electours Government, wherein the Almighty God, by free and lawful
election has placed us, we have always acknowledged and at this present do
acknowledge that we are bound to do our duty and endeavor, to maintain and
defend all such as by God are committed to our Princely Election and
Archbyshopricke, and likewise our common native Country of the Dutch Nation:
and most specially and above all other respects to advance and set before our
eyes the honor of God before all other matters, whereunto with all diligence and
hearty affection we are inclined.

For as much as most earnest, obedient and hearty petition and request has been
lately made unto us by our Nobility and knights, and other Provinces and
cou^treies in no small number, and also by the letters of some great personages
of high estate and calling, wtin the sacred and holy Empire, to suffer, admit
and allow unto the^ in all places of our Jurisdiction and auctorytie, the
public and open exercise of ye preaching of ye holy Gospel, and use and
administration of the holy Sacraments, according to the sacred word and
Scriptures of God, and the Confession of Auspurghe, grounded upon the same
holy Scriptures. And theruppon, considering the everlasting and unchangeable
will of God, that it is our duties to hear his Son, and earnestlye to do his
will. And that all Princes and Governors of the world, ought too cause the
Gates to be set wide open, for the King of Glory, and to let all people to
enter in unto him. Whereunto we have special Commandment from God in our
vocation, and do feel in our conscience, how grievously in the day of
judgment, we shall yield account and make answer before God for all our
actions, and shuttyng up the way of salvation to our leage people.

And acknowledgyng and confessyng our selves to be bound to fear God, from
the bottom of our hearts, and obedientlie to follow his Commandments, and
that he is a mighty and just Judge, and consuming fire, whose fear we
ought continually to set before our eyes. And for that we being Christian
superior, thought it our duty before God, no longer to refuse to accomplish
the earneste and humble petition and suite, of our Nobility and Subjects. We
therefore by the advice of our Lords and friends, and after mature
consultation thereupon had and taken, do grant and permit unto all persons,
of what estate, degree, or calling ^oeuer they be, either subject unto our
Aucthority, or ^rends, and bearing good will to our Archbishopprick, the
Christian liberty of their consciences, by Gods word allowed. And do will,
consent, grant and confirm unto them by virtue of these Presents, that if
any of the Subjects or Inhabitauntes of any City, Town or place of our
Jurisdiction, shall by any of our Officers, Commissioners, Magestrates or
ministers, whatsoever, in or about matters of faith, religion or conscience, be
imprisoned, damnified, mollested or troubled either in Honor, dignity, Fame,
Reputation, body or goodds, for Gods word, or follow^ng the confession of
Auspurghe. That then every of them shall be freely cleared, set at liberty,
and discharged from all imprisonment, loss, molestatio^ and trouble
whatsoever, growinge for any such respect.

Also we do license, grant and confirm herewithall unto our Prelates,
Earls, Lords, Inhabitants, Estates, Commons, Towns, and other Congregations
of people, of our princely Election and Archbyshopricke, that they may and
shall, by warrante hereof, have full power and Authority, to exercise and put
in ure, the free and open Exercise of the preaching of the Gospel, and the
Administratyon and use of the holy Sacraments, according to the holy
Scryptures of the Prophets and Apostles, and agreeable to the Contents and use
of the confession of Aurpurghe, therevppon grounded, without molestation of our
Commisioners, Justices and Officers, or any either of our Jurisdiction, whom
we do mean to defend and assist with the help of the Almighty God:
trusting also upon the mighty power of God, that he will mercifully assist and
favor us in our so godly an enterprise and meaning, and be our defense against
all the Gates of Hell, to the maintenance of his glory and holy word.

Moreover, we do hereby declare and proteste before the Almighty God, who is
the chief truth, and a knower of the secrets of all men's hearts, that we are
not moved and led to this our christian intention, through worldly wisdom,
desire of Honor, or any other wordly respect: neither herein do seek the
profit, honor, dignity, or estimation of our self, but only do seek to
advance the honor and glory of our Redeemer, and to set forth his holy
word. And our intent and meaning herein, is chiefly to seek the prosperitye
and Salvation of our Subjects, whom God has committed to our charge.

Let no man therefore imagine or think, that we are inclined to novelties or
troubles. For our intent and desire is, to see good Christian orders
maynteined and kept with peace and quyetnes, in Churches and Schools of men's
hearts.

And so we are minded by the advise and counsel of the States of our
Countries, and other our Lords and friends, to publishe and set forth
Christyan Orders to be observed and followed in all Churches and Schools of
our Archbishopricke.

In the mean time we are aduysed, to give warning to all such as intend to
live after the word of GOD, and the Confession of Auspurghe, to use and
behave them selves with all reason and affectyon, as good Christians ought to
do. And we require and pray them most hartilye, that no man mollest,
trouble, defy, blaspheme or vex one an other by word or deed. But that
every of them behave themselves one toward an other peaceably and quyetlye in
their conversation and dealings. And to live and continue according to the
Eontentes of this our present Edict.

And as touching our own Person in this case. Whereas ac, cordynge to the
Counsel and appoyntmente of Almighty God, we have entered into the Holy
State of Marryage, and that publiquelye, wherein no man is able justly to
accuse us to have done the same against the accustomed Order, or that we
have any meaning to seek our pryuate advantage, or any oother thing
preiudyciall to our Archbyshopricke, and Prince Electorshyppe, or to
appropryate the same in Succession and Inhe^ytaunce to our Heirs: We
therefore, do make oppen and plain Testimony and Declaration by these
presents, by the highest truth: (which is God Almighty himself) and hereby
do protest that we have no meaning or will, nor are in any wise inclyned or
bent, to bring our Byshoppricke, to the propryetie or possessyon of our
Heirs, neither to bring in any Novelty or Alteration, tendynge to our
pryuate pro^ytte or advancement. But do hereby openly publishe and declare,
that after our Decease, our Honorable Chapyter of our Cathedral Church of
Culleyn, shall have their free Liberty and Election left unto them, and shall
remain in all respects, as in their ancient former estate.

Also we are content, and give our Commandment touching the premises to all
and singular Inhabitants and Subjects of our Archbysshopryke and Prince
Electorship: that an orderly choice and free election may be made of a future
supreme head, to govern them after our decease or free resignation: yet
nevertheless, our meaning is, that, whosoever shall be in election to come to
that succession by an orderly choice and free election, shall be no other but
such a one as is bound unto our said Chapter of our said Cathedral Church,
and a Lord capable, by th'ordinaunces of the same to come to that degree, and
a man of our jurisdiction, both obedient and fytte, and worthy in all
respects for the place when it shall fall unto him: and otherwise, not to be
elected to such preferment by any means. And whatsoever, such person as shall
be by such orderly proceedinge, choice and free election of our worthy
Chapter of our said Cathedral Church, chosen and elected to succeed after
our said decease or resignation. They shall acknowledge him for their future
Lord, any Law, Statute, Act, Ordinance, Edict, or Proclamation, made,
ordained, or provided, either by us, or any other whatsoever he be, to the
contrary of this our publyke declaration, in any wise notwithstanding: for we,
all such do now, and always will cancel, adnichilate and make of none effect.

All the same premises, we wish to be done in the cheifest and best manner and
form that may be, to the end the same may continue of the better force and
effect: whereunto, we will be obedient and lay to our helping hand, and therein
will agree and consent with our said Chapter and inhabitants and confyrme the
aforesaid conditions with assurance thereof, in such sort that no man shall have
just cause to mistrust or conceive any fear of us, or of our Heirs or
Successors.

Wherefore, we will and command all our Baylyffes, Justices, Officers,
Lieutennauntes, Governors, Customers, Burroughmaisters, Cytizens, Common
people, Ministers and Subjects and whatsoever, upon this our public Edict
and Proclamation, with all their endeavor, to observe and perform the same:
and to cause the same Edict and Proclamaiion to be obeyed and maintained from
point to point:

And also contrary to the true meaning thereof, not to encomber or trouble,
or suffer to be encumbred or troubled, any person or perfons of any degree,
vocation, or calling whatsoever, upon pain of our high displeasure and
indignation, and grievous punishment to be inflicted withal upon the
offenders, breakers or repugners of this our present Edict and Proclamation:
for such is our earnest and final intent and will.

In witness whereof, we have caused this our Proclamation to be openly printed
and confirmed with our Seal, and that through al our Archbishopric and Prince
Electorship, to thend, yt every man should have knowledge thereof.

Given in our City of BON, the.xvi. Day of January, in the year of the
Computation of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1583.
Printed at London by Richard Jones: at the Sign of the Rose and the Crown,
near Holburne Bridge. 19. MARCH, 1583.

woodcut of portrait of old man, forehead marked with astrological signs












