The Posies of George Gascoigne Esquire.

Corrected, perfected, and augmented by the Author. 1575.

Tam Marti, quam Mercurio. IMPRINTED AT London by H. Bynneman for Richard Smith.

These Books are to be sold at the Northwest door of Paul's Church.

To the reverend Divines, unto whom these Posies shall happen to be presented,
George Gascoigne Esquire (professing arms in the defense of Gods truth)
wishes quiet in conscience, and all consolation in Christ Jesus.
RIght reverend: I have thought it my part (before I vvade further in
publishing of these Posies) to lay open before your grave judgments, asvvell
the cause which presently moves me to present them, as also the depth and
secrets of some conceytes, which (being passed in clovvdes and figurative
speeches) might percase both be offensive to your gravity, and perilous to my
credit.

It is very near two years past, since (I being in Hollande in service
with the virtuous Prince of Orange) the most part of these Posies were
imprinted, and now at my return, I find that some of them have not only been
offensive for sundry vvanton speeches and lascivious phrases, but further I
hear that the same have been doubtfully construed, and (therefore) scandalous.

My reverend and well-beloved: whatsoever my youth has seemed unto the grauer
sort, I vvoulde be very loath now in my middle age to deserve reproach: more
loath to touch the credit of any other, and most loath to have mine own name
become unto you odious. For if I should now at this age seem as careless
of reproach, as I was in green youth ready to go astray, my faults might
quickly grovve double, and mine estimation should be vvoorthie too remain
but single. I have learned that although there may be found in a Gentleman
whereby to be reprehended or rebuked, yet ought he not to be vvoorthie of
reproof or condemnation.

All this I set down in preamble, too the end I may thereby purchase your
patience. And as I desire that you will not condemn me vvythoute proof, so
am I contented, that if hereafter you find me guilty, your definitive,
sentence shall then pass publikelye under the Seal of Severity.

It were not reason (right reverend) that I should be ignorant how
generally we are all magis proni ad malum quam ad bonum. Even so is it
requisite that I acknovvledge a general reformation of manners more necessary
to be taught, than any VVhetstone of Vanities is meet (in these days) to
be suffered. And therefore as your gravity has thought requysite that all
idle Books or vvanton Pamphlettes should be forbidden, so might it seem
that I were vvoorthie of great reprehension, if I should be the Aucthour of
evil vvilfully, or a prouoker of vices vvittingly. And yet some there are who
have not spared too report that I received great sums of money for the
first printing of these Posies, whereby (if it were true) I might seem not
only a crafty Broker for the vtteraunce of garishe toys, but a corrupt
Merchaunte for the sale of deceyptfull vvares.

For answer hereof it is most true (and I call Heaven and Earth too
witness) that I never received of the Printer, or of any other, one grote or
penny for the first Copyes of these Posyes. True it is that I was not
vnvvillinge the same should be imprinted: And that not of a vaineglorious
desire too be thought a pleasant Poet, neither yet of a light mind too be
counted a cunning Lover. For though in youth I was often ouerhardie too put my
name in Ballaunce of doubtful judgments, yet now I am become so bashful
that I could rather be content too leese the praise of my follyes, than too
hazard the misconceyte of the grave and graye headed Judges. But too confess
a truth unto you right reverend (with whom I may not dissemble in cases
which so generally do touch all men) I was the rather contented too see
them imprinted for these sundry considerations.

First, for that I have seen diverse Authors, (both learned and well
learned) which after they have both reformed their lives, and converted their
studies, have not yet disdeyned to read the Poems which they let pass their
pens in youth. For it seems unto me that in all ages Poetry has been
not only permitted, but also it has been thought a right good and excellent
quality.

Next unto this, I have alvvayes been of opinion, that it is not impossible
either in Poemes or in Prose too write both compendiously, and perfectly in
our English tongue. And therefore although I challenge not unto my self the
name of an English Poet, yet may the Reader find out in my vvrytings, that I
have more faulted in keeping the old English words (quamuis iam obsoleta)
than in borovving of other languages, such Epithetes and Adjectives as smell of
the Ink horn.

Thirdly, as I seek advancement by virtue, so was I desirous that there
might remain in public record, some pledge or token of those gifts
vvhervvith it has pleased the Almighty to endue me: To the end that thereby
the virtuous might be encouraged to employ my pen in some exercise which
might tend both to my preferment, and to the profit of my Country. For many
a man which may like mine outvvarde presence, might yet have doubted whether
the qualityes of my mind had been correspondent to the proportion of my body.

Fourthly, because I had vvritte^ sundry things which could not choose but
content the learned and Godly Reader, therefore I hoped the same should serve
as undoubted proof, that I had laid aside vanities, and delighted to exercise
my pen in moral discourses, at least the one passing (cheek by cheek) with
the other, must of necessity persuade both the learned, and the light minded,
that I could asvvell sovve good grain, as graynes or draffe. And I thought
not meet (being intermingled as they were) to cast away a whole bushel of
good seed, for two or three graynes of Darnell or Cockle.

Lastly, I persuaded my self that as in the better sort of the same I should
purchase good lyking with the honorable aged: So even in the vvorst sort, I
might yet serve as a myrrour for unbridled youth, to avoid those perilles
which I had passed. For little may he do which has escaped the rock or the
sands, if he cannot vvaft with his hand to them that come after him.

These consideration^ (right reverend) did first move me to consent that these
Poemes should pass in print. For recapitulation whereof, and to answer
unto the objections that may be given: I say to the first that I neither take
example of wanton Ovid, doting Nigidius, nor foolish Samocratius. But I delight
to think that the reverend father Theodore Beza, whose life is vvorthily
become a lantern to the whole world, did not yet disdain too suffer the
continued publication of such Poemes as he vvrote in youth. And as he termed
them at last Poemata castrata, So shall your reverend judgments behold in this
second edition, my Poemes gelded from all filthy phrases, corrected in all
erroneous places, and beautified with addition of many moral examples.

To the second, although I be sometimes constreyned for the cadence of rimes,
or per licentiam Poeticam, to use an ynkehorne term, or a strange word: Yet
hope I that it shall be apparent I have rather regard to make our native
language commendable in it self, than gay with the feathers of strange
birds.

To the third reason may be objected, that if I were so desirous to have my
capacity known, I should have done much better to have traveled in some
notorious piece of work, which might generally have spread my commendation.
The which I confess. But yet is it true that I must take the Foord as I find
it: Sometimes not as I vvoulde, but as I may And since the oversight of my
youth had brought me far behind hand and indebted unto the world, I
thought good in the mean time to pay as much as I had, until it might please
God better to enable me. For commonly the greediest creditor is appeased, if he
see his debtor vvilling to pay when he has any thing. And therefore being
busied in martial affairs (whereby also I sought some advancement) I
thought good to notify unto the world before my return, that I could as
well persuade with Pen, as pearce with lance or vveapon: So that yet some
noble mind might be encouraged both to exercise me in time of peace, and to
emploie me in time of service in war.

To the fourth and last considerations, I had alleged of late by a right
reverend father, that although in deed out of every flower the industrious
Be may gather honey, yet by proof the Spider thereout also sucks mischeeuous
poison. Whereunto I can none otherwise answer, but that he who will
throvv a stone at every Dog which barketh, had need of a great satchell or
pocket. And if the learned judgments and honest minds do both construe my
doings aright, and take therein either council or commodity, then care I the
less what the wicked conceive of my conceytes. For I esteem more the praise
of one learned Reader, than I regard the curious carping of ten thousand
unlettered lettered tattlers.

To conclude (right reverend) as these considerations did specially move me at
first to consent to the imprinting of these posies, so now have I yet a
further consideration which moves me most earnestly to sue for this second
edition or publishing of the same. And that is this. I understand that sundry
well disposed minds have taken offense at certain vvanton words and
sentences passed in the fable of Ferdinando Ieronimi, and the Lady Elinora de
Valasco, the which in the first edition was termed The adventures of master
F. I. And that also therewith some busy conjectures have presumed to think
that the same was indeed written to the scandalizing of some vvorthie
personages, whom they vvoulde seem thereby to know. Surely (right reverend) I
smile to see the simplicity of such, who being indeed stark staring blind,
would yet seem to see far into a millstone. And the rather I scorn their
rash judgments, for that in talking with.xx. of them one after another, there
have not two agreed in one conjecture. Alas, alas, if I had been so foolish
as to have passed in recital a thing so done in deed, yet all the world
might think me very simple if I vvoulde call John, John, or Mary, Mary. But
for the better satisfying of all men universally, I do here protest unto you
(reverend) even by the hope of my salvation, that there is no living creature
touched or to be noted thereby. And for the rest you shall find it now in this
second imprinting so turquened and turned, so cleansed from all uncleanly
words, and so purged from the humor of inhumanitie, as percase you vvoulde
not judge that it was the same tale. For although I have bin heretofore
contented to suffer the publication thereof, only to the end men might see my
Method and manner of vvriting, yet am I now thus desirous to set it forth
eftsoons, to the end all men might see the reformation of my mind. And that
all suspicions may be suppressed and thoroughly satisfied, by this mine unfeigned
protestation which I make unto you in that behalf. Finally, were it not that
the same is already extant in such sort as has moved offense, I should rather
be content to cancel it utterly to oblivion, then thus to return it in a new
patched cote. And for full proof of mine earnest zeal in Gods service, I
require of you (reverend) most instantly, that if hereby my skill seem
sufficient to vvade in matters of greater importance, you will then vouchsafe
to employ me accordingly. Surely you shall find me no less ready to
undertake a whole years travail in any work which you shall think me
able to overcome, than I have been vvilling heretofore to spend three hours
in penning of an amorous Sonnet. Even so being desirous that all men generally
(and you especially) should conceive of me as I mean, I have thus far
troubled your learned eyes with this plain Epistle, written for my purgation,
in matters which (else) might both have offended you, and given great
battery to the ramparts of my poor credit. The God of peace vouchsafe to
govern and product you, and me, and all his, in quiet of conscience, and
strength of spirit. Amen. From my poor house at VValtamstovv in the Forest,
this last day of January. 1574.

To al young Gentlemen, and generally to the youth of England, George Gascoigne
Esquire by birth, and Soldier by profession, wishes increase of knowledge in
all virtuous exercises.
GAllant Gentlemen, and lusty youths of this my native Country, I have here
(as you see) published in print such Posies and rymes as I used in my youth,
the which for the barbarousnesse of the style may seem worthless, and yet for
the doubtfulnesse of some dark places they have also seemed (heretofore)
dangerous. So that men may justly both condemn me of rashness, and wonder at
my simplicity in suffering or procuring the same to be imprinted.

A young man well borne, tenderly fostered, and delicately accompanied, shall
hardly pass over his youth without falling into some snares of the Devil, and
temptations of the flesh. But a man of middle years, who has to his cost
experimented the vanities of youth, and to his peril passed them: who has
bought repentance dear, and yet gone through with the bargain: who sees
before his face the time past lost, and the rest passing away in post: Such a
man had more need to be well advised in his doings, and resolute in his
determinations. For with more ease and greater favor may we answer for ten
mad follies committed in grene youth, than one sober oversight escaped in
years of discretion. Lycurgus the good princely Philosopher, ordained that if
an old man perceiving a young man to commit any dishonestie; did not rebuke but
suffer him: the aged should be chastised, and the young man should be absolved.

All this rehearsed and considered, you may (as I say) grow in some doubt,
whether I were worse occupied in first devising, or at last in publishing these
toies and pamphlets: and much the rather, for that it is a thing commonly
seen, that (now adays) few or no things are so well handled, but they shall
be carped at by curious Readers, nor almost any thing so well meant, but may
be much misconstrued.

And heerewithall I assure my self, that I shall be generally condemned as a
man very lightly bent, and rather desirous to continue in the fresh
remembrance of my follyes, than content too cancel them in oblivion by
discontinuance: especially since in a house where many young children are, it
has been thought better policy quite to quench out the fire, than to leave
any loofe cole in the imbers, wherewith Babes may play and put the whole
edifice in danger.

But my lusty youths, and gallant Gentlemen, I had an intent far contrary
unto all these supposes, when I first permitmitted the publication hereof.
And because the greatest offense that has been taken thereat, is, least your
minds might hereby become enuenomed with vanities, therefore unto you I will
address my tale, for the better satisfying of common judgments. And unto you
I will explane, that which being before mistically covered, and commonly
misconstrued, might be no less perilous in seducing you, than grievous
evidence for to prove me guilty of condemnation.

Then to come unto the matter, there are three sorts of men which (being
wonderfully offended at this book) have found therein three manner of matters
(say they) very reprehensible. The men are these: curious Carpers, ignorant
Readers, and grave Philosophers. The faults they find are, Iudicare in the
Creed: Chalk for Cheese: and the common infection of Love. Of these three
sorts of men and matters, I do but very little esteem the two first. But I
deeply regard the third. For of a very troth, there are one kind of people
nowadayes which will mislyke any thing, being bred (as I think) of the spawne
of a Crab or Creuish, which in all streams and waters will swim either
sidewayes, or flat backwards: and when they can indeed find none other fault,
will yet think Iudicare very vntowardlye placed in the Creed. Or (being a
simple Sowter) will find fault at the shape of the leg: or if they be not
there stopped, they will not spare to step up higher, and say, that Apelles
painted Dame Venus very deformed or evil favored.

Of this sort I make small accounte, because indeed they seek a knotte in the
Rushe, and would seem to see very far in a Mylstone.

There are also certain others, who (having no skill at all) will yet be very
busy in reading all that may be read, and think it sufficient if (Parrot
like) they can rehearse things without book: when within book they
understand neither the meaning of the Author, nor the sense of the figurative
speeches, I will forbear to recyte examples by any of mine own doings. Since
all comparisons are odious, I will not say how much the areignment and divorce
of a Lover (being written in jest) have been mistaken in sad earnest. It shall
suffice that the contentions passed in verse long sithence, between master
Churchyard and Camel, were (by a blockheaded reader) co^strued to be indeed a
quarrel between two neighbors. Of whom that one having a Camel in keeping, and
that other having charge of the Churchyard, it was supposed they had grown to
debate, because the Camel came into the Churchyard. Laugh not at this (lusty
yonkers) since the pleasant dittie of the noble Earl of Surrey (beginning thus:
In winters just return) was also construed to be made indeed by a Shepeherd.
What should I stand much in rehersall how the L. Vaux his dittie (beginning
thus: I loath that I did love) was thought by some to be made upon his death
bed? and that the Soulknill of M. Edwards was also written in extremity of
sickness? Of a truth (my good gallants) there are such as having only learned
to read English, do interpret Latin, Greek, French and Italian phrases or
metaphors, eue^ according to their own motherly conception and childish skill.
The which (because they take Chalk for Cheese) shall never trouble me,
whatsoever fault they find in my doings.

But the third sort (being grave Philosophers, and finding just fault in my
doings at the common infection of love) I must needs allege such just
excuse as may counteruayle their just complaynts. For else I should remain
worthy of a severe punishment. They wisely considering that we are all in
youth more apt to delight in harmefull pleasures, then to digest wholesome and
sound advice, have thought meet to forbid the publishing of any ryming
tryfles which may serve as whetstones to sharpen youth unto vanities.

And for this cause, finding by experience also, how the first Copy of these
my Posies has been very much inquired for by the younger sort: and hearing
likewise that (in the same) the greater part has been written in pursuit of
amorous enterpryses, they have justly conceived that the continuance thereof
has been more likely to stir in all young Readers a venomous desire of
vanity, than to serve as a common myrrour of green and youthful
imperfections. Whereunto I must confess, that as the industrious Be may
gather honey out of the most stinking weed, so the malicious Spider may also
gather poison out of the fairest flower that grows.

And yet in all this discourse I see not proved, that either that Gardener is
too blame which planteth his Garden full of fragrant flowers neither that
planter to be dispraysed: which sows all his beds with seeds of wholesome
herbs: neither is that Orchard unfruitful, which (under show of sundry
weeds) has medicinable playsters for all infirmities. But if the Chirurgian
which should seek Sorrel to rypen an Ulcer, will take Rewe which may more
inflame the Impostume, then is he more to blame that mistook his gathering,
than the Gardener which planted aright, and presented store and choice to be
taken. Or if the Physician will gather hot Perceley in stead of cold Endive,
shall he not worthily bear the burden of his own blame?

To speak English, it is your using (my lusty Gallants) or misvsing of these
Posies that may make me praised or dispraysed for publishing of the same. For
if you (where you may learn to avoid the subtle sands of wanton desire) will
run upon the rocks of unlawful lust, then great is your folly, and greater
will grow my rebuke. If you (where you might gather wholesome herbs to cure
your sundry infirmities) will spend the whole day in gathering of sweet
smelling Posies, much will be the time that you shall mispende, and much more
the harm that you shall heap upon my head. Or if you will rather beblister
your hands with a Nettle, then comfort your senses by smelling to the pleasant
Marioram, then wanton is your pastime, and small will be your profit.

I have here presented you with three sundry sorts of Posies: Flowers,
Herbs, and VVeedes. In which division I have not meant that only the flowers
are to be smelled unto, nor that only the VVeedes are to be rejected. I term
some Flowers, because being indeed invented upon a very light occasion, they
have yet in them (in my judgment) some rare invention and Method before not
commonly used. And therefore (being more pleasant than profitable) I have
named them Flowers.

The second (being indeed moral discourses, and reformed inventions, and
therefore more profitable than pleasant) I have named Herbs.

The third (being VVeedes) might seem to some judgments, neither pleasant nor
yet profitable, and therefore meet to be cast away. But as many weeds are
right medicinable, so may you find in this none so vile or stinking, but that
it has in it some virtue if it be rightly handled. Mary you must take heed
how you use the^. For if you delight to put Hemlocke in your fellows pottage,
you may chance both to poison him, and bring your self in peril. But if you
take example by the harms of others who have eaten it before you, then may you
chance to become so wary, that you will look advisedly on all the Perceley
that you gather, least amongst the same one branch of Hemlock might anoy you.

I assure you, my young bloods, I have not published the same to the intent that
other men hereafter might be infected with my follies forepassed. For though it
be a comfort in miserijs habere consortem, yet is it small consolation to a
fellon, to have a Coyner hanged in his company. And I assure you (although you
will think it strange) that I have not caused them to be imprinted for any
vain delight which I have (my self) therein conceived. For the most of them
being written in my madness, might have yielded then more delight to my
frantike fancy to see them published, than they now do accumulate cares in my
mind to set them forth corrected: and a deformed youth had been more likely to
set them to sale long sithence, than a reformed man can be able now to protect
them with simplicity.

The scope of mine intent, and the mark whereat I shoot is double. I mean
grounded upon two sundry causes: the one that being indebted unto the world
(at the least five thousand days very vainly spent) I may yield him yet some
part of mine account in these Poemes. Wherein as he may find great diversity
both in style and sense, so may the good be encouraged to set me on work at
last, though it were noone before I sought service. The other reason is, that
because I have (to mine own great detriment) misspent my golden time, I may
serve as ensample to the youthful Gentlemen of England, that they run not
upon the rocks which have brought me to shipwreck. Beware therefore, lusty
Gallants, how you smell to these Posies. And learn you to use the talent
which I have highly abused. Make me your myrrour. And if hereafter you see me
recover mine estate, or reedifie the decayed walls of my youth, then begin
you sooner to build some foundation which may beautify your Palace. If you
see me sink in distresses (notwithstanding that you judge me quick of
capacity) then learn you to mainteyne your selves swimming in prosperity, and
eschew betymes the whirlepoole of misgouernment.

Finally, I beseech you, and conjure you, that you rather encourage me to
accomplish some worthier travail, by seeing these Posies right smelled unto,
than discourage me from attempting other labors, when I shall see these first
fruits rejected or misused. I have corrected them from sundry faults. Which
if they had not brought suspicion in the first copy, be you then out of doubt
you had never been troubled with these second presents, nor persuaded to
flourishe wisely with a two edged swoorde in your naked hands. But as I have
meant them well, so I crave of God, that they may both pleasure and profit you
for the furtherance of your skill in any commendable enterprise.

From my poor house at VValtamstow in the Forest the second of January. 1575
To the Readers generally a general advertisement of the Author.
ALl that is written is written for our instruction, as the holy Apostle
witnesses to the Romans in his.xv. Chapter. And in his ninth Chapter of his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, he glories that he could (as it were)
transform himself into all professions, thereby to win all kind of men to
God: saying that with the Jews he became a Jew: with them that were under the
law, he seemed also under the law: with the feeble, he showed himself feeble.
And to conclude, he became all things to all men, to the end that he might
thereby win some to salvation. My Schoolmaster which taught me Grammar,
would always say that some scholars he woonne to study by strypes, some
other by fair means, some by promises, some other by praises, some by
vainglorie, and some by very shame. But I never hard him repent him that ever
he had persuaded any scholar to become studious, in what sort soever it were
that he woonne him. For whether the brave Gennet be broken with the bitte, or
with the snaffle, whither he be brought in awe with a Spur, or with a wand,
all is one if he prove ready and well mouthed.

Thus much I write (gentle Reader) to the end that mine intent may appear in
publishing of these Posies. Wherein as there are many things moral, so are
there also some verses more sauced with wantonness than with wisdom. And as
there are some ditties which may please and delight the godly and grauer sort,
so are there some which may allure the younger sort unto fond attempts. But what
for that? Has Terence been forbidden to be read, because his Comedies are
rehearsals of many mad prankes played by wanton youths? No surely.

Paracelsus, and sundry other Physicians and Philosophers, declare, that in
every thing natural there is to be found Salt, Oil, and Brimstone. And I am
of opinion, that in every thing which is written (the holy scriptures excepted)
there are to be found wisdom, folly, emulation, and detraction. For as I
never yet saw any thing so clerkly handled, but that therein might be found
some imperfections: So could I never yet read fable so ridiculous but that
therein some morallitie might be gathered. And as the good writer shall be sure
of some to be maliced: so the bad shall never escape the biting tongues of
slaunderers.

But to return to my purpose: If in the hardest flint there may be found
sparks of lively fire, and the most knottie piece of Box, may be wrought to a
fair Doogen hafte: let these few suffice to persuade thee, that I have not
procured the publication hereof to any end, so much as that the youthful sort
might therein take example, and the aged recreation.

Now if any (misgouerning their own wits) do fortune to use that for a
Spur, which I had here appointed for a Bridle, I can none otherwise lament
it, but to say that I am not the first which has been misiudged. Truly
(gentle Reader) I protest that I have not meant herein to displease any man,
but my desire has rather been to content most men: I mean the divine with
godly Hymns and Psalms, the sober mind with moral discourses, and the
wildest will with sufficient warning. The which if it so fall out, then shall I
think my self right happy. And if it fall out otherwise, I shall yet never
be ashamed to become one of their corporation which reap floutes and
reprehension for their trauayles.

But because these Posies grow to a great bundell, and thereof also the number
of loving lines exceeds in the Superlatiue, I thought good to advertise thee,
that the most part of them were written for other men. And out of all doubt, if
ever I wrote line for my self in causes of love, I have written ten for
other men in lays of lust. For I count greater difference between love and
lust, than there is diversity between wit and wisdom: and yet wit and I
did (in youth) make such a fray, that I fear his cosen wisdom will never
become friends with me in my age. Well, though my folly be greater than my
fortune, yet ouergreat were mine inconstancy, if (in mine own behalf) I
should compyle so many sundry Songs or Sonets. I have heard of an honest
plain meaning Citizen, who (being ouercharged with many matters in the law,
and hearing of a common solicitor of causes in the City) came home to comfort
his wife, and told her that he had heard of one which dwelt at Billingsgate,
that could help all men. Eu^n so (good Reader) I was a great while the man
which dwelt at Billingsgate. For in wanton delights I helped all men, though
in sad earnest I never furthered my self any kind of way. And by that it
proceeds, that I have so often changed my Posie or word. For when I did
compile any thing at the request of other men, if I had subscribed the same
with mine own usual mot or devise, it might have bewrayed the same to have
been of my doing. And I was ever curious in that behalf, as one that was
loathe to bewray the follies of other men. And yet (as you see) I am not very
dangerous to lay my self wide open in view of the world. I have also sundry
times changed mine own word or devise. And no marvel: For he that
wandereth much in those wildernesses, shall seldom continue long in one mind.

Well, it were folly to bewail things which are impossible to be recovered,
sithence Had I wist does seldom serve as a blasone of good understanding. And
therefore I will spend no more words in this Preface, but I pray thee to
smell unto these Posies, as Flowers to comfort, Herbs to cure, and VVeedes to
be avoided. So have I meant them, and so I beseech thee Reader to accept them.

Farewell.
T.B. In praise of Gascogines Posies.
WE praise the plough, that makes the fruitelesse soil
To bring forth corn, (through help of heavenly might)
And eke esteem the simple wretches toil,
Whose painful hands do labor day and night.
We praise the ground, whereon the herbs do grow,
Which heal or help, our greeues and mortal pain,
Yea weeds have worth, wherein we virtue know,
For natures Art, nothing has made in vain.
We praise those flowers which please the secret sense,
And do content, the taste or smell of man,
The Gardners pains and work we recompense,
That skillful is, or aught in cunning can.
But much more praise to Gascoignes pen is due,
Whose learned hand does here to thee present,
A Posie full of Herbs, and Flowers new,
To please all brains, to wit or learning bent.
How much the mind does pass the sense or smell,
So much these Flowers all other do excel.
E.C. In praise of Gascoignes Posies.
IN gladsome Spring, when sweet and pleasant shoures
Have well renewed, what winters wrath has torn,
And that we see, the wholesome smelling Flowers,
Begin to laugh rough winters wrack to scorn:
If then by chance, or choice of owners will,
We roame and walk in place of rare delights,
And therein find, what Art or natures skill
Can well set forth, to feed our hungry sightes:
Yea more, if then the owner of the soil,
Does license yield to use all as our own,
And gladly thinks, the fruits of all his toil,
To our behoof to be well set and sown.
It cannot be, but this so great desert
In basest breast does b^eede this due regard,
With world of thanks, to praise this friendly part,
And wish that worth might pay a just reward.
Good Reader then, behold what gallant spring
This book brings forth, of fruits of finest sorts,
Be bold to take, thy list of every thing,
For so is meant. And for thy glad disportes
The pain was taken: therefore lo this I crave,
In his behalf, that wrote this pleasant work,
With care and cost, (and then most freely gave
His labors great, wherein great treasures lurk:
To thine avail) let his desartes now bind thee,
In word and deed, he may still thankful find thee.
M.C. commending the correction of Gascoignes Posies.
THe Bears blind whelps, which lack both nails and hear,
And lie like lumpes, in filthy farrowed wise,
Do (for a time) most ougly beasts appear,
Till dammes dear tongue, do clear their clozed eyes.
The gadde of steel, is likewise blunt and black,
Till file and fire, do frame it sharp and bright:
Yea precious stones, their glorious grace do lack,
Till curious hand, do make them please the sight.
And so these flowers, although the ground were gay,
VVhereon they grew, and they of gallant hew,
Yet till the badde were cullde and cast away,
The best became the worse by such a crew.
(For my part) then: I lyked not their smell,
But as they be, I like them pretly well.
R.S. In praise of Gascoignes Posies.
THe pleasant plot wherein these Posies g^^w,
May represent Parnassus springs indeed.
Where Pallas with her wise and learned crew,
Did plant great store, and sow much cunning seed.
That Goddess then, on whom the Muses wait,
To guard her ground from greedy gathrers spoil,
Has here ordeynde, by fine and close conceyte,
A green knight chief, and master of the soil.
Such badge bears he that beautified this book
With glorious show, of sundry gallant flowers.
But since he first this labor undertook,
He gleand thereout, (to make the profit ours)
A heap of Herbs, a sort of fruitful seeds,
A needful salve, compound of needless weeds.
Appendix.
All these (with more) my friend here freely gives:
Nor naked words, nor streyne of strange devise.
But Gowers mind, which now in Gascoigne lives,
Yeeldes here in view, (by judgment of the wise)
His pen, his sword, himself, and all his might,
To Pallas school, and Mars in Princes right.
T. Chapter In praise of Gascoignes Posies.
THough goodness of the gold, needs no man's praise ye know,
(And every coin is iudgde and found, by weight, by stamp, or show)
Yet does the praise of men, give gold a double grace,
And makes both pearls and Jewels rich, desirde in every place.
The horse full finely formde, whose pace and train is true,
Is more esteemde for good report, than likte for shape and view.
Yea sure, each man himself, for all his wit and skill,
(If world bestow no lawde on him) may sleep in silence still.
Fame shows the value first, of every precious thing,
And winnes with lyking all the brute, that does the credit bring.
And fame makes way before, to works that are unknown
And peoples love is carried there, where fame her trump has blown.
A cunning workman fine, in Cloister close may sit,
And carue or paint a thousand things, and use both art and wit,
Yet wanting worlds renown, may escape unsought or seen:
It is but fame that outruns all, and gets the goall I ween.
The learned Doctors lawd, that heales where other harms,
By common praise of peoples voice, brings pacients in by swarms.
A goodly stately house, has seldom any fame,
Till world behold the buildings through, and people see the same.
The Flowers and Posies sweet, in better price are held,
When those have praysde their virtues rare, that have their odor smeld.
So by these foresaid proofs, I have a pardon free,
To speak, to write, and make discourse, of any work I see,
That worthy is of praise: for praise is all we get.
Present the world with labors great, the world is in your det,
It never yeeldes reward, nor scarce just praise will give:
Then study out to stand on fame, and strive by fame to live.
Our old forefathers wise, saw long before these days,
How sone faint world would fail deserts, and cold would wax our praise.
And knowing that disdeyne, for toil did rather rise,
Than right renown (whose golden buds, grows up to starry skies)
Betook their labors long, and every act they did,
Unto the Gods, from whose deep sight, no secret can be hid.
And these good gracious Gods, sent down from heavens hie,
(For noble minds) an endless fame, that throw the world does fly.
Which fame is due to those, that seek by new device,
To honor learning every way, and Virtue bring in price.
From Knowledge gardeyn gay, where science sowes her seeds,
A pretty Posie gathered is, of Flowers, Herbs, and VVeedes.
The Flowers by smell are found, the herbs their goodness shows,
The VVeedes amid both herbs and flowers, in dece^t order grows.
The soft and tender nose, that can no weeds abide,
May make his choice of wholesome herbs, whose virtues well are tried.
The fine and flowing wits, that feed on strange delites,
May taste (for seasning dainty mouths) the bitter weed that bites.
The well disposed mind, and honest meaning man,
Shall find (in flowers) proud Peacoks plumes, and feathers of the Swan.
The cursed and crabbed Carle, that Posies flings away,
By this (perhaps) may find some cause, with pretty flowers to play.
The kind and loving worm, that would his lady please,
My light on some such medcin here, shall do them both much ease.
The Lad that lykes the school, and will good warning take:
May snatch some rules out of this book, that may him doctor make.
The hasty trauayling head, that flies to foreyne place,
May wey by this what home is worth, and stay his rouing race.
The manly courage stout, that seeks fame full far,
Shall find by this how sweet is peace, and see how sour is war.
This Posie is so picked, and choysely sorted throw,
There is no Flower, Herb, nor VVeede, but serves some purpose now.
Then since it freely comes, to you for little cost,
Take well in worth these pains of him, that thinks no labor lost:
To do his country good, as many others have,
Who for their toils a good report, of world did only crave.
Grudge not to yield some fame, for fruits that you receive,
Make some exchange for frank good will, some sign or token leave,
To show your thankful hearts. For if you love to take,
And have a conscience grown so great, you can no gift forsake,
And cannot give again, that men deserve to reap,
Adieu we leave you in the hedge, and ore the style we leap.
And yet some style or verse, we after shape in ryme,
That may by art show you a Glass, to see your selves in time.
Thus wish I men their right: and you that judge amiss,
To mend your minds, or frame your Muse, to make the like of this.
G.VV. In praise of Gascoigne, and his Posies.
REader reward naught else, but only good report,
For all these pleasant Posies here, bound up in sundry sort.
The flowers fair and fresh, were set with painful toil,
Of late in Gascoignes Garden plot, a passing pleasant soil.
Now weeds of little worth, are culde from out the rest,
Which he with double pain, did work, to gleane the bad from best,
The state is very strange, and fortune rare in use,
Whose heavy hap he neither helps, nor blazeth their abuse.
In thundering verse he wrayes, where highest minds be thrall,
Where mischief seeks to raise it self, by force of others fall
He pluckes the visour of, from maskes of peevish pride,
And wrayes what sour (in sweet pretense) the coustly corts ca^ hide.
In every gallant flower, he sets forth to show,
Of Venus thralles, the hap, the harm, the want, the weal, the woe.
He finely finds their faults, whose wealth does foster wrong,
Who touches sin (without offense) must plainly sing his song.
His lofty vain in verse, his stately style in prose,
Foretelles that Pallas meant by him, for to defend her foes.
VVherwith to Mars his might, his lusty limbs are knit,
(A sight most rare) that Hectors mind, should match with Pallas wit.
By proof of late appeared (how so reports here ran)
That he in field was foremost still, in spoil the hynmost man.
No backward blastes could bruise the valor of his thought,
Although sly hap, forestoode his hope, in that he credit sought.
In fortunes spite he straue, by virtues to aspire,
Resolude when due deserts might mount, then he should have his hire
Thus late with Mars in field, a lusty Soldier shewde,
And now with peace in Pallas school, he freendly has bestowde,
On thee this heap of flowers, the fruits of all his toil,
Whereof if some but simple seem, consider well the soil.
They grew not all at home, some came from forreyne fields,
The which (percase) set here again, no pleasant savor yeeldes.
Yet who mislyketh most, the worst will hardly mend,
And he were best not write at all, which no man will offend.
P.B. to such as have heretofore found fault with Gascoignes Posies.
GAynst good deserts, both pride and envy swell,
As need repines, to see his neighbor ritche:
And slander chafes, where virtues prosper well,
As sick men think, all others health to mitch:
Such filthy faults, men's hearts ofttymes inflame,
That spite presumes, to stayne the worthies name.
Are brutall things, transferred so to men?
Or men become more savage than the beast?
We see the dog, that kenelles in his den,
(For only food) obeyes his Lords behest:
Yea more than that, remembers so relief,
As (in his kind) he mournes at masters grief.
If thou perceive, whereto my tale intendes,
Then (slander) cease to wrong a friendly wight,
Who for his countries good, his travail spendes,
Sometime where blows are given in bloody fight:
And other times he frames with skillful pen,
Such verse, as may content each moulde of men.
As now behold, he here presents to thee,
The blossoms fair, of three well sorted seeds.
The first he feynes, fresh Flowers for to be:
The second Herbs, the last he terms VVeedes.
All these, the soil of his well fallowed brain,
(With Pallas drops bedewde) yeeldes for thy gain.
The Herbs to grave conceyt, and skillful age,
The fragrant Flowers to sent of younger smell:
The worthless VVeedes, to rule the wantonrage
Of recklesse heads, he gives: then use them well:
And gather (friend) but neither spite nor spoil,
These Posies made, by his long painful toil.
A.VV. In commendation of Gascoigne and his Posies.
I Praised once a book (whereby I purchased blame)
And venturde for to write a verse, before I knew the same.
So that I was deceyude, for when it came to light,
The book deserved no such word, as I therein did wright.
Thus lept I ere I looked, and wandered ere I wist,
Which gives (me haggard) warning since, to trust no falkners fist.
And yet the book was good, (by hap and not my skill)
But not a Book of such contents, as might my words fulfill.
Well now I need not fear, these Posies here to praise,
Because I knew them every flower, and where they grew always.
And sure for my conceyt, even when they bloomed first,
Me thought they smelt not much amiss, no not the very worst.
Perhaps some dainty nose, no Batchlers button lykes,
And some at Pimpernell and Pinkes, a slender quarrel pykes.
Some think that Gillyflowers, do yield a gelous smell,
And some (which like none herb but Sage) say Finkell tastes not well.
Yet Finkell is of force, and Gillyflowers are good,
And Pinks please some, and Pimpernell does serve to steynch the blood:
And Batchlers buttons be, the brauest to behold,
But sure that flower were best not grow, which can abide no cold.
For slander blows so shrill, with eastern envious winds,
And frosts of frumps so nip the roots, of virtuous meaning minds
That few good flowers can thrive, unless they be protected,
Or guarded from suspicious blastes, or with some proppes erected.
So seems by the wight, which gardened this ground,
And set such flowers on every bed, that Posies here abound.
Yet some tongues cannot well, affoorde him worthy praise,
And by our Lord they do him wrong, for I have seen his ways,
And marked all his moodes, and have had proof likewise,
That he can do as well in field, as pen can here devise.
Not many Months yet past, I saw his doughtie deeds,
And since (to hear what slander says) my heavy heart it b^^edes.
Yet Reader grant but this, to try before thou trust,
So shall thou find his flowers and him, both gallant, good and just.
I.B. In commendation of Gascoignes Posies.
THe sauerie sappes in Gascoignes Flowers that are,
Which strayned were by lofty learnings lore:
Could not content the surly for their share,
Ne cause them once, to yield him thanks therefore;
Such was his hap, when first in hand he took,
By labor long, to bring to light this Book.
Yet has he not (for all this) seemde to cease,
Those Flowers fresh again in ground to set,
And yield them earth to bring forth their increase,
With other slippes from foreign soil yfet.
Which he has gaynde by hazard of his life,
In bloody broils, where pouldred shot was rife.
This endless toil, contented well his mind,
Hope held the helm, his Fame on shore to set:
His deep desire, was friendship for to find,
At readers hands, he naught else sought to get:
Wherefore (doubtless) they did him double wrong,
Which F. and I. mysconstrued have so long.
Yet least I should pass from the golden ground,
Of Gascoignes plat, wherein those Posies grew,
I list to tell what Flowers there I found,
And paint by pen, the honor to him dew:
Since that his toil does well deserve the same,
And sacred skill has so aduaunst his name.
First did I find the Flower of Fetters fruit,
Whereof my self have tasted to my pain:
Then might I see the Green knight touch the Lute,
Whose cords were coucht on frettes of deep disdain:
And likewise there, I might perceive full well,
That fragrant Flower which Fancy bad farewell.
In fine I found the flower that Bellum hight,
Sweet unto those, of silly simple sense,
Yet sharp and sour, to those that do delight
In martial martes, for gain of peuish pense.
Such buddes full brave, good Gascoignes Garden gave
To all estates, which list the same to have.
Wherefore (good friend) fly enuies yrkesome ire,
And tred the trace, which Reasons rule has wrought,
Yield not disdeyne to Gascoigne for his hyre,
Whose bruised brain for thee these flowers has sought.
Least if thou do, the blame on thee do light,
Such friendly pains to recompense with spite.
I.D. In praise of Gascoigne and his Posies.
IF Virgill how to till the Earth, to every man does tell,
And Galen he in Phisicks art does many men excel,
If Poets old deseruen praise, by paynting out aright,
The fruits of vice, as Ovid does, and many mo that wright,
By learned skill of many things: If such exalt their name,
And for their hyre, deserved praise by trumpe of Lady Fame:
Why should the Author of this book then leese his due desert,
Since he so freendly here to us, has showed his skillful art?
The healthsome herbs and flowers sweet, from weeds he has divided,
The fruits of Gives in prison strong he has right well decided.
Of wars also, and warriors to, even like a Martial knight,
He has discourst, and showed the lottes, that thereupon do light:
Virgill is dead, and Galen gone, with Poets many more:
Yet works of theirs be still alive, and with us kept in store.
This Author lives, and Gascoigne hights, yet once to die most sure,
Alas the while that worthy wightes may not always endure,
But works of his among the best, for ever more shall rest,
When he in heaven shall take a place prepared for the blessed.
The Printer in commendation of Gascoigne and his works.
CHawcer by writing purchased fame,
And Gower got a worthy name:
Sweet Surrey, sucked Pernassus springs,
And Wiat wrote of wondrous things:
Old Rothfort clambe the stately Throne,
Which Muses hold, in Hellicone.
Then thither let good Gascoigne go,
For sure his verse, deserves so.
M.A. Perugino, a i lettori.
COnciosia la cosa che a'l bono vino, non ci bisogna la ghirlanda nientedi
meno, l'opere virtuose meritano sempremai ogni laud, honor, and mercede.
Tanto per essersi (nella natura loro, and di se stesse) piaceuole, grate, and
piene, d'ogni contento, come per dare stimoli ad altrui d'imitar' i loro
vestigij. In tanto Io stimo l'opera present vn'essempio chiaro and raro della
gloria Inghlese. Quando vi si truouano non solame^te Sonetti, Rhyme, Canzoni,
and altre cose infinitame^te piaceuole, ma con cio non vi mancano discorse
tragiche, modern, and pbylosophichae, della Guerra, delli stati, and della
vera Sapienza. Tutte procedute d'vn tal Iuchiostro, che Io (sendo forastiero)
lo truouo vn' Immitatore di Petrarcha, Amico d'Ariosto, and Parangon di
Bocaccio, Aretino, and ogni altro Poeta quanto sia piu famoso and eccellente
dell'eta nostra.

I. de B. aux lecteurs.
CEux qui voiront, les Rymes de Gascoigne,
(Estants Francois) se plaindront nuicts and iours
Que la Beauty and l'odeur de ces floeurs,
A cest heur (de France) par Gascoign, tant s'esloigne.
H.M. In Poemata Gascoigni Carmen.
SI iam vena viris eadem, quae vatibus olim,
Ingenioque pari possunt disponere partas
Materias, pedibus si incedunt Carmina certis,
Claudunturque suis numeris: Si turba sororum,
Supplicibus potis est priscos inflare furores,
Sed si quod magis est, nostri sua themata texant,
Consona scripturis sacris, nec dissona rectis
Moribus: amaenos, sed quae cognoscere flores
Virtutis, quae docent dulces colligere fructus.
Si fictas fabulas, falsique Cupidinis arts
Cum Venere excludunt, (vt docta indigna poesi)
Cur non censemus celebrandos iure Coronis
Aequales virtute viros, aequalibus esse?
O ingrata tuis non reddere tanta peritis
Praemia, quanta suis dignarunt prima Poetis
Saecula, number lauds tantas licet addere linguis
Romanae primum, (quae nil tamen attulit vltra
Vtile) germanas, vtfas sit spernere gemmas?
Sed vitium hec patriae est and peculiariter Anglis
Conuenit, externis quaecunque feruntur ab oris,
Anteferre suis. Age si sic sapitis, Ecce,
Anglia quos profert flores Gasconia pressit.
B.C. In Poemata Gasconi Carmen.
Men's generosa solet generosos edere flores,
Incassu^nque suos, non sinit ire dies:
Haec tua Gasconi laus est, mercede remota
Hac, friget virtus, haec tibi sufficiat.
Haec tibi (seu Belgas repetas, Martemque ferocem,
Seu patriam and Musas) inuiolata Comes.
K.D. In eundem, Carmen.
Vlderat huius: of. l. Titulum nomenque Poaeta,
Laetaque vix potuit, dicere lingua been est:
Mox vbi quae voluit, libro non vidit in illo,
Magnaque quae fuerat, pars ibi parua fuit,
Quam male ait socio, Martem secreuit amore?
Qui been amat pugnat, qui been pugnat amat.
Eiusdem de eodem.
QVi quondam grave Martis opus, sub gente nefanda,
Militiamque tuli, non vno nomine duram
Arma quibus laetabar, Ego Tritonia Pallas,
Pallas ego trado arma tibi, and nunc per iuga Cynthi
Per sacrum te Hellicona tuus, per Thessala Tempe
Insequor, aeternumque sequar, dum sydera mundum,
Dum deus aeternos, certo moderamine Coelos
Dirigat, aethereasque animas and sydera Coeli.
O quae felices caelesti nectare mentes
Perfundis, Diuumque doces nos dicere Cantus,
Quale^ Aonias inter celiberrima turbas
Calliopaea canit, vel gestis Clio loquendis
Nata. (Nouenarum pars ingens Clio sororum.)
Da Regina tuis ad^^is, antrisque recepto
Cantari vates inter, d^cique Britannos.
P.VV. In Gascoignum, Carmen.
SVnt quorum mentes, tenebrae, Caligoque turpis
Infuscant, vates qui tetigisse timent.
Tu pete florentem, facunde Poeta Corollam,
Excultis pateat, versilus iste locus.
G.H. pro eodem.
QVisquis es hac nostri qui gaudes part laboris,
Iudicio nobis, cantus adesto precor.
Perlege scripta prius, quam pergas scripta probare,
Et been perlectis, inde videbis opus.
Nam nihil in titulum, iuuat inspexisse libelli,
Si vis materiae sit tibi nota minus.
Non etenim primo veniunt fundamina rerum,
Sed sunt in varijs, inspicienda locis.
Perge igitur quo sit pergendum, fine reperto,
In tenebris tum quae dilituere proba.
E. H. in poemata Gascoigni, Carmen.
SI quam Romani laudem moeraere Poetae
Sique fuit Graijs debitus vllus honos,
Graecia si quondam vatem suspexit Homerum,
Si domitrix magni Roma Maronis opus,
Cur non Gasconij facunda poemata laudat
Anglia? and ad coeli sydera summa ferat?
Carmina nam cum re, sic consentire videntur,
Egregium and praestans, vt videatur opus.
Dixerit has aliquis Musas nimis esse iocosas,
Et iuuenum facile possenocere animis.
Non ita, ni forsan, velit ijsdem lector abuti,
Non obsunt, pura si modo mentelegas.
The opinion of the aucthor himself after all these commendations.
WHat need I speak my self, since other say so much?
Who seem to praise these poesies so, as if there were none such?
But sure my silly self, do find therein no smell,
Which may deserve such passing praise, or seem to taste so well,
This boon I only crave, that Readers yet will deigne
(If any weed herein do seem, his fellow flowers to stayne)
Then read but others works, and mark if that they find,
No toys therein which may dislike, some modest readers mind?
Read Virgills Pryapus, or Ouids wanton verse,
Which he about Corinnaes couche, so clerkly can rehearse.
Read Faustoes filthy tale, in Ariostoes ryme,
And let not Marots Alyx pass, without impeach of crime.
These things considred well, I trust they will excuse
This meize of mine, although she seem, such toys sometimes to use.
Believe me Lordings all, it is a Poets part,
To handle each thing in his kind, for therein lies his art:
Lucillius led the dance, and Horace made the law,
That poets by Authority, may call (A dawe) A Dawe,
And eke (a hoar) A Hoar, but yet in cleanly words,
So that the vice may be rebukt, as though it were in bourdes:
This phrase sometimes I use, which (if it be a fault)
Condemn not all the rest therefore, that here in verse is taught,
Smell every poesy right, and you therein shall find,
Fresh flowers, good herbs, and wholesome weeds, to please a skillful mind.
Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
FINIS.
His vltimum vale to Amorous verse.
Kind Erato, and wanton Thalia,
(Whose name my muze, devoutly did inuoke)
Adieu dear dames, Caliope sings alia,
Which are more worth, and smell not of the smoke.
And if blind Cupide, chance to stryke a stroke,
I vow my verse, Apocrypha shall be,
In silence shut, that none (but you) may see.
Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
FINIS.
FLOWERS.
Tam Marti quam Mercurio.
In this division are contained: The Anotamie of a Lover. j. The areignemente
of a Lover. Fol ij. The passions of a Lover. iij. The divorce of a Lover. vij.
The Lullabie of a lover. viij. The lamentation of a Lover. x. The looks of a
Lover enamored. xj. The looks of a Lover forsaken. xvij. The reca^tatio^ of a
lover. xvij Praise of Lady Sands. xviij. Praise of the Lady Gray. xx. Praise of
the Authors mistress. xx. Gascoigns good morrow. xxj Gascoigns good night.
xxiiij Gascoigns Deprofundis. xxvj Gascoig. memories. xxxiij. An Epitaph upon
Captain Bourcher. xlj. A devise of a Mask. xliij. The refusal of a Lover.
lv. Pride in Court. lvj. Despised things may live. 58 In trust is treason. lix.
The constancy of a Lover. Fol. lx. The fruit of Foes. lxj. A Lover once warned
and twice taken. lxj. A Lover encoraged by former examples. lxiij. The History
of Dan Bartholmewe of Bathe. lxv. The fruits of War. cxiij.


Faults escaped in the VVeedes:
Fol. Line. Faults. Correction. 204 13 allgiance allegeaunce 211 17 like I
hope I like hope 214 24 contation contentation 216 28 merrye married Ibid. 31
flattring flitting 218 4 had showed had to plainly showed Ibid. 7 called
calling Ibid. 30 disdaned distayned 220 14 had and 222 30 in of 223 7 And So
224 7 cape cappe Ibid. 8 Crow Crown 229 16 still foil 232 34 braunce
branch 235 19 possessed professed 238 11 that other 240 5 Elaminia Flaminia
242 11 and an Ibid. 30 zoreactes Zoroastes Ibid. 20 do did 249 13 builded
blinded Ibid. 16 prick prick such 258 5 gentelman gentlewoman 361 6 quibbes
quippes 271 31 la mano las manos 275 2 swell as well 276 4 Fraunces china
Frauncischina Ibid. 8 occurments occurrentes 278 6 that I I that 284 8 But that
285 14 this those

Flowers.
The Anatomye of a Lover.
TO make a Lover known, by plain Anatomy,
You lovers all that list beware, lo here behold you me.
Who though mine only looks, your pity well might move,
Yet every part shall play his part, to paint the panges of love.
If first my feeble head, have so much matter left,
If fancies raging force have not, his feeble skill bereft.
These locks that hang unkempt, these hollow dazzled eyes,
These chattering teeth, this tre^bling tongue, well tewed with careful cries.
These wan and wrinkled cheeks, well washed with waves of woe,
May stand for pattern of a ghost, where so this carcass go.
These shoulders they sustain, the yoke of heavy care,
And on my bruised broken back, the burden must I bear.
These arms quite braunfalne are, with beating on my breast,
This right hand weary is to write, this left hand craves rest:
These sides enclose the forge, where sorrow plays the smith,
And hot desire, has kindled fire, to work this metal with.
The Anuile is my heart, my thoughts they strike the stroke,
My lights and lunges like bellows blow, and sighs ascend for smoke.
My secreete parts are so with secreete sorrow soken,
As for the secreete shame thereof, deserves not to be spoken,
My thighs, my knees, my legs, and last of all my feet,
To serve a lovers turn, are so unable and unmeet,
That scarce they sustain up, this restless body well,
Unless it be to see the boure, wherein my love does dwell,
And there by sight eftsoone, to feed my gazing eye,
And so content my hungry corpse, till dollours do me dye:
Yet for a just reward of love so dearly bought,
I pray you say, lo this was he, whom love had worn to naught.
Ever or never.
The arraigment of a Lover.
AT Beautyes bar as I did stand,
When false suspect accused me,
George (quod the Judge) hold up thy hand,
Thou art arraignde of Flatterye:
Tell therefore how thou wylt be tryde?
Whose judgment here wylt thou abide.
My Lord (quod I) this Lady here,
Whom I esteem above the rest,
Does know my guilte if any were:
Wherefore her doom shall please me best,
Let her be Judge and Iurour boathe,
To try me guiltless by mine oathe.
Will is dame bevvties chief Justice of Oyre and terminer.
Quod Beauty, no, it fitteth not,
A Prince her self to judge the cause:
Will is our Justice well you wot,
Appointed to discuss our Laws:
If you will guiltless seem to go,
God and your country quitte you so.
Then craft the crier called a quest,
Of whom was falshoode foremost feere,
A pack of pickethankes were the rest,
Which came false witness for to bear,
The Iurye such, the Judge unjust,
Sentence was said I should be trust.
Ielous the Iayler bound me fast,
To hear the verdite of the byll,
George (quod the Judge) now thou art cast,
Thou must go hence to heavy hill,
And there be hangde all but the head,
God rest thy soul when thou art dead.
Down fell I then upon my knee,
All flat before Dame Beauties face,
And cried, good Lady pardon me,
Which here appeal unto your grace,
You know if I have been untrue,
It was in too much praising you.
And though this Judge do make such haste,
To shead with shame my guiltless blood:
Yet let your pity first be plaste,
To save the man that meant you good,
So shall you show your self a Queen,
And I may be your servant seen.
(Quod Beauty) well: because I guess,
What thou do mean henceforth to he,
Although thy faults deserve no less,
Than Justice here has judged thee,
Wylt thou be bound to stynt all strife,
And be true prisoner all thy life?
Yea Madame (quod I) that I shall,
Lo faith and truth my suerties: Common Bayll.

Why then (quod she) come when I call,
I ask no better warrantise.
Thus am I Beauties bounden thrall,
At her command when she does call.
Ever or never.
The passion of a Lover.
I Smyle sometimes although my grief be great,
To hear and see these lovers paint their pain,
And how they can in pleasant rimes repeat,
The passing pangs, which they in fancies feign.
But if I had such skyll to frame a verse,
I could more pain than all their panges rehearse.
Some say they find nor peace, nor power to fight,
Which seems strange: but stranger is my state:
I dwell in dole, yet soiorne with delight,
Reposde in rest, yet weryed with debate.
For flat repulse, might well appease my will,
But fancy fightes, to try my fortune still.
Some other say they hope, yet live in dread,
They friese, they flame, they fly aloft, they fall,
But I, nor hope with hap to raise my head,
Nor fear to stoop, for why, my gate is small.
Nor can I friese, with cold to kill my heart,
Nor yet so flame, as might consume my smart.
How live I then, which thus draw forth my days?
Or tell me how, I found this fever first?
What fits I feel? what distance? what delays?
What grief? what ease? what like I best? what worst?
These things they tell, which seek redress of pain,
And so will I, although I coumpt it vain.
I live in love, even so I love to live,
(Oh happy state, twice happy he that finds it)
But love to life this cognizance does give,
This badge this mark, to every man that minds it,
Love lends life, which (dying) cannot dye,
Nor living live: and such a life lead I.
The Sunny days which glad the saddest wightes,
Yet never shine to clear my misty moon:
No quiet sleep, amidde the mooneshine nights,
Can close mine eyes, when I am woe begone.
Into such shades my peeuishe sorrow shrowdes,
That Sun and Moon, are still to me in clouds.
And feuerlike I feed my fancy still,
With such repast, as most empaires my health,
Which fever first I caught by wanton will,
When coals of kind did stir my blood by stealth:
And gazing eyes, in beauty put such trust,
That love enflamd my liver al with lust.
My fits are like the fever Ectick fits, There is in deed such a kind of
fever.

Which one day quakes within and burns without,
The next day heat within the boosoms sits,
And shiuiring cold the body goes about.
So is my heart most hot when hope is cold,
And quaketh most when I most heat behold.
Tormented thus without delays I stand,
All ways in one and evermore shall be,
In greatest grief when help is nearest hand,
And best at ease if death might make me free:
Delighting most in that which hurtes my heart,
And hating change which might relieve my smart.
Yet you dear dame: to whom this cure pertaines, Lenuoye.

Devise by times some drammes for my disease,
A noble name shall be your greatest gains,
Whereof be sure, if you will work mine ease.
And though fond fools set forth their fittes as fast,
Yet grant with me that my strange passion past.
Ever or never.
A strange passion of a Lover.
AMid my Bale I has in bliss,
I swim in heaven, I sink in hell:
I find amends for every miss,
And yet my moan no tongue can tell.
I live and love, what would you more:
As never lover lived before.
I laugh sometimes with little lust,
So jest I often and feel no joy:
Mine ease is builded all on trust:
And yet mistrust breeds mine anoye.
I live and lack, I lack and have:
I have and miss the thing I crave.
These things seem strange, yet are they true.
Believe me sweet my state is such,
One pleasure which I would eschew,
Both slakes my grief and breeds my grutch.
So does one pain which I would shoon,
Renew my joys where grief begoon.
Then like the lark that past the night.
In heavy sleep with cares oppressed:
Yet when she spies the pleasant light,
She sends sweet notes from out her breast.
So sing I now because I think
How joys approach, when sorrows shrink.
And as fair Philomene again,
Can watch and singe when other sleep:
And takes pleasure in her pain,
To wray the woo that makes her weep.
So sing I now for to bewray
The loathsome life I lead always.
The which to thee (dear wenche) I write,
That know my mirth, but not my moan:
I pray God grant thee deep delight,
To live in joys when I am gone.
I cannot live, it will not be:
I dye to think to part from thee.
Ferendo Natura.
The Divorce of a Lover.
Divorce me now good death, from love and lingering life,
That one has been my concubine, that other was my wife.
In youth I lived with love, she had my lustye days,
In age I thought with lingering life to stay my wa^dering wais,
But now abusde by both, I come for to complain,
To thee good death, in whom my help does wholly now remain,
My libell lo behold: wherein I do protest,
The process of my plaint is true, in which my grief does rest.
First love my concubine (whom I have kept so trim,
Even she for whom I seemd of yore, in seas of joy to swim:
To whom I dare auowe, that I have served as well,
And played my part as gallantly, as he that hears the hell)
She cast me of long since, and holds me in disdain,
I cannot pranke to please her now, my vaunting is but vain.
My writhled cheeks bewraye, that pride of heat is past,
My stagring steps eke tell the truth, that nature fades fast,
My quaking crooked joints, are combred with the crampe,
The box of oil is wasted well, which once did feed my lamp.
The greenesse of my years, does wyther now so sore, Such a sect there is that
desire no longer life the^ vvhiles they are in love.

That lusty love leapes quite away, and lyketh me no more,
And love my lemman gone, what lyking can I take?
In loathsome life that crooked croane, although she be my make?
She cloyes me with the cough, her comfort is but cold,
She bids me give mine age for alms, where first my youth was sold.
No day can pass my head, but she begins to brall,
No merry thoughts conceived so fast, but she confounds them al.
When I pretend to please, she ouerthwarts me still,
When I would faynest part with her, she ouerwayes my will.
Be judge then gentle death, and take my cause in hand,
Consider every circumstaunce, mark how the case does stand.
Percase thou will aledge, that cause thou can none see,
But that I like not of that one, that other likes not me:
Yea gentle judge give ear, and thou shall see me prove,
My concubine incontinent, a common whore is love.
And in my wife I find, such discord and debate,
As no man living can endure the torments of my state.
Wherefore thy sentence say, deuorce me from them both,
Since only thou may right my wrongs, good death now he not loath.
But cast thy pearcing dart, into my panting breast,
That I may leave both love and life, and thereby purchase rest.
Haud ictus sapio.
The Lullabie of a Lover.
SIng lullaby, as women do,
Wherewith they bring their babes to rest,
And lullaby can I sing to,
As womanly as can the best.
With lullaby they still the child,
And if I be not much beguild,
Full many wanton babes have I,
Which must be stild with lullabie.
First lullaby my youthful years,
It is now time to go to bed,
For croocked age and hoary hears,
Have wone the haven with in my head:
With Lullaby then youth be still,
With Lullaby content thy will,
Since courage quayles, and commes behind,
Go sleep, and so beguile thy mind,
Next Lullaby my gazing eyes,
Which wonted were to glaunce apace.
For every Glass may now suffice,
To show the furrows in my face:
With Lullabye then wink awhile,
With Lullabye your looks beguile:
Let no fair face, nor beauty brighte,
Entice you efte with vain delighte.
And Lullaby my wanton will,
Let reasons rule, now reign thy thought,
Since all to late I find by skyll,
How dear I have thy fancies bought:
With Lullaby now tak thine ease,
With Lullaby thy doubts appease:
For trust to this, if thou be still,
My body shall obey thy will.
Eke Lullaby my loving boy,
My little Robyn take thy rest,
Since age is cold, and nothing coye,
Keep close thy coin, for so is best:
With Lullady be thou content,
With Lullaby thy lusts relente,
Let others pay which has mo pence,
Thou art to pore for such expense.
Thus Lullabye my youth, mine eyes,
My will, my ware, and all that was,
I can no mo delays devise,
But welcome pain, let pleasure pass:
With Lullaby now take your leave,
With Lullaby your dreams deceive,
And when you rise with waking eye,
Remember then this Lullabye.
Ever or Never.
The lamentation of a lover.
NOw have I found the way, to weep and wayle my fill,
Now can I end my dolfull days, and so content my will.
The way to weep enough, for such as list to wayle,
Is this: to go abord ye ship, where pleasure bears sail.
And there to mark the iestes, of every joyful wight,
And with what wind and wave they fleet, to nourish their delight.
For as the stricken Dear, that sees his fellows feed,
Amid the lusty heard (unhurt,) and feels himself to bleed
Or as the seely byrd, that with the Bolte is brusd,
And lies aloof among the leaves, of al her pheares refusd,
And hears them sing full shrill, yet cannot she rejoice,
Nor frame one warbling note to pass, out of her mournful voice.
Even so I find by proof, that pleasure dubleth pain,
Unto a wretched wounded heart, which does in woe, remain.
I pass where pleasure is, I hear some sing for joy,
I see some laugh, some other dau^ce, in spite of dark anoy.
But out alas my mind, amends not by their mirth,
I deem al pleasurs to be pain, that dwell above ye earth.
Such heavy humors feed, ye blood that lendes me breath,
As merry medcins cannot serve, to keep my corpse from death.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
Certain verses written to a Gentlewoman whom he liked very well, and yet had
never any opportunity to discover his affection, being always bridled by
jealous looks which attended them both, and therefore gessing by her lokes,
that she partly also liked him: he wrote in a book of nirs as follows, being
termed with the rest that follow the lokes of a lover enamoured.
THou with thy looks on whom I look full often,
And find there in great cause of deep delight:
Thy face is fair, thy skin is smoth and soft,
Thy lips are sweet, thine eyes are clear and bright,
And every part seems pleasant in my sight.
Yet wot thou well, those lokes have wrought my woe,
Because I love to look upon them so.
For first those looks allurd mine eye to look,
And straight mine eye stird up my heart to love:
And cruel love with deep deceitful hook,
Chokt up my mind whom fancy cannot move,
Nor hope relieve, nor other help behoue:
But still to look, and though I look to much,
Needs must I look because I see none such.
Thus in thy looks my love and life have hold,
And with such life my death draws on a pace:
And for such death no medcine can be told,
But loking still upon thy lovely face,
Wherein are painted pity, peace, and grace,
Then though thy lokes should cause me for to dye,
Needs must I look, because I live thereby.
Since then thy looks my life have so in thrall,
As I can like none other looks but thine:
Lo here I yield my life, my love, and all
Into thy hands, and all things else resign,
But liberty to gaze upon thine eyes.
Which when I do, then think it were thy part,
To look again, and link with me in heart.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
With these verses you shall judge the quick capacity of the Lady: for she
wrote thereunder this short answer.

Look as long as you list, but surely if I take you looking, I will look with
you.

And for a further proof of this Dames quick understanding, you shall now
understand, that sone after this answer of hirs, the same Aucthour chansed
to be at a supper in her company, where were also her brother, her husband, and
an old lover of hirs by whom she had been long suspected. Now, although there
wanted no delicate viandes to content them, yet their chief repast was by
entreglancing of lokes. For the Aucthour being stong with hot affection,
could none otherwise relieve his passion but by gazing. And the Dame of a
courteous enclination deigned (now and then) to requite the same with glancing
at him. Her old lover occupied his eyes with watching: and her brother
perceiving all this could not abstain from winking, whereby he might put
his Sister in remembrance, least she should too much forget her self. But
most of all her husband beholding the first, and being evil pleased with the
second, scarce contented with the third, and misconstruing the fourth, was
constrained to play the fifth part in froward frowning. This royal banquet
thus passed over, the Aucthor knowing that after supper they should pass the
time in propounding of Ryddles, and making of purposes: contrived all this
conceit in a Riddle as follows. The which was no sooner pronounced, but she
could perfectly perceive his intent, and drove out one nail with another, as
also enseweth.

His Ryddle.
I Cast mine eye and saw ten eyes at once,
All seemelye set upon one lovely face:
Two gazed, two glanced, two watched for the nonce,
Two winked wiles, two fround with froward grace.
Thus every eye was pitched in his place.
And every eye which wrought each others woe,
Said to it self, alas why looked I so?
And every eye for jealousy did pine,
And sighed and said, I would that eye were mine.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
In all this lovely company was not one that could and would expound the
meaning hereof. At last the Dame her self answered on this wise. Sir, quod
she, because your dark speech is much to curious for this simple company, I
will be so bold as to quit one question with another. And when you have
answered mine, it may fall out peradventure, that I shall somewhat the better
judge of yours.

Her Question.
WHat thing is that which swimmes in bliss.
And yet consumes in burning grief:
Which being plaste where pleasure is,
Can yet recover no relief.
Which sees to sighe, and sighs to see,
All this is one, what may it be:
He held him self herevvith contented: and afterward when they were better
acquainted, he chaunsed once (groping in her pocket) to find a letter of her
old lovers: and thynking it were better to vvincke than utterly to put out
his eyes, seemed not to understand this first offense: but soon after finding
a lemman (the which he thought he savve her old lemman put there) he devised
thereof thus, and delivered it unto her in vvriting.
I Grooped in thy pocket pretty peate,
And found a Lemman which I looked not:
So found I once (which now I must repeat)
Both leaves and letters which I lyked not.
Such hap have I to find and seek it not,
But since I see no faster means to bind them,
I will (henceforth) take Lemmans as I find them.
The Dame within very short space did aunsvvere it thus.
A Lymone (but no Lemmane) Sir you found,
For Lemmans bear their name to broad before:
The which since it has given you such a wound,
That you seem now offended very sore:
Content your self you shall find (there) no more.
But take your Lemmans henceforth where you lust,
For I will show my letters where I trust.
The looks of a lover forsaken: written by a gentlewoman who passed by him
with her arms set bragging by her sides, and left it unfinished as follows.
WEre my heart set on hoygh as thine is bent,
Or in my breast so brave and stout a will:
Then (long ere this) I could have been content,
With sharp reueng thy careless corpse to kill.
For why thou know (although thou know not all)
What rule, what raygne, what power, what segnory,
Thy melting mind did yield to me (as thrall)
When first I pleased thy wandering fantifie.
What lingering looks bewrayed thine inward thought,
What panges were published by perplexcitie,
Such reakes the rage of love in thee had wrought
And no gramercie for thy courtesy.
I list not vaunt, but yet I dare auowe
(Had been my harmless heart as hard as thine)
I could have bound thee then for starting now,
In bonds of bale, in pangs of deadly pyne.
For why by proof the field is eath to win,
Where as the chiefteynes yield them selves in chains:
The port or passage plain to enter in,
Where porters list to leave the key for gaynes.
But did I then devise with cruelty,
(As tyrants do) to kill the yielding pray?
Or did I brag and boast triumphauntly,
As who should say the field were mine that day?
Did I retire my self out of thy sight
To beat afresh the bulwarks of thy breast?
Or did my mind in choice of change delight,
And render thee as reffuse with the rest?
No Tygre no, the lion is not lewd,
He shows no force on seely wounded sheep, etc.
VVhiles he sat at the door of his lodging, devising these verses above
rehearsed, the same Gentlewoman passed by again, and cast a long look
toward him, whereby he left his former invention and wrote thus.
How long she looked, that looked at me of late,
As who would say, her looks were all for love:
When God he knows they came from deadly hate,
To pinch me yet with pangs which I must prove.
But since my lokes her liking may not move,
Look where she likes, for lo this look was cast,
Not for my love, but even to see my last.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Another Sonet written by the same Gentlewoman, upon the same occasion.
I Looked of late, and saw thee look askance,
Upon my door, to see if I satte there.
As who should say: If he be there by chance,
Yet may he think I look him every where,
No cruel no, thou know and I can tell,
How for thy love I laid my lokes a side:
Though thou (par case) have looked and liked well,
Some new found looks amide this world so wide.
But since thy looks my love have so in chaynd
That to my lokes, thy liking now is past:
Look wh^re thou likest, and let thy hands be staynd,
In true loves blood, which thou shall lack at last,
So look, so lack, for in these toys thus tossed,
My looks thy love, thy looks my life have lost.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
To the same gentlewoman because she challenged the Aucthour for holding down
his head always, and for that he looked not upon her in wonted manner.
YOu must not wonder though you think it strange,
To see me hold my lowering head so low:
And that mine eyes take no delyght to raunge,
About the gleames which on your face do grow.
The mouse which once has broken out of trappe,
Is sildome tysed with the trustlesse bayte,
But lies aloof for fear of more mishappe,
And feeds still in doubt of deep deceipte.
The skorched fly which once has escaped the flame,
Will hardlye come to play again with fire.
Whereby I learn that grievous is the game,
Which follows fancy dazzled by desire.
So that I wynke or else hold down my head,
Because your blazing eyes my bale have bred.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
The Recantacion of a Lover.
NOw must I needs recant the words which once I spoke,
Fond fancy fumes so nie my noose, I needs must smell ye smoke:
And better were to bear a Faggot from the fire,
Than wylfully to burn and blaze, in flames of vain desire.
You Judges then give ear, you people mark me well,
I say, both heaven and earth record the tale which I shall tell,
And know that dread of death, nor hope of better hap,
Have forced or persuaded me to take my turning cap,
But even that mighty Jove, of his great clemency,
Has given me grace at last to judge, the truth from heresy:
I say then and profess, with free and faithful heart,
That wome^s vows are nothing else, but snares of secret smart:
Their beauties blaze are baits which seem of pleasant taste,
But who deuoures the hidden hook, eats poison for repast:
Their smyling is deceit, their fair words trains of treason,
Their wit always so full of wyles, it skorneth rules of reason,
Percase some present here, have heard my self of yore,
Both teach and preach the contrary, my fault was then the more:
I grant my works were these, first one Anatomy,
Wherein I painted every pang of lovers perplexitye:
Next that I was araignde, with George hold up thy hand,
Wherein I yielded Bewties thrall, at her command to stand:
Mine eyes so blinded were, (good people mark my tale)
That once I song, I Bathe in Bliss, amidde my weary Bal^:
And many a frantike verse, then from my pen did pass,
In waves of wicked heresy, so deep I drowned was,
All which I now recant, and here before you burn
Those trifling books, from whose lewd lore my tippet here I turn.
And henceforth will I write, how mad is that man's mind,
Which is entist by any train to trust in womankind.
I spare not wedlock I, who list that state advance,
Ask Astolfe Astolf being the goodliest person in the world found a
dvvarfe lying with his wife
king of Lumbardie, how trim his dwarf could dance.
Wherefore fair Ladies you, that hear me what I say,
If you hereafter see me slip, or seem to go astraye:
Of if my tongue reuolte from that which now it says,
Then plague me thus, Believe it not, for this is now my faith.
Haud ictus sapio.
In praise of Bridges, now Lady Sands.
IN Court who so demaundes what Dame does most excel,
For my conceyt I must needs say, fair Bridges bears ye bell:
Upon whose lively cheek, to prove my judgment true,
The Rose and Lilly seem to strive for equal change of hew:
And therewithal so well her graces all agree,
No frowning cheer dare once presume in her sweet face to be.
Although some lauishe lips, which like some other best,
Will say the blemishe on her browe disgraceth all the rest.
Thereto I thus reply, God wotte they little know,
The hidden cause of that mishap, nor how the harm did grow.
For when Dame nature first had framde her heavenly face,
And thoroughly bedecked it, with goodly gleames of grace:
It lyked her so well: Lo here (quod she) a piece,
For perfect shape that passes all Apelles work in Greece.
This bayte may chance to catch the greatest God of love,
Or mighty thundering Jove himself that rules the roast above.
But out, alas, those words were vaunted all in vain,
And some unseen were present there (poor Bridges) to thy pain.
For Cupide crafty boy, close in a corner stood,
Not blyndfold then, to gaze on her, I guess it did him good.
Yet when he felt the flame began kindle in his breast,
And hard dame nature boast by her, to break him of his rest,
His hot new chosen love, he changed into hate,
And suddenly with mighty mace, began rap her on the pate.
It grieved Nature much to see the cruel deed:
Me seems I see her how she wept, to see her dearling blede.
Well yet (quod she) this hurt shall have some help I trow,
And quick with skin she covered it, that whiter is than snow.
Wherewith Dan Cupid fled, for fear of further flame,
When angel like he saw her shine, whom he had smit with shame.
Lo thus was Bridges hurt, in cradel of her kind,
The coward Cupid brake her brow, to wreke his wounded mind,
The skar still there remains, no force, there let it be,
There is no cloud that can eclipse, so bright a sun as she.
Ever or never.
In praise of Zouche late the Lady Greye of Wilton whom the auctor found in a
homely house.
THese rustie walls whom cankred years deface,
The comely corpse of seemly Zouche enclose,
Whose ancient stock deriude from worthy race,
Procures her praise, where so the carkas goes:
Her angels face declares her modest mind,
Her lovely lokes the gazing eyes allure,
Her deeds deserve some endless praise to find,
To blaze such brute as ever might endure.
Wherefore my pen in trembling fear shall stay,
To write the thing that does surmount my skill.
And I will wish of God both night and day,
Some worthier place to guide her worthy will.
Where princes peers her due deserts may see,
And I content her servant there to be.
Ever or Never.
Gascoignes praise of his mistres.
THe hap which Paris had, as due for his desert,
Who fauord Venus for her face, and skornde Meneruas art:
May serve to warn the wife that they no more esteem,
The glistering gloss of bewties blaze, than reason should it deem.
Dan Priams younger son, found out yt fairest dame,
That ever trod on Troyane mold, what followed of ye same?
I list not brut her bale, let others spread it forth,
But for his part to speak my mind his choice was little worth,
My meaning is but this, who marks the outward show,
And never grops for graftes of grace which in ye mind should grow:
May chance upon such choice as trusty Troilus had,
And dwell in dole as Paris did, when he would feign be glad.
How happy then am I whose hap has been to find,
A mistress first that does excel in virtues of the mind.
And yet therewith has joined, such favor and such grace,
As Pandars niece if (she were here) would quickly give her place.
With in whose worthy breast, Dame Bounty seeks to dwell,
And says to beawty, yield to me, since I do thee excel.
Between whose heavenly eyes, does right remorse appear,
And pity placed by the same, does much amend her cheer.
Who in my dangers deep, did deigne to do me good,
Who did relieve my heavy heart, and sought to save my blood.
Who first encreast my friends, and overthrew my fooes,
Who loved al them that wished me well, and liked none but those.
O Ladies give me leave, I praise not her to far,
Since she does pas you al, as much, as Titan stains a star.
You hold such servants dear, as able are to serve.
She held me dear, when I poor soul, could no good thing deserve.
You set by them that swim in all prosperity,
She set by me when as I was in great calamity.
You best esteem the brave, and let the poorest pass,
She best esteemde my poor good will, all naked as it was.
But whether am I went? what humor guides my brain?
I seek to wey ye woolsack down, with one poor pepper grain.
I seem to pen her praise, that does surpass my skill,
I strive to row against the tide, I hoppe against the hill.
Then let these few suffice, she Helene stains for hew,
Dydo for grace, Cressyde for cheer, and is as Thisbye true.
Yet if you further crave, to have her name displaide,
Dame Favor is my mistres name, dame Fortune is her maid.
Attamen ad solitum.
Gascoignes good morrow.
YOu that have spent the silent night,
In sleep and quiet rest,
And joy to see the cheerful light
That ryseth in the East:
Now clear your voice, now chere your heart,
Come help me now to sing:
Each willing wight come bear a part,
To praise the heavenly King.
And you whom care in prison keeps,
Or sickness does suppress,
Or secret sorrow breaks your sleeps,
Or dolours do distress:
Yet bear a part in dolfull wise,
Yea think it good accord,
And exceptable sacrifice,
Each sprite to praise the lord.
The dreadful night with darkesomnesse,
Had over spread the light,
And sluggish sleep with drowsynesse,
Had over pressed our might:
A glass wherein you may behold,
Each storm that stopes our breath,
Our bed the grave, our clothes like molde,
And sleep like dreadful death.
Yet as this deadly night did last,
But for a little space,
And heavenly day now night is past,
Does show his pleasant face:
So must we hope to see Gods face,
At last in heaven on hie,
When we have changed this mortal place,
For Immortality.
And of such happes and heavenly joys,
As then we hope to hold,
All earthly sightes and wordly toys,
Are tokens to behold.
The day is like the day of doom,
The sun, the Son of man,
The skies the heavens, the earth the tomb
Wherein we rest till than.
The Rainbowe bending in the sky,
Bedeckte with sundry hewes,
Is like the seat of God on hye,
And seems to tell these news:
That as thereby he promised,
To drown the world no more,
So by the blood which Christ has shead,
He will our health restore.
The mistie clouds that fall sometime,
And ouercast the skies,
Are like to troubles of our time,
Which do but dymme our eyes:
But as such dewes are dried up quite,
When Phoebus shows his face,
So are such fancies put to flighte,
Where God does guide by grace.
The caryon Crow, that loathsome be ast,
Which cries against the rain,
Both for her hew and for the rest,
The Devil resembles plain:
And as with gonnes we kill the Crow,
For spoiling our relief,
The Devil so must we overthrow,
With gonshote of belief.
The little bird which sing so sweet,
Are like the angels voice,
Which render God his praises meet,
And teach us to rejoice:
And as they more esteem that mirth,
Than dread the nights anoy,
So much we deem our days on earth,
But hell to heavenly joy.
Unto which Joys for to attain
God grant us all his grace,
And send us after worldly pain,
In heaven to have a place.
Where we may still enjoy that light.
Which never shall decay:
Lord for thy mercy lend us might,
To see that joyful day.
Haud ictus sapio.
Gascoygnes good night.
WHen thou have spent the lingering day in pleasure and delight,
Or after toil and weary way, do seek to rest at night:
Unto thy pains or pleasures past, add this one labor yet,
Ere sleep close up thine eye to fast, do not thy God forget,
But search within thy secret thoughts, what deeds did thee befall:
And if thou find amiss in ought, to God for mercy call.
Yea though thou find nothing amiss, which thou can call to mind,
Yet ever more remember this, there is the more behind:
And think how well so ever it be, that thou have spent the day,
It came of God, and not of thee, so to direct thy way.
Thus if thou try thy daily deeds, and pleasure in this pain,
Thy life shall cleanse thy corn from weeds, and thine shall be ye gain:
But if thy sinful sluggishe eye, will venture for to wink,
Before thy wading will may try, how far thy soul may sink,
Beware and wake, for else thy bed, which soft and smoth is made,
May heap more harm upon thy head, than blows of enmies blade.
Thus if this pain procure thine ease, in bed as thou do lie,
Perhaps it shall not God displease, to sing thus soberly:
I see that sleep is lent me here, to ease my wearye bones,
As death at last shall eke appear, to ease my grievous groans.
My daily sportes, my panch full fed, have causde my drousie eye,
As careless life in quiet led, might cause my soul to dye:
The stretching arms, ye yauning breath, which I to bedward use,
Are patterns of the pangs of death, when life will me refuse:
And of my bed each sundry part in shadows does resemble,
The sundry shapes of death, whose dart shall make my flesh to tremble.
My bed it self is like the grave, my sheets the winding sheet,
My clothes the mould which I must have, to cover me most meet:
The hungry fleas which friske so fresh, to worms I can compare,
Which greedily shall gnaw my flesh, and leave the bones full bare:
The waking Cock that early crows to wear the night away,
Puts in my mind the trumpe that blows before the latter day.
And as I rise up lustily, when sluggish sleep is past,
So hope I to rise joyfully, to Judgment at the last.
Thus will I wake, thus will I sleep, thus will I hope to rise,
Thus will I neither wail nor weep, but sing in godly wise.
My bones shall in this bed remain, my soul in God shall trust,
By whom I hope to rise again from death and earthly dust.
Haud ictus sapio.
The introduction to the Psalm of Deprofundis.
THe Skies began scowle, orecast with misty clouds,
When (as I rode alone by London way,
Cloakelesse, vnclad) thus did I sing and say:
Behold quoth I, bright Titan how he shroudes
His head abacke, and yelds the rain his reach,
Till in his wrath, Dan Jove have soust the soil,
And washed me wretch which in his travail toil.
But holla (here) does rudeness me appeach,
Since Jove is Lord and king of mighty power,
Which can command the Sun to show his face,
And (when him list) to give the rain his place.
Why do not I my weary muses frame,
(Although I be well soused in this shower,)
To write some verse in honor of his name?
Gascoignes Deprofundis.
FRom depth of doole wherein my soul does dwell,
From heavy heart which harbors in my breast,
From troubled sprite which sildome takes rest.
From hope of heaven, from dread of darkesome hell.
O gracious God, to thee I cry and yell.
My God, my Lord, my lovely Lord aloane,
To thee I call, to thee I make my moan.
And thou (good God) vouchsafe in gree to take,
This woeful plaint,
Wherein I faint.
Oh hear me then for thy great mercies sake.
Oh bend thine ears attentively to hear,
Oh turn thine eyes, behold me how I wayle,
O hearken Lord, give ear for mine avail,
O mark in mind the burdens that I bear:
See how I sink in sorrows every where.
Behold and see what dollors I endure,
Give ear and mark what plaintes I put in ure.
Bend wylling ear: and pity therewithal,
My wayling voice,
Which has no choice.
But evermore upon thy name to call.
If thou good Lord should take thy rod in hand,
If thou regard what sins are daily done,
If thou take hold where we our works begone,
If thou decree in Judgment for to stand,
And be extreme to see our scuses skande,
If thou take note of every thing amysse,
And write in rowles how frail our nature is,
O glorious God, O King, O Prince of power,
What mortal wight,
May then have light,
To feel thy frown, if thou have list to lowre?
But thou art good, and have of mercy store,
Thou not delyghst to see a sinner fall,
Thou hearknest first, before we come to call.
Thine ears are set wide open evermore,
Before we knock thou come to the door.
Thou art more pressed to hear a sinner cry,
Then he is quick to climb to thee on hye.
Thy mighty name be praised then always,
Let faith and fear,
True witness bear.
How fast they stand which on thy mercy stay.
I look for thee (my louelye Lord) therefore.
For thee I wait, for thee I tarrye still,
Mine eyes do long to gaze on thee my fill.
For thee I watch, for thee I prye and pore.
My Soul for thee attends evermore.
My Soul does thyrst to take of thee a taste,
My Soul desires with thee for to be plaste.
And to thy word (which can no man deceive)
Mine only trust,
My love and lust.
In confidence continuallye shall cleave.
Before the break or dawning of the day,
Before the light be seen in loftye Skies,
Before the Sun appear in pleasant wise,
Before the watch (before the watch I say)
Before the ward that waytes therefore always:
My soul, my sense, my secreete thought, my sprite,
My will, my wish, my joy, and my delight:
Unto the Lord that sittes in heaven on high.
With hastye wing,
From me does fling,
And stryueth still, unto the Lord to fly.
O Israel, O household of the Lord,
O Abraham's Brattes, O brood of blessed seed,
O chosen sheep that love the Lord in deed:
O hungrye hearts, feed still upon his word,
And put your trust in him with one accord.
For he has mercy evermore at hand,
His fountains flow, his springes do never stand.
And plenteouslye he loves to redeem,
Such sinners all,
As on him call.
And faithfully his mercies most esteem.
He will redeem our deadly drowping state,
He will bring home the sheep that go astraye,
He will help them that hope in him always:
He will appease our discord and debate,
He will soon save, though we repent us late.
He will be ours if we continewe his,
He will bring bale to joy and perfect bliss.
He will redeem the flock of his elect,
From all that is,
Or was amiss.
Since Abraham's heirs did first his Laws reject.
Ever or never.
Gascoignes Memories, written upon this occasion. He had (in myddest of his
youth) determined to abandone all vain delights and to return unto Greyes
Inn, there to undertake again the studdie of the common Laws. And being
required by five sundry Gentlemen to write in verse somewhat worthy to be
remembered, before he entered into their fellowshippe, he compiled these five
sundry sorts of meter upon five sundry theames, which they delivered unto
him, and the first was at request of Frauncis Kinwelmarshe who delivered him
this theme. Audaces fortuna iuuat. And therevppon he wrote this Sonnette
following.
IF yelding fear, or cancred villainy,
In Caesar's haughty heart had taken the charge,
The walls of Rome had not been rearde so hye,
Nor yet the mighty Empire left so large.
If Menelaus could have ruld his will,
With foul reproach to loose his fair delight,
Then had the stately towers of Troy stood still,
And Greeks with grudge had drunk their own despite.
If dread of drenching waves or fear of fire,
Had stayde the wandering Prince amydde his race,
Ascanius then, the fruit of his desire,
In Lauine Land had not possessed place.
But true it is, where lottes do light by chance,
There Fortune helps the boldest to advance.
Sic tuli.
Learn first to spare thy budget at the brinke,
So shall the bottom be the faster bound:
But he that list with lavish hand to link,
(In like expense) a pennye with a pound,
May chance at last to sit a side and shrink
His harbraind head with out dame dainties door.
Hick, hobbe, and Dick, with clouts upon their knee,
Have many times more goonhole grotes in store
And change of crowns more quick at call then he,
Which let their lease and take their rent before.
For he that rappes a royal on his cappe,
Before he put one penny in his pursse,
Had need turn quick and broch a better tappe,
Or else his drink may chance go down the wursse.
I not deny but some men have good hap,
To climb a lofte by scales of courtly grace,
And win the world with liberalitye:
Yet he that yerks old angels out apace,
And has no new to purchase dignitye,
When orders fall, may chance to lack his grace.
For haggard hawks mislike an empty hand:
So stiffely some stick to the mercers stall,
Till suits of silk have swet out all their land.
So often thy neighbors banquet in thy hall,
Till Dauie Debet in thy parler stand,
And bids the welcome to thine own decay.
I like a Lions looks not worth a leeke
When every Fox beguiles him of his pray:
What sauce but sorrow serves him aweeke.
Which all his cates consumes in one day?
First use thy stomach to a stand of ale,
Before thy Malmesey come in Marchantes books,
And rather were (for shifte) thy shirte of male,
Than tear thy silken sleues with teynter hokes,
Put feathers in thy pillowes great and small,
Let them be princkt with plumes, that gape for plummes,
Heap up both gold and silver safe in ^ooches,
Catch, snatche, and scratche for scrapings and for crommes
Before thou deck thy hatte (on high) with brooches.
Let first thine one hand hold fast all that commes,
Before that other learn his letting fly:
Remember still that soft fire makes sweet malte,
No haste but good (who means to multiplye:)
Bought wit is dear, and dressed with sower salt,
Repentance commes to late, and then say I,
Who spares the first and keeps the last unspent,
Shall find that sparing yeeldes a goodly rent.
Sic tuli.
Alexander Neuile delivered him this theme, Sat cito, si sat been, whereupon
he compiled these seven Sonets in sequence, therein bewraying his own Nimis
cito: and therewith his Vix been, as follows.
IN haste post haste, when first my wandering mind,
Beheld the glistring Court with gazing eye,
Such deep delights I seemde therein to find,
As might beguile a grauer guest than I.
The stately pomp of Princes and their peers,
Did seem to swim in flouddes of beaten goulde,
The wanton world of young delightful years,
Was not unlike a heaven for to behoulde.
Wherein did swarm (for every saint) a Dame,
So fair of hue, so fresh of their attire,
As might excel dame Cinthia for Fame,
Or conquer Cupid with his own desire.
These and such like were baytes that blazed still
Before mine eye to feed my greedy will.
2.
Before mine eye to feed my greedy will,
Began muster eke mine old acquainted mates,
Who helped the dish (of bayne delighte) to fill
My empty mouth with dayntye delicates:
And folishe boldness took the whippe in hand,
To lashe my life into this trustlesse trace,
Til all in haste I leapte a loofe from land,
And hoyste up soil to catch a Courtly grace:
Each lingering day did seem a world of woe,
Till in that hapless haven my head was brought:
Waves of wanhope so tossed me to and fro,
In deep despair to drown my dreadful thought:
Each hour a day each day a year did seem,
And every year a world my will did deem.
3.
And every year a world my will did deem,
Till lo, at last, to Court now am I come,
A seemly swayne, that might the place beseem,
A gladsome guest embraste of all and some:
Not there content with common dignity,
My wandering eye in haste, (yea post post haste)
Beheld the blazing badge of bravery,
For want whereof, I thought my self disgraste:
Then peeuishe pride puffte up my swelling heart,
To further forth so hot an enterprise:
And comely cost began to play his part,
In praising patterns of mine own devise.
Thus all was good that might be got in haste,
To princke me up, and make me higher plaste.
4.
To prinke me up and make me higher plaste,
All came to late that tarried any time,
Pills of provision pleased not my taste,
They made my heels to heavy for to clime:
Me thought it best that boughs of boystrous oak.
Should first be shread to make my feathers gaye.
Till at the last a deadly dinting stroke,
Brought down the bulk with edge tools of decay:
Of every farm I then let fly a lease,
To feed the purse that paid for peevishness,
Till rent and all were fallen in such disease,
As scarce could serve to maintain cleanlynesse:
They bought, the body, fine, ferme, lease, and land,
All were to little for the merchauntes hand.
5.
All were to little for the merchauntes hand,
And yet my brauerye bigger than his book:
But when this hot account was coldly scande,
I thought high time about me for to look:
With heavy cheer I cast my head abacke,
To see the fountain of my furious race.
Comparde my loss, my living, and my lack,
In equal balance with my iolye grace.
And saw expenses grating on the ground
Like lumpes of lead to press my pursse full often,
When light reward and recompense were found,
Fleeting like feathers in the wind alofte:
These thus comparde, I left the Court at large,
For why? the gains does seeldome quitte the charge.
6.
For why? the gains does seldom quitte ye charge,
And so say I, by proof too dearly bought,
My haste mad wast, my brave and brainsicke barge,
Did float to fast, to catch a thing of naught:
With leisure, measure, mean, and many mo,
I might have kept a chair of quiet state,
But hasty heads can not be settled so,
Till crooked Fortune give a crabbed mate:
As busy brains must beat on tickle toys,
As rash invention breeds a raw devise,
So sudden falls do hinder hasty joys,
And as swifte baytes do fleetest fyshe entice.
So haste makes waste, and therefore now I say,
No haste but good, where wisdom makes the way.
7.
No haste but good, where wisdom makes the way,
For proof whereof, behold the simple snayle,
(Who sees the soldiers carcass cast a way,
With hot assault the Castle to assail.)
By line and leisure clymes the loftye wall,
And winnes the turrettes top more conningly,
Than doughtye Dick, who lost his life and all,
With hoysting up his head to hastilye.
The swiftest bitche brings forth the blyndest whelps,
The hottest Fevers coldest crampes ensue,
The nakedst need has over latest helps:
With Neuyle then I find this proverb true,
That haste makes waste, and therefore still I say,
No haste but good, where wisdom makes the way.
Sic tuli.
Richard Courtop (the last of the five) gave him this theme, Durum aeneum and
miserabile aeuum, and thereupon he wrote in this wise
WHen peerless Princes courts were free from flattery,
The Justice from unequal doom, the quest from perjury.
The pillars of the state, from proud presumption,
The clearkes from heresy, the commones from rebellion:
Then right rewards were given, by swaye of dew desarte,
Then virtues derlinges might be plaste aloft to play their part:
Then might they coumpt it true, that has been said of old,
The children of those happy days, were borne in beds of gold.
And swadled in the same: the Nurse that gave them suck.
Was wife to liberallitie, and lemman to good luck.
When Caesar won the field, his captains caught the Towns,
And every painful soldiers purse was crammed full of crowns.
Licurgus for good Laws, lost his own liberty,
And thought it better to prefer common commodity.
But now the times are turnde, it is not as it was,
The gold is gone, the silver sunk, and nothing left but brass.
To see a King encroache, what wonder should it seem,
When commons cannot be content, with country Dyadeeme?
The Prince may dye a babe, trust up by treachery,
Where vain ambition does move trustlesse nobillitye.
Errors in pulpit preach, where faith in priesthood fails,
Promotion (not devotion) is cause why clergy quails.
Thus is the stage stakt out, where all these parts be plaide,
And I the prologue should pronounce, but that I am afraid.
First Cayphas plays the Priest, and Herod sits as king,
Pylate the Judge, Judas the Iurour verdict in does bring,
Vain tatling plays the vice, well cladde in ritche array,
And poor Tom Trooth is laughed to skorn, with garments nothing gay.
The woman wantonness, she commes with ticing train,
Pride in her pocket plays bo peep, and bawdry in her brain.
Her handmaides be deceipte, danger, and dalliaunce,
Riot and Revel follow her, they be of her alliance:
Next these commes in Sim Swashe, to see what stir they keep.
Clim of the Clough then takes his heels, it is time for him to creep:
To pack the pageaunt up, commes Sorrow with a song,
He say these iestes can get no grotes, and all this gear goth wrong:
First pride without cause why, he singes the treble part,
The mean he mumbles out of tune, for lack of life and heart:
Cost lost, the counter Tenor chanteth on apace,
Thus all in discords stands the cliffe, and beggrie singes the base,
The players loose their pains, where so few pence are sturring,
Their garments wear for lack of gains, and fret for lack of furring.
When all is done and past, was no part plaide but one,
For every player plaide the fool, till all be spent and gone.
And thus this foolish jest, I put in dogrell rhyme,
Because a crosier staff is best, for such a crooked time.
Sic tuli.
And thus an end of these five Theames, admounting to the number of.CCLVIII.
verses, devised ryding by the way, writing none of them until he came at the
end of his Journey, the which was no longer than one day in ryding, one day
in tarying with his friend, and the third in returning to Greyes Inn: and
therefore called Gascoignes memories.
A gloze upon this text, Dominus ijs opus habet.
MY recklesse race is run, green youth and pride be past,
My riper mellowed years begin to follow on as fast.
My glancing looks are gone, which wonted were to pry,
In every gorgious garishe glass, that glistred in mine eye.
My sight is now so dim, it can behold none such,
No mirror but the merry mean, can please my fancy much.
And in that noble glass, I take delight to vewe,
The fashions of the wonted world, compared by the new.
For mark who list to look, each man is for him self.
And beats his brain to hord and heap, this trashe and worldly pelf.
Our hands are closed up, great gifts go not abroad,
Few men will lend a lock of heye, but for to gain a load.
Give Gave is a good man, what need we lashe it out,
The world is wondrous fearful now, for danger bids men doubt.
And ask how chances this? or what means all this meede?
Forsoothe the common answer is, because the Lord has need.
A noble jest by gisse, I find it in my glass,
The same freeholde our savior Christ, conveyed to his ass.
A text to try the truth, and for this time full fit,
Fo where should we our lessons learn, but out of holy writ?
First mark our only God, which rules all the roast,
He sets a side all pomp and pride, wherein fond wordlings boast.
His train is not so great, as filthy Satan's band,
A smaller heard may serve to feed, at our great masters hand.
Next mark the heathens Gods, and by them shall we see,
They be not now so good fellows, as they were wont to be.
Jove, Mars, and Mercury, Dame Venus and the rest,
They ba^quet not as they were wont, they know it were not best.
So kings and princes both, have left their halles at large,
Their privy chambers cost enough, they cut off every charge.
And when an office falls, as chance sometimes may be,
First keep it close a year or twain, then geld it by the fee.
And give it out at last, but yet with this prouiso,
(A bridle for a brainsicke Jade) durante been placito.
Some think these ladders low, to climb alofte with speed:
Well let them creep at leisure the^, for sure the Lord has need.
Dukes Earls and Barons bold, have learnt like lesson now,
They break up house and come to court, they live not by yt plowe.
Percase their rooms be skant, not like their stately boure,
A field bed in a corner coucht, a pallad on the flower.
But what for that? no force, they make thereof no boast,
They feed them selves with delycates, and at the princes cost.
And as for all their men, their pages and their swaynes,
They choke the^ up with chynes of beef, to multiply their gains.
Themselves lie near to look, when any leaf does fall,
Such cromes were wont to feed pore gromes, but now ye Lords sick al.
And why? oh sir, because, both dukes and lords have need,
I mock not I, my text is true, believe it as your creed.
Our Prelates and our Priests, can tell this text with me,
They can hold fast their fattest fermes, and let no lease go free.
They have both wife and child, which may not be for got,
The scriptures say the Lord has need, and therefore blame them not.
Then come a little lower, unto the contrye knight,
The squire and the gentleman, they leave the country quite,
Their Halles were all to large, their tables were to long,
The clouted shoes came in so fast, they kept to great a throng,
And at the porters lodge, where lubbers wont to feed,
The porter learnes to answer now, hence hence the Lord has need.
His gestes came in to thick, their diet was to great,
Their horses eat up all the hey, which should have fed his neat:
Their teeth were far to fine, to feed on porke and souse,
Five flocks of sheep could scarce maintain good mutten for his house.
And when this count was cast, it was no biding here,
Unto the good town is he gonne, to make his friends good cheer.
And welcome there that will, but shall I tell you how:
At his own dish he feeds them, that is the fashion now,
Side bords be laid aside, the tables end is gonne,
His cook shall make you noble cheer, but hostler has he none.
The chargers now be changde, wherein he wont to eat,
An old frutedish is big enough to hold a ioynte of meat.
A sallad or a sauce, to taste your cates with all,
Some stra^g devise to feed men's eyes, men's stomachs now be small.
And when the tenauntes come to pay their quarters rent,
They bring some foul at Midsommer, a dish of Fish in Lent,
At Christmasse a capon, at Mighelmasse a goose:
And somewhat else at Newyeres tide, for fear their lease fly loose.
Good reason by my troth, when Gentlemen lack groates,
Let Plowmen pinche it out for pence, and patch their russet coats:
For better Fermers fast, than Manner houses fall,
The Lord has need, than says the text, bring old Ass colt and all.
Well lowest now at last, let see the contrye loute,
And mark how he does swink and sweat, to bring this gear about:
His feastinges be but few, cast whipstockes clout his shoone,
The wheaten loaf is locked up as soon as dinners done:
And where he wont to keep a lubber, two or three,
Now has he learnd to keep no more, but Sim his son and he,
His wife and Mawde his maid, a boy to pitch the carte,
And turn him up at Hollontide, to feel the winter smarte:
Dame Alyson his wife does know the price of meal,
Her bride cakes be not half so big as she was wont to steal.
She wears no silver hooks, she is content with worsse,
Her pendantes and her silver pinnes she puts in her pursse.
Thus learn I by my glass, that merry mean is best,
And he most wise that finds the mean, to keep himself at rest.
Perchance some open mouth will mutter now and than,
And at the market tell his mate, our landlordes a zore man:
He racketh up our rentes, and keeps the best in hand,
He makes a wo^drous deal of good out of his own measne land:
Yea let such pelters prate, saint Needam be their speed,
We need no text to answer them, but this, The Lord has need.
Ever or never
An Epitaph upon Captain Bourcher late slain in the wars in Zelande, the
which has been termed the tale of a stone as follows.
Fie Captains fie, your tongues are tied to close,
Your Soldiers eke by silence purchase shame:
Can no man pen in meetre nor in prose,
The life, the death, the valliaunt acts, the fame,
The birth, behavior, nor the noble name,
Of such a feere as you in fight have lost:
Alas such pains would quickly quite the cost.
Bourcher is dead, whom each of you did know,
Yet no man writes one word to paint his praise,
His sprite on high, his earkasse here below,
Does both condemn your doting idle days:
Yet cease they not to sound his worthy ways,
Who lived to dye, and dyed again to live,
With death dear bought, he did his death forgive.
He might for birth have boasted noble race,
Yet were his manners meek and always mild,
Who gave a guess by gazing on his face,
And iudgde thereby, might quickly be beguilde,
In field a Lion, and in Town a Child,
Fierce to his foe, but courteouse to his friend.
Alas the while, his life so soon should end?
To serve his Prince his life was ever pressed,
To serve his God, his death he thought but dew,
In all attempts as foreward as the best,
And all to forewardes, which we all may rue,
His life so showed, his death eke tried it true:
For where his foes in thickest prease did stand,
Bourcher caught bane with bloody sword in hand.
And mark the courage of a noble heart,
When he in bed lay wounded wondrous sore,
And heard alarm, he soon forgot his smart,
And calde for arms to show his service more:
I will to field (quod he) and God before.
Which said, he sailde into more quiet coast,
Still praising God, and so gave up the ghost.
Now muze not reader though we stones can speak,
Or write sometimes the deeds of worthy ones,
I could not hold although my heart should break,
(Because here by me buried are his bones,)
But I must tell this tale thus for the nones.
When men cry mumme and keep such silence long,
Then stones must speak, else dead men shall have wrong.
Finis
quod Marmaduke Marblestone.
A devise of a Mark for the right honorable Viscount Mountacute, written upon
this occasion, when the said L. had prepared to solemnize two marriages
between his son and heir, and the Daughter of sir William Dormer Knight,
and between the son and heir of sir William Dormer, and the Daughter of
the said L. Mountacute: there were eight Gentlemen (all of blood or alliance
to the said L. Mountacute) which had determined to present a Mask at the day
appointed for the said marriages, and so far they had proceeded therein, that
they had already bought furniture of Silks. etc, and had caused their
garments to be cut of the Venetian fashion. Now then they began to imagine
that (without some special demonstration) it would seem somewhat obscure to
have Venetians presented rather than other country men. Whereupon they
entreated the Aucthour to devise some verses to be uttered by an Actor wherein
might be some discourse convenient to render a good cause of the Venetians
presence. The Aucthour calling to mind that there is a noble house of the
Mountacutes in Italy, and therwithall that the L. Mountacute here does quarter
the coat of an ancient English Gentleman called Mounthermer, and has the
inheritance of the said house, did thereupon devise to bring in a Boy of the
age of twelve or.xiiii. years, who should feign that he was a Mounthermer by
the fathers side, and a Mountacute by the mothers side, and that his father
being slain at the last wars against the Turk, and he there taken, he was
recovered by the Venetians in their last victory, and with them sailing
toward Venice, they were driven by tempest upon these coasts, and so came to
the marriage upon report as follows, and the said Boy pronounced the devise
in this sort.
WHat wonder you my Lords? why gaze you gentlemen?
And wherefore marvel you Mez Dames, I pray you tell me then^
Is it so rare a sight, or yet so strange a toye,
Amongst so many nooble peers, to see one Pouer Boy?
Why? boys have been allowed in every kind of age.
As Ganymede that pretye boy, in Heaven is Jove his page.
Cupid that mighty God although his force be fearse,
Yet is he but a naked Boy, as Poets do rehearse.
And many a preetye boy a mighty man has proved,
And served his Prince at all assayes deserving to be loved.
Percase my strange attire my glittering golden gite,
Does either make you marvel thus, or move you with delight.
Yet wonder not my Lords for if your honors please,
But even to give me ear a while, I will your doubts appease.
And you shall know the cause, wherefore these roabes are worn,
And why I go outlandishe like, yet being English borne.
And why I thus presume to press into this place,
And why I (simple boy) am bold to look such men in face.
First then you must perstande, I am no stranger I,
But English boy, in England borne, and bred but even hereby.
My father was a Knight, Mount Hermer was his name,
My mother of the Mountacutes, a house of worthy fame.
My father from his youth was trained up in field,
And always took his chief delight, in helmet spear and shield.
Soldado for his life, and in his happy days,
Soldado like has lost his life, to his immortal praise.
The thundering fame which blewe about the world so wide,
How that the Christian enemy, the Turk that Prince of pride,
Addressed had his power, to swarm upon the Seas,
With Galleys, foists, and such liks ships, well armde at al assaies.
And that he made his vaunt, the greedy fish to glut,
With gobs of Christian carcasses, in eruell pieces cut.
These news of this report, did pearce my fathers ears,
But never touched his noble heart, with any spark of fears.
For well he knew the trade of all the Turkishe wars,
And had amongst them shed his blood, at many cruel iarres.
In Rhodes his race begone, a slender tale young man,
Where he by many martial feats, his spurs of knighthood wan.
Yea though the piece was lost, yet won he honor still,
And evermore against the Turks he warred by his will.
At Chios many know, how hardily he fought,
And how with streams of stryuing blood, his honor dear he bought.
At length enforst to yield with many captains mo,
He bought his liberty with Lands, and let his goods ago.
Zechines Apeece of gold like the Crusado
of glistering gold, two thousand was his price,
The which to pay his lands must leap, for else he were unwise,
Believe me now my Lords although the loss be mine,
Yet I confess them better sold, than like a slave to pine.
"For lands may come again, but liberty once lost,
"Can never find such recompense, as counteruailes the cost.
My self now know the case, who like my fathers lot,
Was like of late for to have lost my liberty God wot.
My father (as I say) enforste to leave his land,
In mortgage to my mothers kin, for ready coin in hand,
Began now upon these news, which erst I did rehearse,
Prepare himself to save his pawn, or else to leese his phearce.
And first his ransom paid, with that which did remain,
He rigged up a proper Bark, was called Leffort Britain.
And like a venturer (besides him seemly self)
Determined for to venture me and all his worldly pelf.
Perhaps some hope of gain persuaded so his mind,
For sure his hauty heart was bent, some great exploite to find.
How so it were, the winds now hoysted up our sails,
We furrowing in the foming flooddes, to take our best auailes.
Now hearken to my words, and mark you well the same,
For now I will declare the cause, wherefore I hither came.
My father (as I say) had set up all his rest,
And tossed on seas both day and night, disdayning idle rest,
We left our forelandes end, we past the coast of France,
We reached the cape of Finis Terre our course for to advance.
We past Marrocchus streightes, and at the last descried,
The fertile coasts of Cyprus soil, whicch I my self first spyed.
My self (a foreward boy) on highest top was plast,
And there I saw the Cyprian shore, whereto we sayld in haste.
Which when I had declared unto the masters mate,
He lepte for joy and thanked God, of that our happy state.
"But what remains to man, that can continue long?
"What sun can shine so clear and bright but clouds may rise among?
Which sentence soon was proved, by our unhappy hap,
We thought our selves full near our friends, and light in enemies lap.
The Turk yt Tirant he, with siege had girte the walls,
Of famous Famagosta The chief City in Cyprus.
then and sought to make them thralles.
And as he lay by land, in strong and stately trenche,
So was his power pressed by Sea, his Christian foes to drenche.
Upon the waltring waves, his Foistes and Galleys fleet,
More forest like than orderly, for such a man most meet.
This heavy sight once seen, we turnde our course apace,
And set up al our sails in haste, to give such fury place.
But out alas, our wills, and winds were contrary,
For raging blastes did blow us still upon our enemy.
My father seeing then, whereto he needs must go,
And that the mighty hand of God, had it appointed so.
Most like a worthy knight (though certain of his death)
Began clean forget all wayling words, as lauishe of his breath.
And to his Christian crewe, this (too short) tale he told,
To comfort them which seemde to faint, and make the coward bold,
"Fellows in arms, quod he, although I bear the charge,
"And take upon me chieftaines name, of this unhappy barge,
"Yet are you all my pheares, and as one company,
"We must like true companions, together live and die,
"You see quod he our foes, with furious force at hand,
"And in whose hands our handful here, unable is to stand,
"What rests then to do, should we unto them yield?
"And wifully receive that yoke, which Christians cannot weld.
"No sure, hereof be sure, our lives were so unsure,
"And though we live, yet so to live, as better death endure.
"To hear those hellishe fiendes in raging blasphemy,
"Defye our only Savior, were this no misery?
"To see the foul abuse of boys in tender years,
"The which I know must needs abhor all honest Christians ears.
"To see maids ravished, Wives, Women forced by fear,
"And much more mischief than this time can let me utter here.
"Alas, quod he, I tell not all, my tongue is tide,
"But all the slaueries on the earth, we should with them abide.
"How much were better than, to dye in worthy wise,
"And so to make our carcasses, a wylling Sacrifice.
"So shall we pay the debt, which unto God is due,
"So shall you die in his defense, who deind to die for you.
"And who with hardy hand, most Turkish tikes can quell,
"Let him account in conscience, to please his maker well.
"You see, quod he, my son, wherewith he looked on me,
"Whom but a babe, yet have I brought, my partner here to be.
"For, him I must confess, my heart is pensive now,
"To leave him living thus in youth, to die I know not how.
"But since it pleases God, I may not murmr I,
"If God had pleased we both should live, and as God will we dye.
Thus with a braying sigh, his noble tongue he stayde,
Commanding all the ordinance, in order to be laid.
And placing all his men in order for to fight,
Fell groueling still upon his face, before them all in sight.
And when in secreete so, he whispered had a while,
He raisde his head with cheerful look, his sorrows to beguile:
And with the rest he prayde, to God in heaven on hie,
Which ended thus, Thou only Lord, can help in misery.
This said (behold) the Turks enclosde us round about,
And seemde to wonder that we durst resist so great a rout.
Whereat they doubt not long, for though our power was slender,
We sent them signs by Canon shot, that we meant not to render.
Then might we see them chafe, then might we hear them rage,
And all at once they bent their force, about our silly cage.
Our ordinance bestowed, our men them selves defend,
On every side so thick beset, they might not long contend.
But as their captain wild, each man his force did strain,
To send a Turk (some two or three) unto the hellishe train,
And he himself which saw, he might no more abide,
Did thrust a mide the thickest throng, and so with honor died.
With him there dyed like wise, his best aproued men,
The rest did yield as men amazd, they had no courage then.
Amongst the which my self, was taken by Turks alas,
And with the Turks a turkish life, in Turkey must I pass.
I was not done to death for so I often craude,
But like a slave before the Gattes, of Famagosta saude.
That piece once put to sack, I thither was conveyed,
And under sauegard evermore, I silly boy was stayed.
There did I see such sightes, as yet my heart do prick,
I saw the noble The governor of Famagosta.
Bragadine, when he was fleyd quick.
First like a slave enforst to bear to every breach,
Two baskets laden full with earth The general of the Turks.
Mustaffa did him teach.
By whom he might not pass before he kyst the ground,
These cruel torments (yet with mo) that worthy souldior found.
His ears cut from his head, they set him in a chair,
And from a maine yard hoisted him aloft into the air,
That so he might be showed with cruelty and spite,
Unto us all, whose weeping eyes did much abhor the sight.
Alas why do I thus with woeful words rehearse,
These werye news which all our hearts with pity needs must pearce?
Well then to tell you forth, I still a slave remaind,
To one, which Prelybassa hight, who held me still enchaind.
With him I went to Seas into the gulf of Pant,
With many christians captives mo, which did their freedom want.
There with the Turkishe train we were enforst to stay,
With waltring still upon the waves, did wait for further pray.
For why? they had advise, that the Venetian fleet,
Did floote in Argostelly then, with whom they hopte to meet.
And as they waltered thus with tides and billows tossed,
Their hope had hap, for at the last they met them to their cost.
As in October last upon the seventh day,
They found the force of christian knights addressed in good array.
And shall I try my tongue to tell the whole discourse,
And how they did encounter first, and how they joined in force?
Then harken now my lords, for sure my memory,
Does yet record the very plot of all this victory,
The christian crew came on, in form of battle pight,
And like a cressent cast them selves preparing for to fight.
On other side the Turks, which trusted power to much,
Disorderly did spread their force, the will of God was such.
Well at the last they met, and first with cannones thunder,
Each other sought with furious force to slit their ships in sunder.
The barks are battered sore, the galleys gald with shot,
The hulks are hit, and every man must stand unto his lot.
The powder sendes his smoke into the cruddy skies,
The smoulder stops our nose with stench, the fume offends our eyes.
The pots of lime vnsteakt, from highest top are cast,
The parched pease are not for got to make them slip as fast.
The wild fire works are wrought and cast in foemens face,
The grappling hooks are streched forth, ye pikes are pusht a pace.
The halbert hew on head, the brown bills bruise the bones,
The harquebush does spit his spite, with pretty persing stones.
The drums cry dub a dub, the braying trumpets blow,
The whistling fifes are seldom herd, these sounds do drown the^ so.
The voice of warlike wights, to comfort them that faint,
The pitious plaints of golden hearts, which were with fears attaint.
The groaning of such ghosts as gasped now for breath,
The prayers of the better sort, prepared unto death.
And to be short, each grief which on the earth may grow,
Was eath and easy to be found, upon these floudes to flow.
If any sight on earth, may unto hell resemble,
Then sure this was a hellishe sight, it makes me yet to tremble:
And in this bloody fight, when half the day was spent,
It pleazed God to help his flock, which thus in pound was pent.
The general of Spain, began gald that galley sore,
Where in my Prely Bassa was, and grieude it more and more:
Upon that other side, with force of sword and flame,
The good Venetian General did charge upon the same.
At leength they came aboorde, and in his raging pride,
Stroke of this Turkish captains head, which blasphemd as it did:
Oh how I feel the blood now trickle in my breast,
To think what joy then pierst my heart, and how I thought me blessed.
To see that cruel Turk which held me as his slave,
By happy hand of Christians, his payment thus to have:
His head from shoulders cut, upon a Pike did stand,
The which Don John of Austrye, held in his triumphant hand.
The boldest Bassa then, that did in life remain,
Began tremble at the sight hereof, for privy grief and pain.
Thus when these fierce had fought, from morning until night,
Christ gave his flock the victory, and put his foes to flight:
And of the Turkishe train, were eight score Galleys taken,
Fifteen sunk, five and twenty burnt, and brought unto their bane,
Of Christians set at large were fourteen thousand souls,
Turks twenty thousand registered in Beelzebub his rolls.
Thus have you now my Lords, the sum of all their fight,
And trust it all for true I tell, for I was still in sight:
But when the Seas were calm, and skies began to clear,
When foes were all or dead or fled, and victors did appear.
Then every Christian sought amongst us for his friend,
His kinsman or companion, some succor them to lend:
And as they ransakte so, lo God his will it was,
A noble wise Venetian, by me did chance to pass:
Who gazing on my face, did seem to like me well,
And what my name, and whence I was, commanded me to tell:
I now which waxed bold, as one that escaped had,
From deepest hell to highest heaven, began for to be glad:
And with a lively sprite, began to plead^ my case,
And hid not from this worthy man, mine ancient worthy race:
And told my fathers name, and how I did descend,
From Mountacutes by Mothers side, nor there my tale did end.
But furthermore I told my Fathers late exployte,
And how he left his lands, goods and life, to pay son Dieu son droit.
Nor of my self I craved so credited to be,
For lo there were remaining yet, These four whom here you see. The four to
che bearers, that came in with the Actor.

Which all were English borne, and knew I had not lied,
And were my Fathers soldiers eke, and saw him how he dyed.
This grave Venetian who heard the famous name,
Of Mountacutes rehearsed there, which long had been of fame.
In Italy, and he of self same worthy race,
Began straight with many courteous words, in arms me to embrace.
And kyssed me on cheek, and bad me make good cheer,
And thank the mighty hand of God, for that which happened there,
Confessing that he was him self a Mountacute,
And bare the self same arms that I did quarter in my scute:
And for a further proof, he showed in his hat,
This token which the Mountacutes The Actor had a token in his cap like to the
Mountacutes of Italy.
did bear always, for that.
They covet to be known from Capels where they pass,
For ancient grutch which long ago, twene these two houses was.
Then took me by the hand, and led me so aboorde,
His Galley: where there were yfeere, full many a comely Lord:
Of whom eight Mountacutes did sit in highest place,
To whom this first declared first my name, and then my race:
Lo Lordings here (quod he) a babe of our own bloods,
Who^ Turks had taken, his father slain, with loss of lands and goods:
See how God favors us, that I should find him now,
I strange to him, he strange to me, we met I know not how.
But sure when I him saw, and gazed in his face,
Me thought he was a Mountacute, I chose him by his grace.
Herewith he did rehearse my Fathers valiant deed,
For loss of whom each Mountacute, did seem in heart to bleed.
They all embrast me then, and straight as you may see,
In comely garments trimde me up, as brave as brave may be:
I was in sackcloath I, now am I cladde in Gold,
And wear such roabes, as I my self take pleasure to behold.
Amongst their other gifts, this token they me gave, The token that he did
wear in his cappe.

And had me like a Mountacute, my self always behave.
The Montacutes and capels in Italye do were tokens in their cappes to be
known one from another.
Now hearken then my Lords, I staying on the Seas.
In consort of these lovely Lords, with comfort and with ease.
Determined with them in Italy to dwell,
And there by train of youthful years in knowledge to excel.
That so I might at last reedifye the walls,
Which my good father had decaide by tossing fortunes balls.
And while they slice the Seas to their desired shore,
Behold a little gale began, increasing more and more.
At last with raging blast, which from Southeast did blow,
Began send our sails upon these shores, which I full well did know.
I spyed the Chalkie Clyues upon the Kentishe coast,
Whereby our Land hight Albion, as Brutus once did boast.
Which I no sooner saw, but to the rest I said,
Siate di buona voglta, My Lords be well apaide:
I see by certain signs these Tempests have us cast,
Upon my native country coasts with happy hap at last:
And if your honors please this honor me to do,
In English havens to harbor you, and see our Cities too:
Lo London is not far, whereas my friends would be,
Right glad, with favor to requite your favor showed to me:
Vouchsafe my Lords (quod I) to stay upon this strand,
And whiles your Barks be rigged new, remain with me on land,
Who though I be a Boy, my Father dead and slain,
Yet shall you see I have some friends which will you entertain.
These Noble men which are, the flower of courtesy,
Did not disdain this my request, but took it thankfully.
And from their battered Barks commanded to be cast,
Some Venetian hotes
Gondalaes, wherein upon our pleasant streams they past.
Into the month of Thames, thus did I them transport,
And to London at the last, whereas I heard report.
Even as we landed first, of this twice happy day,
To think whereon I leapt for joy, as I both must and may.
And to these lovely Lords, which are Magnificoes,
I did declare the whole discourse in order as it rose:
That you my Lord who are the chiefest Mountacute,
And he whom English Mountacutes their only stay impute,
Had found the means this day to match your son and heir,
In marriage with a worthy dame, which is both fresh and fair,
And (as reports are spread) of goodly quallyties,
A virgin trained from her youth in godly exercise,
Whose brother had like wise your daughter taken to wife,
And so by double lynkes enchaynde themselves in lovers life:
These noble Mountacutes which were from Venice drouen.
By tempest (as I told before) wherewith they long had strouen.
Began now give thanks to God which so did them convey,
To see such honors of their kin in such a happy day.
And straight they me entreat, whom they might well command.
That I should come to you my Lord, first them to recommaund.
And then this boon to crave, that under your protection,
They might be bold to enter here, deuoyd of all suspection.
And so in friendly wise for to conselebrate,
This happy match solemnized, according to your state.
Lo this is all they crave, the which I can not doubt,
But that your Lordship soon will grant, with more, if more ye might:
Yea were it for no more, but for the Courtesy,
Which as I say they shewde to me in great extremity:
They are Venetians, and though from Venice reft,
They come in such Venecian robes, as they on seas had left:
And since they be your friends, and kinsmen too by blood,
I trust your entretainement will be to them right good:
They will not tarry long, lo now I hear their drum,
Behold, lo now I see them here, in order how they come,
Receive them well my lord, so shall I pray all ways,
That God vouchsafe to bless this house with many happy days.
After the mask was done, the Actor took master Tho. Bro. by the hand an
brought him to the Venetians, with these words:
GVardate Signori my lovely Lords behold,
This is another Mountacute, hereof you may be bold.
Of such our patron here, The viscont Mountacute,
Has many comely sequences, well sorted all in suit.
But as I spied him first, I could not let him pass,
I took the card that likt me best, in order as it was.
And here to you my lords, I do present the same,
Make much of him, I pray you then, for he is of your name.
For whom I dare aduante, he may your Trounchman be,
Your herald and ambassador, let him play all for me.
Then the Venetians embraced and received the same master Tho. Brown, and
after they had a while whispered with him, he turned to the Bridegroomes and
Brides, saying thus.
BRother, these noblemen to you now have me sent,
As for their Trounchman to expound the effect of their intent
They bid me tell you then, they like your worthy choice.
And that they cannot choose therein but triumph and rejoice.
As far as guess may give, they seem to praise it well,
They say between your Ladies eyes, does Gentilezza dwell.
I term it as they do, their english is but weak,
And I (God knows) am al to young, beyond sea speech to speak.
And you my sister-eke they seem for to commend,
With such good works as may beseem a cousin and a friend.
They like your chosen pheare, so pray they for your sake,
That he may always be to you, a faithful loving make.
This in effect is all, but that they crave aboone,
That you will give them license yet, to come and see you soon.
Then will they speak them selves, such english as they can,
I fear much better then I speak, that am an english man.
Lo now they take their leaves of you and of your dames,
Here after shall you see their face and know them by their nams.
Then when they had taken their leaves the Actor did make an end thus.
And I your Seruidore, vibascio le mani,
These words I learnt amongst them yet, although I learnt not many
Haud ictus sapio.
The refusal of a lover, written to a gentlewoman who had refused him and chosen
a husband (as he thought) much inferior to himself, both in knowledge, birth,
and parsonage, wherein he bewraieth both their names in clouds, and how she was
won from him with sweet gloves, and broken ringes.
I Cannot wish thy grief, although thou work my woo,
Since I professed to be thy friend, I cannot be thy foe:
But if things done and past, might well be called again,
Then would I wish the wasted words, which I have spent in vain:
Were yet untold to thee, in earnest or in game,
And that my doubtful musing mint, had never thought ye same.
For whiles I thee beheld, in careful thoughts I spent,
My liking lust, my luckelesse love which ever truly meant.
And whiles I sought a mean, by pity to procure,
Too latte I found that gorged hawks, do not esteem the lure.
This vauntage have thou then, thou may well brag and boast.
Thou might have had a lustye lad of stature with the most.
And eke of noble mind, his virtues nothing base,
Do well declare that he desends, of ancient worthy race.
Save that I Know not
not his name, and though I could it tell,
My friendly pen shall let it pass, because I love him well.
And thou have chosen one of meaner parentage,
Of stature small and therewithal, unequal for thine age.
His Good qua^^^ies.
thewes unlike the first, yet have thou hot desire,
To play thee in his flitting flames, God grant they prove not fire.
Him hold thou as dear, and he thy Lord shall be,
(Too late alas) thou love him, that never loved thee.
And for just proof hereof, mark what I tell is true,
Some dismold day shall change his mind, and make him seek a new.
Then wylt thou much repent, thy bargain made in haste,
And much lament those perfumd Gloves, which yield such sower taste.
And eke the falsed faith, which lurkes in broken ringes,
Though hand in hand say otherwise, yet do I know such things.
Then shall thou sing and say, farewell my trusty Squire,
Would God my mind had yielded once, unto thy just desire.
Thus shall thou wayle my want, and I thy great unrest,
Which cruel Cupid kindled has, within thy broken breast.
Thus shall thou find it grief, which erst thou thoughtest game,
And I shall hear the weary news, by true reporting fame.
Lamenting thy mishap, in source of swelling tears,
Harding my heart with cruel care, which frosen fancy bears.
And though my just desert, thy pity could not move,
Yet will I wash in wayling words, thy careless childishe love.
And say as Troylus said, since that I can no more,
Thy wanton will did waver once, and woe is me therefore.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Pride in Court written by a Gentlevvoman in Court, who (when she was
there placed) seemed to disdain him, contrary to a former profession.
WHen danger keeps the door, of Lady bewties bower,
When jealous toys have chased Trust out of her stro^gest tower.
Then faith and trooth may fly, then falsehood winnes the field,
Then feeble naked fautlesse hearts, for lack of fence must yield.
And then preuailes as much to hoppe against the hill,
As seek by suite for to appease a froward Ladies will.
For oaths and solemn vows, are wasted then in vain,
And truth is compted but a toye, when such fond fancies reign.
The sentence sone is said, when will it self is Judge,
And quickly is the quarrel picked, when Ladies list to grudge.
This sing I for my self, (which wroate this weary song)
Who justly may complain my case, if ever man had wrong.
A Lady have I served, a Lady have I loved,
A Ladies good will once I had, her ill will late I proved.
In country first I knew her, in country first I caught her,
And out of country now in Court, to my cost have I sought her.
In Court where Princes reign, her place is now assignde,
And well were worthy for the room, if she were not unkind.
There I (in wonted wise) did show my self of late,
And found that as the soil was changed, so love was turned to hate.
But why? God knows, not I: save as I said before,
Pity is put from porters place, and danger keeps the door.
If courting then have skill, to change good Ladies so,
God send each wilful Dame in Court, some wound of my like woe.
That with a troubled head, she may both turn and toss,
In restless bed when she should sleep and feel of love the loss.
And I (since porters put me from my wonted place)
And deep deceipte has wrought a wyle to wrest me out of grace:
Will home again to cart, as fitter were for me,
Then thus in court to serve and starve, where such proud porters be.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
This question being propounded by a Dame unto the Aucthour, to wit, why he
should write Spreta tamen viuunt, he answers thus.
Despised things may live, although they pine in pain:
And things often trodden under foot, may once yet rise again.
The stone that lies full low, may clime at last full hye:
And stand a loft on stately towr's, in sight of every eye.
The cruel Axe which felles the tree that grew full straight:
Is worn with rust, when it renewes, and springs up on height.
The roots of rotten Reeds in swelling seas are seen:
And when each tide has tossed his worst, they grow again full green.
Thus much to please my self, vnpleasauntly I sing.
And shrich to ease my morning mind, in spite of enuies sting.
I am now set full light, who erst was dearly loved:
Some new found choice is more estemd, than yt which well was proved.
Some Diomede is crept into Dame Cressides heart:
And trusty Troylus now is taught in vain to plain his part.
What rests then for me? but thus to wade in woe:
And hang in hope of better chance, when change appoints so.
I see no sight on earth, but it to Change enclines:
As little clouds often ouercast, the brightest Sun that shines.
No Flower is so fresh, but frost can it deface:
No man so sure in any seat, but he may leese his place.
So that I stand content (though much against my mind)
To take in worth this loathsome lot, which luck to me assynd,
And trust to see the time, when they that now are up:
May feel the whirle of fortunes wheel, and taste of sorrows cup.
God knows I wish it not, it had been bet for me:
Still to have kept my quiet chair in hap of high degree.
But since without recure, Dame Change in love must reign:
I now wish change that sought no change, but constant did remain.
And if such change do chance, I vow to clap my hands,
And laugh at them which laughed at me: lo thus my fancy stands.
Spreta tamen viuunt.
In trust is Treason, written by a Lover, leaning only to his Ladies
promises, and finding them to fail.
THe straightest Tree that grows upon one only root:
If that root fail, will quickly fade, no props can do it boot.
I am that fading plant, which on thy grace did grow,
Thy grace is gone wherefore I moan, and wither all in woe.
The tallest ship that sails, if she too Ancors trust:
When Ancors slip and Cables break, her help lies in the dust.
I am the ship my self, mine Ancor was thy faith:
Which now is fled, thy promise broke, and I am driven to death.
Who climeth often on hie, and trusts the rotten bow:
If that bow break may catch a fall, such state stand I in now.
Me thought I was a loft, and yet my seat full sure:
Thy heart did seem to me a rock which ever might endure.
And see, it was but sand, whom seas of subtlety:
Have soked so with wanton waves, that faith was forced to fly.
The flooddes of fickleness have undermined so,
The first foundation of my joy, that mirth is ebbed to woe.
Yet at low water marks, I lie and wait my time:
To mend the breach, but all in vain, it cannot pass the prime.
For when the prime flood comes, which all this rage begoon:
Then waves of will do work so fast, my piles are over roon.
Duty and diligence which are my workmen there,
Are glad to take up fools in haste, and run away for fear.
For fancy has such force, it ouerfloweth all,
And whispring tales do blow the blasts, that make it rise and fall.
Thus in these tempests tossed, my restles life does stand:
Because I builded on thy wodres, as I was borne in hand.
Thou weart that only stake, wereby I meant to stay:
Alas, alas, thou stoodst so weak, the hedge is borne away.
By thee I thought to live, by thee now must Idye:
I made thee my Physician, thou art my mallady.
For thee I longde to live, for thee now welcome death:
And welcome be that happy pang, that stops my gasping breath.
Twice happy were that axe, would cut my rotes down right:
And sacred were that swelling sea, which would consume me quight.
Blessed were that bow would break to bring down climing youth,
Which craks aloft, and quakes full often, for fear of thine untruth.
Ferenda Natura.
The constancy of a lover has thus sometimes been briefly declared.
THat self same tongue which first did thee entreat
To link thy liking with my lucky love:
That trusty tongue must now these words repeat,
I love thee still, my fancy cannot move.
That dreadlesse heart which durst attempt the thought
To win thy will with mine for to consent,
Maintains that vow which love in me first wrought,
I love thee still, and never shall repent.
That happy hand which hardely did touch,
Thy tender body to my deep delight:
Shall serve with sword to prove my passion such.
As loves thee still, much more than it can write.
Thus love I still with tongue, hand, heart and all,
And when I change, let vengeance on me fall.
Ferenda Natura.
The fruit of foes written to a Gentlewoman, who blamed him for writing his
friendly advise in verse unto another lover of hyrs.
THe cruel hate which boyles within thy burning breast,
And seeks to shape a sharp revenge, on them yt love thee best:
May warn all faithful friends, in case of ieopardie,
How they shall put their harmless hands, between the barck and tree.
And I among the rest, which wrote this weary song,
Must needs allege in my defense, that thou have done me wrong.
For if in simple verse, I chaunc'd to touch thy name,
And touched the same without reproach, was I therefore to blame?
And if (of great good will) I gave my best advise,
Then thus to blame without cause why, me thinks thou art not wise.
Amongst old written tales, this one I bear in mind,
A simple soul much like my self, did once a serpent find.
Which (almost dead for cold) lay moyling in the mire,
When he for pity took it up, and brought it to the fire.
No sooner was the Snake, recured of her grief,
But straight she sought to hurt the man, that lent her such relief.
Such Serpent seem thou, such simple soul am I,
That for the weight of my good will, am blamed without cause why.
But as it best beseemes, the harmless gentle heart,
Rather to take an open wrong, than for to plain his part:
I must and will endure, thy spite without repent,
The blame is mine, the triumph thine, and I am well content.
Meritum petere, grave.
A Lover often warned, and once again drouen into fantastical flames by the
chase of company, does thus bewail his misfortunes.
I That my race of youthful years had roon,
Always untied, and not (but once) in thrall,
Even I which had the fields of freedom won,
And lived at large, and playde with pleasurs ball:
Lo now at last am taken again and taught,
To taste such sorrows, as I never sought.
I love, I love, alas I love indeed,
Ierie alas but no man pityes me:
My wounds are wide, yet seem they not to bleed,
And hidden wounds are hardly heald we see.
Such is my luck to catch a sudden clappe,
Of great mischaunce in seeking my good hap.
My morning mind which dwelt and dyed in dole.
Sought company for solace of the same:
My cares were cold, and craved comforts coal,
To warm my will with flakes of friendly flame.
I sought and found, I craved and did obtain,
I won my wish, and yet I got no gain.
For whiles I sought the cheer of company,
Fair fellowship did wonted woes revive:
And craving medcine for my malady,
Dame pleasures plasters proved a corosiue.
So that by mirth, I reapt no fruit but moan,
Much worse I fere, than when I was alone.
The cause is this, my lot did light to late,
The Birds were flowen before I found the nest:
The steed was stolen before I shut the gate,
The cates consumd, before I smelt the feast.
And I fond fool with empty hand must call,
The gorged Hawk, which likes no lure at all.
Thus still I toil, to till the barraine land,
And grope for grappes among the bramble briers:
I strive to sail and yet I stick on sand,
I deem to live, yet drown in deep desires.
These lottes of love, are fit for wanton will,
Which finds too much, yet must be seeking still.
Meritum petere grave.
The lover encouraged by former examples, determines to make virtue of
necessity.
WHen I record with in my musing mind,
The noble names of wightes bewicht in love:
Such solace for my self therein I find,
As nothing may my fixed fancy move:
But patiently I will endure my woe,
Because I see the heavens ordain it so.
For whiles I read and ryfle their estates,
In every tale I note mine own anoye:
But whiles I mark the meanings of their mates,
I seem to swime in such a sugared joy,
As did (parcase) entise them to delight,
Though turned at last, to drugges of sower despite.
Peruse (who list) Dan David's perfect deeds,
There shall he find the blot of Bersabe,
Whereon to think, my heavy heart it bleedes,
When I compare my love like her to be:
Vrias wife before mine eyes that shines,
And David I, from duty that declines.
Then Solomon this princely Peophetes son,
Did Pharaos daughter make him fall or no?
Yes, yes, perdie his wisdom could not shoone
Her subtle snares, nor from her counsel go.
I nam Am not.
(as he) the wisest wight of all,
But well I wot, a woman holds me thrall.
So am I like the proud Assirian Knight,
Which blasphemed God, and all the world defied:
Yet could a woman overcome his might,
And daunt his force in all his Pomp and Pride.
I Holiferne, am dronken brought to bead,
My love like Judith, cutting of my head.
If I were strong, as some have made account,
Whose forre is like to that which Sampson had?
If I be bold, whose courage can surmount,
The heart of Hercules, which nothing drad?
Yet Dalila, and Deyanyraes love,
Did teach them both, such panges as I must prove.
Well let these pass, and think on Nasoes name,
Whose skillful verse did flow in learned style:
Did he (think you) not dote upon his Dame?
Corinna fair, did she not him beguile?
Yes God he knows, for verse nor pleasant rymes,
Can constant keep, the key of Cressides crimes.
So that to end my tale as I began,
I see the good, the wise, the stout, the bold:
The strongest champion and the learned man,
Have been and be, by lust of love controlde.
Which when to think, I hold me well content,
To live in love, and never to repen^.
Meritum petere, grave.
The delectable history of sundry adventures passed by Dan Bartholmew of Bathe,
The Reporter.
TO tell a tale without authority,
Or feign a Fable by inuencion,
That one proceeds of quick capacitye,
That other proves but small discretion,
Yet have both one and other often been done.
And if I were a Poet as some be,
You might perhaps here some such tale of me.
But far I find my feeble skyll to faint,
To feign in figurs as the learned can,
And yet my tongue is tide by due constraint,
To tell nothing but truth of every man:
I will assay even as I first began,
To tell you now a tale and that of truth,
Which I my self saw proved in my youth.
I need not seek so far in costs abroad,
As some men do, which write strange historyes,
For whiles at home I made my chief abode
And saw our lovers play their Tragedyes,
I found enough which seemed to suffice,
To set on work far finer wits than mine,
In paynting out the pangs which make them pine.
Amongst the rest I most remember one
Which was to me a dear familyar friend,
Whose doting days since they be paste and gone,
And his annoye (near) come unto an end,
Although he seem his angry brow to bend,
I will be bold (by his leave) for to tell,
The restless state wherein he long did dwell.
Learned he was, and that became him best,
For though by birth he came of worthy race,
Yet beutie, birth, brave personage, and the rest,
In every choice, must needs give learning place:
And as for him he had so hard a grace,
That by aspect he seemde a simple man,
And yet by learning much renown he wan.
His name I hide, and yet for this discourse,
Let call his name Dan Bartholmew of Bathe,
Since in the end he thither had recourse,
And (as he said) did skamble there in skathe:
In deed the rage which wrong him there, was rathe,
As by this tale I think your self will guess,
And then (with me) his loathsome life confess.
For though he had in all his learned lore,
Both read good rules to bridle fantasy,
And all good authors taugh him evermore,
To love the mean, and leave extremity,
Yet kind has lent him such a quality,
That at the last he quite forgot his books,
And fastened fancy with the fairest looks.
For proof, when green youth lept out of his eye,
And left him now a man of middle age,
His hap was yet with wandering looks to spy,
A fair young impe of proper personage,
Eke borne (as he) of honest parentage:
And truth to tell, my skill it cannot serve,
To praise her beauty as it did deserve.
First for her head, the beeres were not of Gold,
But of some other metal far more fine,
Whereof each crinet seemed to behold,
Like glistring wiers against the Sun that shine,
And therewithal the blazing of her eyne,
Was like the beams of Titan, truth to tell,
Which glads us all that in this world do dwell.
Upon her cheeks the Lilly and the Rose,
Did entremeete, with equal change of hew,
And in her gifts no lack I can suppose,
But that at last (alas) she was untrue,
Which flinging fault, because it is not new,
Nor seldom seen in kits of Cressides kind,
I marvel not, nor bear it much in mind.
Dame Natures fruits, wherewith her face was fraught,
Were so frost bitten with the cold of craft,
That all (save such as Cupides snares had caught)
Might soon epsy the feathers of his shaft:
But Bartholmew his wits had so bedaft,
That all seemd good which might of her be gotten,
Although it proud no sooner ripe than rotten.
That mouth of hirs which seemde to flow with mell,
In speech, in voice, in tender touch, in taste,
That dympled chin wherein delight did dwell,
That ruddy lip wherein was pleasure plast,
Those well shapt hands, fine arms and slender wast,
With all the gifts which gave her any grace,
Were smiling baits which caught fond fools apace.
Why strive I then to paint her name with praise?
Since form and fruits were found so far unlike,
Since of her cage Inconstance kept the keys,
And Change had cast her honor down in dike:
Since fickle kind in her the stroke did strike,
I may no praise unto a knife bequeath,
With rust yfret, though painted be the sheath.
But since I must a name to her assign,
Let call her now Ferenda Natura,
And if thereat she seem for to repine,
No force at all, for hereof am I sure a,
That since her prankes were for the most vnpure a.
I can appoint her well no better name,
Than this where in dame Nature bears the blame.
And thus I say, when Bartholmew had spent
His pride of youth (untied in linkes of love)
Behold how hap contrary to intent,
(Or destenies ordained from above,)
From which no wight on earth may well remove)
Presented to his view this fiery dame,
To kindle coals where erst had been no flame.
Whom when he saw to shine in seemly grace,
And therewithal began mark her tender youth,
He thought not like, that under such aface
She could convey the treason of untruth:
Whereby be vowed (alas the more his ruth)
To serve this saint for term of all his life,
Lo here both root and rind of all his strife.
I cannot now in loving terms displaye
His suite, his service, nor his sorry fare:
His obseruaunces, nor his queynt array,
His skalding sighs, nor yet his cooling care,
His waiting still to snatch himself in snare,
I can not write what was his sweetest sour,
For I my self was never Paramoure.
But to conclude, much worth in little writ,
The highest flying hawk will stoop at last,
The wildest beast is drawn with hungrye bitte.
To eat a homlye bayte some times in have,
The prick of kind can never be vnplaste,
And so it seemed by this dayntye dame,
Whom he at last with labor did reclame.
And when he had with mickel pain procured
The calm consent of her unwieldy will,
When he had her by faith and troth assured,
To like him best, and aye to love him still,
When fancy had of flattery fed his fill,
I not discern to tell my tale aright,
What man but he had ever such delight?
The lingering days he spent in trifling toys,
To whette the tools which carved his content:
The poasting nights he past in pleasing joys,
Wearing the web which love to him had lent:
In such a pinfolde were his pleasures pent
That selde he could her company eschew,
Or leave such looks as might his Lack.
sport renew.
But if by force he forced were to part,
Then might you see how fancy fed his mind,
Then all alone he mused on his mart.
All company seemde then (but hirs) unkind:
Then sent he tokens true love for to bind,
Then wrote he letters, lines and loving lays,
So to beguile his absent doleful days.
And since I know as others eake can tell,
What skyll he had, and how he could endite,
Me thinks I cannot better do than well,
To set down here, his ditties of delyght,
For so at least I may my self acquit,
And vaunt to show some verses yet unknown,
Well worthy praise though none of them mine own.
No force for that, take you them as they be,
Since mine empress is but to make report:
Imagine then, before you that you see
A wight bewitched in many a subtle sort,
A Lover lodgd in pleasures princely port,
Vaunting in verse what joys be did possess,
His triumphs here I think will show no less.
Dan Bartholmew his first Triumph.
Resign king Priams sons, that princes were in Troy,
Resign to me your happy days, and boast no more of joy:
Sir Paris first stand forth make answer for thy pheare,
And if thou can defend her cause, whom Troy did bye so dear:
What? blush not man, be bold, although thou bear some blame,
Tell truth at last, and so be sure to save thy self from shame.
Then gentle Sheapheard say: what madness did thee move,
To choose of all the flowers in Greece, foul Helene for thy love?
Needs must I coumpt her foul, whose first fruits were forlorn?
Although she sold her second chafe, above the price of corn.
Alas, she made of thee, a noddye for the nonce,
For Menelaus lost her twice, though thou her foundst but once.
But yet if in thine eye, she seemde a peerless piece,
Ask Theseus yt mighty Duke, what towns she knew in Greece?
Ask him what made her leave her woeful aged sire,
And steal to Athens gyglot like: what? what but foul desire?
Alas poor Paris thou did nothing else but gleane,
The partched ears which he cast by, when he had reaped clean:
He sliude the gentle slip, which could both twist and twind,
And growing left the broken branch, for the^ that came behind,
Yet have thou filled the world with brute, (the more thy blame,)
And say, that Hellens bewty past each other stately dame,
For proof thou can allege the taste of ten years war,
And how her blazing beams first brought both Greece and Troy to jar
No no, thou art deceiude, the drugs of of foul despite,
Did work in Menelaus will, not loss of such delighte,
Not love, but loathsome hate, not dolor, but disdain,
Did make him self a sharp revenge, til both his foes were slain,
Thy brother Troylus eke, that gemme of gentle deeds,
To think how he abused was, alas my heart it bleedes:
He bet about the bushe, whiles other caught the birds,
Whom crafty Gresside mocked to much, yet feed him still with words.
And god he knows not I, who plucked her first sprung rose,
Since Lollius and Chaucer both, make doubt upon that gloss.
But this I know to well, and he to far it felt,
How Diomede undid his knots, and caught both brooch and belt,
And how she chose to change, and how she changed still,
And how she dyed leaper like, a against her lovers will.
Content you then good knights, your triumph to resign,
Confess your stars both dim and dark, whereas my sun does shine:
For this I dare avow, without vaunt be it told,
My derling is more fair than she, for whom proud Troy was sold.
More constant to conteyne, than Cresside to be eoy,
No Calcas can contriue the craft, to train her out of Troy,
No Diomede can draw her settled heart to change,
No madding mood can move her mind, nor make her thoughts to range,
For her alone it is, that Cupide blindfolde goes,
And dare not look for fear least he his liberty should loose:
At her dame Venus chafes, and pines in ielowsie,
Least bloody Mars should her epsy, and chang his fantasy,
Of her the Queen of Heaven does stand in dreadful doubt,
Least Jove should melte in drops of gold, if once he find her out.
Oh that my tongue had skill, to tell her praise aright,
Or that my pen her due deserts, in worthy verse could write:
Or that my mind could muse, or happy heart conceive,
Some words that might resound her worth, by high Mineruas leave.
Oh how the blooming joys, do blossom in my breast,
To think within my secret thought, how far she steines ye rest.
Me thinks I hear her speak, me thinks I see her still,
Me thinks I feel her feelingly, me thinks I know her will.
Me thinks I see the states which sue to her for grace,
Me thinks I see one look of hirs repulse them all apace.
Me thinks that hour is yet, and evermore shall be,
Wherein my happy hap was first, her heavenly face to see:
Wherein I spide the writ, which woond between her eyne,
And said behold, be bold, for I, am borne to be but thine.
Me thinks I feel the joys, which never yet were felt,
Whom flame before yet never touched, me thinks I feel them melt.
One word and there an end, me thinks she is the sun,
Which only shines now a days, she dead, ye world were done.
The rest are twinkling stars, or Moons which borow light,
To comfort other careful souls, which wander in the night.
And night God knows it is, where other Ladies be,
For sure my dame adornes the day, there is no sun but she.
Then lovers by your leave, and think it nothing strange,
Although I seem with calm content, in seas of joys to range:
For why, my sails have found both wind and waves at will,
And depthes of all delights in her, with whom I travel still.
And ancors being wayed, I leave you all at large,
To steare this seemelye Ship my self, such is my mistress charge.
Fato non fortuna.
Dan Bartholmew his second Triumph.
Fie pleasure fie, thou cloyest me with delight,
Thou fylst my mouth with sweet meats overmuch,
I wallow still in joy both day and night.
I deem, I dream, I do, I taste, I touch:
No thing but all that smelles of perfect bliss,
Fie pleasure fie, I cannot like of this.
To taste (sometimes) a bait of bitter gall,
To drink a draught of sower Ale (some season)
To eat brown bread with homely hands in Hall.
Does much increase men's appetites by reason:
And makes the sweet more sugared that ensewes,
Since minds of men do still seek after news.
The pampred horse is seldom seen in breath,
Whose maunger makes his grease (oftimes) to melt,
The crammed Foul comes quickly to his death.
Such coldes they catch in hottest happes that swelt.
And I (much like) in pleasure scawled still,
Do fear to starve although I feed my fill.
It might suffice that love has built his bower,
Between my Ladies lively shyning eyes,
It were enough that Bewties fading flower:
Grows ever fresh with her in heavenly wise.
It had been well that she were fair of face,
And yet not rob all other Dames of grace.
To muse in mind, how wise, how fair, how good,
How brave, how frank, how courteous, and how true,
My Ladys is: does but inflame my blood,
With humors such, as bid my health adue.
Since hap always when it is clombe on hye,
Does fall full low, though erst it reachte the Sky.
Lo pleasure lo, lo thus I lead a life,
That laughes for joy, and trembles often for dread,
Thy panges are such as call for changes knife,
To cut the twist, or else to stretch the thread.
Which holds yfeere the bondell of my bliss,
Fie pleasure fie, I dare not trust to this.
Fato non fortuna.
Dan Bartholmewes his third Triumph.
IF ever man yet found the bathe of perfect bliss,
Then swim I now amid the seas where naught but pleasure is.
I love and am beloved, without vaunt be it told,
Of one more fair then she of Greece, for whom proud Troy was sold.
As bountiful and good as Cleopatra Queen,
As constant as Penelope, unto her make was seen.
What would you more? my pen, unable is to write,
The least desert that seems to shine within this worthy wight.
So that (for now) I cease with hands held up on hye.
And crave of God that when I change, I may be forced to dye.
Fato non Fortuna.
The Reporter.
THese vaunting verses with a many mo,
(To his mishap) have come unto my hands,
Whereof the rest (because he sailed so,
In braggers boat which set it self on sands,
And brought him eke fast bound in follyes bands)
Of courtesy I keep them from your sight,
Let these suffice which of my self I write.
The highest tree that ever yet could grow,
Although full fair it slorisht for a season,
Found yet at last some fall to bring it low,
This old said saw is (God he knows) not geason:
For when things pass the reach and bounds of reason.
They fall at last, although they stand a time,
And bruise the more, the higher that they clime.
So Bartholmew unto his pain did prove,
For when he thought his hap to be most hye,
And that he only reapt the fruictes of love.
And that he swelt in all prosperity,
His comfort changed to calamity:
And though I do him wrong to tell the same,
Yet read it you, and let me bear the blame.
The Saint he served became a crafty devil,
His goddess to an Idol seemde to change,
Thus all his good transformed into evil,
And every joy to raging grief did raunge:
Which Metamorphosis was maruels strange:
Yet shall you seldom otherwise it prove,
Where wicked Lust does bear the name of Love.
This sudden change when he began to spy,
And cold suspect into his mind had crept,
He bounst and bet his head tormentingly,
And from all company him self he kept,
Whereby so far in storms of strife he stepped,
That now he seemed an Image not a man,
His eyes so dead, his color waxt so wan.
And I which always bear him great good will,
(Although I knew the cause of all his grief,
And what had trainde and tysed him theretyll,
And plain to speak, what moved his mischief)
Yet since I sought to ease him with relief:
I did become importunate to know,
The secreete cause whereon this grudge should grow.
At last with much ado, his trembling tongue,
Bewrayde theffect of his vnwylling will,
Which here to tell since it were all to long,
And I therewith too barren am of skyll,
And trouble you with tedious tydinges still,
Content you now to hear himself rehearse,
His strange affectes in his lamenting verse.
Which verse he wrote at Bathe (as erst was said)
And there I saw him when he wrote the same,
I saw him there with many moanes dismaide,
I saw him there both fryse and flashe in flame,
I saw him grieved when others made good game:
And so appears by his dark discourse,
The which to read I crave your just remorse.
Dan Bartholmewes Dolorous discourses.
I Have entreated care to cut the thread,
Which all to long has held my lingering life,
And here aloof now have I hyd my head,
From company thereby to stint my strife.
This solitarye place does please me best,
Where I may wear my wylling mind with moan,
And where the sighs which boil out of my breast,
May skald my heart, and yet the cause unknown.
All this I do, for thee my sweetest sour,
For whom (of yore) I counted not of care,
For whom with hungry jaws I did devour.
The secret bait which lurked in the snare:
For whom I thought all foreign pleasures pain,
For whom again, all pain did pleasure seem,
But only thine, I found all fancies vain,
But only thine, I did no dolours deem.
Such was the rage, that whilome did possess,
The privy corners of my mazed mind:
When hot desire, did count those torments less.
Which gaind the gaze that did my freedom bind.
And now (with care) I can record those days,
And call to mind the quiet life I led,
Before I first beheld thy golden rays,
When thine untruth yet troubled not my head.
Remember thou, as I can not forget,
How I had laid, both love, and lust aside,
And how I had my fixed fancy set.
In constant vow, for ever to abide.
The bitter proof of panges in pleasure past,
The costlye taste, of honey mixed with gall:
The painted heaven, which turnde to hell at last.
The freedom fainde, which brought me but to thrall.
The lingering suit, well fed with fresh delays,
The wasted vows which fled with every wind:
The restless nights, to purchase pleasing days,
The toyling days to please my restless mind.
All these (with mo) had bruised so my breast,
And graft such grefe within my groaning heart,
That had I left Dame fancy and the rest.
To greener years, which might endure the smart.
My weary bones did bear away the skarres,
Of many a wound received by disdain:
So that I found the fruit of all those wars,
To be naught else but panges of unknown pain.
And now mine eyes were shut from such delight,
My fancy faint, my hot desires were cold,
When cruel hap, presented to my sight.
The maidens face, in years which were not old.
I think the Goddess of revenge deuisde,
So to be wreackt on my rebelling will,
Because I had in youthful years dispisde,
To taste the baits, which tyste my fancy still.
How so it were, God knows, I cannot tell:
But if Ilye, you Heavens, the plague be mine,
I saw no sooner, how delight did dwell
Between those little infantes eyes of thine,
But straight a sparkling cole of quick desire,
Did kindle flame within my frozen heart,
And yelding fancy softly blewe the fire,
Which since has been the cause of all my smart.
What need I say? thy self for me can swear,
How much I tendered thee in tender years:
Thy life was then to me (God knows) full dear,
My life to thee is light, as now appears.
I loved the first, and shall do to my last,
Thou flattredst first, and so thou would do still:
For love of thee full many pains I past,
For deadly hate thou seek me to kill.
I cannot now, with manly tongue rehearse,
How sone that melting mind of thine did yield,
I shame to write, in this waymenting verse,
With how small fight, I vanquished thee in field:
But Caesar he, which all the world subdude,
Was never yet so proud of Victory,
Nor Hanyball, with martial feats endude.
Did so much please himself in policy,
As I (poor I) did seem to triumph then,
When first I got the Bulwarks of thy breast,
With hot Alarmes I comforted my men,
In foremost rank I stood before the rest,
And shook my flagge, not all to show my force,
But that thou might thereby perceive my mind:
Askaunces As who should say:
lo, now could I kill thy corce,
And yet my life is unto thee resinde.
Well let this pass, and think upon the joy,
The mutual love, the confidence, the trust,
Whereby we both abandoned annoye,
And fed our minds with fruits of lovely lust.
Think on the Tithe, of kysses got by stealth,
Of sweet embracinges shortened by fear.
Remember that which did maintain our health,
Alas alas why should I name it here.
And in the midst of all those happy days,
Do not forget the chaunges of my chance,
When in the depth of many waywarde ways,
I only sought, what might thy state advance.
Thou must confess how much I card for thee,
When of my self, I card not for my self,
And when my hap was in mishappes to be,
Esteemd thee more, than all the worldly pelf.
Mine absente thoughts did beat on thee alone,
When thou had found afond and newfound choice:
For lack of thee I sunk in endless moan,
When thou in change did tumble and rejoice.
O mighty gods needs must I honor you,
Needs must I judge your judgments to be just,
Because she did for sake him that was true,
And with false love, did cloak a fained lust.
By high decrees, you ordained the change,
To light on such, as she must needs mislike,
A meet reward for such as like to raunge,
When fancies force, their feeble flesh does strike.
But did I then give bridle to thy fall,
Thou head strong thou accuse me if thou can?
Did I not hazard love yea life and all,
To ward thy will, from that unworthy man?
And when by toil I trauayled to find,
The secret causes of thy madding mood,
I found naught else but tricks of Cressides kind,
Which plainly proud, that thou weart of her blood.
I found that absent Troylus was forgot,
When Dyomede had got both brooch and belt,
Both glove and hand, yea heart and all god wot,
When absent Troylus did in sorrows swelt.
These tricks (with mo) thou know thy self I found,
Which now are needelesse here for to rehearse,
Unless it were to touch a tender wound,
With corosiues my panting heart to perse.
But as the Hounde is counted little worth,
Which gives over for a loss or twain,
And cannot find the means to single forth.
The stricken Dear which does in heard remain:
Or as the kindly Spaniell which has sprung
The pretty Partriche, for the Falcons flight,
Does never spare but thrusts the thorns among,
To bring this byrd yet once again to sight,
And though he know by proof (yea dearly bought)
That selde or never, for his own avail,
This weary work of his in vain is wrought,
Yet spares he not but labors-tooth and nail.
So labord I to save thy wandering ship,
Which reckelesse then, was running on the rocks,
And though I saw thee seem to hang the lyppe.
And set my great good will, as light as flocks:
Yet hauld I in, the main sheate of the mind,
And stayed thy course by ancors of advice,
I won thy will into a better wind,
To save thy ware, which was of precious price.
And when I had so harbored thy Bark,
In happy haven, which saufer was than Dover,
The Admyrall, which knew it by the mark,
Straight challengde all, and said thou were a rouer.
Then was I forced in thy behalf to plead,
Yea so I did, the Judge can say no less,
And whiles in toil, this loathsome life I lead,
Came thou thy self the fault for to confess,
And down on knee before thy cruel foe,
Dydst pardon crave, accusing me for all,
And saydst I was the cause, that thou did so,
And that I spoone the thread of all thy thrall.
Not so content, thou furthermore did swear These things are mistical and
not to be understood but by Thaucthour him self.

That of thy self thou never meant to swerue,
For proof whereof thou did the colors wear,
Which might bewray, what saint thou meant to serve.
And that thy blood was sacrificed eke,
To manifest thy steadfast martyrd mind,
Till I perforce, constraynd thee for to seek,
These raging seas, adventures thereto find.
Alas, alas, and out alas for me,
Who am enforced, thus for to repeat
The false reports and cloked guyles of thee,
Whereon (to often) my restless thoughts do beat.
But thus it was, and thus God knows it is.
Which when I found by plain and perfect proof,
My musing mind then thought it not amiss,
To shrink aside, lamenting all aloof.
And so to beat my simple shiftlesse brain,
For some device, that might redeem thy state,
Lo here the cause, for why I take this pain,
Lo how I love the wight which me does hate:
Lo thus I lie, and restless rest in Bathe,
Whereas I bathe not now in bliss pardie,
But boil in Bale and skamble thus in skathe,
Because I think on thine inconstancy.
And wylt thou know how here I spend my time,
And how I draw my days in dolours still?
Then stay a while: give ear unto my rhyme,
So shall thou know the weight of all my will.
When Titan is constrained to forsake,
His Lemans couche, and clymeth to his carte,
Then I begin to languishe for thy sake,
And with a sighe, which may bewray my smarte.
I clear mine eyes whom gum of tears had glewed,
And up on foot I set my ghostly corse,
And when the stony walls have often renewed.
My pittious plaintes, with Echoes of remorce,
Then do I cry and call upon thy name,
And thus I say, thou cursed and cruel both,
Behold the man, which takes grief for game,
And loves them, which most his name do loathe.
Behold the man which ever truly meant,
And yet accusde as aucthour of thine ill,
Behold the man, which all his life has spent.
To serve thy self, and aye to work thy will:
Behold the man, which only for thy love,
Did love himself, whom else he set but light:
Behold the man, whose blood (for thy behoue)
Was ever pressed to shed it self outright.
And can thou now condemn his loyalty?
And can thou craft to flatter such a friend?
And can thou see him sincke in ieoperdie?
And can thou seek to bring his life to end?
Is this the right reward for such desert?
Is this the fruit of seed so timely sown?
Is this the price, appointed for his part?
Shall truth be thus by treason overthrown?
Then farewell faith, thou art no woman's pheare:
And with that word I stay my tongue in time,
With rolling eyes I look about each where,
Least any man should hear my rauing rhyme.
And all in rage, enraged as I am,
I take my sheet, my slippers and my Gown,
And in the Bathe from whence but late I came,
I cast my self in dollours there to drown.
There all alone I can my self conueye,
Into some corner where I sit unseen,
And to my self (there naked) can I say,
Behold these braune fallen arms which once have been.
Both large and lusty, able for to fight,
Now are they weak, and wearishe God he knows
Unable now to daunt the foul despite,
Which is presented by my cruel foes.
My thighs are thin, my body lanck and lean,
It has no bumbast now, but skin and bones:
And on mine Elbowe as I lie and lean,
I see a trusty token for the nones. Another mystery.

I spy a bracelet bound about mine arm,
Which to my shaddowe seems thus to say,
Believe not me: for I was but a Charm,
To make thee sleep, when others went to play.
And as I gaze thus galded all with grief,
I find it fazed almost quite in sunder,
Then think I thus: thus wastes my relief,
And though I fade, yet to the world no wonder.
For as this lace, by leisure learnes to wear,
So must I faint, even as the Candle wastes,
These thoughts (dear sweet) within my breast I bear,
And to my long home, thus my life it hastes.
Herewith I teele the drops of sweltring sweat,
Which trickle down my face, enforced so,
And in my body feel I likewise beat,
A burning heart which tosseth too and fro.
Thus all in flames I sinderlyke consume,
And were it not that wanhope lendes me wind,
Soon might I fret my facyes all in fume,
And like a Ghost my ghost his grave might find.
But frysing hope does blow full in my face,
And cold of cares becommes my cordial,
So that I still endure that yrksome place,
Where sorrow seethes to skalde my skin withal.
And when from thence or company me drieus,
Or weary woes do make me change my seat,
Then in my bed my restless pains reuiues,
Until my fellows call me down to meat.
And when I rise, my corpse for to array,
I take the glass, sometimes (but not for pride,
For God he knows my mind is not so gaye)
But for I would in comeliness abide:
I take the glass, wherein I seem to see,
Such wythred wrinckles and so foul disgrace,
Another mystery.
That little marvel seems it to me,
Though thou so well dydst like the noble face.
The noble face was fair and fresh of hew,
My wrinckled face is foul and fades fast:
The noble face was unto thee but new,
My wrinckled face is old and clean outcast:
The noble face might move thee with delight,
My wrinckled face could never please thine eye:
Lo thus of crime I covet thee to quite.
And still accuse my self of Surcuydry:
As one that am unworthy to enjoy,
The lasting fruit of such a love as thine,
Thus am I tickled still with every toye,
And when my Fellows call me down to dyne,
No change of meat prouokes mine appetite,
Nor sauce can serve to taste my meats withal,
Then I devise the juice of grapes to dight,
For Sugar and for Sinamon I call,
For Ginger, Grains, and for each other spice,
Wherewith I mix the noble Wine apace,
My Fellows praise the depth of my devise,
Another mystery.
And say it is as good as Ippocrace.
As Ippocrace say I? and then I swelt,
My faynting lymmes straight fall into a sown,
Before the taste of Ippocrace is felt,
The naked name in dollours does me drown,
For then I call unto my troubled mind,
That Ippocrace has been thy daily drink,
That Ippocrace has walked with every wind.
In bottels that were filled to the brinke.
With Ippocrace thou banquetedst full often,
With Ippocrace thou madst thy self full merrye,
Such cheer had set thy new love so alofte,
That old love now was scarcely worth a cherry.
And then again I fall into a trance,
But when my breath returns against my will,
Before my tongue can tell my woeful chance,
I hear my fellows how they whisper still.
One says that Ippocrace is contrary,
Unto my nature and complexion,
Whereby they judge that all my malladye,
Was long of that by alteration.
An other says, no, no this man is weak,
And for such weak, so hot things are not best,
Then at the last I hear no liar speak,
But one which knows the cause of mine unrest*
And says, this man is (for my life) in love,
He has received repulse, or drunk disdain.
Alas cry I: and ere I can remove,
Into a sown I sone return again.
Thus drive I forth, my doolefull dining time,
And trouble others with my troubles still,
But when I here, the Bell has passed prime,
Into the Bathe I wallowe by my will,
That there my tears (unseen) might ease my grief,
For though I starve yet have I fed my fill,
In privy panges I count my best relife.
And still I strive in weary woes to drench,
But when I plondge, than woe is at an ebb,
My glowing coals are all to quick to quench.
And I (to warm) am wrapped in the web,
Which makes me swim against the wished wave,
Lo thus (dear wenche) I lead a loathsome life,
And greedely I seek the greedy grave,
To make an end of all these storms and strife,
But death is deaf, and hears not my desire,
So that my days continewe still in dole,
And in my nights I feel the secret fire,
Which close in embers, coucheth like a cole,
And in the day has been but raked up,
With covering ashes of my company,
Now breaks it out, and boyles the careful cup,
Which in my heart does hang full heavily.
I melt in tears, I swelt in chilling sweat,
My swelling heart, breaks with delay of pain,
I freeze in hope, yet burn in haste of heat,
I wish for death, and yet in life remain.
And when dead sleep does close my dazeled eyes,
Then dreadful dreams my dolors do increase,
Me thinks I lie awake in woeful wise.
And see thee come, my sorrows for to cease.
Me seems thou say (my good) what means this?
What ails thee thus co languish and lament?
How can it be that bathing all in bliss:
Such cause unknown disquiets thy content?
Thou do me wrong to keep so close from me
The grudge or grief, which gripeth now thy heart,
For well thou know, I must thy partner be.
In bale, in bliss, in solace, and in smarte.
Alas, alas, these things I deem in dreams,
But when mine eyes are open and awake,
I see not thee: where with the flowing streams,
Of brinishe tears their wonted floods do make.
Thus as thou see I spend both nights and days,
And for I find the world did judge me once,
A witless writer of these lovers lays,
I take my pen and paper for the nonce,
I lay aside this foolish ryding rhyme,
And as my troubled head can bring to pass,
I thus bewray the torments of my time:
Bear with my Muse, it is not as it was.
Fato non fortuna.
The extremity of his Passion.
AMong the toys which toss my brain,
and reaue my mind from quiet rest,
This one I find, does there remain,
to breed debate within my breast.
When woe would work, to wound my will,
I cannot weep, nor wail my fill.
My tongue has not the skill to tell,
the smallest grief which gripes my heart,
Mine eyes have not the power to swell,
into such Seas of secret smart,
That will might melt to waves of woe,
and I might swelt in sorrows so.
Yet shed mine eyes no trickling tears,
but flouddes which flow abundauntly,
Whose fountain first enforst by fears,
found out the gappe of jealousy.
And by that breach, it soketh so,
that all my face, is still on flow.
My voice is like the raging wind,
which roareth still, and never stays,
The thoughts which tomble in my mind,
are like the wheel which whirles always.
Now here, now there, now up, now down,
in depth of waves, yet cannot drown.
The sighs which boil out of my breast,
are not like those, which others use,
For lovers sighs, sometimes take rest,
And lend their minds, a leave to muse.
But mine are like the surging Seas,
whom calm nor quiet can appeas.
And yet they be but sorrows smoke,
my breast the fordge where fury plays,
My panting heart, yt strikes the stroke,
my fancy blows the flame always,
The coals are kindled by desire,
and Cupide warmes him by the fire.
Thus can I neither drown in dole,
nor burn to ashes though I waste,
Mine eyes can neither quench the cole,
which warmes my heart in all this haste.
Nor yet my fancy make such flame,
that I may smoulder in the same.
Wherefore I come to seek out Care,
beseeching him of courtesy,
To cut the thread which cannot wear,
by panges of such perplexity.
And but he grant this boon of mine,
thus must I live and ever pine.
Fato non fortuna.
LO thus (dear heart) I force my frantike Muse,
To frame a verse in spite of my despite,
But whiles I do these mirthlesse meeters use,
This rash conceit does reave me from delight.
I call to mind how many loving lays,
How many Sonets, and how many songs,
I did devise within those happy days,
When yet my will, had not received wrongs.
All which were evermore regarded so,
That little fruit I seemd thereby to reap,
But rather when I had bewrayed my woe,
Thy love was light, and lusted still to leap.
The rimes which pleased thee were all in print,
And mine were ragged, hard for to be read, Another similitude.

Lo dear: this dagger dubbes me with this dint,
And leave this wound within my ielous head.
But since I have confessed unto Care,
That now I stand upon his courtesy,
And that the bale; which in my breast I bare,
Has not the skill to kill me cunningly,
Therefore with all my whole devotion,
To Care I make this supplication.
Fato non fortuna.
His libell of request exhibited to Care.
O Courteous Care, whom others (cruel) call,
And rail upon thine honorable name,
O knife that can cut of the thread of thrall,
O sheare that shreadst the seemerent sheet of shame,
O happy end of every grievous game:
Vouchsafe O Prince, thy vassal to behold,
Who loves thee more, than can with tongue be told.
And now vouchsafe to pity this his plaint,
Whose tears bewray,
His truth always,
Although his feeble tongue be forced to faint.
I must confess O noble king to thee,
That I have been a Rebel in my youth,
I preast always in pleasures court to be,
I fled from that, which Cupide still eschuth,
I fled from Care, lo now I tell the truth,
And in delights, I loved so to dwell,
Thy heavenly house did seem to me but hell.
Such was my rage, the which I now repent,
And pardon crave,
My soul to save,
Before the web of weary life be spent.
But mark what fruits did grow on such a tree,
What crop did rise upon so rash sown seed,
For when I thought my self in heaven to be,
In depth of hell I drowned was in deed:
Whereon to think my heavy heart does bleed:
Me thought I swumme in Seas of all delight,
When as I sunk in puddles of despite,
Alas alas I thought my self beloved,
When deadly hate,
Did play check mate,
With me poor pawn, that no such prancks had proved.
This when I tried (ay me) to be to true,
I wept for woe, I pined all for pain,
I tare my here, I often changed hew,
I left delight, with dollours to complain.
I shund each place where pleasure did remain,
I cride, I calde on every kind of death,
I strove each way to stop my fainting breath.
Short tale to make, I stepped so far in strife,
That still I sought,
With all my thought,
Some happy help to leave my lothed life.
But hope was he that held my hand abacke,
Hope is ever contrary to a lovers Passion
From quick dispatch of all my griping grief,
When heat of hate had burnt my will to wrack.
Then hope was cold, and lent my life relief,
In every choice hope challengde to be chief.
When coldest crampes had clean overcome my heart,
Then hope was hot, and warnde my weary smart,
Then heart was heardie, hope was still in dread,
When heart was faint,
(With fears attaint,)
Then hardy hope held up my fearful head.
Thus when I found that neither flowing tears,
Could drown my heart in waves of weary woe,
Nor hardy hand could overcome my fears,
To cut the sack of all my sorrows so,
Nor death would come, nor I to death could go.
And yet I felt great drops of secret smart,
Distilling still within my dying heart:
I then perceiude that only care was he,
Which as my friend,
Might make an end,
Of all these pains, and set my fancy free.
Wherefore (oh Care) grant thou my just request,
Oh kill my corpse, oh quickly kill me now.
Oh make an end and bring my bones to rest,
Oh cut my thread (good Care) I care not how,
Oh Care be kind: and here I make a vow,
That when my life out of my breast shall part,
I will present thee with my faithful heart:
And send it to thee as a Sacrifice,
Because thou have,
Vouchsaft at last,
To end my furies in this friendly wise.
Fato non Fortuna.
WHat greater glory can a Keysar gain,
If mad mood move his subjects to rebel,
Than that at last (when all the traitors train,
Have trod the pathe, of deep repentance well,
And naked need with Cold and Hunger both,
Has bitten them abroad in foreign land,
Whereby they may their lewd devises loath.
(When hairbraind haste, with cold advise is scande)
If then at last, they come upon their knee,
And pardon crave with due submission:
And for this cause, I think that Care of me,
Was moved most, to take compassion.
For now I find, that pity pricks his mind,
To see me plonged still in endless pain,
And right remorse, his princely heart does bind,
To rule the rage wherein I do remain.
I feel my tears do now begin to stay,
For Care from them their swelling springs does soke,
I feel my sighs their labors now allaye,
For Care has quenched the coals that made the^ smoke.
I feel my panting heart begins to rest,
For Care has staide the hammers of my head,
I feel the flame which blazed in my breast,
Is now with careful ashes ouerspread.
And gentle Care, has whet his karuing knife,
To cut in twain the thread of all my thrall,
Desired death now overcomes life,
And woe still works to help in haste with all.
But since I feel these panges approaching so,
And lothed life begin to take his leave,
Me thinks it meet, to give before I go,
Such lands, and goods, as I behind me leave.
So to discharge my troubled conscience,
And eke to set an order for my heir,
Who might (perhaps) be put to great expense,
To sue for that, which I bequeath him here.
Wherefore (dear wenche) with all my full intent,
I thus begin to make my Testament.
Fato non fortuna.
His last will and Testament.
IN Jove his mighty name, this eight and twentieth day,
Of frosted bearded Ianuar, the enemy to May:
Since Adam was create, five thousand years I guess,
Five hundredth, forty more and five, as stories do express.
I being whole of mind, (immortal Gods have praise)
Though in my body languishing with panges of pain always,
Do thus ordain my will which long in woes have wept,
Beseeching mine executours to see it duly kept.
First I bequeath my soul on Charons boat to tend,
Until thy life (my love) at last may light on luckye end,
That there it may awaite, to wait upon thy ghost,
When thou have quite and clean forgot what pranks now please thee most.
So shall it well be seen whose love is like to mine:
For so I mean to try my truth, and there till then to pine.
My body he enbalmde, and cloased up in chest,
With ointments and with spiceries of every sweet the best:
And so preserved still until the day do come,
That death divorce my love from life, and trusse her up in tomb.
Then I bequeath my corpse to couche beneathe her bones,
And there to feed the greedy worms that linger for the nones.
To frette upon her flesh, which is to fine therefore,
This service may it do her yet, although it do no more.
My heart (as heretofore) I must bequeathe to Care,
And God he knows, I think the gift to simple for his share.
But that he may perceive, I mean to pay my dew,
I will it shall be taken quick, and borne him bleeding new,
As for my funerals, I leave that toye at large,
To be as mine executours will give thereto in charge.
Yet if my goods will stretche unto my strange device,
Then let this order be observed, mine heir shall pay the price:
First let the torche bearers be wrapte in weeds of woe,
Let all their lights be virgin wax, because I lou'de it so.
And care not though the twist be course that lends them light,
If fancy fume, and free will flame, then must they needs burn bright,
Next them let come the quier, with psalms and doleful song,
Recording all my rough repulse and wraying all my wrong.
And when the deskant singes, in treeble tunes above,
Then let fa burden say, (by low) I lived and did for love:
About my heavy hearse, some mourners would I have,
Who migh the same accompany and stand about the grave,
But let them be such men, as may confess with me,
How contrary the lots of love, to all true lovers be.
Let Patience be the Priest, the Clarke be Close conceit,
The Sertin be Simplicity, which means no disceipt.
Let alms of Love be dealt, even at the Chaunsell door,
And feed them there with fresh delays, as I have been of yore:
Then let the youngest sort, be set to ring Loves Bells,
And pay Repentance for their pains, but give the^ nothing else,
Thus when the Dirge is done, let every man depart,
And learn by me what harm it is to have a faithful heart.
Those little lands I have, mine heir must needs possess,
His name is Lust, the lands be loss, few lovers escape with less.
The rest of all my goods, which I not here rehearse,
Give learned Poets for their pains, to deck my Tomb with verse:
And let them write these words upon my careful chest,
Lo here he lies, that was as true (in love) as is the best.
Alas I had forgot the Parsons dew to pay,
And so my soul in Purgatory, might remain always.
Then for my privy Tithes, as kysses caught by stealth,
Sweet collinges and such other knackes as multiplied my wealth:
I give the Vickar here, to please his greedy will,
A deintie dishe of sugar soppes, but saust with sorrow still:
And twice a week at least, let dight them for his dishe,
On Fridayes and on wednesdaies, to save expense of fish.
Now have I much bequeathed and little left behind,
And others mo must yet be served or else I were unkind.
Wet eyes and wayling words, Executours I make,
And for their pains ten pound of tears let either of them take.
Let sorrow at the last my Suprauisor be,
And steadfastness my surest stead, I give him for his fee.
Yet in his pattent place this Sentence of prouiso,
That he which loves steadfastly, shall want no sauce of sorrow.
Thus now I make an end, of this my weary will,
And sign it with my simple hand, and set my seal there till.
And you which read my words, although they be in rhyme,
Yet reason may persuade you eke, Thus lovers dote sometime.
The Subscription and seal.
MY mansion house was Moan: from Dolours dale I came,
I Fato: Non Fortuna, hight, lo now you know my name:
My seal is sorrows sithe, within a field of flame,
Which cuts in twain a careful heart, yt sweltreth in the same.
Fato non Fortuna.
ALas, lo now I hear the passing Bell,
Which Care appoints carefullye to knoule,
And in my breast, I feel my heart now swell,
To break the stringes, which ioynde it to my soul.
The Crystal yse, which lent mine eyes their light,
Does now wax dym, and dazeled all with dread,
My senses all, will now forsake me quite,
And hope of health abandoneth my head,
My weary tongue can talk no longer now,
My trembling hand now leaves my pen to hold,
My joints now stretch, my body cannot bow,
My skin looks pale, my blood now waxes cold.
And are not these, the very panges of death?
Yes sure (sweet heart) I know them so to be,
They be the panges, which strive to stop my breath,
They be the panges, which part my love from thee.
What said I? Love? Nay life: but not my love,
My life departes, my love continues still:
My lothed life may from my corpse remove,
My loving Love shall always work thy will.
It was thy will even thus to try my truth,
Thou have thy will, my truth may now be seen,
It was thy will, that I should dye in youth,
Thou have thy will my years are yet but grene.
Thy penance was that I should pine in pain,
I have performde thy penance all in woe,
Thy pleasure was that I should here remain,
I have been glad to please thy fancy so.
Now since I have performed every part
Of thy command, as near as tongue can tell,
Content thee yet before my muse depart,
To take this Sonet for my last farewell.
Fato non fortuna.
His Farewell.
FArewell dear Love whom I have loved and shall,
Both in this world, and in the world to come,
For proof whereof my sprite is Charons thrall,
And yet my corpse attendant on thy toome.
Farewell dear sweet, whose wanton will to please
Each taste of trouble seemed mell to me,
Farewell sweet dear, whose doubts for to appease,
I was contented thus in bale to be.
Farewell my life, farewell for and my death,
For thee I lyu'd for thee now must I dye,
Farewell from Bathe, whereas I feel my breath
Forsake my breast in great perplexity,
Alas how welcome were this death of mine,
If I had did between those arms of thine?
Fato non Fortuna.
The Reporters conclusion.
WHere might I now find flooddes of flowing tears,
So to suffice the swelling of mine eyes,
How might my breast unload the bale it bears?
Alas alas how might my tongue devise
To tell this weary tale in woeful wise?
To tell I say these tydinges now of truth,
Which may provoke the craggy rocks to rush?
In depth of dole would God that I were drownde,
Where flattering joys might never find me out,
Or graued so within the greedy ground,
As false delights might never breed my doubt,
Nor guilefull love her purpose bring about:
Whose trustlesse trains in colors for to paint,
I find by proof my wits are all to faint.
I was that man whom destinies ordeine,
To bear each grief that grows on the mold,
I was that man which proved to my pain,
More panges at once than can with tongue be told,
I was that man (hereof you may be hold)
Whom heaven and earth did frame to scoff and scorn,
I, I was he which to that end was borne.
Suffized not my self to taste the fruit,
Of sugared sowres which grow in gadding years,
But that I must with pain of like pursuit,
Perceive such panges by pattern of my pears,
And feel how fancies fume could fond my pheares?
Alas I find all fates against me bent,
For nothing else I live but to lament.
The force of friendship bound by holy oath,
Did draw my will into these crooked ways,
For with my friend I went to Bathe (though loath)
To lend some comfort in his dollie days,
The steadfast friend sticks fast at all assayes:
Yet was I loath such time to spend in vain,
The cause whereof, lo here I tell you plain.
By proof I found as you may well perceive,
That all good counsel was but worn in wast,
Such painted pains his passions did deceive.
That bitter gall was mell to him in taste,
Within his will such roots of ruin plast,
As graffes of griefs were only given to grow,
Where youth did plant and rash conceit did sow.
I saw at first his ears were open aye
To every tale which fed him with some hope,
As fast again I saw him turn away
From grave advise, which might his conscience grope,
From reasons rule his fancy lightly lope,
He only gave his mind to get that gain,
Which most he wished and least could yet attain.
Not I alone, but many mo with me,
Had found what fickleness his Idol used,
And how she claimed Cressides heir to be,
And how she had his great good will abused,
And how she was of many men refused,
Who tried her tricks and knew her by the kind,
Save only him she made no lover blind.
But what for this? whose face is plainer seen,
Than he which thinks he walks in a net?
Or who in bale has ever deeper been.
Than he which thought his state might not be bet,
In such a iollitye these lovers iet.
That weal to them does seem to be but woe.
And grief seems joy, they feed their fancyes so.
Tell him that reason ought to be his rule,
And he allowed no reason but his own,
Tell him that best were quicklye to recule,
Before all force by fears were overthrown,
And that his base were better ouerblowne.
Then thus to pine remedylesse in grief,
And he would say that grief was his relief.
Short tale to make so long he lived thus,
Till at the last he began in deed to dye,
Believe me Lords (and by him that dyed for us)
I saw him give to close his dying eye,
I saw him strive and strangle passingly.
And such a grief I took, that yet I not,
If he or I had then more grief ygot.
But who has seen a Lamp begin to fade,
Which lacks oil to feed his lyngring light,
And then again who so has seen it made,
With oil and weecke to last the longsome night:
Let him conceive that I saw such a sight.
Whereof to think (although I sighde erewhile)
Lo now I laughe my sorrows to beguile.
Upon the stones a trampling steed we heard,
Which came full straight unto our lodging door,
And straight therewith we heard how one inquired,
If such a Knight (as I describde before)
Were lodged there: the Host withouten more,
Said yes forsooth, and God he knows (quod he)
He is as sick as any man may be.
The messenger swear by no bugges I trow,
But bad our host to bring him where he lay,
(Quod I to Bartholmew) I hear by low,
A voice which seems somewhat of you to say:
And ear that past not full a furlong way,
Behold the man came stowping in at door,
And truth to tell he syked wondrous sore.
At last from out his bosom did he take,
A Letter sealde yfolded fair and well,
And kyssing it (I think for Mistress sake)
He said to Bartholmew: Sir Knight be well,
Now read these lines the which I need not tell,
From whence they come: but make an end of moan,
For you are sick, and she is woe begone.
The thief condemnde and gone to gallowe tree,
(If one cry Grace: lo here a Pardon pressed)
Does dye sometimes, when most he seemde to be,
From death redeemd, such bronts may breed in breast,
Twyxt sudden joy, and thoughts which pain oppressed,
The Roman VViddowe dyed when she beheld,
Her Sun (whom erst) She compted slain in field.
So Bartholmew tweene grief and sudden joy,
Lay still in trance, me thinks I see him yet,
And out of doubt it gave me such anoye,
To see him so, him self in fancies fret,
That sure I thought his eyes in head were set.
And that he lay (as some say) drawing on,
Until his breath and all were past and gone.
But high degrees of heaven which had ordainde,
(For his decay) a fresh delay of pain,
Revived him: yet from his eyes down raind,
Such rewfull tears as moved me to plain,
The doleful plight wherein he did remain.
For trust me now, to see him sorrow so.
It might have made a stone to melt in woe.
Thrice did his tongue begin to tell his thought,
And thrice (alas) it foltred in his mouth,
With stopping sobbes and skalding sighs he sought.
To utter that which was to me uncouth.
So stays the stream, when furiously it flouth.
And filles the dikes where it had wont to swim,
Until by force it breaks above the brimme.
At last (with pain) the first word that he spoke,
Was this: Alas, and therewithal he stayed,
His feebled Jaws and hollow voice could make,
None other sound, his thoughts were all dismayed,
His hearye head full low in bosom laid.
Yet when he saw me mark what he would say,
He cried right out Alas and well away.
Alas (quod he) dear friend behold this blood,
And with that word began again to sorrowne:
The messenger which in a studdye stood,
Awakt at last: and in mine ear did rowne,
Saying: those lines which I have there thrown down.
Were written all with blood of her own hand,
For whom he now in this distress does stand.
And since (quod he) She has vouchsafed so,
To shead her blood in witness of her grief,
Me thinks he rather should relieve her woe:
Then thus deny to send her some relief.
Alas alas (quod he) she holds him chief.
And well wot I (what ere his fancy be)
There sittes no man so near her heart as he.
Therewith he raysde his heavy head alight,
Askaunces Ha? in deed and think thou so?
But out alas his weak and weary sprit,
Forbad his tongue in further terms to go.
His thought said Haight, his silly speech cried Ho.
And thus he lay in dompes and doleful trance,
Till darksome night did somewhat change his chance.
For when the light of day began to fade,
And courtins round about his bed were drawn,
A golden slomber did his lymmes invade,
And held him hushed till day again began dawne,
Whereby Dame quiet put him in a pawn,
To set his thoughts (which striued erst) at one,
And bad debate be packing to be gone.
Percase sweet love did lull him so on sleep,
Perhaps Dame fancy rockt the Cradell too,
How so it were I take thereof no keep,
With such conceiptes have I nothing to do,
But when he wakt he asked plainly who,
Had brought him so from rage to quiet rest,
And who had borne the torments from his breast?
(Quod I) my friend: here is a letter lo,
Behold it here and be all hole again,
What man were he that wyther would in woe,
Which thus might prosper in despite of pain?
Were he not worse then mad which would complain,
On such a friend as this to me does seem?
Which (for thy health) her blood does not esteem?
Thus much I said to comfort him God knows,
(But what I thought that keep I cloose in hold)
Sometimes a man must flatter with his foes,
And sometimes say that brass is bright as Gold:
For he that has not all things as he would,
Must wink sometimes, as though he did not see,
And seem to think things are not as they be.
Dan Bartholmew began take the brief in hand,
And brake the seal, but when he saw the blood,
Good Lord how bolt upright his here did stand?
For though the friendly words therein were good,
Yet many a thought they moved in his mood.
As well appeared by his flecked cheeks,
Now cherrye read, now pale and green as leekes.
I dreamt (quod he) that I was done to death,
And that I lay full cold in earth and claye,
But that I was restored unto breath,
By one that seemde like Pellycane to play,
Who shed his blood to give me food always,
And made me live in spite of sorrow still,
See how my dream agrees now with this byll?
His feebled wits forgotten had there while,
By whom and how he had this letter first,
But when he spyde the man, then began he smile,
For secreete joy his heart did seem to burst,
Now thought he best that (erst) he compted worst.
And lovingly he did the man embrace,
And asked how farde the root of all his grace?
See sudden change, see subtle sweet disceipte,
Behold how love can make his subjects blind,
Let all men mark hereby what guilefull bait,
Dan Cupide lays to tyse the lovers mind:
Alack alack a slender thread may bind,
That prysonor fast, which means to tarrye still,
A little road correctes a ready will.
The brief was writ and blotted all with gore,
And thus it said: Behold how steadfast love,
Has made me hardy (thanks have he therefore)
To write these words thy doubts for to remove,
With mine own blood: and if for thy behoue.
These bloody lines do not thy Cares convert:
I vow the next shall bleed out of my heart.
I dwell to long upon this thriftlesse tale,
For Bartholmew was well appeasde hereby,
And feelingly he banished his bale,
Taking herein a taste of remedy,
By lyte and lyte his fittes away began fly.
And in short space he did recover strength,
To stand on foot and take his horse at length.
So that we came to London both yfere,
And there his Goddess tarryed till we came,
I am to blame to call her Goddess here,
Since she deserude in deed no Goddess name,
But sure I think (and you may judge the same)
She was to to him a Goddess in his thought,
Although perhaps her Shrines was ouerbought,
I may not write what words between them past.
How tears of grief were turnde to tears of joy,
Nor how their dole became delight at last.
Nor how they made great mirth of much anoye,
Nor how content was coined out of coye,
But what I saw and what I well may write,
That (as I may) I mean for to endite.
In lovely London love began now renew,
This blooddye Letter made it battle much,
And all the doubts which he in fancies drew,
Were done away as there had been none such,
(But to him self) he bare no body grutch.
Him self (he said) was cause of all this woe,
Withouten cause that her suspected so.
O loving Youths this glass was made for you,
And in the same you may your selves behold,
Believe me now not one in all your crew,
Which (where he loves) has courage to be bold,
Your Cressides climes are always uncontrolled.
You dare not say the Sun is clear and bright,
You dare not swear that darkesome is the night.
Terence was wise which taught by Pamphilus,
How courage quails where love be blinds the sense,
Though proof of times makes lovers quarelous,
Yet small excuse serves love for just defense.
These Courtisanes have power by pretense.
To make a Swan of that which was a Crow,
As though black pitche were turned into Snow.
Ferenda, She whom heaven and earth had framde,
For his decay and to bewitche his wits,
Made him now think him self was to be blamde.
Which causeles thus would fret himself in fittes,
She made him think that sorrow sildome sittes,
Where trust is tied in fast and faithful knottes,
She said Mistrust was meet for simple sottes.
What will you more she made him to believe,
That she first loved although she younger were,
She made him think that his distress did grieve,
Her guiltless mind: and (that it might appear,
How these conceiptes could join or hang yfere)
She did confess how soon she yielded his,
Such force (quod she) in learned men there is.
She further said that all to true it was,
How youthful years (and lack of him alone)
Had made her once to choose out brittle glass,
For perfect Gold: She did confess (with moan)
That youthfully she bytte a worthless bone.
But that therein she tasted deep delight,
That said she not, nor I presume to write.
She swear (and that I bear full well in mind)
How Dyomede had never Troylus place,
She said and swear (how ever sat the wind)
That Admirals did never know her case,
She said again that never Noble Face,
Did please her eye nor moved her to change,
She said her mind was never given to range.
She said and said that Bracelettes were ybound,
To hold him fast (but not to charm his thought)
She wysht therewith that she were deeply drowned,
In Ippocrace: if ever she had sought,
Or drunk, or smelt, or taken, or found, or bought,
Such Nectar drops as she with him had drunk,
(But this were true) she wished her soul were sonke.
And to conclude, she said no printed rymes,
Could please her so as his brave Triumphs did:
Why wander I? She cou'red all her crimes,
With deep disceipt, and all her guiles she hyd,
With fained tears, and Bartholmew she ryd.
With double gyrthes, she byt and whyned both,
And made him love where he had cause to loath.
These be the fruictes which grow on such desire,
These are the gains ygot by such an art,
To late commes be that seeks to quench the fire,
When flames possess the house in every part,
Who list in peace to keep a quiet heart.
Fly love betimes, for if he once oretake him,
Then seeld or never shall he well forsake him.
If once thou take him Tenant to thy breast,
No writ nor force can serve to pluck him thence,
No pylles can purge his humor like the rest,
He bydes in bones, and there takes residence,
Against his blows no bucklar makes defense.
And though (with pain) thou put him from thy house,
Yet lurkes he still in corners like a Mouse.
At every hole he creeps in by stelth,
And priuilye he feeds on thy crommes,
With spoils unseen he wastes all thy wealth,
He plays boe peep when any body commes,
And dastardlik he seems to dread the drommes,
Although in deed in Embushe he awaytes,
To take thee straggling if thou pass his straites.
So seemed now by Bartholmews success,
Who yielded sone unto this second charge,
Accusing still him self for his distress,
And that he had so languished at large,
Short work to make: he had none other charge.
To bear loves blows, but still to trust her tale,
And pardon crave because he bread her bale.
And thus he lyude contented still with craft,
Mistrusting most, that gave least cause of doubt,
He fled mishappe and held it by the haft,
He banished bale and bare it still about,
He let in love and thought to hold him out.
He seemde to bathe in perfect bliss again,
When (God he knows) he fostred privy pain.
For as the Tree which crooked grows by kind,
(Although it be with propping underset)
In trackt of time to crooked course will twinde,
So could Ferenda never more forget,
The lease at large where she her flinges had set.
But rangde again, and to her byas fell,
Such chaunges chance where lust (for love) does dwell.
And as it hapt (and God his will it was)
Dan Bartholmew perceyude it very plain,
So that perforce he let his pleasures pass,
And straue no more against the stream in vain,
But therewithal he purchased such pain,
As yet I shrink in mind thereof to muse,
And marvel more how he the same could use.
His lustlesse limbs which wonted were to sit,
In quiet chair, with pen and paper pressed,
Were armed now with helm and harness fyt,
To seek adventures boldly with the best,
He went to wars that wont to live in rest.
And wars in deed he made withouten blows,
For why his friends were now become his foes.
Such was his hap to war both night and day,
To watch and ward at every time and tide,
Though foes were far yet skowted he always.
And when they came he must their brontes abide,
Who ever fled he would his head not hyde.
For sure despair his corpse so close had armed,
That by deaths darte he could no whit be harmed.
In his Ensign these colors began he choose,
Black, white, and green, first black for morning moan,
Then white for chaste, because he did refuse,
(Thenceforth) to think but even of her alone.
A bend of green: for though his joys were gone,
Yet should it seem he hoped for a day,
And in that bend his name he did displaye.
That self same name which in his will he wrote,
(You know my mind) when he was out of tune a,
When he subscribde (which may not be forgote)
How that his name was Fato Non Fartuna.
And as I guess because his love was Vna,
That played her pranckes according to her kind,
He wrote these words her best excuse to find.
As who should say, lo destenies me drive,
And hap could not have overthrown me thus:
I constrew this because I do believe,
That once again he will be amorous,
I fere it much by him that dyed for us,
And who so doubts that causeles thus I faint.
Let him but read the green Knights heavy plaint.
Bartello he which writes ryding tales,
Bringes in a Knight which cladde was all in green,
That sighed sore amidde his grievous gales,
And was in hold as Bartholmew has been.
But (for a placke) it may therein be seen,
That, that same Knight which there his griefs begone,
Is Batts own Fathers Sisters brothers Son.
Well since my borrell brain is all to bloont.
To give a guess what end this man shall have,
And since he rages not as he was wont.
Although sometimes he seem (alite) to crave,
Yet will I not his doings so deprave,
As for to judge (before I see his end)
What harder hap his angry stars can send.
And therewithal my wearye muse desires,
To take her rest: and pardon craves also,
That she presumde to bring her self in briars,
By penning thus this true report of woe:
With sillye grace these sorye rimes may go,
In such a rank as Bartholmew has plast,
So that she fears her cunning is disgrast.
But take them yet in gree as they be meant,
And wayle with me the loss of such a man:
I coumpt him lost because I see him bent,
To yield again where first his grief began,
And though I cannot write as others can.
Some mournful verse to move you moan his fall,
Yet weep (with me) you faithful lovers all.
Finis.
quod Dixit and Dixit.

Lenuoye.
Sir Salamanke to thee this tale is told,
Peruse it well and call unto thy mind,
The pleasant place where thou dydst first behold
The rewfull rymes: remember how the VVinde
Did calmelye blow: and made me leave behind,
Some leaves thereof: whiles I sat reading still,
And thou then seemdst to hearken with good will.
Believe me now, had thou not seemd to like
The woeful words of Bartholmews discourse,
They should have lain still drowned in the dyke,
Like Sybylls leaves which fly with little force,
But for thou seemdst to take therein remorce.
I sought again in corners of my breast,
To find them out and place them with the rest.
Such skyll thou have to make me (fool) believe,
My bables are as brave as any be,
Well since it is so, let it never grieve
Thy friendly mind this worthless verse to see
In print at last: for trust thou unto me,
Thine only praise did make me venture forth,
To set in show a thing so little worth.
Thus unto thee these leaves I recommend,
To read, to raze, to view, and to correct,
Vouchsafe (my friend) therein for to amend
That is amiss, remember that our sect,
Is sure to be with floutes always infect.
And since most mockes will light upon my muse,
Vouchsafe (my friend) her faults for to peruse.
Tam Marti quam Mercurio.
The fruits of War, written upon this Theme, Dulce Bellum inexpertis, and
it was written by peecemeale at sundry times, as the Aucthour had vacaunt
leysures from service, being begone at Delfe in Hollande, and dyrected to the
right honorable the Lord Greye of VVylton as appears by the Epistle
Dedicatory next following.

To the Right honorable and mine especial good Lord, The Lord Greye of
VVylton.
MY Singular good Lord: I am of opinion that long before this time your honor
has thoroughly perused the book, which I prepared to be sent unto you
somewhat before my coming hither, and therewithal I do likewise coniectour
that you have found therein just cause to laugh at my follies forepassed. So
that I am partly in doubt whether I were more ouerseene in my first devising,
or in my last dyrecting of the same? But as fantastical humors are common
imperfections in green vnmellowed brains: So hope I yet that your good
Lordshippe will rather wink at my weakness in generallitie, then reprove my
rashness in perticularitie. And because I would be glad, to draw your
Lordshippe into forgetfulness thereof, by fresh record of some more martial
matter, as also for that I would have your Honor perceive that in these
lyngering broils, I do not altogether pass over my time in idleness: I
have therefore thought meet now to present you with this Pamphlete written by
stelth at such times as we Loytered from service. And the sobiect thereof being
war, I could not more conuenientlye address the same unto any Marshiall man,
then unto your good Lordshippe: Whom I have heard to be an universal patron
of all Soldiers, and have found to be an exceeding fauourour of me your
unworthy follower. The verse is roughe. And good reason, sithence it treats
of roughe matters, but if the sense be good then have I hit the mark which I
shote at: Knowing that your Lordshippe can win Honny out of the Thistle. And
such as it is, I dyrect it unto your Honor. Beseeching the same, to take it in
(...) ^gree, and to perceive that I am and ever will continue.

Your Lordships most bounden and assured. George Gascoigne.

Dulce bellum inexpertis.
TO write of War and wot not what it is,
Nor ever yet could march where War was made,
May well be thought a work begone amiss,
A rash attempt, in woorthlesse verse to wade,
To tell the trial, knowing not the trade:
Yet such a vain even now does feed my Muse,
That in this theme I must some labor use.
2
And herewithal I cannot but confess,
How inexpert I am in feats of war:
For more than writing does the same express,
I may not boast of any cruel jar,
Nor vaunt to see full valiant facts from far:
I have nor been in Turkey, Denmark, Greece,
Ne yet in Colch, to win a Golden fleece.
3
But nathelesse I some what read in writ,
Oh high exploits by Martial men ydone,
And thereupon I have presumed yet,
To take in hand this Poem now begone:
Wherein I mean to tell what race they run,
Who follow Drums before they know the dubbe,
And brag of Mars before they feel his clubbe.
4
Which talk to tell, let first with pen declare a definito.

What thing war is, and whereof it proceeds,
What be the fruits that fall unto their share
That gape for honor by those haughty deeds,
What bloody broils in every state it breeds:
A weary work vneths I shall it write,
Yet (as I may) I must the same endite.
5
The Poets old in their fond fables feign,
That mighty Mars is god of War and Strife,
Poets and Astronomers definition.
These Astronomers think, where Mars does reign,
That all bebate and discord must be rife,
Some think Bellona goddess of that life:
So that some one, and some another judge,
To be the cause of every grievous grudge.
6
Painters description.
Among the rest that Painter had some skill,
Which thus in arms did once set out the same,
A field of Genles, and on a Golden hill
A stately town consumed all with flame,
On cheafe of Sable (taken from the dame)
A sucking babe (oh) borne to bide myschaunce,
Begoarde with blood, and perced with a lance.
7
On high the Helm, I bear it well in mind,
The Wreath was Silver poudred all with shot,
About the which (goutte du sang) did twinde
A roll of Sable, black and foul beblot,
The Creast two hands, which may not be forgot,
For in the Right a trenchand blade did stand,
And in the Left a fiery burning brande.
8
Thus Poets, Painters, and Astronomers,
Have given their guess this subject to define,
Yet are those three, and with them travelers,
Not best betrust among the Worthies nine,
Their words and works are deemed not divine:
But why? God knows (my matter not so mar,)
Unless it be because they feign to far.
9
Common peoples opinion.
Well then, let see what says the common voice,
These old said sawes, of war what can they say?
Who list to harken to their whispring noise,
May hear them talk and tattle day by day,
That Princes pride is cause of war always:
Plenty brings pride, pride plea, plea pine, pine peace,
Peace plenty, and so (say they) they never cease.
10
And though it have been thought as true as steel,
Which people prate, and preach above the rest,
Yet could I never any reason feel,
To think Vox populi vox Dei est,
As for my skill, I count him but a beast,
Which trusts truth to dwell in common speech,
Where every lourden will become a leech.
11
Then what is war? define it right at last,
And let us set all old said sawes aside,
Let Poets lie, let Painters faigne as fast,
Astronomers let mark how stars do glide,
And let these Travelers tell wonders wide:
But let us tell by trusty proof of truth,
What thing is war which raises all this ruth.
12
And for my part my fancy for to wright, The Authors definition.

I say that war is even the scourge of God,
Tormenting such as dwell in princely plight,
Yet not regard the reaching of his rod,
Whose deeds and duties often times are odd,
Who raunge at randon jesting at the just,
As though they raignde to do even what they lust.
13
Whom neither plague can pull into remorse,
Nor dearth can draw to mende that is amiss,
Within whose hearts no pity finds force,
Nor right can rule to judge what reason is.
Whom sickness salueth not, nor bale brings bliss:
Yet can high love by waste of bloody war,
Send scholemaisters to teach them what they are.
14
Then since the case so plain by proof does stand,
That war is such, and such always it was,
How chances then that many take in hand
To joy in war, whiles greater pleasures pass?
Who count the quiet Burgher but an Ass,
That lives at ease contented with his own,
Whiles they seek more and yet are overthrown.
15
If Mars move war, as Starcoonners can tell,
And Poets eke in fables use to feign,
Or if Bellona cause men's hearts to swell
By deadly grudge, by rancor or dysdaine,
Then what delight may in that life remain?
Where anger, wrath, teene, mischief and debate,
Do still uphold the pillars of the State?
16
If Painters craft have truly war dysplayde,
Then is it woorsse (and badde it is at best)
Where towns destroyde, and fields with blood berayde,
Young children slain, old widows foul oppressed,
Maids ravished, both men and wives distressed:
Short tale to make, where sword and cindring flame
Consume as much as earth and air may frame.
17
If pride make war (as common people prate)
Then is it good (no doubt) as good may be,
For pride is root of evil in every state,
The sowrse of sin, the very feend his fee,
The head of Hell, the bough, the branch, the tree,
From which do spring and sproute such fleshly seeds,
As nothing else but moan and myschiefe breeds.
18
But if war be (as I have said before)
Gods scourge, which does both Prince and people tame,
Then warn the wiser sort by learned lore,
To flee from that which brings naught but blame,
And let men count it grief and not a game,
To feel the burden of Gods mighty hand,
When he concludes in judgment for to stand.
19
Oh Prince be pleased with thine own diadem,
Confine thy countries with their common bounds, Prince.

Enlarge no land, ne stretch thou not thy stream,
Pen up thy pleasure in Repentance pounds,
Least thine own sword because of all thy wounds:
Claim naught by war where title is not good,
It is Gods scourge, then Prince beware thy blood.
20
Oh Dukes, oh Earls, oh Barons, Knights and squiers,
Keep you content with that which is your own, Nobility.

Let bravery never bring you in his briers,
Seek not to mow where you no seed have sown,
Let not your neighbors house be overthrown,
To make your garden straight, round, even and square,
For that is war, (Gods scourge) then Lords be ware.
21
Oh bishops, deacons, prelates, Prelacie.
priests and all,
Strive not for tithes, for glebelande, nor for fees,
For polling Peter pens, for popish Pall,
For proud pluralities, nor new degrees,
And though you think it lubberlike to leese,
Yet should you lend that one half of your cote:
Then Priests leave war, and learn to sing that note.
22
Oh lawless Lawyers, Lawyers.
stop your too long nose,
Wherewith you smell your needy neighbors lack,
Which can pretend a title to suppose,
And in your rules vplandish loutes can rack,
Till you have brought their wealth unto the wrack:
This is plain war, although you term it strife,
Which God will scourge, then Lawyers leave this life.
23
Oh Merchants make more conscience in an oath,
Sell not your Silks by danger nor deceyte,
Merchants.
Break not your banks with coin and credit both,
Heap not your hoordes by wiliness of weight,
Set not to sale your subtilties by sleight,
Breed no debate by bargayning for days,
For God will skourge such guiles ten thousand ways.
24
Husbandmen.
Oh country clownes, your closes see you keep,
With hedge, and ditche, and mark your meade with meares,
Let not dame flattery in your bosom creep,
To tell a fittone in your Landlordes ears,
And say the ground is his as plain appears.
Where you but set the bounders forth to far:
Plie you the plough and be no cause of war.
25
Oh common people claim nothing but right,
Co^munaltie.
And cease to seek that you have never lost,
Strive not for trifles: make not all your might,
To put your neighbors purse to needelesse cost,
When your own gilte is spent, then farewell frost:
The Lawyer gaynes, and leads a Lordly life,
Whiles you leese all and beg to stinte your strife.
26
Knew Kings and Princes what a pain it were,
To win mo realms than any wit can weelde,
To pine in hope, to fret as fast for fear,
To see their subjects murdered in the field,
To loose at last, and then themselves to yield,
To break sound sleep with carke and inward care,
They would love peace, and bid war well to fare.
27
If noble men and gentle bloodes yborne,
Wist what it were to have a widows curse,
Knew they the skourge of God (which wro^gs does skorns)
Who sees the poor still wronged to the worse,
Yet stays revenge till he it list disburse:
Wist they what were to catch Gods after clappes,
Then would they not oppress so much perhaps.
28
These spiritual Pastors, nay these spiteful Popes,
Which ought to lend a lauterne to the rest,
Had they themselves but light to see the ropes,
And snares of Hell which for their feet are dressed,
Because they pill and pole, because they wrest.
Because they covet more than borrell men,
(Hard be their hearts) yet would they tremble then.
29
Lawyers and Merchants put them both yfeare,
Could they foresee how fast their heirs lashe out,
If they in mind this old Proverb could bear.
De bonis malepartis vix (through out)
Gaudebit tertius baeres out of doubt,
They would percase more peace than plea procure,
Since goods ill got, so little time endure.
30
Whiles Pierce the Plowma^ hopes to pick a thank,
By moving bounds (which got skarce graze his goose)
His Landlord laws so long to win that bank,
Till at the last the Ferme and all flies loose,
Then farewell Pierce the man proves but a mouse,
And seeks a cottage if he could one get,
So fair he fisht by moving mischief yet,
31
If common people could foresee the fine,
Which lights at last by lashing out at law,
Then who best loves this question, Mine or Thine,
Would never grease the greedy sergeants pawe,
But sit at home and learn this old said saw,
Had I revenged been of every harm,
My coat had never kept me half so warm.
32
But whether now? my wits are went awrie,
I have presumde to preach to long God wot,
Where mine empryse was well to testify
How sweet war is to such as know it not,
I have but touched their ill luck and their lot,
Which are the cause why strife and wars begin,
Naught have I said of such as serve therein.
33
And therwithal I termed have all strife,
All quarells, contecks, and all cruel iarres,
Oppressions, bryberes, and all greedy life,
To be (in genere) no bet than wars,
Whereby my theme is stretched beyond the stars,
And I am entered in a field so large,
As to much matter does my Muse surcharge.
34
But as the hawke which soareth in the sky,
And clymbes aloft for sollace of her wing,
The greater gate she gets up on high,
The truer stoop she makes at any thing:
So shall you see my Muse by wandering,
Find out at last the right and ready way,
And keep it sure though erst it went astray.
35
My promise was, and I record it so,
To write in verse (God wot though little worth)
That war seems sweet to such as little know
What commes thereby, what fruits it brings forth:
Who knows none evil his mind no bad abhorth,
But such as once have fealt the skortching fire,
Will seldom (efte) to play with flame desire.
36
Then war is badde: and so it is in deed,
Yet are three sorts which therein take delight,
But who they be now harken and take heed,
For (as I may) I mean their names to wright,
The first hight Haughty heart, a man of might,
The second Greedy mind most men do call,
And Miser (he the mome) co^mes last of all.
37
As for the first, three sparks of mighty mood
Desire of fame, disdain of Idleness,
And hope of honor, so inflame his blood, Haughty hearts.

That he haunts war to win but worthiness,
His doughty deeds always declare no less:
For whiles most men for gains or malice fight,
He gapes for glory setting life but light.
38
O noble mind: alas and who could think,
So good a heart so hard a hap should have?
A sweet perfume to fall into a sink,
A costly jewel in a swelling wave,
Is hap as hard as if in greedy grave,
The lustiest life should shryned be perforce,
Before dyre death give sentence of divorce.
39
And such I count the hap of Haughty heart,
Which hunts (naught else) but honor for to get,
Where treason, malice, sickness, sore and smarte,
With many myschieues more his purpose let,
And he mean while (which might have spent it bet)
But loses time, or does the same mispend,
Such guerdons gives the wicked war at end.
40
I set aside to tell the restless toil,
The mangled corpse, the lamed limbs at last,
The shortened years by fret of fevers foil,
The smoothest skin with skabbes and skarres disgrast,
The frolic favor frounst and foul defast,
The broken sleeps, the dreadful dreams, the woe,
Which won with war and cannot from him go.
41
I list not write (for it becommes me not)
The secret wrath which God does kindle often,
To see the sucklings put unto the pot,
To hear their giltlesse blood send cries alofte,

And call for vengeance unto him, but soft
The Soldiers they commit those heinous acts,
Yet Kings and Captains answer for such factes.
42
What need me now at large for to rehearse,
The force of Fortune, when she list to frown?
Why should I here display in barreyne verse,
How realms are turned topsie turuie down,
How Kings and Keysars loose both claim and crown?
Whose haughty hearts to hent all honor haunte,
Till high mishaps their doughtiest deeds do daunte.
43
All these with mo my pen shall ouerpasse,
Since Haughty heart has fixed his fancy thus,
Let chance (says he) be fickell as it was,
Sit bonus (in re mala) Animus,
Nam omne solum viro forti Ius.
And fie (says he) for goods or filthy gain,
I gape for glory, all the rest is vain.
44
Vain is the rest, and that most vain of all,
A smouldring smoke which flies with every wind,
A tickell treasure, like a trendlyng ball,
A passing pleasure mocking but the mind,
A fickle fee as fancy well can find.
A summers fruit which long can never last,
But ripeneth soon, and rottes again as fast.
45
And tell me Haughty heart, confess a truth,
What man was aye so safe in Glories port?
But traynes of treason (oh the more the ruth)
Could undermine the Bulwarks of this forte,
And raze his ramparts down in sundry sort?
Search all thy books, and thou shall find therein,
That honor is more hard to hold than win:
46
Ask Julius Caesar Caesar.
if this tale be true,
The man that conquered all the world so wide,
Whose only word commanded all the crew,
Of Romayne Knights at many a time and tide,
Whose pomp was thought so great it could not glide.
At last with bodkins dubd and doust to death,
And all his glory banished with his breath.
47
Of malice more what should I make discource,
Than thy foul fall proud Pompey Pompey.
by thy name,
Whose swelling heart envying Caesar's force,
Did boil and burn in will and wicked flame,
By his down fall thy fonder clyme to frame,
Till thine own head bebathed with enmies tears,
Did end thy glory with thy youthful years.
48
Alas alas how many may we read,
Whom sickness sith has cut as green as grass?
Whom cold in Camps has chaungd as pale as lead?
Whose grease has molt all caffed as it was,
With charges given, with skarmouching in chasse?
Some lamed with gout (soon gotten in the field)
Some forced by flux all glory up to yield.
49
Of sudden sores, or clappes caught unaware,
By sword, by shot, by mischief, or by mine,
What need I more examples to declare,
Then Montacute Montacute Earl of Salisbury.
which died by doom divine?
For when he had all France defayct, in fine,
From lofty tower discovering of his foes,
A Cannons clappe did all his glory lose.
50
I had forgot (wherein I was to blame)
Of bold brave Bourbon somewhat for to say
That Haughty heart whom never Prince could tame,
Borbon.
Whom neither town could stop nor wall let way,
Nor king nor Keyser could his journey stay:
His Epitaph down set upon his Tomb
Declares no less: I leave it to your doom.
Borbons Epitaph.
Deuicto Gallo, Aucto Imperio, Pontifice obsesso, Italia superata,
Roma capta, Borbonij boc marmor bahet cineres.
51
Oh glorious title ringing out renown,
Oh Epitaph of honor and high hap,
Who reads the same as it is there set down,
Would think that Borbon sat in fortunes lap,
And could not fall by chance of after clappe:
Yet he that wrote this thundering flattering verse,
Left out one thing which I must needs rehearse.
52
For when he had his king by war foredone,
Enlargde the Empire and besiegde the Pope,
Taken Rome, and Italy had ouerronne,
Yet was he forced, always from laws to lope,
And trudge from trial so to escape the rope:
Yea more than that a banished man he served,
Least loved of them whose thanks he most deserved.
53
Lo lordings here a lesson for the nones,
Behold this glass and see yourselues therein,
This Epitaph was writ for worthy ones,
For Haughty hearts which honor hunt to win.
Beware beware, what broils you do begin.
For smiling luck has often times Finem duram,
And therefore think possic victoria Curam.
54
And yet if glory do your hearts inflame,
Or hot desire a haughty name to have,
Or if you thirst for high renown or fame,
To blase such brute as time might not deprave,
You leese the labor that you might well save:
For many a praise in that mean while you past,
Which (bet than war) might make your name to last.
55
As first (percase) you skipt Phylosophie,
That noble skill which does surmount the rest,
Whereto if you had (...) your memory,
Then bruntes of war had never bruzde your breast,
Yet had our name been blazed, and you been blessed:
Ask Aristotle Aristotle.
if I speak amiss,
Few Soldiers fame can greater be than his.
56
Next Rethorike, that hoonnie harmless art,
Which conquers more than war can well subdue,
You past it by, and therefore loose your part
Of glories great, which thereunto are due,
And might by right your names for aye renew:
Such glory lo did Cicero Cicero.
attain,
Which longer lasts, than other glories vain.
57
Of Physike speak for me king Auicen, Auicene.

Who more esteemde the mean to save himself,
Than lessons leude of proud ambitious men,
Which make debate for mucke and worldly pelf:
Yet was his glory never set on shelfe,
Nor never shall, whiles any world may stand,
Where men have mind to take good books in hand.
58
What should I stretch into Astronomy?
Or maruels make of Musikes sugared sound?
Or beat my brains about Geometry?
Or in Arithmetike of arts the ground?
Since evermore it is and has been found,
That who excels in any of the same,
Is sure to win an everlasting fame.
59
My meaning is no more but to declare,
That Haughty hearts do spend their time in vain,
Which follow wars, and bring themselves in snare,
Of sundry ylls, and many a pinching pain,
Whiles if they list to occupy their brain,
In other feats with lesser toil^ ygot,
They might have fame when as they have it not.
60
Well, Greedy mind Greedy mind
is of another mood,
That man was framde out of some other molde,
He follows wars for wealth and worldly good,
To fill his purse with grotes and glistring gold,
He hopes to buie that Haughty heart has sold:
He is as hot as any man at spoil,
But at a breach he keeps no such coil.
61
Alas good Greedy mind, and can thou find
No better trade, to fill thy boystrous baggs?
Is wit now went so wandering from thy mind?
Are all thy points so void of Reasons taggs?
Well so may thou come roysting home in rags,
And lose thy time as Haughty heart does eke,
Whiles like a dolt thou wealth in war do seek.
62
O bleareyde fool, are both thine eyes beblast?
Can thou not see? look up (what man?) God mend thee,
Look at these Lawyers how they purchase fast,
Mark well these Merchants (better mind God send thee)
See how the suits of silk that they would lend thee,
And many mo so fine in fashion stand,
Till at the last they pay for unthrifts land.
63
The Grasier gets by feeding fat his neat,
The Clothier coins by carding locks of wool,
The Butcher buildes by cutting out of meat,
The Tanners hydes do fill his budget full,
The Sheep master his old cast croanes can cull,
The Shoemaker can shift by shaping shoes,
The Crafty bawd can live by keeping stews.
64
The gorgeous Goldesmith getts the Devil and all,
The Haberdasher heapeth wealth by hattes,
The Barber lives by handling of his ball,
The Coupers house is heelde by hooping fattes,
The Roge rubbes out by poisoning of Rattes,
The Channel raker lives by his fee,
Yet count I him more worthy praise than thee.
65
To rake up rytches evermore by wrong,
To multiply by moving of myschiefe,
To live by spoil which seeldome lasts long,
To hoorde up heaps whiles others lack relief,
To win all wealth by playing of the thief,
Is not so good a gain I dare auowe,
As his that lives by toyling at the plowe.
66
And yet the drudge that delueth in the ground,
The poorest pesant and the homeliest hind,
The meanest man that ever yet was found,
To get a gain by any trade or kind,
Lives more at rest and has more ease of mind,
More sure to win, much lesser dread to leese,
Than any page that lives by Mars his fees.
67
Ne will I yet affray the doubtful hearts
Of such as seek for wealth in war to fall,
By thundering out the sundry sudden smartes
Which daily chance as fortune trilles the ball:
Suffiseth this to proo^e my theme withal,
That every bullet has a lighting place,
Though Greedy mind forseeth not that disgrace.
68
The mist of More would have, does bleare his eyes,
So is he armde with avarice always,
And as he couets more than may suffice,
So is he blind and dazzled day by day,
For whiles he ventures for a double pay,
He quite forgets the pay that pays for all,
Til Lead (for Gold) do glut his greedy gal.
69
Yea though he gain and cram his purse with crounes,
And therewith escape the foemens force in field,
He naught foreseeth what treasons dwells in Towns,
Ne what mishappes his ill got goods may yield:
For so may chance (and seen it is not seelde)
His own companions can contriue a mean,
To cut his throat and rinse his budgets clean.
70
But if he wist, or had the wit to know,
What dangers dwell, where might bears right adowne,
What inward griefs to quiet minds may grow
By greedy thyrst of riches or renown,
Where wrong of war often times erects the crown,
He would percase confess among the rest,
That Dulce bellum inexpertis est.
71
So that I say as erst I said before,
That even as Haughty heart does hunt in vain,
Which seeks to win most honor evermore,
By haunting wars: so can I see no gain,
(With calm content) to feed that others vain:
Wherefore my word is still (I change it not)
That War seems sweet to such as raunge it not.
72
Well then, let see what reason or what rule
Can Miser Miser.
move, to march among the rest:
I mean not Miser he that sterues his Mule
For lack of meat: no that were but a jest:
My Miser is as brave (sometimes) as best,
Where if he were a snudge to spare a groate,
Then Greedy mind and he might wear one coat.
73
But I by Miser mean the very man,
Which is enforst by chip of any chance,
To step aside and wander now and than,
Till lowering luck may pipe some other dance,
And in mean while yet hops to advance
His staylesse state, by sword, by spear, by shield,
Such bulwarks (lo) my Misers brain does build.
74
The forlorn hope, which have set up their rest
By rash expense, and know not how to live,
The busy brain that medleth with the best,
And gets dysgrace his rashness to repreeue,
The man that slew the wight that thought to theeue,
Such and such more which flee the Catchpols fist,
I count them Misers, though the Queen it wist.
75
And yet forsooth these love to live in war,
When (God he knows) they wot not what it means,
Where if they saw how much deceived they are,
Whiles they be brought into mine uncles beans,
And hoppe in hazard by their headie means:
Then would they learn and love to live at home,
Much rather yet than wide in wars to rome.
76
The unthrift Unthrifts.
he that selles a roode of land,
For Flemish sticks of Silks and such like wares,
Weenes yet at last to make a happy hand
By bloody war, and hopes to shredde such shares,
In goods ill got to counteruaile his cares,
That he may once recover his estate,
To royst again in spite of Catchpolles pate.
77
The restless tongue that tattleth still at large,
Praters.
Till just correction cause it to be still,
Is banished often, and sitts in Misers barge,
To bridle so the wandering of his will:
Yet when he hears a trumpet sounding thrill,
He follows fast, and to himself he says,
Now can I keep me out of Catchpols ways.
78
The bloody murdrer and the crafty thief,
Felons.
Which have by force or fraud done what offense,
To creep in corners, oh they think it leefe,
Though Miser there do pay for their expense:
But when they hear a pay proclaimde for pence,
Lo then they trudge, and gape to get such wealth,
As may discharge their heads from hangmans health.
79
Of these three sorts full many have I seen,
Some hate the streates, because the stones were hot,
Some shunde the Court (and though they lovde our Queen)
Yet in the Counselors ways they stumbled not,
Some might not drink of Justice Griffyns pot:
But all and some had rather fight with foes,
Than once to light within the lappes of those.
80
As for the first what need I much to wright?
Since now adays the Sun so hot does shine,
That few young bloods (unless it be by night)
Can bide the streates: no, narrow lanes be fine,
Where every fhade may serve them for a shrine:
But in Cheapside the Sun so scaldes the street,
That every pauing stone would partch their feet.
81
So of the second some what could I say,
How tattling tungs and busy biting pens,
Have fled from Court long since many a day,
And been full glad to lurk in Misers dens,
Some for their own speech, some for other men's,
Some for their books because they wrote too much,
Yea some for rymes, but sure I know none such.
82
And for the third, I cannot blame them I,
If they at bar have once held up their hand,
And smelt the smoke which might have made them fry,
Or learnde the leap out of their native land,
Me think if then their cause be rightly scande,
That they should more delight to follow drums,
Than bide at home to come in hangmans thumbes.
83
But holla yet, and lay a straw thereby,
For whiles they escape for one offense or twain,
They go so long to schole with fellonie,
And learn such lessons in the Soldiers train,
That all delays are dalied but in vain:
For commonly at their home come they pay,
The debt which hangman claimde erst many a day.
84
How much were better then, with contrite heart
First to repent, and then to make amends?
And therwithall to learn by troubles smarte,
What sweet repose the lawful life us lendes:
For when such plagues the mighty God us sendes,
They come as well to scourge offenses past,
As eke to teach a better trade at last.
85
And eke how much were better for the first,
To bear low sail, begin the world anewe,
And stand content to muster with the worst,
Till God convey them to some better crewe,
It better were to bydde all pride adieu,
And stoop betimes in hope to rise again,
Than still to strive against the stream in vain.
86
So were more meet for mealy mouthed men,
And bufle ^edlars with their Princes mates,
Writers and rimers for to turn their pen
In humble style unto the lofty states,
And eke with tongue attending at their gates,
In lowly wise their favor to beseech,
Than still to stand in stout and sturdie speech.
87
But mighty Mars has many men in store,
Which wait always to keep his kingdom up,
Of whom no one does show his service more,
Than lingering Hope which still does bear his cup,
And flatteringly lendes every man a suppe.
Which haunts his court or in his progress pass,
Hope brings the boll whereon they all must quasse.
88
The Ambitious Prince does hope to conquer all,
The Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Knights hope to be kings,
The Prelates hope to pushe for Popish pall,
Hope is cupbearer to war.
The Lawyers hope to purchase wondrous things,
The Merchaunts hope for no less reckenings,
The peasant hopes to get a Ferme at least,
All men are guestes where Hope does hold the feast.
89
Amongst the rest poor Miser is so dry,
And thristeth so to taste of some good change
That he in haste to Hope runs by and by.
And drinks so deep (although the taste be strange,)
That madding mood does make his wits to raunge,
And he runs on were Hope does lead the way,
Most commonly (God knows) to his decay.
90
So that for company he sings the same,
Which Haughty heart and Greedy mind do sing
He says that Bellum breeds grief of game:
And though at first it seem a pleasant thing
At last (says he) it strikes with a sting,
And leaves a skarre although the wound be heald,
Which gives disgrace and cannot be conceald.
91
To prove this true how many in my days,
(And I for one) might be rehearced here,
Who after proof of diverse wandering ways,
Have been constreynd to sit with sorry cheer,
Close in a corner fumbled up for fear?
Till from such dens, drums dubbe has called the^ forth,
To change their chance for lottes (often) little worth.
92
But here (me thinks) I hear some carping tongue,
That barks a pace and killes me with his cry,
One thinks he says that all this gear goes wrong,
When works of war are wrotte by such as I,
Me thinks I hear him still this text apply,
That evil may those presume to teach a trade,
Which nay themselves in Scholars room did wade.
93
And for because my self confessed have,
That (more than might by writ expressed be)
I may not seem above my skill to brave,
Since yet mine eyes the wars did never see:
Therefore (say some) how fond a fool is he,
That takes in hand to write of worthy war,
Which never yet has come in any jar?
94
No jar (good sir) yes yes and many iarres,
For though my pen of courtesy did put,
A difference twixt broils and bloody wars,
Yet have I shot at master Bellums butte,
And thrown his ball although I touched no tutte:
I have percase as deeply dealt the dole,
As he that hit the mark and gat the gole.
95
For I have seen full many a Flushyng fraye, Flushyng frayes and fleesing of
Flaunders.

And fleest in Flaunders eke among the rest,
The brag of Bruges, where was I that day?
Before the walls good sir as brave as best,
And though I marched all armde withouten rest,
From Aerdenburgh and back again that night,
Yet mad were he that would have made me knight.
96
So was I one forsooth that kept the town,
Of Aerdenburgh Aerdenburgh.
(withouten any walls)
From all the force that could be dressed down,
By Alba Duke for all his cries and calls,
A high exployte. We held the Flemings thralles,
Seven days and more without or bragges or blows,
For all that while we never herd of foes.
97
I was again in trench before Tergoes, Tergoes.

(I dare not say in siege for both mine ears)
For look as often as ever Hell brake lose,
I mean as often as the Spainish pears,
Made salie forth (I speak this to my pheares)
It was no more but which Cock for a groate,
Such troops we were to keep them up in coat.
98
Yet surely this withouten brag or boast,
Our English bloudes did there full many a deed,
Which may be Chronicled in every coaste,
For bold attempts, and well it was agreed,
That had their heads been ruled by wary heed,
Some other feate had been attempted then,
To show their force like worthy English men.
99
Since that siege raysde I romed have about,
In Zeeland, Holland, Waterland, and all,
By sea, by land, by air, and all throughout,
As leaping lottes, and chance did seem to call,
Now here, now there, as fortune trilde the ball,
Where good The Prince of Orange his name is Guillam of Nassau.
Guyllam of Nassau badde me be,
There needed I none other guide but he.
100
Percase sometimes S. Gyptians pilgrymage,
Did carry me a month (yea sometimes more)
To brake the Bowres, and rack them in a rage,
Because they had no better cheer in store,
Beef, Mutton, Capon, Plouer, Pigeons, Bore,
All this was naught, and for no Soldiers toothe,
Were these no iarres? (speak now Sir) yes forsoothe.
101
And by my troth to speak even as it is,
Such prankes were playde by Soldiers daily there,
And though my self did not therein amiss,
(As God he knows and men can witness bear,)
Yet since I had a charge, I am not clear,
For seldom climes that Captain to renown,

Whose Soldiers faults so pluck his honor down.
102
Well let that pass I was in rolling trench,
At Ramykins, Ramykins.
where little shot was spent,
For gold and groates their matches still did quench,
Which kept the Forte, and forth at last they went,
So pinde for hunger (almost ten days pent)
That men could see no wrincles in their faces,
Their powder packt in caves and privy places.
103
Next that I serude by night and eke by day,
By Sea, by land, at every time and tide,
Against A Coronel of the kings side.
Mountdragon whiles he did assaie,
To land his men along the salt sea side,
For well he wist that Ramykins went wide,
And therefore sought with victual to supply,
Poor Myddleburgh which then in suddes did lie.
104
And there I saw full many a bold attempt,
By seely souls best executed aye,
And brauest bragges (the foemens force to tempt)
Accomplished but coldely many a day,
The Soldier charge, the leader lope away,
The willing drum a lusty march to sound,
Whiles rank retyrers gave their enemies ground.
105
Again at Seathe Soldier forward still,
When Mariners had little lust to fight,
And whiles we stay twixt faynte and forward will.
Our enemies prepare themselves to flight,
They hoyste up sail (o weary word to wrihgt)
They hoyste up sail that lack both stream and winds,
And we stand still so forced by froward minds.
106
O victory: (whom Haughty hearts do hunte)
O spoil and pray (which greedy minds desire)
O golden heaps (for whom these Misers wont
To follow Hope which settes all hearts on fire)
O gain, O gold, who list to you aspyre,
And glory eke, by bold attempts to win,
There was a day to take your prisoners in.
107
The ships retire with riches full yfraught,
The Soldiers march (mean while) into the town,
The tide skarce good, the wind stark staring naught,
The haste so hoate that (ear they sink the sown)
They came on ground, and strike all sails adowne:
While we (ay me) by backward sailors led,
Take up the worst when all the best are fled.
108
Such triu^phs chance where such Lieutena^ts rule,
Where will commaundes when skill is out of town,
Where boldest bloudes are forced to recule,
By Simme the boteswayne when he list to frown,
Where Captains crouch, and fishers wear the Crown.
Such happes which happen in such hapless wars,
Make me to term them broils and beastly iarres.
109
And in these broils (a beastly broyle to write,)
My Colonel, and I fell at debate,
So that I left both charge and office quite,
A Captains charge and eke a Martials state,
Whereby I proved (perhaps though all to late)
How soon they fall which lean to rotten bows,
Such faith find they, that trust to some men's vows.
110
My heart was high, I could not seem to serve,
In regiment where no good rules remain,
Where officers and such as well deserve,
Shall be abusde by every page and swayne,
Where discipline shall be but deemed vain,
Where blocks are stridde by stumblers at a straw,
And where self will must stand for martial law.
111
These things (with mo) I could not seem to bear,
And thereupon I cracked my staff in two,
Yet stayde I still though out of pay I were,
And learn to live as private Soldiers do,
I lived yet, by God and lacked too:
Till at the last when Beauois fled amayne,
Our camp removde to streine An Island so called which was sore spoiled by our
countrymen.
the land van Strain.
112
When A Coronel of the kings side which was governor of Middelburgh next
before Mou^tdragon.
Beauois fled, Mountdragon came to town,
And like a Soldier Myddelburgh he kept,
But courage now was coldly come adowne,
On either side: and quietly they slept,
So that my self from Zeland lightly lept,
Withfull intent to taste our English ale,
Yet first I meant to tell the Prince my tale.
113
For though the wars waxt cold in every place,
And small experience was there to be seen,
Yet thought I not to part in such disgrace,
Although I longed much to see our Queen:
For he that once a hired man has been,
Must take his Masters leave before he go,
Unless he mean to make his friend his foe.
114
Then went I straight to A town in Holland.
Delfe, a pleasant town,
Unto that Prince, whose passing virtues shine,
And unto him I came on knees adowne,
Beseeching that his excellence in fine,
Would grant me leave to see this country mine:
Not that I weary was in wars to serve,
Nor that I lackt what so I did deserve.
115
But for I found some contecke and debate,
In regiment where I was wont to rule,
And for I found the stay of their estate,
Was forced now in towns for to recule,
I craved leave no longer but till Christmas.
Yewle,
And promised then to come again Sans fail,
To spend my blood where it might him avail.
116
The noble Prince gave grant to my request,
And made me passeporte signed with his seal,
But when I was with baggs and baggage pressed,
The Prince began to ring another peale,
And sent for me, (desiring for my weal)
That I would stay a day or two, to see,
What was the cause he sent again for me.
117
My Colonel was now come to the Court,
With whom the Prince had many things to treat,
And for he hoapte, in good and godly sort,
Tweene him and me to work a friendly feate,
He like a gracious Prince his brains did beat,
To set accord between us if he might,
Such pains he took to bring the wrong to right.
118
O noble Prince, there are too few like thee,
If Virtue wake, she watches in thy will,
If Justice live, then surely thou art he,
If Grace do grow, it grows with thee still,
O worthy Prince would God I had the skill,
To write thy worth that men thereby might see,
How much they err that speak amiss of thee.
119
The simple Sottes do coumpt thee simple too,
Whose like for wit our age has seldom bredde,
The railing roges mistrust thou dare not do,
As Hector did for whom the Grecians fled,
Although thou yet werte never seen to dredde,
The slandrous tongues do say thou drinkst to much,
When God he knows thy custom is not such.
120
But why do I in worthless verse devise,
To write his praise that does excel so far?
He heard our greeues himself in gracious wise,
And mildly meant to join our angry jar,
He meant to make that we began to mar:
But wicked wrath had some so far enraged,
As by no means their malice could be swaged.
121
In this mean while the Spainiards came so near
That Delfe was girte with siege on every side,
And though men might take shippyng every where,
And so be gone at any time or tide,
Yet truth to tell (I speak it for no pride)
I could not leave that Prince in such distress,
Which cared for me and yet the cause much less.
122
But see mishappe how craftily it creepes,
Whiles fawning fortune fleareth full in face,
My heavy heart within my belly weeps,
To reckon here a drop of dark disgrace,
Which fell upon my pleasant plight apace,
And brought a pack of doubts and dumps to pass,
Whiles I with Prince in love and favor was.
123
A worthy dame whose praise my pen shall write
(My sword shall eke her honor still defend)
A loving letter to me did endight,
And from the Camp the same to me did send,
I mean from Camp where foes their force did bend:
She sent a brief unto me by her maid,
Which at the gates of Delfe was stoutely stayde.
124
This letter taken, I was mistrusted much,
And thought a man that were not for to trust,
The fruit of fancy.
The Burghers straight began to bear me grutche,
And cast a snare to make my neck be trust,
For when they had this letter well discust:
They sent it me by her that brought it so,
To try if I would keep it close or no.
125
I read the lines, and knowing whence they came,
My harmless heart began to pant apace,
Well to be plain, I thought that never Dame,
Should make me deal in any doubtful case,
Or do the thing might make me hide my face:
So that unto the Prince I went forthwith,
And showed to him of all this pack the pith.
126
The thing God knows was of no great emport,
Some freendly lines the virtuous Lady wrote
To me her friend: and for my safe passeporte,
The Camepomaster Valdes his hand was got,
And seal therewith, that I might safely trotte,
The pleasauntest village (as I think) that is in Europe.
Unto the Haghe a stately pleasant place,
Whereas remaynd this worthy woman's grace.
127
And here I set in open verse to show,
The whole effect wherefore this work was wrought,
She had of mine (whereof few folks did know)
A counterfayte, a thing to me dear bought,
Which thing to have I many time had sought
And when she knew how much I did esteem it
She vowde that none but I should thence redeem it.
128
Lo here the cause of all this secret slight,
I swear by Jove that nothing else was meant,
The noble Prince (who saw that no deceit,
Was practiced) gave trust to mine intent:
And leave to write from whence the same was sent,
But still the Bowgers (Burghers should I say)
Encreast their doubts and watched me day by day.
129
At every port it was (forsooth) forbidden.
be last,
That I the Green captain.
(die groene Hopman) might not go out,
But when their foes came skirmishing full fast,
Then with the rest the Green knight for them fought,
Then might he go without mistrust or doubt:
O drunken plompes, I plain without cause why,
For all cards told there was no fool but I.
130
I was the fool to fight in your defense.
Which know no freende, nor yet your selves full well,
Yet thus you see how pay proclaymde for pence,
Pulles needy souls in stead of heaven to hell,
And makes men hope to bear away the bell.
Whereas they hang in ropes that never rotte,
Yet war seems sweet to such as know it not.
131
Well thus I dwelt in Delfe a winters tide,
In Delfe (I say) without one penny pay:
My men and I did cold and hunger bide,
To show our truth, and yet was never day,
Wherein the Spanyard came to make us play,
But that the Green knight was amongst the rest,
Like a proverb.
John Greyes bird that ventred with the best.
132
At last the Prince to Zeland came himself,
To hunger Middleburgh, or make it yield,
And I that never yet was set on shelf,
When any sayld, or wind, or waves could weeld,
Went after him to show my self in field.
The self same man which erst I vowed to be,
A trusty man to such a Prince as he.
133
The force of Flaunders, Brabant, Geldres, Fryze,
Henault, Artoys, Lyegeland, and Luxembrough,
Were all ybent, to bring in new supplies
To Myddleburgb: and little all enough,
For why the protestau^ts
Gaeulx would neither bend nor bough.
But one of force must break and come to naught,
All The Island wherein Flushing does stand.
Walkers theirs, or Flushyng dearly bought.
134
There once again I served upon seas,
And for to tell the cause and how it fell,
It did one day the Prince (my chieftayne) please,
To ask me thus: Gascoigne (quoth he) you dwell
Amongst us still: and thereby seems well,
That to our side you bear a faithful heart,
For else long since we should have seen you starte.
135
But are (said he) your Soldiers by your side?
O Prince (quoth I) full many days be past,
Since that my charge did with my Cron^ll glyde:
Yet bide I here, and mean to be with last:
And for full proof that this is not a blast
Of glorious talk: I crave some fisher boat,
To show my force among this furious floate.
136
The Prince began like my faith and forward will,
Rigged up and fully furnished.
Equyppt a Hoye and set her under sail,
Wherein I served according to my skill,
My mind was such, my cunning could not quayle,
Withouten brag of those that did assail
The foemens fleet which came in good array,
I put my self in foremost rank always.
137
Three days we fought, as long as water served,
And came to ancor neyghbourlike yfeere,
The Prince himself to see who best deserved,
Stood every day attending on the peer,
And might behold what bark went foremost there:
Ill heart had he that would not stoutely fight,
When as his Prince is present still in sight.
138
At last our foes had tidings over land,
That near to a Town.
Bergh their fellows went to wrack,
On a River.
Scheld they met by Rymerswaell a band
Of Lusty gallants.
Edell bloets, who put their force abacke,
The admiral of flushing.
Jews de Boyzett did put them there to sack,
And lost an eye, because he would resemble
Julian de Romero.
Dan Iuliane, whom (there) he made to tremble.
139
When this was known The castellane of Anwerp.
Sancio de Auila,
Who had the charge of those that fought with us,
Went up the A River.
Hont and took the ready way,
To Anwerpe town: leaving in danger thus,
Poor Myddelburgh which now waxt dolorous,
To see all hope of succor shrink away,
Whiles they lackt bread and had done many a day.
140
And when Mountdragon might no more endure,
He came to talk and rendered all at last,
With whom I was within the City sure,
Before he went, and on his promise past,
Such trust I had to think his faith was fast:
I dinde, and supt, and lay within the town,
A day before he was from thence ybowne.
141
Thus Middleburgh, Armew, and all the rest,
Of Walkers I Will became the Princes pray,
Who gave to me because I was so pressed,
At such a pinche, and on a dismal day,
Three hundredth gilderns good above my pay.
And bad me bide till his ability,
Might better gwerdon my fidelity.
142
I will not lie, these Gilderns pleased me well,
And much the more because they came vncraued,
Though not vnneeded as my fortune fell,
But yet thereby my credit still was saved,
My skores were paid, and with the best I braued,
Till (lo) at last, an English new relief,
Came over seas, and Chester was their chief.
143
Of these the Prince persuaded me to take,
A band in charge with Coronels consent,
At whose requests I there did undertake,
To make mine ensign once again full bent,
And sooth to say, it was my full intent,
To loose the sadle or the horse to win,
Such hapless hope the Prince had brought me in.
144
Soldiers behold and Captains mark it well,
Hope is the herbenger of mishappe.
How hope is harbenger of all mishappe,
Some hope in honor for to bear the bell.
Some hope for gain and venture many a clappe,
Some hope for trust and light in treasons lap.
Hope leads the way our lodging to prepare,
Where high mishap (often) keeps an Inn of care.
145
I hoapt to show such force against our foes,
That those of Delf might see how true I was,
I hopt in deed for to be one of those
Whom fame should follow, where my feet should pass,
I hoapt for gaynes and found great loss alas:
I hoapt to win a worthy Soldiers name,
And light on luck which brought me still to blame.
146
In Valkenburgh (a fort but new begone)
With others more I was ordeynde to be,
And far beforne the work were half way done,
Our foes set forth our sorry seat to see,
They came in time, but cursed time for me,
They came before the courtine raised were,
One only foot above the trenches there.
147
What should we do, four ensigns lately pressed,
Five hundredth men were all the bulk we bare,
Our enemies three thousand at the least,
And so much more they might always prepare:
But that most was, the truth for to declare,
We had no store of powder, nor of pence,
Nor meat to eat, nor mean to make defense.
148
Here some may say that we were much to blame,
Which would presume in such a place to bide,
And not foresee (how ever went the game)
Of meat and shot our soldiers to provide:
Who so do say have reason on their side,
Yet proves it still (though ours may be the blot)
That war seems sweet to such as know it not.
149
For had our forte been fully fortified,
Two thousand men had been but few enough,
To man it once, and had the truth been tried,
We could not see by any reason how,
The Prince could send us any succor now,
Which was constreynd in towns himself to shield,
And had no power to show his force in field.
150
Herewith we had nor powder packt in store,
Nor flesh, nor fish, in poudring tubbes yput,
Nor meal, nor malt, nor mean (what would you more?)
To get such gear if once we should be shut.
And God he knows, the English Soldiers gut,
Must have his fill of victualles once a day,
Or else he will but homely earne his pay.
151
To scuse ourselves, and Coronell withal,
We did foretell the Prince of all these needs,
Who promised always to be our wall,
And badde us trust as truly as our creedes,
That all good words should be performd with deeds,
And that before our foes could come so near,
He would both send us men and merry cheer.
152
Yea Robyn Hoode, our foes came down apace,
And first they chargde another Forte likewise,
Alphen I mean, which was a stronger place,
And yet to weak to keep in warlike wise:
Five other bands of English footmen.
Fanteries,
Were therein set for to defend the same,
And them they chargde for to begin the game.
153
This Forte fro ours was distant ten good miles,
I mean such miles as English measure makes,
Between us both stood Leyden town therewhiles,
Which every day with fair words undertakes,
To feed us fat and cramme us up with cakes:
It made us hope it would supply our need,
For we (to it) two Bulwarks were in deed.
154
But when it came unto the very pinche,
Leyden farewell, we might for Leyden sterue,
I like him well that promises an inche,
And pays an ell, but what may he deserve
That flatters much and can no faith observe?
And old said saw, that fair words make fools feign,

Which proverb true we proved to our pain.
155
A conference among our selves we called,
Of Officers and Captains all yfeere,
For truth (to tell) the Soldiers were apald,
And when we asked, now mates what merry cheer?
Their answer was: it is no bidyng here.
So that perforce we must from thence be gone,
Unless we meant to keep the place alone.
156
Herewith we thought that if in time we went,
Before all streights were stopped and taken up,
We might (perhaps) our enemies prevent,
And teach them eke to taste of sorrows cup:
At Maesland Sluyse, we hoped for to suppe,
A place whereas we might good service do,
To keep them out which took it after too.
157
Whiles thus we talk, a messenger behold,
From Alphen came, and told us heavy news,
Captains (quoth he) hereof you may be bold,
Not one poor soul of all your fellows crewes,
Can escape alive, they have no choice to choose:
They sent me thus to bid you shifte in time,
Else look (like them) to stick in Spainish lime.
158
This tale once told, none other speech preuaylde,
But pack and trudge, al leisure was to long,
To mende the mart, our watch (which never faylde)
Descried our foes which marched all along,
And toward us began in have to throng,
So that before our last could pass the port,
The foremost foes were now within the Forte.
159
I promest once and did perform it too,
To bide therein as long as any would,
What booted that? or what could Captains do,
When common sort would tarry for no gould?
To speak a troth, the good did what they could,
To keep the badde in ranks and good array,
But labor lost to hold that will away.
160
It needelesse were to tell what deeds were done,
Nor who did best, nor who did worst that day,
Nor who made head, nor who began to run,
Nor in retreat what chief was last always,
But Soldier like we held our enemies play:
And every Captain straue to do his best,
To stay his own and so to stay the rest.
161
In this retire three English miles we trodde,
With face to foes and shot as thick as hayle,
Of whose choice men full fifty souls and odd,
We laid on ground, this is withouten fail,
Yet of our own, we lost but three by tale:
Our foes themselves confessed they bought full dear,
The hot pursuit which they attempted there.
162
Thus came we late at last to Leyden walls,
Too late, too soon, and so may we well say,
For notwithstanding all our cries and calls,
They shut their gates and turned their ears away:
In fine they did forsake us every way,
And badde us shifte to save ourselves apace,
For unto them were fond to trust for grace.
163
They neither gave us meat to feed upon,
Nor drink, nor powder, pickax, tool nor spade,
So might we sterue, like misers woe begone,
And fend our foes, with blows of English blade,
For shot was shronke, and shift could none be made:
Yea more than this, we stood in open field,
Without defense from shot our selves to shield.
164
This thus well weyed, when weary night was past,
And day began peep, we heard the Spainish drommes,
Which stroke a march about us round to cast,
And forth withal their Ensigns quickly co^mes,
At sight whereof, our Soldiers bitte their tho^mes:
For well they wilt it was no boot to fly,
And biding there, there was no boot but die.
165
So that we sent a drum to summone talk,
And came to Parlee middle way between,
Monsieur de Licques, and Mario did walk,
From foemens side, and from our side were seen,
My self, that match for Mario might been:
And Captain Sheffeld borne of noble race,
To match de Licques, which there was chief in place.
166
Thus met we talked, and stood upon our toes,
With great demaundes whom little might content,
We craved not only freedom from our foes,
But shippyng eke with sails and all full bent,
To come again from whence we first were went:
I mean to come, into our English coast,
Which soil was sure, and might content us most.
167
An old said saw, (and often seen) that whereas,
Thou comste to crave, and doubtst for to obtain,
Iniquum pete (then) vt aequum feras,
This had I heard, and sure I was full feign,
To prove what profit we thereby might gain:
But at the last when time was stolen away,
We were full glad to play another play.
168
We rendered then with safety for our lives,
Our Ensigns splayed, and manyging our arms,
With further faith, that from all kind of gives,
Our soldiers should remain withouten harms:
And sooth to say, these were no false allarmes,
For why? they were within twelve days discharged,
And sent away from prison quite enlarged.
169
They were sent home, and we remained still,
In prison pent, but yet right gently used,
To take our lives, it was not Licques will,
(That noble blood, which never man abused,)
Nor ever yet was for his faith accused,
Would God I had the skill to write his praise,
Which lent me comfort in my doleful days.
170
We bode behind, four months or little less,
But whereupon that God he knows not I,
Yet if I might be bold to give a guess,
Then would I say it was for to epsy,
What ransom we would pay contentedly:
Or else to know how much we were esteemde,
In England here, and for what men ydeemde.
171
How so it were, at last we were dispatched,
And home we came as children come from school,
As glad, as fish which were but lately caught,
And straight again were cast into the poole:
For by my fay I coumpt him but a fool,
Which would not rather poorly live at large,
Than rest in prison fed with costly charge.
172
Now have I told a tedious tale in rhyme,
Of my mishappes, and what ill luck I had,
Yet some may say, that all to loud I chime,
Since that in wars my fortune was not badde,
And many a man in prison would be glad,
To fare no worse, and lodge no worse than we,
And eke at last to escape and go so free.
173
I must confess that both we were well used,
And promise kept according to contract,
And that nor we, nor Soldiers were abused,
No rigor showed, nor lovely dealing lackt:
I must confess that we were never rackt,
Nor forced to do, nor speak against our will,
And yet I coumpt it froward fortune still.
174
A truth it is (since wars are led by chance,
And none so stout but that sometimes may fall,)
No man on earth his honor might advance,
To render better (if he once were thrall)
Why who could wish more comfort at his call,
Than for to yield with ensign full displayde,
And all arms borne in warlike wise for aid?
175
Or who could wish dispatche with greater speed,
Than soldiers had which tarried so few days?
Or who could wish, more succor at his need,
Than used was to them at all assayes?
Bread, meat, and drink, yea wagons in their ways,
To ease the sick and hurt which could not go,
All taken in wars, are seldom used so.
176
Or who could wish (to ease his captive days)
More liberty than on his faith to rest?
To eat and drink at Barons board always,
To lie on down, to banquet with the best,
To have all things, at every just request,
To borowe coin, when any seemde to lack,
To have his own, away with him to pack?
177
All this and more I must confess we had,
God save (say I) our noble Queen therefore,
Hinc illae lachrimae, there lay the padde,
Which made the straw suspected be the more,
For trust me true, they coueted full sore,
To keep our Queen and country fast their friends,
Till all their wars might grow to luckie ends.
178
But were that once to happy end ybrought,
And all stray sheep come home again to fold,

Then look to door: and think the cat is naught,
Although she let the mouse from out her hold:
Believe me now, me thinks I dare be bold,
To think that if they once were friends again,
We might soon sell, all freendship found in Spain.
179
Well these are words and far beyond my reach,
Yet by the way receive them well in worth,
And by the way, let never Licques appeach
My railing pen, for though my mind abhorrth,
All Spainish prankes: yet must I thunder forth
His worthy praise, who held his faith unstained,
And evermore to us a friend remained.
180
Why said I then, that war is full of woes?
Or sour of taste, to them that know it best?
Who so demaundes, I will my mind disclose,
And then judge you the burdens of my breast:
Mark well my words and you shall find him blessed,
That medleth least with wars in any wise,
But quiet lives, and all debate defies.
181
For though we did with truth and honor yield,
Yet yielding is always a great disgrace,
And though we made a brave retire in field,
Yet who retyres, does always yield his place:
And though we never did our selves embase,
But were always at Barons table fed,
Yet better were at home with Barlie bread.
182
I leave to tell what loss we did sustain,
In pens, in pay, in wares, and ready wealth,
Since all such trash may gotten be again,
Or wasted well at home by privy stelth:
Small loss has he which all his living selth,
To save his life, when other help is none,
Cast up the saddle when the horse is gone.
183
But what I said, I say and swear again,
For first we were in Hollande sore suspect,
The states did think, that with some filthy gain
The Spainish peers us Captains had infect,
They thought we meant our ensigns to erect
In Kings behalf: and eke the common sort,
Thought privy pay had made us leave our forte.
184
Again, the Kings men (only Licques except,
And good A coronell of the kings side.
Verdugo) thought we were too well,
And that we were but playde with in respect,
When as their men in great distress did dwell:
So that with hate their burning hearts did swell,
And bad hang up or drown us euerychone,
These bones we had always to byte upon.
185
This sause we had unto our costly fare,
And every day we threatened were in deed,
So that on both sides we must bide the care,
And be mistrust of every wicked deed,
And be reuilde, and must our selves yet feed
With lingering Hope, to get away at last,
That self same Hope which tied us there so fast.
186
To make up all, our own men playde their part,
And rang a peale to make us more mystrust,
For when they should away from us depart,
And saw us hyde, they thought we stayed for lust,
And sent them so in secret to be trust:
They thought and said, thus have our Captains sold
Us silly souls, for groates and glistring gold.
187
Yea, when they were to England safely brought,
Yet talkte they still even as they did before:
For slaundrous tongues, if once they tattle ought,
With mickell pain will change their wicked lore:
It has been proved full many days of yore,
That he which once in slander takes delight,
Will seldom frame his words to sound aright.
188
Strange tale to tell, we that had set them free,
And set ourselves on sands for their expense,
We that remaynd in danger of the tree,
When they were safe, we that were their defense,
With arms, with cost, with deeds, with eloquence:
We that saved such, as knew not where to fly,
Were now by them accusde of treachery.
189
These fruits (I say) in wicked wars I found,
Which make me write much more than else I would,
For loss of life, or dread of deadly wound,
Shall never make me blame it though I could,
Since death does dwell on every kind of mould:
And who in war has caught a fatal clappe,
Might chance at home to have no better hap.
190
So loss of goods shall never trouble me,
Since God which gives can take when pleases him,
But loss of fame or slaundred so to be,
That makes my wits to break above their brimme,
And frettes my heart, and lames me every limme:
For Noble minds their honor more esteem,
Than worldly wights, or wealth, or life can deem.
191
And yet in wars, such graffes of grudge do grow,
Such lewdness lurkes, such malice makes mischief,
Such envy boyles, such falsehood fire does blow,
That Bounty burns, and truth is called thief,

And good deserts are brought into such brief,
That Saunder snuff which swears the matter out,
Brings oftentimes the noblest names in doubt.
192
Then whether I be one of Haughty heart,
Or Greedy mind, or Miser in decay,
I said and say that for mine own poor part,
I may confess that Bellum every way,
Is Sweet: but how? (bear well my words away)
Forsooth, to such as never did it try,
This is my Theme I cannot change it I.
Peroratio.
193
O noble Queen, whose high foresight prouides,
That wast of war, your realms does not destroy,
But pleasant peace, and quiet concord glydes,
In every coast, to drive out dark anoye,
O virtuous dame, I say Pardonez moy,
That I presume in worthless verse to warn,
Thambitious Prince, Prince.
his duties to descerne.
194
Your skillful mind (O Queen without compare)
Can soon conceive that cause constraynes me so,
Since wicked wars have bredde such cruel care,
In Flaunders, France, in Spain and many mo,
Which reap thereby none other worth but woe:
Whiles you (mean while) enjoy the fruits of peace,
Still praising God, whose bounties never cease.
195
If you (my liege) vouchsafe in gracious wise,
To pardon that which passes from my Muse,
Then care I not what other kings devise,
In wars defense: nor though they me accuse,
And say that I their bloody deeds abuse:
Your only grace my sovereign Lady be,
Let other Kings think what they list of me.
196
And you my Lords to whom I duties owe,
And bear such love as best becomes me,
Nobility.
First Earl of Bedford, whom I right well know,
To honor arms: and worthy VVarwyke he,
In whose good grace I covet sore to be:
Then Leyster next, ( Sussex not set behind)
And worthy Essex men of noble mind.
197
Young Oxenford as toward as the best,
Northumberland, and Ormount worthy praise,
Lyncolne, Kildare, and VVorster with the rest
Of noble Earls, which hold your happy days
In high renown, as men of war always:
With others mo to many to recite,
Vouchsafe my Lords to pardone that I write.
198
Of Wilton Gray (to whom these rimes I wrote)
With all the Barons hold of English soil,
I humbly crave that it may be forgotte,
Although my Muze have seemde to keep a coil
With mighty men which put the weak to foil:
I meant not you since, by your deeds appears,
You rule with right, like wise and worthy pears.
199
Prelacie.
Right reverend, of Canterbury chief,
London, and Lincoln, Bishops by your name,
Good Drove of Pawles (which lend a great relief,
To naked need) and all the rest of fame,
In pastors place: with whom I were too blame,
If Neuynsone my master were not plaste,
Since by his help I learning first embraste.
200
Bear with my verse, and think I meant not you,
Whereas I spoke of pride in Prelacie,
But let it bide even there where first it grew,
Till God vouchsafe to quench hypocrisy,
Which by pretense to punish heresy,
Does conquer realms, and common concords break,
You know my mind, I need no playner speak.
201
You gemmes of Justice, chief of either bench,
And he that keeps her Majesty's great seal,
Good Queens attorney, he whose pitties quench Lawyers.

(I say sometimes) the rigor of his zeal,
When misery, to mercy must apeale,
And Sergeant Louelace, many ways my friend,
As I have found (yet let me there not end,)
203
But hold my tale to Rugge and all the rest
Of good Grayes Inn, where honest Yeluerton,
And I Per se sometimes yfeere did rest,
When amity first in our breasts begone,
Which shall endure as long as any Sun
May shine on earth, or water swim in Seas,
Let not my verse your lawlike minds displease,
203
For well wot you. our master Christ himself,
Which had but twelve Apostles in his train,
Had Judas yet, which sold for worldly pelf
Our Savior: this text is true and plain:
And where so many Lawyers do remain,
There may be some although that you be none,
Which breed debate and love to cast a bone.
204
In Chancerie I need no man suspect,
Since conscience, in that court bears sway,
Yet in the same I may no ways neglect,
Nor worthy Powle, nor Cordell by the way,
Of whom that one, is of my keep the keye,
That other once did lend me such advise,
As was both sound and good, had I been wise.
205
He told me once, (I bear it well in mind,
And shall it nay forget whiles life does last)
That hard it is a noble name to find,
In such attempts as then in service past:
Believe me now I found his words no blast,
Wherefore I pray both him and his compeere,
To bear with that which I have written here.
206
And as for Merchants, though I find the most
Hard hearted men and compting cunningly,
Yet Albany shall think I do not boast
Merchaunts.
In railing wise: for sure his courtesy,
Constreynes me now to praise him worthily.
And gentle Row with Luntley make me say,
That many Merchaunts bear even what they may.
207
But to conclude, I mean no more but thus,
In all estates some one may tread awrye,
And he that list my verses to discuss,
Shall see I meant no more, but modestly
To warn the wise, that they such faults do fly
As put down peace by couine or debate,
Since war and strife bring woe to every state.
FINIS.
L'enuoie.
GO little Book, God grant thou none offend,
For so meant he which sought to set thee forth,
And when thou come where Soldiers seem to wend,
Submit thy self as writ but little worth:
Confess withal, that thou have been too bold,
To speak so plain of Haughty hearts in place,
And say that he which wrote thee could have told
Full many a tale, of bloods that were not base:
He could have writ Dan Dudleyes noble deeds,
Whose like has since been hard on earth to find,
Although his Virtue shows it self in Seeds,
Which freade his tracks, and come not far behind.
He might have sung of Gray the worthy praise,
Whose offspring holds the honor of his sire:
He could declare what Wallop was always,
What Awdelie seemde, what Randell did require.
He could say what deserts in Drewrie be,
In Read, in Bryckwell, and a meany more:
But bashfulnesse did make him blush, least he
Should but eclypse their fames by singing so.
Suffiseth this, that still he honors those
Which wade in wars to get a worthy name,
And least esteems the greedy snudge, which goes
To gain good gold, without respect of fame.
And for the third sort, those that in dystresse
Do drive their days, till drums do draw them out,
He coumpts him self to be nor more nor less,
But even the same: for sure withouten doubt,
If drums once sound a lusty martch in deed,
Then farewell books, for he will trudge with speed.
FINIS.
Tam Marti quam Mercurio.
Corected, perfected, and finished.
WHo soever is desirous to read this proposicion more at large and cunningly
handled, let him but peruse the Proverb or adage it self in the first
Centurian of the fourth Chyllyade of that famous Clarke Erasmus Roterodamus:
the which is there also Entitled: Dulce bellum inexpertis.

HERBS.
Tam Marti quam Mercurio.
In this division are contained: The Comedy called Supposes. Folio. 1. The
Tragedy called Iocasta. Fol. 73 The fruit of Reconciliation. 129 The force of
true Friendship. 131 The force of Love in Strangers. 132 The praise of brown
beauty. 134 The Partrich and the Merlyn. 135 The virtue of Ver. 136 The
complainte of a Dame in absence. 138 The praise of a Countess. 139 The
affection of a lover. 140 The complainte of a Dame suspected. 141 A Riddle. 143
The shield of Love. 144 The gloze upon Dominus ijs opus habet. 145 Gascoignes
counsel to Diue. Fol. 148 Gascoignes counsel to Wythipole. 151 Gascoygnes
woodmanship. Fol. 156 Gascoigns gardenings. 160 Gascoigns journey into
Hollande. 163


SVPPOSES: A Comedy written in the Italian tongue by Ariosto, Englished by
George Gascoygne of Grayes Inn Esquire, and there presented. 1566.
The names of the Actors.
BAlia, the Nurse. Polynesta, the young woman. Cleander, the Doctor, suter to
Polynesta. Pasyphilo, the Parasite. Carrion, the Doctors man. Dulypo, feigned
servant and lover of Polynesta. Erostrato, feigned master and suter to
Polynesta. Dalio and Crapyno servants to feigned Erostrato. Scenaese, a
gentleman stranger. Paquetto and Petrucio his servants. Damon, father to
Polinesta. Neuola, and two other his servants. Psyteria, an olda hag in his
house. Phylogano, a Scycilian gentleman, father to Erostrato. Lytio, his
servant. Ferrarese, an Inkeeper of Ferrara.
The Comedy presented as it were in Ferrara.

The Prologue or argument.
I Suppose you are assembled here, supposing to reap the fruit of my
trauayles: and to be plain, I mean presently to present you with a Comedy
called Supposes: the very name vvherof may peradventure drive into every of
your heads a sundry Suppose, to suppose, the meaning of our supposes. Some
percase will suppose we mean to occupy your ears with sophistical
handling of subtle Suppositions. Some other vvil suppose we go about to
discipher unto you some queint conceiptes, which hitherto have been only
supposed as it were in shadows: and some I see smyling as though they
supposed we would trouble you with the vain suppose of some vvanton
Suppose. But understand, this our Suppose is nothing else but a mystaking or
imagination of one thing for an other. For you shall see the master supposed
for the servant, the servant for the master: the freeman for a slave, and the
bondslaue for a freeman: the stranger for a well known friend, and the
familiar for a stranger. But what? I suppose that even already you suppose me
very fond, that have so simply disclosed unto you the subtilties of these our
Supposes: where otherwise in deed I suppose you should have heard almost
the last of our Supposes, before you could have supposed any of them
arighte. Let this then suffice.

Supposes.
Actus primus.
Scena. 1.
BALIA, the Nurse. POLYNESTA, the young woman. HEre is no body, come forth
Polynesta, let us look about, to be sure least any man hear our talk: for I
think within the house the tables, the plankes, the beds, the portals, yea and
the cupbords them selves have ears.

Pol. You might as well have said, the windows and the doors: do you not see
how they harken?


Ba. Well you jest fair, but I would advise you take heed, I have bidden you
a thousand times beware: you will be spied one day talking with Dulippo.


Po. And why should I not talk with Dulippo, as well as with any other, I pray
you?


Ba. I have given you a wherefore for this why many times: but go too, follow
your own advise till you ouerwhelme us all with soden mishappe.


Po. A great mishappe I promise you: marie Gods blessing on their heart that
set such a brouche on my cappe.


Ba. Well, look well about you: a man would think it were enough for you
secretly to rejoice, that by my help you have passed so many pleasant nights
together: and yet by my troth I do it more than half against my will, for I
would rather you had settled your fancy in some noble family yea and it is no
small grief unto me, that (rejecting the suites of so many nobles and
gentlemen) you have chosen for your darling a poor servant of your fathers,
by whom shame and infamy is the best dower you can look for to attain.


Po. And I pray you whom may I thank but gentle nourse? that continually
praising him, what for his personage, his courtesy, and above all, the extreme
passions of his mind, in fine you would never cease till I accepted him,
delighted in him, and at length desired him with no less affection, than he
erst desired me.


Ba. I can not deny, but at the beginning I did recommende him unto you (as in
deed I may say that for my self I have a pitiful heart) seeing the depth of
his unbridled affection, and that continually he never ceased to fill mine
ears with lamentable complaynts.


Po. Nay rather that he filled your pursse with bribes and rewards, Nourse.


Ba. Well you may judge of Nourse as you list. In deed I have thought it
always a deed of charity to help the miserable young men, whose tender youth
consumes with the furious flames of love. But be you sure if I had thought you
would have passed to the terms you now stand in, pity nor pencion, penny nor
pater noster should ever have made Nurse once to open her mouth in the cause.


Po. No of honesty, I pray you, who first brought him into my chamber? who
first taught him the way to my bed but you? fie Nourse fie, never speak of it
for shame, you will make me tell a wise tale anon.


Ba. And have I these thanks for my good will? why then I see well I shall be
counted the cause of all mishappe.


Po. Nay rather the author of my good hap (gentle Nourse) for I would thou
knew I love not Dulipo, nor any of so mean estate, but have bestowed my
love more worthily than thou deemest: but I will say no more at this time.


Ba. Then I am glad you have changed your mind yet.


Po. Nay I neither have changed, nor will change it.


Ba. Then I understand you not, how said you?


Po. Mary I say that I love not Dulipo, nor any such as he, and yet I neither
have changed nor will change my mind.


Ba. I can not tell, you love to lie with Dulipo very well: this gear is
Greek to me: either it hangs not well together, or I am very dull of
understanding: speak plain I pray you.


Po. I can speak no plainer, I have sworn to ye contrary.


Ba. How? make you so deintie to tell it Nourse, least she should reveal it?
you have trusted me as far as may be, (I may show to you) in things that
touch your honor if they were known: and make you strange to tell me this? I
am sure it is but a trifle in comparison of those things whereof heretofore you
have made me privy.


Po. Well, it is of greater importance than you think Nourse: yet would I tell
it you under condition and promise that you shall not tell it again, nor give
any sign or token to be suspected that you know it.


Ba. I promise you of my honesty, say on.


Po. Well hear you me then: this young man whom you have always taken for
Dulipo, is a noble borne Sicilian, his right name Erostrato, son to
Philogano, one of the worthiest men in that country.


Ba. How Erostrato? is it not our neighbor, which?


Po. Hold thy talking nourse, and harken to me, that I may explane the whole
case unto thee. The man whom to this day you have supposed to be Dulipo, The
first supose and grownd of all the suposes
is (as I say) Erostrato, a gentleman that came from Sicilia to study in this
City, and even at his first arrival met me in the street, fell enamored of me,
and of such vehement force were the passions he suffered, that immediately he
cast aside both long gown and books, and determined on me only to apply his
study. And to the end he might the more co^modiously both see me and talk
with me, he exchanged both name, habit, clothes and credit with his servant
Dulipo (whom only he brought with him out of Sicilia) and so with the turning
of a hand, of Erostrato a gentleman, he became Dulipo a serving man, and soon
after sought service of my father, and obtained it.


Ba. Are you sure of this?


Po. Yea out of doubt: on the other side Dulippo took upon him the name of
Erostrato his master, the habit, the credit, books, and all things
needful to a studente, and in short space profited very much, and is now
esteemed as you see.


Ba. Are there no other Sicylians here: nor none that pass this way, which
may discover them?


Po. Very few that pass this way, and few or none that tarry here any time.


Ba. This has been a strange adventure: but I pray you how hang these
things together? that the studente whom you say to be the servant, and not
the master, is become an earnest suter to you, and requires you of your
father in marriage?


Po. That is a policy devised between them, to put Doctor Dotipole out of
conceit: the old dotarde, he that so instantly does lie upon my father for
me. But look where he comes, as God help me it is he, out upon him, what a
luskie yonker is this? yet I had rather be a Noone a thousand times, than be
combred with such a Coystrell.


Ba. Daughter you have reason, but let us go in before he come any nearer.


Polynesta goes in, and Balya stays a little while after, speaking a word
or two to the doctor, and then departs. Scena. 2.
CLEANDER, Doctor. PASIPHILO, Parasite. BALYA, Nourse. WEre these dames here,
or did mine eyes dazzle?

Pa. Nay sir here were Polynesta and her nourse.


Cle. Was my Polynesta here? alas I knew her not.


Ba. He must have better eyesight that should marry your Polynesta, or else
he may chance to ouersee the best point in his tables sometimes.


Pa. Sir it is no marvel, the air is very mistie too day: I my self knew her
better by her apparel than by her face.


Cle. In good faith and I thank God I have mine eye sight good and perfect,
little worse than when I was but twenty years old.


Pa. How can it be otherwise? you are but young.


Cle. I am fifty years old.


Pa. He tells ten less than he is.


Cle. What say thou of ten less?


Pa. I say I would have thought you ten less, you look like one of six
and thirty, or seven and thirty at the most.


Cle. I am no less than I tell.


Pa. You are like enough too live fifty more: show me your hand.


Cle. Why is Pasiphilo a Chiromancer?


Pa. What is not Pasiphilo? I pray you show me it a little.


Cle Here it is.


Pa. O how straight and infracte is this line of life? you will live to the
years of Melchisedech.


Cle. Thou would say, Methusalem.


Pa. Why is it not all one?


Cle. I perceive you are no very good Bibler Pasiphilo.


Pa. Yes sir an excellent good Bibbeler, specially in a bottle: Oh what a
mount of Venus here is? but this light serves not very well, I will behold
it an other day, when the air is clearer, and tell you somewhat, peradventure
to your contentation.


Cle. You shall do me great pleasure: but tell me, I pray thee Pasiphilo, whom
doste thou think Polynesta likes better, Erostrato or me?


Pa. Why? you out of doubt: She is a gentlewoman of a noble mind, and makes
greater account of the reputation she shall have in marrying your worship,
than that poor scholar, whose birthe and parentage God knows, and very few
else.


Cle. Yet he takes it upon him bravely in this country.


Pa. Yea, where no man knows the contrary: but let him brave it, bost his
birth, and do what he can, the virtue and knowledge that is within this body of
yours, is worth more than all the country he came from.


Cle. It becomes not a man to praise him self: but in deed I may say, (and
say truly,) that my knowledge has stood me in better stead at a pinche,
than could all the goods in the world. I came out of Otranto when the Turks
won it, and first I came to Padua, after hither, where by reading,
counsailing, and pleading, within twenty years. I have gathered and gained as
good as ten thousand Ducats.


Pa. Yea mary, this is the right knowledge: Philosophy, Poetry, Logike, and
all the rest, are but pickling sciences in comparison to this.


Cle. But pyckling in deed, whereof we have a verse: The trade of Law does
fill the boystrous bags, They svvimme in silk, when others royst in rags.


Pa. O excellent verse, who made it? Virgil?


Cle. Virgil? tushe it is written in one of our gloses.


Pa. Sure who soever wrote it, the moral is excellent, and worthy to be
written in letters of gold. But too the purpose: I think you shall never
recover the wealth that you lost at Otranto.


Cle. An other supose.
I think I have dubled it, or rather made it four times as much: but in deed,
I lost mine only son there, a child of five years old.


Pa. O great pity.


Cle. Yea, I had rather have lost all the goods in ye world.


Pa. Alas, alas: by God and grafts of such a stock are very gayson in these
days.


Cle. I know not whether he were slain, or the Turks took him and kept him as
a bond slave.


Pa. Alas, I could weep for compassion, but there is no remedy but patience,
you shall get many by this young damsel with the grace of God.


Cle. Yea, if I get her.


Pa. Get her? why doubt you of that?


Cle. Why? her father holds me off with delays, so that I must needs doubt.


Pa. Content your self sir, he is a wise man, and desirous to place his
Daughter well: he will not be too rash in his determination, he will think
well of the matter: and let him think, for the longer he thinks, the more
good of you shall he think: whose wealth? whose virtue? whose skill? or whose
estimation can he compare to yours in this City?


Cle. And have thou not told him that I would make his Daughter a dower of two
thousand Ducates?


Pa. Why, even now, I came but from thence since.


Cle. What said he?


Pa. Nothing, but that Erostrato had proffered the like.


Cle. Erostrato? how can he make any dower, and his father yet alive?


Pa. Think you I did not tell him so? yes I warrant you, I forgot nothing that
may further your cause: and doubt you not, Erostrato shall never have her
unless it be in a dream.


Cle. Well gentle Pasiphilo, go thy ways and tell Damon I require nothing but
his daughter: I will none of his goods: I shall enrich her of mine own: and if
this dower of two thousand Ducates seem not sufficient, I will make it five
hundredth more, yea a thousand, or what so ever he will demand rather the^
fail: go to Pasiphilo, show thy self fre^dly in working this feate for me:
spare for no cost, since I have gone thus far, I will be loath to be out bidden.
Go.


Pa. Where shall I come to you again?


Cle. At my house.


Pa. When?


Cle. When thou will.


Pa. Shall I come at dinner time?


Cle. I would bid thee to dinner, but it is a Saints even which I have ever
fasted.


Pa. Fast till thou famishe.


Cle. Hark.


Pa. He speaks of a dead man's fast.


Cle. Thou hear me not.


Pa. Nor thou understand me not.


Cle. I dare say thou art angry I bid the not to dinner: but come if thou
will, thou shall take such as thou find.


Pa. What? think you I know not where to dine?


Cle. Yes Pasiphilo thou art not to seek.


Pa. No be you sure, there are enowe will pray me.


Cle. That I know well enough Pasiphilo, but thou can not be better welcome
in any place than to me, I will tarry for thee.


Pa. Well, since you will needs, I will come.


Cle. Dispatche then, and bring no news but good.


Pa. Better than my reward by the rood.


Cleander exit, Pasiphilo restat. Scena. iij.
PASIPHILO. DVLIPO. O Miserable covetous wretch, he finds an excuse by S.
Nicolas fast, because I should not dine with him, as though I should dine at
his own dishe: he makes goodly feasts I promise you, it is no wonder though
he think me bound unto him for my fare: for over and besides that his
provision is as skant as may be, yet there is great difference between his
diet and mine. I never so much as sippe of the wine that he tastes, I feed at
the bordes end with brown bread: Marie I reach always to his own dishe, for
there are no more but that only on the table. Yet he thinks that for one such
dinner I am bound to do him all the service that I can, and thinks me
sufficiently rewarded for all my travel, with one such festival promotion.
And yet peradventure some men think I have great gains under him: but I may
say and swear, that this dosen year I have not gained so much in value as
the points at my hose (which are but three with codpeece point and al): he
thinks that I may feed upon his favor and fair words: but if I could not
otherwise provide for one, Pasiphilo were in a wise case. Pasiphilo has mo
pastures to pass in than one, I warrant you: I am of household with this
scholar Erostrato, (his riuale) as well as with Domine Cleander: now with the
one, and then with the other, according as I see their Caters provide good
cheer at the market: and I find the means so to handle the matter, that I am
welcome too both. If the one see me talk with the other, I make him believe
it is to harken news in the furtherance of his cause: and thus I become a
broker on both sides. Well, let them both apply the matter as well as they
can, for in deed I will travel for none of them both: yet will I seem to
work wonders on each hand. But is not this one of Damons servants that
comes forth? it is: of him I shall understand where his master is. Whither
goes this ioyly gallant?

Du. I come to seek some body that may accompany my Master at dinner, he is
alone, and would feign have good company.


Pa. Seek no further, you could never have found one better than me.


Du. I have no commission to bring so many.


Pa. How many? I will come alone.


Du. How can thou come alone, that have continually a legion of ravening
wolves within thee?


Pa. Thou do (as servants commonly do) hate all that love to visit their
masters.


Du. And why?


Pa. Because they have too many teeth as you think.


Du. Nay because they have to many tongues.


Pa. Tongues? I pray you what did my tongue ever hurt you?


Du. I speak but merrily with you Pasiphilo, go in, my master is ready to
dine.


Pa. What? dineth he so early?


Du. He that rises early, dineth early.


Pa. I would I were his man, master doctor never dineth till noone, and how
dilicately then God knows. I will he bold to go in, for I count my self
bidden.


Du. You were best so. Pasiphilo intrat. Dull. restat.

Hard hap had I when I first began this unfortunate enterprise: for I supposed
the readiest medicine to my miserable affects had been to change name, clothes,
and credit with my servant, and to place my self in Damons service: thinking
that as sheuering cold by glowing fire, thurst by drink, hunger by pleasant
repasts, and a thousand such like passions find remedy by their contraries,
so my rest less desire might have found quiet by continual contemplation.
But alas, I find that only love is insatiable: for as the fly plays with the
flame till at last she is cause of her own decay, so the lover that thinks
with kissing and colling to content his unbridled apetite, is commonly seen
the only cause of his own consumption. Two years are now past since (under
the color of Damons service) I have been a sworn servant to Cupid: of whom I
have received as much favor and grace as ever man found in his service. I
have free liberty at al times to behold my desired, to talk with her, to
embrace her, yea (be it spoken in secret) to lie with her. I reap the fruits
of my desire: yet as my joys abound, even so my pains increase. I fare like
the covetous man, that having all the world at will, is never yet content: the
more I have, the more I desire. Alas, what wretched estate have I brought my
self unto, if in the end of all my far fetches, she be given by her father
to this old doting doctor, this buzard, this bribing villain, that by so many
means seeks to obtain her at her fathers hands? I know she loves me best of
all others, but what may that prevail when perforce she shall be constrained to
marie another? Alas, the pleasant taste of my sugared joys does yet remain so
perfect in my remembrance, that the least soppe of sorrow seems more sour
tha^ gal in my mouth. If I had never known delight, with better contentatio^
might I have passed these dreadful dolours. And if this old Mumpsimus (whom
the pockes consume) should win her, then may I say, farewell the pleasant
talk, the kind embracings, yea farewell the sight of my Polynestat for he like
a jealous wretch will pen her up, that I think the birds of the air shall
not win the sight of her. I hoped to have cast a block in his way, by the
means that my servant (who is supposed to be Erostrato, and with my habit
and credit is well esteemed) should proffer himself a suter, at the least to
counteruaile the doctors proffers. But my master knowing the wealth of the
one, and doubting the state of the other, is determined to be fed no longer
with fair words, but to accept the doctor, (whom he right well knows) for
his son in law. Well, my servant promised me yesterday to devise yet again
some new conspiracy to drive master doctor out of conceit, and to lay a
snare that the fox himself might be caughte in: what it is, I know not, nor
I saw him not since he went about it: I will go see if he be within, that at
least if he help me not, be may yet prolong my life for this once. But here
comes his lackie: ho Jack pack, where is Erostrato?


Here must Crapine be coming in with a basket and a stick in his hand. Scena.
iiij.
CRAPINO the Lackie. DVLIPO. ERostrato? mary he is in his skin.

Du. Ah hooreson boy, I say, how shall I find Erostrato?


Cra. Find him? how mean you, by the week or by the year?


Du. You crack halter, if I catch you by the ears, I shall make you answer
me directly.


Cra. In deed?


Du. Tarry me a little.


Cra. In faith sir I have no leisure.


Du. Shall we try who can run fastest?


Cra. Your legs be longer than mine, you should have given me the advantage.


Du. Go to, tell me where is Erostrato?


Cra. I left him in the street, where he gave me this Casket, (this basket I
would have said) and had me bear it to Dalio, and return to him at the Dukes
Palace.


Du. If thou see him, tell him I must needs speak with him immediately: or
abide awhyle, I will go seek him my self, rather than he suspected by going
to his house.


Crapino departs, and Dulipo also: after Dulipo comes in again seeking
Erostrato. Finis Actus. 1.
Actus. ij.
Scena. j.
DVLIPO. EROSTRATO. I Think if I had as many eyes as Argus, I could not have
sought a man more narrowly in every street and every by lane, there are not
many Gentlemen, scholars, nor Merchants in the City of Ferara, but I have
met with them, except him: peradventure he is come home an other way: but
look where he comes at the last.

Ero. In good time have I spied my good master.


Du. For the love of God call me Dulipo (not master,) maintain the credit
that thou haste hitherto kept, and let me alone.


Ero. Yet sir let me sometimes do my duty unto you, especially where no body
hears.


Du. Yea, but so long the Parat uses to cry knappe in sport, that at the
last she calls her master knave in earnest: so long you will use to call me
master, that at the last we shall be heard. What news?


Ero. Good.


Du. In deed?


Ero. Yea excellent, we have as good as won the wager.


Du. Oh, how happy were I if this were true?


Ero. Hear you me, yesternight in the evening I walked out, and found
Pasiphilo, and with small entreating I had him home to supper, where by such
means as I used, he became my great friend, and told me the whole order of
our adversaries determination: yea and what Damon does intend to do also, and
has promised me that from time to time, what he can epsy he will bring me
word of it.


Du. I can not tell whether you know him or no, he is not to trust unto, a very
flattering and a lying knave.


Ero. I know him very well, he can not deceive me: and this that he has told
me I know must needs be true.


Du. And what was it in effect?


Ero. That Damon had purposed to give his daughter in marriage to this doctor,
upon the dower that he has proffered. Another supose.



Du. Are these your good news? your excellent news?


Ero. Stay a while, you will understand me before you hear me.


Du. Well, say on.


Ero. I answered to that, I was ready to make her the like dower.


Du. Well said.


Ero. Abide, you hear not the worst yet.


Du. O God, is there any worsse behind?


Ero. Worsse? why what assurance could you suppose that I might make without
some special consent from Philogano my father?


Du. Nay you can tell, you are better scholar than I.


Ero. In deed you have lost your time: for the books that you toss now a
days, treat of small science.


Du. Leave thy jesting, and proceed.


Ero. I said further, that I received letters lately from my father, whereby I
understood that he would be here very shortly to perform all that I had
proffered: therefore I required him to request Damon on my behalf, that he would
stay his promise to the doctor for a fourtnight or more.


Du. This is somewhat yet, for by this means I shall be sure to linger and live
in hope one fourtnight longer: but, at the fourthnights end when Philogano
comes not, how shall I then do? yea and though he came, how may I any way
hope of his consent, when he shall see, that to follow this amorous enterprise,
I have set aside all study, all remembrance of my duty, and all dread of
shame. Alas, alas, I may go hang my self.


Ero. Comfort your self man, and trust in me: there is a slave for every
sore, and doubt you not, to this mischief we shall find a remedy.


Du. O friend revive me, that hitherto since I first attempted this matter have
been continually dying.


Ero. Well harken a while then: this morning I took my horse and rode into the
fields to solace my self, and as I passed the foorde beyond S. Anthonies
gate, I met at the foot of the hill a gentleman riding with two or three men:
and as me thought by his habit and his looks, he should be none of the
wisest. He saluted me, and I him: I asked him from whence he came, and whither
he would? he answered that he had come from Venice, then from Padua, now was
going to Ferrara, and so to his country, which is Scienna: As soon as I
knew him to be a Scenese, suddenly lifting up mine eyes, (as it were with an
admiration) I said unto him, are you a Scenese, and come to Farrara? why not,
said he: quoth I (, half and more with a trembling voice) know you the
danger that should ensue if you be known in Ferrara to be a Scenese? he more
than half amassed, desired me earnestly to tell him what I meant.


Du. I understand not whereto this tends.


Ero. I believe you: but harken to me.


Du. Go too then.


Ero. I answered him in this sort: Gentleman, because I have heretofore found
very courteous entertaynement in your country, (being a stude^t there,) I
account my self as it were bound to a Scenese: and therefore if I knew of any
mishappe toward any of that country, God forbid but I should disclose it: and
I marvel that you knew not of the injury that your countrymen offered this
other day to the Ambassadors of Count Hercules.


Du. What tales he tells me: what appertain these to me?


Ero. If you will harken a while, you shall find them no tales, but that they
appertain to you more than you think for.


Du. Forth.


Ero. I told him further, these Ambassadoures of Count Hercules had diverse
Mules, Wagons, and Charettes, lade^ with diverse costly jewels, gorgeous
furniture, and other things which they carried as presents, (passing that way)
to the king of Naples: the which were not only stayed in Sciene by the officers
whom you call Customers, but serched, ransacked, tossed and turned, and in the
end exacted for tribute, as if they had been the goods of a mean merchant.


Du. Whither the devil will he? is it possible that this gear appertain any
thing to my cause? I find neither head nor foot in it.


Ero. O how impacie^t you are: I pray you stay a while.


Du. Go to yet a while then.


Ero. I proceeded, that upon these causes the Duke sent his Chauncelor to
declare the case unto the Senate there, of whom he had the most discourteous
answer that ever was heard: whereupon he was so enraged with all of that
country, that for revenge he had sworn to spoil as many of them as ever
should come to Ferara, and to send them home in their dublet and their hose.


Du. And I pray thee how could thou upon the sudden devise or imagine such
a lie? and to what purpose?


Ero. You shall hear by and by a thing as fit for our purpose, as any could
have happened.


Du. I would feign hear you conclude.


Ero. You would feign leap over the style, before you come at the hedge: I
would you had heard me, and seen the gestures that I enforced to make him
believe this.


Du. I believe you, for I know you can counterfeit well.


Ero. Further I said, the duke had charged upon great penalties, that the
Inholders and vitlers should bring word daily of as many Sceneses as came to
their houses. The gentleman being (as I gessed at the first) a man of small
sapientia, when he heard these news, would have turned his horse an other way.


Du. By likelyhoode he was not very wise when he would believe that of his
country, which if it had been true every man must needs have known it.


Ero. Why not? when he had not been in his country for a month paste, and I
told him this had happened within these seven days.


Du. Belike he was of small experience.


Ero. I think, of as little as may be: but best of all for our purpose, and
good adventure it was, that I met with such an one. Now harken I pray you.


Du. Make an end I pray thee.


Ero. He, as I say, when he hard these words, would have turned the bridle: and
I fayning a countenance as though I were somewhat pensive and careful for him,
paused a while, and after with a great sighe said to him: Gentleman, for the
courtesy that (as I said) I have found in your country, and because your
affairs shall be the better dispatched, I will find the means to lodge you
in my house, and you shall say to every man, that you are a Sicilian of
Cathanea, your name Philogano, father to me that am in deed of that country
and city, called here Erostrato. And I (to pleasure you) will (during your
abode here) do you reverence as you were my father.


Du. Out upon me, what a gross hedded fool am I? now I perceive whereto this
tale tends.


Ero. Well, and how like you of it?


Du. Indifferently, but one thing I doubt.


Ero. What is that?


Du. Marie, that when he has been here two or three days, he shall hear of
every man that there is no such thing between the Duke and the Town of Sciene.


Ero. As for that let me alone, I do entertain and will entertain him so
well, that within these two or three days I will disclose unto him all the
whole matter, and doubt not but to bring him in for performance of as much as
I have promised to Damon: for what hurt can it be to him, when he shall bind
a strange name and not his own?


Du. What, think you he will be entreated to stand bound for a dower of two
thousand Ducates by the year?


Ero. Yea why not, (if it were ten thousand) as long as he is not in deed the
man that is bound?


Du. Well, if it be so, what shall we be the nearer to our purpose?


Ero. Why? when we have done as much as we can, how can we do any more?


Du. And where have you left him?


Ero. At the Inn, because of his horses: he and his men shall lie in my house.


Du. Why brought you him not with you?


Ero. I thought better to use your advise first.


Du. Well, go take him home, make him all the cheer you can, spare for no
cost, I will allow it.


Ero. Content, look where he comes.


Du. Is this he? go meet him, by my truth he looks even like a good soul,
he that fisheth for him, might be sure to catch a cods head: I will rest
here a while to discipher him.


Erostrato espieth the Scenese and goes toward him: Dulipo stands aside.
Scena. ij.
The SCENESE. PAQVETTO and PETRVCIO his servants. EROSTRATO. HE that trauaileth
in this world passes by many perilles.

Pa. An other supose.
You say true sir, if the boat had been a little more laden this morning at
the ferrie, we had been all drowned, for I think, there are none of us that
could have swomme.


Sc. I speak not of that.


Pa. O you mean the foul way that we had since we came from this Padua, I
promise you, I was afraid twice or thrice, that your mule would have lien fast
in the mire.


Sc. Jesus, what a blockehead thou art, I speak of the peril we are in
presently since we came into this city.


Pa. A great peril I promise you, that we were no sooner arrived, but you found
a friend that brought you from the Inn, and lodged you in his own house.


Sc. Yea marie, God reward the gentle young man that we met, for else we had
been in a wise case by this time. A dottish supose.
But have done with these tales, and take you heed, and you also sir, take
heed that none of you say we be Sceneses, and remember that you call me
Philogano of Cathanca.


Pa. Sure I shall never remember these outla^dish words, I could well remember
Haccanea.


Sc. I say, Cathanea, and not Haecanea, with a vengeance.


Pa. Let another name it then when need is, for I shall never remember it.


Sc. Then hold thy peace, and take heed thou name not Scene.


Pa. How say you, if I feign my self dum as I did once in the house of
Crisobolus?


Sc. Do as thou think best: but look where comes the gentleman whom we
are so much bound unto.


Ero. Welcome, my dear father Philogano.


Sc. Gramercie my good son Erostrato.


Ero. That is well said, be mindful of your tongue, for these Ferareses be as
crafty as the Devil of hell.


Sc. No, no, be you sure we will do as you have bidden us.


Ero. For if you should name Scene they would spoil you immediately, and turn
you out of the town, with more shame, than I would should befall you for a
thousand Crowns.


Sc. I warant you, I was giving the^ warning as I came to you, and I doubt not
but they will take good heed.


Ero. Yea and trust not the servants of my household to far, for they are
Ferareses all, and never knew my father, nor came never in Sicilia: this is my
house, will it please you to go in? I will follow.


They go in. Dulipo tarieth and espieth the Doctor coming in with his man.
Scena. iij.
DVLIPO alone. THis gear has had no evil beginning, if it continue so and
fall to happy end. But is not this the silly Doctor with the side bonet, the
doting fool, that dare presume to become a suter to such a peerlesse Paragone?
O how covetousness does blind the common sort of men. Damon more desirous of
the dower, than mindful of his gentle and gallant daughter, has determined to
make him his Son in law, who for his age may be his father in law: and has
greater respect to the abundance of goods, than to his own natural child. He
bears well in mind to fill his own purse, but he little remembers that his
daughters purse shall be continually empty, unless Master Doctor fill it with
double ducke eggs. Alas: I jest and have no joy, I will stand here aside and
laugh a little at this lobcocke.

Dulippo espieth the Doctor and his man coming. Scena. iiij.
CARRION the doctors man. CLEANDER. DVLIPO. Master, what the Devil mean you to
go seek guestes at this time of the day? the Majors officers have dined ere
this time, which are always the last in the market.

Cle. I come to seek Pasiphilo, to the end he may dine with me.


Ca. As though six mouths and the cat for the seventh, be not sufficient to
eat an harlotrie shotterell, a pennieworth of cheese, and half a score
spurlings: this is all the dainties you have dressed for you and your family.


Cle. Ah greedy gut, art thou afearde thou shall want?


Ca. I am afearde in deed, it is not the first time I have found it so.


Du. Shall I make some sport with this gallant? what shall I say to him?


Cle. Thou art afearde belike that he will eat thee and the rest.


Ca. Nay, rather that he will eat your mule, both hear and hyde.


Cle. Hear and hyde? and why not flesh and all?


Ca. Because she has none. If she had any flesh, I think you had eaten her
your self by this time.


Cle. She may thank you then, for your good attenda^ce.


Ca. Nay she may thank you for your small allowance.


Du. In faith now let me alone.


Cle. Hold thy peace drunken knave, and epsy me Pasiphilo.


Du. Since I can do no better, I will set such a staunce between him and
Pasiphilo, that all this town shall not make them friends.


Ca. Could you not have sent to seek him, but you must come your self? surely
you come for some other purpose, for if you would have had Pasiphilo to dinner,
I warant you he would have tarried here an hour since.


Cle. Hold thy peace, here is one of Damons servant, An other supose.
of him I shall understand where he is: good fellow art not thou one of Damons
servant?


Du. Yes sir, at your knamandement.


Cle. Gramercie, tell me then, has Pasiphilo been there this day or no?


Du. Yes sir, and I think he be there still, ah, ah, ah.


Cle. What laughest thou?


Du. At a thing, that every man may not laugh at.


Cle. What?


Du. Talk, that Pasiphilo had with my master this day.


Cle. What talk I pray thee?


Du. I may not tell it.


Cle. Does it concern me?


Du. Nay I will say nothing.


Cle. Tell me.


Du. I can say no more.


Cle. I would but know if it concern me, I pray thee tell me.


Du. I would tell you, if I were sure you would not tell it again.


Cle. Believe me I will keep it close: Carrion give us leave a little, go aside.


Du. If my master should know that it came by me, I were better die a
thousand deaths.


Cle. He shall never know it, say on.


Du. Yea, but what assurance shall I have?


Cle. I lay thee my faith and honesty in paune.


Du. A pretty paune, the fulkers will not lend you a farthing on it.


Cle. Yea, but amongst honest me^ it is more worth than gold.


Du. Yea marie sir, but where be they? but will you needs have me tell it unto
you?


Cle. Yea I pray thee if it any thing appertain to me.


Du. Yes it is of you, and I would gladly tell it you, because I would not have
such a man of worship so scorned by a villain ribaulde.


Cle. I pray thee tell me then.


Du. I will tell you so that you will swear never to tell it to Pasiphilo, to
my master, nor to any other body.


Ca. Surely it is some toye devised to get some money of him.


Cle. I think I have a book here.


Ca. If he knew him as well as I, he would never go about it, for he may as
soon get one of his teeth from his jaws with a pair of pinchers, as a penny
out of his purse with such a conceit.


Cle. Here is a letter will serve the turn: I swear to thee by the contents
hereof never to disclose it to any man.


Du. I will tell you, I am sorry to see how Pasiphilo does abuse you,
persuading you that always he labors for you, where in deed, he lies on
my master continually, as it were with tooth and nail for a stranger, a
scholar, borne in Sicilia they call him Roscus or arskisse, he has a mad
name I can never hit upon it.


Cle. And thou recknest it as madly: is it not Erostrato?


Du. That same I should never have remembered it: and the villainy speaks all the evil of you that can be devised.


Cle. To whom?


Du. To my master, yea and to Polynesta hirselfe sometimes.


Cle. Is it possible, Ah slave, and what says he?


Du. More evil than I can imagine: that you are the miserablest and most
nigardly man that ever was.


Cle. Says Pasiphilo so by me?


Du. And that as often as he comes to your house, he is like to die for
hunger, you fare so well.


Cle. That the Devil take him else.


Du. And that you are the testiest man, and most diverse to please in the whole
world, so that he cannot please you unless he should even kill himself with
continual pain.


Cle. O deuilish tongue.


Du. Furthermore, that you cough continually and spit, so that a dog cannot
abide it.


Cle. I never spitte nor coughe more than thus, vho, vho, and that but since I
caughte this murre, but who is free from it?


Du. You say true sir, yet further he says, your arm holes stincke, your
feet worse than they, and your breathe worst of all.


Cle. If I quite him not for this gear.


Du. And that you are bursten in the cods.


Cle. O villain, he lies, and if I were not in the street thou should see
them.


Du. And he says, that you desire this young gentle woman, as much for other
men's pleasure as for your own.


Cle. What means he by that?


Du. Peradventure that by her beauty, you would entice many young men to your
house.


Cle. Young men? to what purpose?


Du. Nay, guess you that.


Cle. Is it possible that Pasiphilo speaks thus of me?


Du. Yea, and much more.


Cle. And does Damon believe him?


Du. Yea, more than you would think: in such sort, that long ere this, he
would have given you a flat repulse, but Pasiphilo entreated him to continue
you a suter for his advantage.


Cle. How for his advantage?


Du. Marie, that during your suit he might still have some reward for his
great pains.


Cle. He shall have a rope, and yet that is more than he deserves: I had
thought to have given him these hose when I had worn them a little nearer, but
he shall have a. etc.


Du. In good faith sir, they were but lost on him. Will you any thing else
with me sir?


Cle. Nay, I have heard to much of thee already.


Du. Then I will take my leave of you.


Cle. Farewell, but tell me, may I not know thy name?


Du. Sir, they call me Foul fall you.


Cle. An ill favored name by my truth: art thou this country man?


Du. No sir, I was borne by a castle me^ call Scabbe catch you: fare you well
sir.


Cle. Farewell. Oh God how have I been abused? what a spokesman? what a
messanger had I provided?


Car. Why sir, will you tarry for Pasiphilo till we die for hunger?


Cle. Trouble me not, that the Devil take you both.


Car. These news what so ever they be, like him not.


Cle. Art thou so hungry yet? I pray to God thou be never satisfied.


Car. By the mass no more I shall as long as I am your servant.


Cle. Go with mischaunce.


Car. Yea, and a mischief to you, and to al such covetous wretches.


Finis Actus. 2.
Actus. iij.
Scena. j.
DALIO the cook. CRAPINE the lackie. EROSTRATO, DVLIPO. BY that time we come
to the house, I trust that of these xx. eggs in the basket we shall find but
very few whole. But it is a folly to talk to him. What the devil, will thou
never lay that stick out of thy hand? he fights with the dogs, beats
the bears, at every thing in the streate he finds occasion to tarry: if he
spy a slipstring by the way such another as himself, a Page, a Lackie or a
dwarf, the devil of hell cannot hold him in chains, but he will be doing
with him: I cannot go two steps, but I must look back for my yonker: go
to halter sick, if you break one egg I may chance break, etc.

Cra. What will you break? your nose in mine etc?


Da. Ah beast.


Cra. If I be a beast, yet I am no horned beast.


Da. Is it even so? is the wind in that door? If I were vnloden I would tell
you whether I be a horned beast or no.


Cra. You are always laden either with wine or with ale.


Dal. Ah spiteful boy, shall I suffer him?


Cra. Ah cowardely beast, dare thou strike and say never a word?


Dal. Well, my master shall know of this geere, either he shall redress it,
or he shall lose one of us.


Cra. Erostra. and Du. ex improuiso.
Tell him the worst thou can by me.


Ero. What noise, what a rule is this?


Cra. Marie sir, he strikes me because I tell him of his swearing.


Dal. The villain lies deadly, he reuiles me because I bid him make have.


Ero. Holla: no more of this. Dalio, do you make in a readiness those
Pigeons, stock Doves, and also the breast of Veale: and let your vessel be as
clear as glass against I return, that I may tell you which I will have
roasted, and which boiled. Crapine, say down that basket and follow me. Oh
that I could tell where to find Pasiphilo, but look where he comes that
can tell me of him.


Dull. Dulipo is espied by Erostrato.
What have you done with Philogano your father?


Ero. I have left him within, I would feign speak with Pasiphilo, can you tell
me where he is?


Du. He dined this day with my master, but whether he went from thence I know
not, what would you with him?


Ero. I would have him go tell Damon that Philogano my father is come and
ready to make assurance of as much as he will require. Now shall I teach master
doctor a schole point, he trauaileth to none other end but to catch Cornua,
and he shall have them, for as old as he is, and as many subtilties as he has
learned in the law, he can not go beyond me one ace.


Du. O dear friend, go thy ways seek Pasiphilo, find him out, and conclude
somewhat to our contentation.


Ero. But where shall I find him?


Du. At the feasts if there be any, or else in the market with the poulters or
the fishmongers.


Ero. What should he do with them?


Du. Mary he watches whose Caters bie the best meat. If any bie a fat Capon, a
good breast of Veale, fresh Samon or any such good dishe, he follows to the
house, and either with some news, or some stale jest he will be sure to make
himself a geast.


Ero. In faith, and I will seek there for him.


Du. Then must you needs find him, and when you have done I will make you
laughe.


Ero. Whereat?


Du. At certain sport I made to day with master doctor.


Ero. And why not now?


Du. No it asks further leisure, I pray thee dispatche, and find out
Pasiphilo that honest man.


Dulipo tarieth. Erostrato goes out. Scena. ij.
DVLIPO alone. THis amorous cause that ha^geth in controversy between Domine
doctor and me, may be compared to the^ that play at primero: of who^ some one
peradventure shall leese a great sum of money before he win one stake, and at
last half in anger shall set up his rest: win it: and after that another,
another, and another, till at last he draw the most part of the money to his
heap: ye other by little and little still diminishing his rest, til at last he be
come as near the brinke, as erst ye other was: yet again peradventure fortune
smiling on him, he shall as it were by piece meal, pull out the guts of his
fellows bags, and bring him barer than he himself was tofore, and so in play
continue still, (fortune favoring now this way, now yt way) til at last the one
of the^ is left with as many crosses as God has brethren. O how often have I
thought my self sure of the upper hand herein? but I triumphed before the
victory. And then how often again have I thought the field lost? Thus have
I been tossed now over, now under, even as fortune list to whirle the
wheel, neither sure to win nor certain to loose the wager. And this
practice that now my servant has devised, although hitherto it has not
succeeded amiss, yet can I not count my self assured of it: for I fear still
that one mischance or other will come and turn it topsie turuie. But look
where my master comes.

Damon coming in, espieth Dulipo and calls him. Scena. iij.
DAMON. DVLIPO. NEVOLA, and two mo servants. DVlipo.

Du. Here sir.


Da. Go in and bid Neuola and his fellows come hither that I may tell them
what they shall go about, and go you into my study: there upon the shelfe you
shall find a roll of writings which John of the Deane made to my Father, when
he sold him the Grange ferme, endorced with both their names: bring it hither
to me.


Du. It shall be done sir.


Da. Go, I will prepare other manner of writings for you tha^ you are aware of. O
fools that trust any man but themselves now adays: oh spiteful fortune, thou
do me wrong I think, that from the depth of Hell pit thou haste sent me
this servant to be the subversion of me and all mine. Come hither sirs, The
servants come in.
and hear what I shall say unto you: go into my study, where you shall find
Dulipo, step to him all at once, take him and (with a cord that I have laid
on the table for the nonce) bind him hand and foot, carry him into the
dungeon under the stayres, make fast the door and bring me the key, it hangs
by upon a pin on the wall. Dispatche and do this gear as privily as you can:
and thou Neuola come hither to me again with speed.


Ne. Well I shall.


Da. Alas how shall I be revenged of this extreme despite? if I punish my
servant according to his diuelishe deserts, I shall heap further cares upon
mine own head: for to such detestable offenses no punishment can seem
sufficient, but only death, and in such cases it is not lawful for a man to be
his own caruer. The laws are ordained, and officers appointed to minister
justice for the redress of wrongs: and if to the potestates I complain me, I
shall publishe mine own reproach to the world. Yea, what should it prevail
me to use all the puinishments that can be devised? the thing once done can not
be undone. My daughter is defloured, and I utterly dishonested: how can I then
wype that blot off my browe? and on whom shall I seek revenge? Alas, alas I
my self have been the cause of all these cares, and have deserved to bear the
punishment of all these mishappes. Alas, I should not have committed my dearest
darling in custody to so careless a creasure as this old Nurse: for we see
by common proof, that these old women be either peeuishe, or pitiful: either
easily inclined to evil, or quickly corrupted with bribes and rewards. O wife,
my good wife (that now lie cold in the grave) now may I well bewail the
want of thee, and mourning now may I bemone that I miss thee: if thou had
lived (such was thy government of the least things) that thou would
prudently have provided for the preservation of this pearl. A costly jewel
may I well account her, that has been my chief comfort in youth, and is
now become the corosiue of mine age. O Polynesta, full evil have thou
requited the clemency of thy careful father: and yet to excuse thee giltlesse
before God, and to condemn thee guilty before the world, I can count none
other but my wretched self the caytife and causer of all my cares. For of all the duties that are requisite in humane life, only obedience is by the
parents to be required of the child: where on ye other side the parents are
bound, first to beget them, then to bring the^ forth, after to nourish them,
to preserve them from bodily perils in the cradle, from danger of soul by
godly education, to match them in consort inclined to virtue, too banish them
all idle and wanton company, to allow them sufficient for their sustentation,
to cut off excess the open gate of sin, seldom or never to smile on them
unless it be to their encouragement in virtue, and finally, to provide them
marriages in time convenient, lest (neglected of us) they learn to set either
to much or to little by themselves. Five years are past since I might have
married her, when by continual excuses I have prolonged it to my own
perdition. Alas, I should have considered, she is a collop of my own flesh:
what should I think to make her a princess? Alas alas, a poor kingdom have I
now caught to endowe her with: It is too true, that of all sorrows this is the
head source and chief fountain of all furies: the goods of the world are
uncertain, the gains to be rejoiced at, and the loss not greatly to be
lamented: only the children cast away, cutteth the parents throat with the
knife of inward care, which knife will kill me surely, I make none other
account.


Damons servants come to him again. Scena. iiij.
NEVOLA. DAMON. PASIPHILO. SIr, we have done as you had us, and here is the
key.

Da. Well, go then Neuola and seek master Casteling the iayler, he dwells by
S. Antonies gate, desire him too lend me a pair of the fetters he uses for
his prisoners, and come again quickly.


Ne. Well sir.


Da. Hear you, if he ask what I would do with them, say you ca^ not tell, and
tell neither him nor any other, what is become of Dulipo. Damon goes out.

I warant you sir. Fie upon the Devil, An other suppose.
it is a thing almost impossible for a man now a days to handle money, but
the metal will stick on his fingers: I marvelled always at this fellow of
mine Dulipo, that of the wages he received, he could maintain himself so
bravely apparelled, but now I perceive the cause, he had the disbursing and
receipt of all my masters affairs, the keys of the granair, Dulippo here,
Dulippo there, favor with my master, in favor with his daughter, what
would you more, he was Magister factotum: he was as fine as the Crusadoe, and
we silly wretches as course as canuas: well, behold what it is come to in the
end, he had bin better to have done less. Pasi. subito and improuiso venit.



Pa. Thou say true Neuola, he has done to much in deed.


Ne. From whence come thou in the devils name?


Pa. Out of the same house thou came from, but not out of the same door.


Ne. We had thought thou had been gone long since.


Pa. When I arose from the table, I felt a rumbling in my belly, which made
me run to the stable, and there I fell on sleep upon the straw, and have
line there ever since: And thou whether go thou?


Ne. My master has sent me on an errand in great have.


Pa. Whether I pray thee?


Ne. Nay I may not tell: Farewell.


Pa. As though I need any further instructions: O God what news I heard eue^
now, as I lay in the stable: O good Erostrato and pore Cleander, An other
suppose.
that have so earnestly strouen for this damsel, happy is he that can get her
I promise you, he shall be sure of mo than one at a clap that catches her,
either Adam or Eve within her belie. Oh God, how men may be deceived in a
woman? who would have believed the contrary but that she had bin a virgin? ask
the neighbors and you shall hear very good report of her: mark her behauiors
and you would have judged her very maydenly: seldom seen abroad but in plac^
of prayer, and there very devout, and no gaser at outward sightes, no blaser
of her beauty above in the windows, no stale at the door for the bypassers:
you would have thought her a holy young woman. But much good do it Domine
Doctor, he shall be sure to lack no CORN in a dear year, whatsoever he have
with her else: I beshrewe me if I let the marriage any way. But is not this the
old scabbed queen that I heard disclosing all this geere to her master, as I
stood in the stable ere now? it is she. Whither goes Psiteria?


Pasiphilo espieth Psiteria coming. Scena. v.
PSITERIA, PASIPHILO. TO a Gossip of mine hereby.

Pa. What? to tattle of the goodly stir that thou keptst concerning Polynesta.


Ps. No no: but how knew you of that geere?


Pa. You told me.


Ps. I? when did I tell you?


Pa. Even now when you told it to Damon, I both saw you and heard you, though
you saw not me: a good part I promise you, to accuse the poor wenche, kill
the old man with care, over and besides the danger you have brought Dulipo
and the Nursse unto, and many more, fie, fie.


Ps. In deed I was to blame, but not so much as you think.


Pa. And how not so much? did I not hear you tell?


Ps. Yes, But I will tell you how it came to pass: I have known for a great
while, that this Dulipo and Polynesta have lain together, and all by the means
of the nurse: yet I held my peace, and never told it. Now this other day the
Nursse sell on scolding with me, and twyce or thryce called me drunken old
whore, and such names that it was too badde: and I called her baude, and told
her that I knew well enoughe how often she had brought Dulipo to Polynestas
bed: yet all this while I thought not that any body had heard me, but it
befell clean contrary: for my master was on the other side of the wall, and
heard all our talk, where upon he sent for me, and forced me to confess all
that you heard.


Pas. And why would thou tell him? I would not for. etc.


Ps. Well, if I had thought my master would have taken it so, he should rather
have killed me.


Pas. Why? how could he take it?


Ps. Alas, it pitieth me to see the poor young woman how she weeps, wailes,
and tears her hear: not esteming her own life half so dear as she does
poor Dulipos: and her father, he weeps on the other side, that it would
pearce an heart of stone with pity: but I must be gone.


Pas. Go that the gunne powder consume thee old trotte.


Finis Actus. 3.
Actus. iiij.
Scena. j.
EROSTRATO fained. WHat shall I do? Alas what remedy shall I find for my
ruefull estate? what escape, or what excuse may I now devise to shifte over our
subtle supposes? for though to this day I have usurped the name of my master,
and that without check or control of any man, now shall I be openly
deciphered, and that in the sight of every man: now shall it openly be known,
whether I be Erostrato the gentleman, or Dulipo the servant. We have hitherto
played our parts in abusing others: but now comes the man that will not be
abused, the right Philogano the right father of the right Erostrato: going to
seek Pasiphilo, and hearing that he was at the water gate, behold I espied my
fellow Litio, and by and by my old master Philogano setting forth his first
step on land: I to fuge and away hither as fast as I could to bring word to the
right Erostrato, of his right father Philogano, that to so sudden a mishap
some subtle shift might be upon the sudden devised. But what can be imagined
to serve the turn, although we had months respite to beat our brains
about it, since we are commonly known, at the least supposed in this town, he
for Dulipo, a slave and servant to Damon, and I for Erostrato a gentleman and a
student? But behold, run Crapine to yonder old woman before she get within
the doors, and desire her to call out Dulipo: but hear you? if she ask who
would speak with him, say thy self and none other.

Erostrato espieth Psiteria coming, and sends his lackey to her. Scena. ij.
CRAPINE. PSITERIA. EROSTRATO fained. HOnest woman, you gossip, thou rotten
whore, hear thou not old witch?

Ps. A rope stretche your young bones, either you must live to be as old as I,
or be hanged while you are young.


Cra. I pray thee look if Dulipo be within.


Ps. Yes that he is I warrant him.


Cra. Desire him then to come hither and speak a word with me, he shall not
tarry.


Ps. Content your self, he is otherwise occupied.


Cra. Yet tell him so gentle girl.


Ps. I tell you he is busy.


Cra. Why is it such a matter to tell him so, thou crooked Crone?


Ps. A rope stretche you marie.


Cra. A pockes eat you marie.


Ps. Thou will be hanged I wara^t thee, if thou live to it.


Cra. And thou will be burnt I warant thee, if the canker consume thee not.


Ps. If I come near you hempstring, I will teach you to sing solfa.


Cra. Come on, and if I get a stone I will scare crows with you.


Ps. Go with a mischief, I think thou be some devil that would tempte me.


Ero. Crapine: hear you? come away, let her go with a vengeance, why come you
not? Alas look where my master Philogano comes: what shall I do? where
shall I hide me? he shall not see me in these clothes, nor before I have spoken
with the right Erostrato.


Erostrato espyeth Phylogano commming, and runs about to hide him. Scena.
iij.
PHILOGANO. FERRARESE the Inn keeper. LITIO a servant. HOnest man it is even
so: be you sure there is no love to be compared like the love of the parents
toward their children. It is not long since I thought that a very weighty
matter should not have made me come out of Sicilia, and yet now I have taken
this tedious toil and travail upon me, only to see my son, and to have him
home with me.

Fer. By my faith sir, it has been a great travail in deed, and to much for
one of your age.


Phi. Yea be you sure: I came in company with certain gentlemen of my
country, who had affairs to dispatche as far as to Aneona, from thence by
water too Rauenna, and from Rauenna hither, continually against the tide.


Fer. Yea and I think yt you had but homly lodging by yt way.


Phi. The worst yt ever man had: but that was nothing to the stir that ye
serchers kept with me when I came aborde ye ship: Jesus how often they
untrussed my male, and ransaked a little capcase that I had, tossed and turned
all that was within it, serched my bosom, yea my breeches, yt I assure you I
thought they would have flayed me to search between the fell and the flesh
for fardings.


Fer. Sure I have heard no less, and that the merchants bobbe them sometimes,
but they play the knaves still.


Phi. Yea be you well assured, such an office is the inheritance of a knave,
and an honest man will not meddle with it.


Fer. Well, this passage shall seem pleasant unto you when you shall find your
child in health and well: but I pray you sir why did you not rather send for
him into Sicilia, than to come your self, specially since you had none other
business? peradventure you had rather endanger your self by this noisome
journey, than hazard to draw him from his study.


Phi. Nay, that was not the matter, for I had rather have him give over his
study altogether and come home.


Fer. Why? if you minded not to make him learned, to what end did you send him
hither at the first?


Phi. I will tell you: when he was at home he did as most young men do, he
played many mad prankes and did many things that liked me not very well: and I
thinking, that by that time he had seen the world, he would learn to know
himself better, exhorted him to study, and put in his election what place he
would go to. At the last he came hither, and I think he was scarce here so
sone as I felt the want of him, in such sort, as from that day to this I have
passed few nights without tears. I have written to him very often that he
should come home, but continually he refused still, beseching me to continue
his study, wherein he doubted not (as he said) but to profit greatly.


Fer. In deed he is very much commended of al men, and specially of the best
reputed students.


Phi. I am glad he has not lost his time, but I care not greatly for so much
knowledge. I would not be without the sight of him again so long, for all the
learning in the world. I am old now, and if God should call me in his
absence, I promise you I think it would drive me into disperation.


Fer. It is commendable in a man to love his children but to be so tender over
them is more womanlike?


Phi. Well, I confess it is my fault: and yet I will tell you another cause
of my coming hither, more weighty than this. Diverse of my country have been
here since he came hither, by whom I have sent unto him, and some of the^
have been thrice, some four or five times at his house, and yet could never
speak with him. I fear he applies his study so, that he will not leese the
minute of an hour from his book. What, alas, he might yet talk with his
countrymen for a while: he is a young man, tenderly brought up, and if he fare
thus continually night and day at his book, it may be enough to drive him into
a frenzy.


Fer. In deed, enough were as good as a feast. Lo you sir here is your son
Erostratoes house, I will knock.


Phi. Yea, I pray you knock.


Fer. They hear not.


Phi. Knock again,


Fer. I think they be on sleep.


Ly. If this gate were your Grandefathers soul, you could not knock more
softly, let me come: ho, ho, is there any body within?


Dalio comes to the wyndowe, and there makes them answer. Scena. iiij.
DALIO the cook. FERARESE the inholder. PHILOGANO. LITIO his man. WHat devil
of hell is there? I think he will break the gates in pieces.

Li. Marie sir, we had thought you had been on sleep within, and therefore
we thought best to wake you: what does Erostrato?


Da. He is not within.


Phi. Open the door good fellow I pray thee.


Da. If you think to lodge here, you are deceived I tell you, for here are
guestes enowe already.


Phi. A good fellow, and much for thy master honesty by our Lady: and what
guestes I pray thee?


Da. Another suppose.
Here is Philogano my masters father, lately come out of Sicilia.


Phi. Thou speak truer tha^ thou art aware of, he will be, by that time
thou have opened the door: open I pray thee heartily.


Da. It is a small matter for me to open the door, but here is no lodging for
you, I tell you plain, the house is full.


Phi. Of whom?


Da. I told you: here is Philogano my masters father come from Cathanea.


Phi. And when came he?


Da. He came three hours since, or more, he alighted at the Angel, and left
his horses there: afterward my master brought him hither.


Phi. Good fellow, I think thou have good sport to mock me.


Da. Nay, I think you have good sporet to make me tarry here, as though I have
nothing else to do: I am matched with an unruly mate in the kitchen. I will
go look to him another while.


Phi. I think he be drunken.


Fer. Sure he semes so: see you not how read he is about the gilles?


Phi. Abide fellow, what Philogano is it whom thou talkest of?


Da. An honest gentleman, father to Erostrato my master.


Phi. And where is he?


Da. Here within.


Phi. May we see him?


Da. I think you may if you be not blind.


Phi. Go to, go tell him here is one would speak with him.


Da. Mary that I will willingly do.


Phi. I can not tell what I should say to this geere. Litio, what think
thou of it?


Li. I cannot tell you what I should say sir, the world is large and long,
Another suppose.
there may be more Philoganos and more Erostratos than one, yea and more
Ferraras, more Sicilias, and more Cathaneas: peradventure this is not that
Ferrara which you sent your son unto.


Phi. Peradventure thou art a fool, and he was another that answered us even
now. But be you sure honest man, that you mistake not the house?


Fer. Nay, then god help, think you I know not Erostratos house? yes, and
himself also: I saw him here no longer since tha^ yesterday. But here co^mes
one that will tell us tidings of him, I like his countenance better than the
others that answered at the window erewhile.


Dalio draws his head in at the wyndowe, the Scenese comes out. Scena. v.
SCENESE. PHLLOGANO. DALIO. WOuld you speak with me sir?

Phi. Yea sir, I would feign know whence you are.


Sce. Sir I am a Sicilian, at your commandment.


Phi. What part of Sicilia?


Sce. Of Cathanea.


Phi. What shall I call your name?


Sce. My name is Philogano.


Phi. What trade do you occupy?


Sce. Merchandise.


Phi. What merchandise brought you hither?


Sce. None, I ^ame only to see a son that I have here whom I saw not these
two years.


Phi. What call they your son?


Sce Erostrato.


Phi. Is Erostrato your son?


Sce. Yea verily.


Phi. And are you Philogano?


Sce. The same.


Phi. And a merchant of Cathanea?


Sce. What need I tell you so often? I will not tell you a lie.


Phi. Yes, you have told me a false lie, and thou art a vilaine and no better.


Sce. Sir, you offer me great wrong with these injurious words.


Phi. Nay, I will do more than I have yet proffered to do, for I will prove
thee a liar, and a knave to take upon thee that thou art not.


Sce. A stout suppose.
Sir I am Philogano of Cathanea, out of all doubt, if I were not I would be
loath to tell you so.


Phi. Oh, see the boldness of this brute beast, what a brazen face he sets
on it?


Sce. Well, you may believe me if you list: what wonder you?


Phi. I wonder at thy impudency, for thou, nor nature that framed thee, can
ever counterfaite thee to be me, ribauld villain, and lying wretch that thou
art.


Da. A pleasant suppose.
Shall I suffer a knave to abuse my masters father thus? hence villain, hence,
or I will sheath this good fawchio^ in your pau^ch: if my master Erostrato
find you prating here on this fashion to his father, I would not be in your
coat for mo conney skins tha^ I gat these twelve months: come you in again
sir, and let this Curre bark here till he burst.


Dalio pulls the Scenese in at the doors. Scena. vj.
PHILOGANO. LITIO. FERARESE. LItio, how likest thou this geere?

Li. Sir, I like it as evil as may be: but have you not often heard tell of
the falsehood of Ferara, and now may you see, it falls out accordingly.


Fer. Friend, you do not well to slander the City, these men are no
Ferrareses you may know by their tongue.


Li. Well, there is never a barrel better herring, beetwene you both: but in
deed your officers are most to blame, that suffer such faults to escape
unpunished.


Fer. What know the officers of this? think you they know of every fault?


Li. Nay, I think they will know as little as may be, specially when they
have no gains, by it, but they ought to have their ears as open to hear of
such offenses, as the Ingates be to receive guests.


Phi. Hold thy peace fool.


Li. By the mass I am a fearde that we shall be proved fools both two.


Phi. Well, what shall we do?


Li. I would think best we should go seek Erostrato him self.


Fer. I will wait upon you willingly, and either at the schools, or at the
conuocations, we shall find him.


Phi. By our Lady I am weary, I will run no longer about to seek him, I am sure
hither he will come at the last.


Li. Sure, A true suppose.
my mind gives me that we shall find a new Erostrato ere it be long.


Fe. Look where he is, whether runs he? stay you awhile, I will go tell him
that you are here: Erostrato, Erostraro, ho Erostrato, I would speak with you.


Erostrato is espied upon the stage running about. Scena. vij.
Fained EROSTRATO. FERARESE. PHILOGANO. LITIO. DALIO. Now can I hide me no
longer. Alas what shall I do: I will set a good face on, to bear out the
matter.

Fera. O Erostrato, Philogano your father is come out of Sicilia.


Ero. Tell me that I know not, I have been with him and seen him already.


Fera. Is it possible? and it seems by him that you know not of his coming.


Ero. Why, have you spoken with him? when saw you him I pray you?


Fera. Look you where he stands, why go you not too him? Look you Philogano,
behold your dear son Erostrato.


Phi. Erostrato? this is not Erostrato: this seems rather to be Dulipo, and
it is Dulipo in deed.


Li. Why, doubt you of that?


Ero. What says this honest man?


Phi. Mary sir, in deed you are so honorably ^ladde, it is no marvel if you
look big.


Ero. To whom speaks he?


Phi. What, God help, do you not know me?


Ero. As far as I remember Sir, I never saw you before.


Phi. Hark Litio, h^^e is good geere, this honest man will not know me.


Ero. A shameless suppose.
Gentleman, you take your marks amiss.


Li. Did I not tell you of the falsehood of Ferrara master? Dulipo has learned
to play the knave indifferently well since he came hither.


Phi. Peace I say.


Ero. Friend, my name is not Dulipo, ask you thorough out this town of great
and small, they know me: ask this honest man that is with you, if you will not
believe me.


Ferra. In deed, I never knew him otherwise called than Erostrato: and so
they call him, as many as know him.


Li. Master, now you may see the falsehood of these fellows: this honest man
your host, is of counsel with him, A needelesse suppose.
and would face us down that it is Erostrato: beware of these mates.


Fera. Friend, thou do me wrong to suspect me, for sure I never heard him
otherwise called than Erostrato.


Ero. What name could you hear me called by, but by my right name? But I am
wise enough to stand prating here with this old man, I think he be mad.


Phi. Ah runnagate, ah villain traitor, do thou use thy master thus? what
have thou done with my son villain?


Da. Does this dog bark here still? and will you suffer him master thus to
revile you?


Ero. Come in, come in, what will thou do with this pestil?


Da. I will rap the old cackabed on the costerd.


Ero. Away with it, and you sir, lay down these stones: come in at door
every one of you, bear with him for his age, I pass not of his evil words.


Erostrato takes all his servants in at the doors. Scena. viij.
PHILOGANO. FERARESE. LITIO. ALas, who shall relieve my miserable estate? to
whom shall I complain? since he whom I brought up of a child, yea and
cherished him as if he had been mine own, does now utterly deny to know me:
and you whom I took for an honest man, and he that should have brought me to
the sight of my son, are compacte with this false wretch, and would face me
down that he is Erostrato. An other suppose.
Alas, you might have some compassion of mine age, to the misery I am now in,
and that I am a stranger desolate of all comfort in this country: or at the
least, you should have feared the vengeance of God the supreme judge (which
knows the secrets of all hearts) in hearing this false witness with him,
whom heaven and earth do know to be Dulipo and not Erostrato.

Li. If there be many such witnesses in this country, men may go about to
prove what they will in controversies here.


Fer. Well sir, you may judge of me as it pleases you: and how the matter
comes to pass I know not, but truly, ever since he came first hither, I have
known him by the name of Erostrato the son of Philogano a Cathanese: now
whether he be so in deed, or whether he be Dulipo, (as you allege) let that
be proved by them that knew him before he came hither. But I protest before
God, that which I have said, is neither a matter compact with him, nor any
other, but even as I have hard him called and reputed of al me^.


Phi. Out and alas, he whom I sent hither with my son to be his servant, A
shrewde suppose.
and to give attendance on him, has either cut his throat, or by some evil
means made him away: and has not only taken his garments, his books, his
money, and that which he brought out of Sicilia with him, but usurps his
name also, and turns to his own commodity the bills of exchange that I
have always allowed for my sons expenses. Oh miserable Philogano, oh
unhappy old man: oh eternal God, is there no judge? no officer? no higher
powers whom I may complain unto for redress of these wrongs?


Fer. Yes sir, we have potestates, we have Judges, and above al, we have a most
just prince: doubt you not, but you shall have justice if your cause be just.


Phi. Bring me then to the Judges, to the potestates, or to whom you think
best: for I will disclose a pack of the greatest knauerie, a fardell of the
fowlest falsehoode that ever was heard of.


Li. Sir, he that will go to the law, must be sure of four things: first, a
right and a just cause: then a righteous advocate to plead: next, favor
coram Iudice: and above all, a good purse to procure it.


Fer. I have not heard, that the law has any respect to favor: what you mean
by it I cannot tell.


Phi. Have you no regard to his words, he is but a fool.


Fer. I pray you sir, let him tell me what is favor.


Li. Favor call I, to have a friend near about the judge, who may so solicit
thy cause, as if it be right, speedy sentence may ensue without any delays:
if it be not good, then to prolong it, till at the last, thine adversary being
weary, shall be glad to compound with thee.


Fer. Of thus much (although I never heard thus much in this country before)
doubt you not Philogano, I will bring you to an advocate that shall speed you
accordingly.


Phi. Then shall I give my self, as it were a pray to the Lawyers, whose
insatiable jaws I am not able to feed, although I had here all the goods and
lands which I possess in mine own country: much less being a stranger in
this misery. I know their cautels of old: at the first time I come they will so
extol my cause, as though it were already won: but within a seue^night or ten
days, if I do not continually feed them as the crow does her brattes, twenty
times in an hour, they will begin to wax cold, and to find cauils in my
cause, saying, that at the first I did not well instruct them, till at the
last, they will not only draw the stuffing out of my purse, but the marrow
out of my bones.


Fer. Yea sir, but this man that I tell you of, is half a Saint.


Li. And the other half a Devil, I hold a penny.


Phi. Well said Litio, in deed I have but small confidence in their smothe
looks.


Fer. Well sir, I think this whom I mean, is no such manner of man: but if
he were, An other suppose.
there is such hatred and evil will between him and this gentleman (whether he
be Erostrato or Dulipo, what so ever he be) that I warrant you, he will do
whatsoever he can do for you, were it but to spite him.


Phi. Why? what hatred is betwixt them?


Fer. They are both in love and suitors to one gentlewoman, the daughter of a
welthie man in this city.


Phi. Why? is the villeine become of such estimation that he dare presume to be
a suter to any gentlewoma^ of a good family?


Fer. Yea sir out of all doubt.


Phi. How call you his adversary?


Fer. Cleander, one of the excellentest doctors in our city.


Phi. For Gods love let us go to him.


Fer. Go we then.


Finis Actus. 4.
Actus. v.
Scena. 1.
Feigned EROSTRATO. WHat a mishappe was this? that before I could meet with
Erostrato, I have light even full in the lap of Philogano: where I was
constrained to deny my name, to deny my master, and to feign that I knew him
not, to contend with him, and to revile him, in such sort, that hap what hap
can, I ca^ never hap well in favor with him again. Therefore if I could come
to speak with ye right Erostrato, I will renounce unto him both habit and
credit, and away as fast as I can trudge into some strange country, where I
may never see Philogano again. Alas, he that of a little child has brought me
up unto this day, Another suppose.
and nourished me as if I had been his own: and in deed (to confess the
troth) I have no father to trust unto but him. But look where Pasiphilo
comes, the fittest man in the world to go on me message to Erostrato.

Erostrato espieth Pasiphilo coming toward him. Scena. ij.
PASIPHILO. EROSTRATO. TWo good news have I heard to day already: one that
Erostrato prepared a great feast this night: the other, that he seeks for me.
And I to ease him of his travail, least he should run up and down seeking
me, and because no man loves better tha^ I to have an erand where good cheer
is, come in post have even home to his own house: and look where he is.

Ero. Pasiphilo, thou must do one thing for me if thou love me.


Pas. If I love you not, who loves you? command me.


Ero. Go then a little there, to Damons house, ask for Dulipo, and tell him.


Pas. Wot you what? I cannot speak with him, he is in prison.


Ero. In prison? how comes that to pass? where is he in prison?


Pas. In a vile dungeon there within his masters house.


Ero. Can thou tell wherefore?


Pas. Be you content to know he is in prison, I have told you to much.


Ero. If ever you will do any thing for me, tell me.


Pas. I pray you desire me not, what were you the better if you knew?


Ero. More than thou think Pasiphilo by God.


Pas. Well, and yet it stands me upon more than you think, to keep it
secret.


Ero. Why Pasiphilo, is this the trust I have had in you? are these the fair
promises you have awayes made me?


Pas. By the mass I would I had fasted this night with master doctor, rather
than have come hither.


Ero. Well Pasiphilo, either tell me, or at few words never think to be
welcome to this house from henceforthe.


Pas. Nay, yet I had rather leese all the Gentlemen in this town. But if I
tell you any thing that displease you, blame no body but your self now.


Ero. There is nothing ca^ grieve me more tha^ Dulipoes mishappe, no not mine
own: and therefore I am sure thou can tell me no worsse tidings.


Pa. Another plain and homely suppose.
Well, since you would needs have it, I will tell you: he was taken a bed with
your beloved Polynesta.


Ero. Alas, and does Damon know it?


Pa. An old trotte in the house disclosed it to him, whereupon he took both
Dulipo and the Nurse which has been the broker of all this bargayne, and
clapte them both in a cage, where I think they shall have sorrow soppes too
their sweet meats.


Ero. Pasiphilo, go thy ways into the kitchen, command the cook to boil and
roast what likes thee best, I make thee supra visour of this supper.


Pa. By the mass if you should have studied this seuennight, you could not
have appointed me an office to please me better. You shall see what dishes I
will devise.


Pasiphilo goes in, Erostrato tarieth. Scena. iij.
Feigned EROSTRATO alone. I Was glad to rid him out of the way, least he should
see me burst out of these swelling tears, which hitherto with great pain I
have prisoned in my breast, and least he should hear the Echo of my doubled
sighs, which bounce from the botome of my heavy heart. O cursed I, O cruel
fortune, that so many dispersed griefs as were sufficient to subvert a legion
of Lovers, have suddenly assembled within my careful carkase to treat this
fearful heart in sunder with desperation. Thou that have kept my master all
his youth within the realm of Sicilia, reserving the wind and waves in a
temperate calm (as it were at his command) now to convey his aged limbs
hither, neither sooner nor later: but even in the worst time that may be. If at
any time before thou had conducted him, this enterprise had been cut off
without care in the beginning: and if never so little longer thou had lingered
his journey, this happy day might then have fully finished our drifts and
devises. But alas, thou have brought him even in the very worst time, to plunge
us al in the pit of perdition. Neither art thou content to enta^gle me alone in
thy ruinous ropes, but thou must also catch the right Erostrato in thy crooked
claws, to reward us both with open shame and rebuke. Two years have thou kept
secret our subtle Supposes, even this day to discipher them with a sorrowful
success. What shall I do? Alas what shift shall I make? it is too late now to
imagine any further deceit, for every minute seems an hour til I find some
succor for the miserable captive Erostrato. Well, since there is no other
remedy, I will go to my master Philogano, and to him will I tell the whole
truth of the matter, that at the least he may provide in time, before his son
feel the smart of some sharp revenge and punishment. This is the best, and
thus will I do. Yet I know, that for mine own part I shall do bitter penance
for my faults forepassed: but such is the good will and duty that I bear to
Erostrato, as even with the loss of my life I must not stick to adventure any
thing which may turn to his commodity. But what shall I do? shall I go seek
my master about the town, or shall I tarry his return hither? If I meet him
in the streets, he will cry out upon me, neither will he harken to any thing
that I shall say, till he have gathered all the people wondering about me, as it
were at an Owl. Therefore I were better to abide here, and yet if he tarry
long I will go seek him, rather than prolong the time to Erostratos peril.

Pasiphilo returns to Erostrato. Scena. iiij.
PASIPHILO. Feigned EROSTRATO. YEa dress them, but lay them not to the fire,
till they will be ready to sit down. This geere goes in order: but if I had
not gone in, there had fallen a foul fault.

Ero. And what fault I pray thee?


Pa. Marie, Dalio would have laid the shoulder of mutton and the Capon both to
the fire at once like a fool: he did not consider, that the one would have
more roasting than the other.


Ero. Alas, I would this were the greatest fault.


Pa. Why? and either the one should have been burned before the other had been
roasted, or else he must have drawn them off the spitte: and they would have
been served to the boorde either cold or raw.


Ero. Thou have reason Pasiphilo.


Pa. Now sir, if it please you I will go into the town and buy oranges,
olives, and caphers, for without such sauce the supper were more than half
lost.


Ero. Erostrato exit.
There are within already, doubt you not, there shall lack nothing that is
necessary.


Pa. Since I told him these news of Dulipo, he is clean beside himself: he
has so many hammers in his head, that his brains are ready to burst: A
knauishe suppose.
and let them break, so I may suppe with him to night, what care I? But is not
this Dominus noster Cleandrus that comes before? well said, by my truth we
will teach master Doctor to wear a cornerd cappe of a new fashion. By God
Polynesta shall be his, he shall have her out of doubt, for I have told
Erostrato such news of her, that he will none of her.


Cleander and Philogano come in, talking of the matter in controversy. Scena.
v.
CLEANDER. PHILOGANO. LITIO. PASIPHILO. YEa, but how will ye prove that he is
not Erostrato, having such presumptio^s to the contrary? or how shall it be
thought that you are Philogano, when an other takes upon him this same name,
and for proof brings him for a witness, which has been ever reputed here
for Erostrato?

Phi. I will tell you sir, let me be kept here fast in prison, and at my charges
let there be some man sent into Sicilia, that may bring hither with him two or
three of the honestest me^ in Cathanea, and by them let it be proved if I or
this other be Philogano, and whether he be Erostrato or Dulipo my servant: and
if you find me contrary, let me suffer death for it.


Pa. I will go salute master Doctor.


Cle. It will ask great labor and great expenses to prove it this way, but it
is the best remedy that I can see.


Pa. God save you sir.


Cle. And reward you as you have deserved.


Pa. Then shall he give me your favor continually.


Cle. He shall give you a halter, knave and villein that thou art.


Pa. I know I am a knave, but no villein. I am your servant.


Cle. I neither take thee for my servant, nor for my friend.


Pa. Why? wherein have I offended you sir?


Cle. Hence to the gallows knave.


Pa. What soft and fair sir, I pray you, I praesequar, you are mine elder.


Cle. I will be even with you, be you sure, honest man.


Pa. Why sir? I never offended you.


Cle. Well, I will teach you: out of my sight knave.


Pa. What? I am no dog, I would you wist.


Cle. Pratest thou yet villein? I will make thee.


Pa. What will you make me? I see well the more a man does suffer you, the
worsse you are.


Cle. Ah villein, if it were not for this gentleman, I would tell you what I.


Pa. Villein? nay I am as honest a man as you.


Cle. Thou lie in thy throat knave.


Phi. O sir, stay your wisdom.


Pas. What will you fight? marie come on.


Cle. Well knave, I will meet with you another time, go your way.


Pas. Even when you list sir, I will be your man.


Cle. And if I be not even with thee, call me out.


Pas. Nay by the Mass, all is one, I care not, for I have nothing: if I had
either lands or goods, peradventure you would pull me into the law.


Phi. Sir, I perceive your patience is moved.


Cle. This villain: but let him go, I will see him punished as he has
deserved. Now to the matter, how said you?


Phi. Lawyers are never weary to get money.
This fellow has disquieted you sir, peradventure you would be loath to be
troubled any further.


Cle. Not a whit, say on, and let him go with a vengeance.


Phi. I say, let them send at my charge to Cathanea.


Cle. Yea I remember that well, and it is the surest way as this case requires:
but tell me, how is he your servant? and how come you by him? inform me fully
in the matter.


Phi. I will tell you sir: when the Turks won Otranto.


Cle. Oh, you put me in remembrance of my mishappes.


Phi. How sir?


Cle. For I was driven among the rest out of the town (it is my native
country) and there I lost more than ever I shall recover again while I live.


Phi. Alas, a pitiful case by S. Anne.


Cle. Well, proceed.


Phi. At that time (as I said) there were certain of our country that
scoured those costs upon the seas, with a good bark; well appointed for the
purpose, and had espiall of a Turkey vessel that came laden from thence with
great abundance of riches.


Cle. A gentle suppose.
And peradventure most of mine.


Phi. So they boarded them, and in the end overcame them, and brought the goods
to Palermo, (...) whence they came, and amongst other things that they had, was
this villeine my servant, a boy at that time, I think not past five years
old.


Cle. Alas, I lost one of that same age there.


Phi. And I being there, and liking the Childs favor well, proffered them
four and twenty ducates for him, and had him.


Cle. What? was the child a Turk? or had the Turks brought him from Otranto?


Phi. They said he was a Child of Otranto, but what is that to the matter?
once.xxiiij. Ducattes he cost me, that I wot well.


Cle. Alas, I speak it not for that sir, I would it were he whom I mean.


Phi. Why, whom mean you sir? A crafty suppose.



Liti. Beware sir, be not to lavish.


Cle. Was his name Dulipo then? or had he not another name?


Liti. Beware what you say sir.


Phi. What the devil have thou to do? Dulipo? no sir his name was Carino.


Liti. Yea, well said, tell all and more to, do.


Cle. O Lord, if it be as I think, how happy were I? and why did you change
his name then?


Phi. We called him Dulipo, because when he cried as Chrildren do sometimes,
he would always cry on that name Dulipo.


Cle. Well, then I see well it is my own only Child, whom I lost, when I
lost my country: he was named Carino after his grandfather, and this Dulipo
whom he always remembered in his lamenting, was his foster father that
nourished him and brought him up.


Li. Sir, have I not told you enough of ye falsehood of Ferara? this gentleman
will not only pick your purse, but beguile you of your servant also, and make
you believe he is his son.


Cle. Well goodfellow, I have not used to lie.


Liti. Sir no, but every thing has a beginning.


Cle. Fie, Philogano have you not the least suspecte that may be of me.


Liti. No marie, but it were good he had the most suspecte that may be.


Cle. Well, hold thou thy peace a little good follow. I pray you tell me
Philogano had ye child any remembrance of his fathers name, his mothers name,
or ye name of his family?


Phi. He did remember them, and could name his mother also, but sure I have
forgotten the name.


Liti. I remember it well enough.


Phi. Tell it then.


Liti. Nay, that I will not marie, you have told him too much al ready.


Phi. Tell it I say, if thou can.


Liti. Ca^? yes by ye mass I ca^ well enough: but I will have my tongue pulled
out, rather tha^ tell it, unless he tell it first: do you not perceive sir,
what he goes about?


Cle. Well, I will tell you then, my name you know already: my wife his mothers
name was Sophronia, the house that I came of, they call Spiagia.


Liti. I never heard him speak of Spiagia but in deed I have heard him say,
his mothers name was Sophronia: but what of yt? a great matter I promise you.
It is like enoughe that you two have compact together to deceive my master.


Cle. What needs me more evident tokens? this is my son out of doubt whom I
lost eighteen years since, and a thousand thousand times have I lamented for
him: he should have also a mould on his left shoulder.


Li. He has a moulde there in deed: and an hole in an other place to, I would
your nose were in it.


Cle. Fair words fellow Litio: oh I pray you let us go talk with him, O
fortune, how much am I bound to thee if I find my son?


Phi. Yea how little am I beholde^ to fortune, that know not where my son is
become, and you whom I chose to be mine advocate, will now (by the means of
this Dulipo) become mine adversary?


Cle. A right suppose.
Sir, let us first go find mine: and I warrant you yours will be found also
ere it be long.


Phi. God grant: go we then,


Cle. Since the door is open, I will never knock nor call, but we will be bold
to go in.


Li. Sir, take you heed, least he lead you to some mischief.


Phi. Alas Litio, if my son be lost what care I what become of me?


Li. Well, I have told you my mind Sir, do you as you please.


Exeunt: Damon and Psiteria come in. Scena sexta.
DAMON. PSITERIA. COme hither you old kallat, you tatling huswife, that the
devil cut out your tongue: tell me, how could Pasiphilo know of this geere but
by you?

Psi. Sir, he never knew it of me, he was the first that told me of it.


Da. Thou lie old drabbe, but I would advise you tell me the truth, or I will
make those old bones rattle in your skin.


Psi. Sir, if you find me contrary, kill me.


Da. Why? where should he talk with thee?


Psi. He talked with me of it here in the street.


Da. What did you here?


Psi. I was going to the weauers for a web of clothe you have there.


Da. And what cause could Pasiphilo have to talk of it, unless thou began
the matter first?


Psi. Nay, he began with me sir, reuiling me, because I had told you of it: I
asked him how he knew of it, and he said he was in the stable when you
examined me ere while.


Da. Alas, alas, what shall I do then? in at doors old whore, I will pluck
that tongue of thine out by the roots one day. Alas it greeueth me more that
Pasiphilo knows it, than all the rest. He that will have a thing kept
secret, let him tell it to Pasiphilo: the people shall know it, and as many
as have ears and no mo. By this time he has told it in a hundredth places.
Cleander was the first, Erostrato the second, and so from one to another
throughout the city. Alas, what dower, what marriage shall I now prepare for
my daughter? O poor dolorons Damon, more miserable than misery it self, The
first suppose brought to conclusion.
would God it were true that Polynesta told me ere while: that he who has
deflowred her, is of no servile estate, (as hitherto he has been supposed in
my service) but that he is a gentleman borne of a good parentage in Sicilia.
Alas, small riches should content me, if he be but of an honest family: but I
fear that he has devised these toys to allure my daughters love. Well I will
go examine her again, my mind gives me that I shall perceive by her tale
whether it be true or not. But is not this Pasiphilo that comes out of my
neighbors house? what the devil ayleth him to leap and laughe so like a
fool in ye high way?


Pasiphilo comes out of the town laughing. Scena septima.
PHILOGANO. DAMON O God, that I might find Damon at home.

Da. What the diuill would he with me?


Pas. That I may be the first that shall bring him these news.


Da. What will he tell me, in the name of God?


Pas. O Lord, how happy am I? look where he is.


Da. What news Pasiphilo, that thou art so merry?


Pas. Sir I am merry to make you glad: I bring you joyful news.


Da. And that I have need of Pasiphilo.


Pas. I know sir, that you are a sorrowful man for this mishap that has
chanced in your house, peradventure you thought I had not known of it. But
let it pass, pluck up your sprits, and rejoice: for he that has done you
this injury is so well borne, and has so rich parents, that you may be glad
to make him your son in law.


Da. How know thou?


Pas. His father Philogano one of the worthiest men in all Cathanea, is now
come to the city, and is here in your neighbors house.


Da. What, in Erostratos house?


Pas. Nay in Dulipos house: for where you have always supposed this gentleman
to be Erostrato, it is not so, but your servant whom you have emprisoned
hitherto, supposed to be Dulipo, he is in deed Erostrato: and that other is
Dulipo. And thus they have always, even since their first ariual in this
city, exchaunged names, to the end that Erostrato the master, under ye name
of Dulipo a servant, might be entertained in your house, and so win the love
of your daughter.


Da. Well, then I perceive it is eue^ as Polinesta told me.


Pas. Why, did she tell you so?


Da. Yea: But I thought it but a tale.


Pas. Well, it is a true tale: and here they will be with you by and by: both
Philogano this worthy man, and master doctor Cleander.


Da. Cleander? what to do?


Pas. Cleander? Why thereby lies another tale, the most fortunate adventure
that ever you heard: wot you what? this other Dulipo, whom all this while we
supposed to be Erostrato, is found to be the son of Cleander, whom he lost
at the loss of Otranto, and was after sold in Sicilia too this Philogano the
strangest case that ever you heard: a man might make a Comedy of it. They will
come even straight, and tell you the whole circumstance of it themselves.


Da. Nay I will first go hear the story of this Dulipo, be it Dulipo or
Erostrato that I have here within, before I speak with Philogano.


Pas. So shall you do well sir, I will go tell them that they may stay a
while, but look where they come.


Damon goes in, Scenese, Cleander and Philogano come upon the stage.
Scena.viij.
SCENESE. CLEANDER. PHILOGANO. SIr, you shall not need to excuse ye matter any
further, since I have received no greater injury than by words, let the^ pass
like wind, I take them well in worth: and am rather well pleased than
offended: for it shall both be a good warning to me another time how to trust
every man at the first sight, yea, and I shall have good game here after to
tell this pleasant story another day in mine own country.

Cle. Gentleman, you have reason: and be you sure, that as many as hear it,
will take great pleasure in it. And you Philogano may think, that god in
heaven above, has ordained your coming hither at this present to the end I
might recover my lost son, whom by no other means I could ever have found
out.


Phi. Surely sir I think no less, for I think that not so much as a leaf
falls from the tree, without the ordinance of god. But let us go seek Damon,
for me thinks every day a year, every hour a day, and every minute to much
till I see my Erostrato.


Cle. I cannot blame you, go we then. Carino take you that gentleman home in
the mean time, the fewer the better to be present at such affairs.


Pasiphilo stays their going in. Scena.ix.
PHILOGANO CLEANDER. Master doctor, will you not show me this favor, to tell
me the cause of your displeasure?

Cle. Gentle Pasiphilo, I must needs confess I have done thee wrong, and
that I believed tales of thee, which in deed I find now contrary.


Pas. I am glad then that it proceedee rather of ignorance than of malice.


Cle. Yea believe me Pasiphilo.


Pas. O sir, but yet you should not have given me such foul words.


Cle. Well, content thy self Pasiphilo, I am thy friend as I have always
been: for proof whereof, come suppe with me to night, and from day to day this
seven night be thou my guest. But behold, here comes Damo^ out of his house.


Here they come all together Scena decima.
CLEANDER. PHILOGANO. DAMON. EROSTRATO. PASIPHILO. POLINESTA. NEVOLA. and other
servant. WE are come unto you sir, to turn you sorrow into joy and
gladness: the sorrow, we mean, that of force you have sustained since this
mishappe of late fallen in your house. But be you of good comfort sir, and
assure your self, that this young man which youthfully and not maliciously has
committed this amorons offense, is very well able (with consent of this worthy
man his father) to make you sufficient amends: being borne in Cathanea of
Sicilia, of a noble house, no way inferior unto you, and of wealth (by ye
report of such as know it) far exceeding that of yours.

Phi. And I here in proper person, do present unto you sir, not only my
assured friendship and brotherhoode, but do earnestly desire you to accept my
poor child (though unworthy) as your son in law: and for recompense of the
injury he has done you, I profer my whole lands in dower to your daughter:
yea and more would, if more I might.


Cle. And I sir, who have hitherto so earnestly desired your daughter in
marriage, do now willingly yield up and quite claim to this young man, who both
for his years and for the love he bears her, is most meetest to be her
husband. For where I was desirous of a wife by whom I might have issue, to leave
that little which god has sent me: now have I little need, that (thanks be to
god) have found my dearly beloved son, who^ I lost of a child at ye siege
of Otranto.


Da. Worthy gentleman, your friendship, your alliance, and the nobility of
your birthe are such, as I have much more cause to desire them of you than
you to request of me that which is already granted. Therefore I gladly, and
willingly receive the same, and think my self most happy now of all my life
past, that I have gotten so toward a son in law to my self, and so worthy
a father in law to my daughter: yea and much the greater is my contentation,
since this worthy gentleman master Cleander, does hold himself satisfied.
And now behold your son.


Ero. O father.


Pas. Behold the natural love of the child to the father: for inward joy
he cannot pronounce one word, in stead whereof he sends sobbes and tears to
tell the effect of his inward invention. But why do you abide here abroad? will
it please you to go into the house sir?


Da. Pasiphilo has said well: will it please you to go in sir?


Ne. Here I have brought you sir, both fetters and boltes.


Da. Away with them now.


Ne. Yea, but what shall I do with them?


Da. Marie I will tell thee Neuola: to make a right end of our supposes, lay
one of those boltes in the fire, and make thee a suppositorie as long as mine
arm, God save the sample. Nobles and gentlemen, if you suppose that our
supposes have given you sufficient cause of delighte, show some token, whereby
we may suppose you are content.


Et plauserunt. FINIS.
IOCASTA: A Tragedy written in Greek by Euripides, translated and digested
into Act by George Gascoygne, and Francis Kinvvelmershe of Grayes Inn, and
there by them presented, 1566.
The argument of the Tragedy.
To scourge the crime of wicked Laius,
And vvrecke the foul Incest of Oedipus,
The angry Gods styrred up their sons, by strife
With blades embrevved to reaue each others life:
The wife, the mother, and the concubyne,
(Whose fearful heart foredrad their fatal fine,)
Her sons thus dead, disdayneth longer life,
And slayes hirself with selfsame bloody knyfe:
The daughter she, surprisde with childish dread
(That durst not dye) a loathsome life does lead,
Yet rather chose to guide her banished sire,
Than cruel Creon should have his desire.
Creon is King, the Figure.
type of Tyranny,
And Oedipus, myrrour of misery.
Fortunatus Infoelix.
The names of the Interloquutors.
Iocasta, the Queen. Seruus, a noble man of the Queens train. Bailo,
governor to the Queens sons. Antygone, daughter to the Queen. Chorus,
four Thebane dames. Pollynices and Eteocles. sons to Oedipus and the Queen.
Creon, the Queens brother. Meneceus, son to Creon. Tyresias, the divine
priest. Manto, the daughter of Tyresias. Sacerdos, the sacrifycing priest.
Nuntij, three messangers from the camp. Oedipus, the old King father to
Eteocles and Pollynices, son and husband to Iocasta the Queen.
The Tragedy presented as it were in Thebes.

The order of the dumme shows and Musickes before every Act.
First, before the beginning of the first Act, did sound a doleful and
strange noise of violles, Cythren, Bandurion, and such like, during the
which, there came in upon the Stage a king with an Imperial crown upon his
head, very richely apparelled: a Scepter in his right hand, a Mounde with a
Cross in his left hand, sitting in a Chariote very richely furnished, drawn
in by four Kings in their Dublettes and Hosen, with Crowns also upon their
heads. Representing unto us Ambition, by the history of Sesostres king of
Egypt, who being in his time and reign a mighty Conqueror, yet not content
to have subdued many princes, and taken from them their kingdoms and
dominions, did in like manner cause those Kings whom he had so overcome, to
draw in his Chariote like Beasts and Oxen, thereby to content his unbridled
ambitious desire. After he had been drawn twyce about the Stage, and retired,
the Music ceased, and Iocasta the Queen issued out of her house, beginning
the first Act, as follows. Iocasta the Queen issues out of her Palace,
before her twelve Gentlemen, following after her eight Gentlewomen, whereof
four be the Chorus that remain on the Stage after her departure. At her
entrance the Trumpettes sounded, and after she had gone once about the Stage,
she turns to one of her most trusty and esteemed servant, and unto him she
discloseth her grief, as follows.

The first Act.
The first Scene.
IOCASTA. SERVVS. O Faithful servant of mine ancient sire,
Though unto thee, sufficiently be known
The whole discourse of my recurelesse grief
By seeing me from Princes royal state
Thus basely brought into so great contempt,
As mine own sons repine to hear my plaint,
Now of a Queen but barely bearing name,
Seeing this town, seeing my flesh and blood,
Against it self to levy threatening arms,
(Whereof to talk my heart it rendes in twain)
Yet once again, I must to thee recompte
The wailefull thing that is already spread,
Because I know, that pity will compel
Thy tender heart, more than my natural child,
With ruthful tears to moan my mourning case.
Ser. My gracious Queen, as no man might surmount
The constant faith I bear my souraine Lord,
So do I think, for love and trusty zeal,
No Son you have, does owe you more than I:
For hereunto I am by duty bound,
With service meet no less to honor you,
Than that renoumed Prince your dear father.
And as my duties be most infinite,
So infinite, must also be my love:
Then if my life or spending of my blood
May be employde to do your highness good,
Command (O Queen) command this carcass here,
In spite of death to satisfy thy will,
So, though I die, yet shall my willing ghost
Contentedly forsake this withered corpse,
For joy to think I never shewde my self
Ungrateful once to such a worthy Queen.

Ioca. Thou know what care my careful father took,
In wedlockes sacred state to settle me
With Laius, king of this unhappy Thebs,
That most unhappy now our City is:
Thou know, how he, desirous still to search
The hidden secrets of supernall powers,
Unto Divines did make his often recourse,
Of them to learn when he should have a son,
That in his Realm might after him succeed:
Of whom receiving answer sharp and sour,
That his own son should work his wailfull end,
The wretched king (though all in vain) did seek
For to eschew that could not be eschewed:
And so, forgetting laws of natures love,
No sooner had this paynfull womb brought forth
His eldest son to this desired light,
But straight he chargde a trusty man of his
To bear the child into a desert wood,
And leave it there, for Tigers to devour.

Ser. O lucklesse babe, begot in woeful hour.

Ioc. His servant thus obedient to his hest,
Up by the heels did hang this faultlesse Impe,
And percing with a knife his tender feet,
Through both the wounds did draw the slender twigs,
Which being bound about his feeble limbs,
Were strong enough to hold the little soul.
Thus did he leave this infant scarcely borne,
That in short time must needs have lost his life,
If destenie (that for our greater greefes
Decreede before to keep it still alive)
Had not unto this child sent present help:
For so it chaunst, a shepherd passing by,
With pity moude, did stay his giltlesse death:
He took him home, and gave him to his wife,
With homely fare to feed and foster up:
Now harken how the heavens have wrought the way
To Laius death, and to mine own decay.

"Ser. Experience proves, and daily is it seen,
"In vain (too vain) man strives against the heavens.

Ioca. Not far fro thence, the mighty Polibus,
Of Corinth King, did keep his princely court,
Unto whose woeful wife (lamenting much
She had no offspring by her noble pheere)
The courteous shepherd gave my little son:
Which grateful gift, the Queen did so accept,
As nothing seemde more precious in her sight:
Partly, for that, his faitures were so fine,
Partly, for that, he was so beautiful,
And partly, for because his comely grace
Gave great suspicion of his royal blood.
The infant grew, and many years was demde
Polibus son, till time, that Oedipus
(For so he named was) did understand
That Polibus was not his sire in deed,
Whereby forsaking friends and country there,
He did return to seek his native stock:
And being come into Phocides land,
Took notice of the cursed oracle,
How first he should his father do to death,
And then become his mothers wedded mate.

Ser. O fierce aspect of cruel planets all,
That can decree such seas of heinous faults.

Ioca. Then Oedipus, freight full of chilling fear,
By all means sought to avoid this furious fate,
But whiles he weende to shun the shameful deed,
Vnluckly guided by his own mishappe,
He fell into the snare that most he feared:
For lo, in Phocides did Laius lie,
To end the broils that civil discord then
Had raised up in that unquiet land,
By means whereof my woeful Oedipus,
Affording aid unto the other side,
With murdring blade unawares his father slew.
Thus heavenly doom, thus fate, thus powers divine,
Thus wicked read of Prophets took effect:
Now only restes to end the bitter hap
Of me, of me his miserable mother.
Alas, how cold I feel the quaking blood
Pass too and fro within my trembling breast?
Oedipus, when this bloody deed was done,
Forced forth by fatal doom, to Thebes came,
Where as full soon with glory he atchieude
The crown and scepter of this noble land,
By conquering Sphinx that cruel monster lo,
That erst destroyde this goodly flouring soil:
And thus did I (O hateful thing to hear)
To my own son become a wretched wife.

Ser. No marvel, though the golden Sun withdrew
His glittering beams from such a sinful fact.

Ioca. And so by him that from this belly sprang,
I brought to light (O cursed that I am)
As Well two sons, as daughters also twain:
But when this monstrous marriage was disclosde,
So sore began the rage of boiling wrath
To swell within the furious breast of him,
As he him self by stresse of his own nails,
Out of his head did tear his griefull eyne,
Unworthy more to see the shining light.

Ser. How could it be, that knowing he had done
So foul a blot, he would remain alive?

"Ioca. So deeply faulteth none, the which unawares
"Does fall into the crime he can not shun:
And he (alas) unto his greater grief,
Prolongs the date of his accursed days,
Knowing that life does more and more increase
The cruel plages of his detested gilte,
"Where stroke of griefly death does set an end
"Unto the pangs of man's increasing pain.

Ser. Of others all, most cause have we to moan
Thy woeful smarte (O miserable Queen)
Such and so many are thy grievous harms.

Ioca. Now to the end this blind outrageous sire.
Should reap no joy of his unnatural fruit,
His wretched sons, pricked forth by furious spite,
Adiudge their father to perpetual prison:
There buried in the depthe of dungeon dark,
(Alas) he leads his discontented life,
Accursing still his stony hearted sons,
And wishing all the infernal sprites of hell,
To breathe such poysned hate into their breasts,
As each with other fall to bloody wars,
And so with pricking point of piercing blade,
To rippe their bowels out, that each of them
With others blood might strain his guilty hands,
And both at once by stroke of speedy death
Be forthwith thrown into the Stigian lake.

Ser. The mighty Gods prevent so foul a deed,

Ioca. They to avoid the wicked blasphemies,
And sinful prayer of their angry sire,
Agreed thus, that of this noble realm,
Until the course of one full year was run,
Eteocles should sway the kingly mace,
And Polynice as exul should depart,
Till time expyrde: and then to Polynice
Eteocles should yield the scepter up:
Thus year by year the one succeeding other,
This royal crown should unto both remain.

Ser. Oh thunbridled minds of ambicious men.

Ioca. Etocles thus plast in princely seat,
Drunk with the sugared taste of kingly reign,
Not only shut his brother from the crown,
But also from his native country soil.
Alas poor Polynice, what might he do,
Unjustly by his brother thus betrayed?
To Argos he, with sad and heavy cheer
Forthwith conuayde him self, on whom at length
With fauning face good fortune smyled so,
As with Adrastus king of Argiues there,
He found such favor and affinity,
As (to restore my son unto his reign,)
He has besiedge this noble city Thebes,
And hence proceeds my most extreme annoye:
For, of my sons, who ever do prevail,
The victory will turn unto my grief:
Alas, I fear (such is the chance of war)
That one, or both shall purchase death thereby.
Wherefore, to shun the worst that may befall,
Though comfortless, yet as a pitiful mother
Whom nature binds to love her loving sons,
And to provide the best for their avail,
I have thought good by prayers to entreat
The two brethren (nay rather cruel foes)
A while to stay their fierce and furious fight,
Till I have tried by means for to apease
The swelling wrath of their outraging wills,
And so with much to do, at my request
They have forborne unto this only hour.

Ser. Small space good wot, to stint so great a strife.

Ioca. And even right now, a trusty man of mine,
Returned from the camp, enforming me
That Polynice will straight to Thebes come,
Thus of my woe, this is the wailefull su^me.
And for because, in vain and bootelesse plainte
I have small need to spend this little time,
Here will I cease, in words more to be wray
The restless state of my afflicted mind,
Desiring thee, thou go to Eteocles,
Hartly on my behalf beseching him,
That out of hand according to his promise,
He will vouchsafe to come unto my court,
I know he loves thee well, and to thy words
I think thou know he will give willing ear.

Ser. (O noble Queen) since unto such affairs
My spedie diligence is requisite,
I will apply effectually to do
What so your highness has commanded me.

Ioca. I will go in, and pray the Gods therwhile,
With tender pity to appease my grief.

Iocasta goes off the stage into her palace, her four handmaides follow her,
the four Chorus also follow her to the gates of her palace, after coming on
the stage, take their place, where they continue to the end of the Tragedy.
SERVVS SOLVS. "THe simple man, whose marvel is so great
"At stately courts, The court lively painted.
and princes regal seat,
"With gasing eye but only does regard
"The golden gloss that outwardly appears,
"The crowns bedeckt with pearl and precious stones,
"The rich attire imbost with beaten gold,
"The glittering mace, the pomp of swarming train,
"The mighty halles heapt full of flattering friends,
"The chambers huge, the goodly gorgeous beds,
"The gilted roofes embowde with curious work,
"The faces sweet of fine disdayning dames,
"The vain suppose of wanton reign at lust:
"But never viewes with eye of inward thought,
"The painful toil, the great and grievous cares,
"The troubles still, the new increasing fears,
"That princes nourish in their jealous breasts:
"He wayeth not the charge that Jove has laid
"On princes, how for themselves they reign not:
"He weenes, the law must stoop to princely will,
"But princes frame their noble wills to law:
"He knows not, that as the boystrous wind
"Does shake the tops of highest reared towers,
"So does the force of froward fortune strike
"The wight that highest sits in haughty state.
Lo Oedipus, that sometime reigned king
Of Thebane soil, that wonted to suppress
The might Prince, and keep him under check,
That fearful was unto his foreign foes,
Now like a poor afflicted prisoner,
In dungeon dark, shut up from cheerful light,
In every part so plagued with annoy,
As he abhorrs to lead a longer life,
By means whereof, the one against the other
His wrathful sons have planted all their force,
And Thebes here, this ancient worthy town,
With threatening siege girt in on every side,
In danger lies to be subverted quite,
If help of heavenly Jove uphold it not,
But as dark night succedes the shining day,
So lowering grief comes after pleasant joy.
Well now the charge her highness did command
I must fulfill, though happily all in vain.
Seruus goes off the stage by the gates called Electrae. Antygone attended
with.iij. gentlewomen and her governor comes out of the Queen her mothers
Palace. BAILO. ANTIGONE. O Gentle daughter of King Oedipus,
O sister dear to that unhappy wight
Whom brothers rage has reaued of his right,
To whom, thou know, in young and tender years
I was a friend and faithful gouenour,
Come forth, since that her grace has granted leave,
And let me know what cause has moved now
So chaste a maid to set her dainty foot
Over the thresholde of her secret lodge?
Since that the town is furnishte every where
With men of arms and warlike instruments,
Unto our ears there co^mes no other noise,
But sound of trumpe, and neigh of trampling stedes,
Which running up and down from place to place,
With hideous cries betoken blood and death:
The blasing sun ne shines half so brighte,
As it was wont to do at dawne of day:
The wretched dames throughout the woeful town,
Together clustring to the temples go,
Beseching Jove by way of humble plainte,
With tender ruthe to pity their distress.
An. The love I bear to my sweet Polynice,
My dear brother, is only cause hereof.

Bai. Why daughter, know thou any remedy
How to defend thy fathers city here
From that outrage and fierce repyning wrath,
Which he against it, justly has conceived?

An. Oh governor might this my faultlesse blood
Suffice to stay my brethrens dyre debate,
With glad content I could afford my life
Betwixt them both to plant a perfect peace.
But since (alas) I cannot as I would,
A hot desire enflames my fervent mind
To have a sight of my sweet Polynice.
Wherefore (good guide) vouchsafe to guide me up
Into some tower about this hugie court,
From whence I may behold our enemies camp,
Thereby at least to feed my hungry eyes
But with the sight of my beloved brother:
Then if I die, contented shall I die.

Bai. O princly dame, the tender care thou takste
Of thy dear brother, deserves double praise:
Yet crau'st thou that, which cannot be obtainde,
By reason of the distance from the town
Unto the plain, where tharmie lies incampte:
And furthermore, besemeth not a maid
To show her self in such unseemly place,
Whereas among such young and lusty troops
Of harebrainde soldiers marching to and fro,
Both honest name and honor is empairde:
But yet rejoice, since this thy great desire,
Without long let, or yet without thy pain,
At wish and will shortly may be fulfillde.
For Polynice forthwith will hither come,
Even I my self was lately at the camp,
Commanded by the Queen to bid him come,
Who labors still to link in friendly league,
Her iarring sons (which hap so hoped for,
Eftsoon I pray the gracious gods to grant)
And sure I am, that ere this hour pass,
Thou shall him here in person safely see.

Anti. O loving friend, do thou then warrant me,
That Polynice will come unto this court?

Bai. Ere thou he ware thou shall him here behold.

Anti. And who (alas) does warrant his adventure,
That of Eteocles he take no harm?

Bai. For constant pledge, he has his brothers faith,
He has also the truce that yet endures.

An. I fear alas, alas I greatly fear,
Some trustlesse snare his cruel brother lays
To trappe him in.

Bai. Daughter, god knows how willing I would be
With sweet relief to comfort thy distress,
But I cannot impart to thee, the good
Which I my self do not as yet enjoy.
The wailefull cause that moves Eteocles
With Polynice to enter civil wars
Is ouergreat, and for this only cause
Full many men have broke the laws of truth,
And topsie turuie turned many towns,
"To gredie (daughter) too too gredie is
"Desire to rule and reign in kingly state.
Ne can he bide, that swaise a realm alone
To have another ioynde with him therein:
Yet must we hope for help of heavenly powers,
Since they be just, their mercy is at hand,
To help the weak when worldly force does fail.

An. As both my brethren be, so both I bear
As much good will as any sister may,
But yet the wrong that unto Polynice
This trothlesse tyrant has unjustly showed,
Does lead me more, to wish the prosperous life
Of Polynice, than of that cruel wretch,
Besides that, Polynice whiles he remainde
In Thebes here, did ever love me more,
Than did Eteocles, whose swelling hate
Is toward me increased more and more:
Whereof I partly may assure my self,
Considering he disdaynes to visit me,
Yea, happly he intends to reaue my life,
And having power he will not stick to do it.
This therefore makes me earnestly desire
Often times to see him: yet ever as I think
For to discharge the duty of a sister,
The fear I have of hurt, does change as fast
My doubtful love into disdainefull spite.

Bai. Yet daughter, must ye trust in mighty Jove,
His will is not, that for thoffence of one
So many suffer undeserved smarte:
I mean of thee, I mean of Polynice,
Of Iocasta thy woeful aged mother,
And of Ismena thy beloved sister,
Who though for this she does not outwardly
For drearie eyes distill lamenting tears,
Yet do I think, no less aflicting grief
Does inwardly torment her tender breast.

An. Besides all this, a certain jealousy,
Lately conceyude (I know not whence it springs)
Of Creon, my mothers brother, appaules me much,
Him doubt I more than any danger else.

Bai. Dear daughter, leave this foolish jealousy,
And seeing that thou shall here shortly find
Thy brother Polynice, go in again.

An. O joyful would it be to me therwhile,
To understand the order of the host,
Whether it be such as have sufficient power
To overthrow this mighty town of Thebes.
What place supplies my brother Polynice?
Where found ye him? what answer did he give?
And though so great a care pertains not
Unto a maid of my vnskill years,
Yet, forbicause my self partaker am
Of good and evil with this my country soil,
I long to hear thee tell those fearful news,
Which otherwise I cannot understand.

Bai. So noble a desire (O worthy dame)
I much commend: and briefly as I can,
Will satisfy thy hungry mind herein.
The power of men that Polynice has brought,
(Whereof he, (being Adrastus son in law)
Takes chiefest charge) is even the flower of Greece,
Whose hugie train so mighty seems to be,
As I see not, how this our drouping town
Is able to withstand so strong a siege.
Entering the field their army did I find
So orderly in form of battle set,
As though they would forthwith have given the charge:
In battles seven the host divided is,
To each of which, by order of the king,
A valiant knight for captain is assignde:
And as you know this city has seven gates,
So every captain has his gate prescribde,
With fierce assault to make his entry at.
And further, passing through our frouning foes
(That gave me countnaunce of a messanger)
Hard by the King I spied Polynice,
In golden glistring arms most richely cladde,
Whose person many a stately prince enpalde,
And many a comely crowned head enclosde:
At sight of me his color straight he chaungde,
And like a loving child, in clasped arms
He caught me up, and friendly kissed my cheke,
Then hearing what his mother did demand
With glad consent according to her hest
Gave me his hand, to come unto the court,
Of mutual truce desirous so he seemde,
He asked me of Antygone and Ismena,
But chiefelie unto thee above the rest
He gave me charge most heartly to commend him.

An. The gods give grace he may at length possess
His kingly right, and I his wished sight.

Bai. Daughter no more, it is time ye now return:
It stands not with the honor of your state
Thus to be seen suspiciously abroad:
"For vulgar tongues are armed evermore
"With slanderous brute to bleamishe the renoume
"Of virtues dames, which though at first it spring
"Of slender cause, yet does it swell so fast,
A glass for young women.
"As in short space it fills every ear
"With swifte report of undeserved blame:
"You cannot be to curious of your name:
"Fond show of evil (though still the mind be chaste)
"Decays the credit often, that Ladies had,
"Sometimes the place presumes a wanton mind:
"Repair sometimes of some, does hurt their honor:
"Sometimes the light and garishe proud attire
"Persuades a yelding bent of pleasing youths.
The voice that goes of your unspotted fame,
Is like a tender flower, that with the blast
Of every little wind does fade away.
Go in dear child, this way will I go see
If I can meet thy brother Polynice.

Antigone with her maids returns into her mothers palace, her governor
goes out by the gates Homoloydes. CHORUS. IF greedy lust of man's ambitious eye
(That thristeth so for swaye of earthly things)
Would eke foresee, what mischefes grow thereby,
What careful toil to quiet state it brings,
What endless grief from such a fountain springs:
Then should he swim in seas of sweet delight,
That now complains of fortunes cruel spite.
For then he would so safely shield himself
With sacred rules of wisdoms sage advise,
As no alluring train of trustles pelf,
To fond affectes his fancy should entise,
Then wary heed would quickly make him wise:
Where contrary (such is our skillesse kind)
We most do seek, that most may hurt the mind.
Amid the troop of these unstable toys,
Some fancies lo to beauty must be bent,
Some hunt for wealth, and some set all their joys,
In regal power of princely government,
Yet none of these from care are clean exempt:
For either they be got with grievous toil,
Or in the end forgone with shameful foil.
This flitting world does firmly naught retain,
Wherein a man may boldly rest his trust,
Such fickle chance in fortune does remain,
As when she lust, she threatens whom she lust,
From high renoume to throw him in the dust:
Thus may we see that each triumphing joy
By fortunes froune is turned to annoye.
Those elder heads may well be thought to err,
The which for easy life and quiet days,
The vulgar sort would seem for to prefer,
If glorious Phoebe with-holde his glistring rays,
From such a peer as crown and scepter swayes,
No marvel though he hide his heavenly face,
From us that come of less renoumed race.
Selde shall you see the ruin of a Prince, Argumentu^ a maiore.

But that the people eke like brunt do bear,
And old records of ancient time long since,
From age to age, yea almost every where,
With proof hereof has glutted every ear:
Thus by the follies of the princes heart,
The bounden subject still receives smart.
Lo, how unbridled lust of private reign,
Has pricked both the brethren unto war:
Yet Polynice, with sign of less disdain,
Against this land has brought from countries far,
A foreign power, to end this cruel jar,
Forgetting quite the duty, love, and zeal,
He ought to bear unto this common weal.
But whosoever gets the victory,
We wretched dames, and thou O noble town,
Shall feel thereof the woeful misery,
Thy gorgeous pomp, thy glorious high renoume,
Thy stately towers, and all shall fall a down,
Since raging Mars will each of them assist
In others breast to bathe his bloody fist.
But thou Bacchus.
O son of Semel, and of Jove,
(That tamde the proud attempt of giaunts strong)
Do thou defend, even of thy tender love,
Bacchus was the God whom they most honored in Thebes.
Thy humble thralls from this afflicting wrong,
Whom wast of war has now tormented long:
So shall we never fail ne day ne night
With reverence due thy praises to resight.
Finis Actus primi.
Done by F. Kinwelmarshe.
The order of the second dumb shevve.
BEfore the beginning of this second Act did sound a very doleful noise of
flutes: during the which there came in upon the stage two coffines covered with
hearclothes, and brought in by.viij. in mourning weed: and accompanied
with.viij. other mourners: and after they had carried the coffins about the
stage, there opened and appeared a Grave, wherein they buried ye coffins and put
fire to them: but the flames did sever and part in twain, signifying discord
by the history of two brethren, whose discord in their life was not only to be
wondered at, but being buried both in one Tomb (as some writers affirm) the
flames of their funerals did yet part the one from the other in like manner,
and would in no wise join into one flame. After the Funerals were ended and
the fire consumed, the grave was closed up again, the mourners withdrew the^
off the stage, and immediately by ye gates Homoloydes entered Pollinyces
accompanied with vj. gentlemen and a page that carried his helmet and Target:
he and his men unarmed saving their gorgets, for that they were permitted to
come into the town in time of truce, to the end Iocasta might bring the two
brethren to a parle: and Pollinyces after good regard taken round about him,
speak as follows.

Actus. 2.
Scena. 1.
POLINICES. CHORUS. IOCASTA. ETEOCLES. Lo here mine own city and native
soil,
Lo here the nest I ought to nestle in,
Yet being thus entrencht with mine own towers,
And that, from him the safeconduct is given
Which does enjoy as much as mine should be,
My feet can tread no step without suspect:
For where my brother bides, even there behoues
More wary scout than in an enmies camp.
Yet while I may wthin this right hand hold
This Never.
bronde, this blade, (vnyelde^ ever yet)
My life shall not be left without revenge.
But here behold the holy sancturie,
Of Baccus eke the worthy Image, lo
The aultars where the sacred flames have shone,
And where of yore these giltlesse hands of mine
Full often have offered to our mighty gods:
I see also a worthy company
Of Thebane dames, resembling unto me
The train of Iocasta my dear mother:
Behold them clad in clothes of griesly black,
That hellishe hew that Sword.
nay for other harms
So well besemed wretched wightes to wear:
For why, ere long their selves, themselves shall see
(Gramercy to their princes tyranny)
Some spoiled of their sweet and sucking babes,
Some lose their husband, other some their sire,
And some their friends that were to them full dear.
But now it is time to lay the sword aside.
And eke of them to know where is the Queen:
O worthy dames, heavy, unhappy ye,
Where rests now the restless queen of Thebes?
Chor. O worthy impe sprung out of worthy race,
Renoumed Prince, whom we have looked for long,
And now in happy hour art come to us,
Some quiet bring to this unquiet realm.
O queen, O queen, come forth and see thy son,
The gentle fruit of all thy joyful seed.

Iocast. My faithful friends, my dear beloved maids,
I come at call, and at your words I move
My feebled feet with age and agony:
Where is my son? O tell me where is he,
For whom I sighed have so often sith,
For whom I spend both nights and days in tears?

Poli. Here noble mother, here, not as the king,
Nor as a Citizen of stately Thebes,
But as a stranger now, I thank my brother.

Iocast. O son, O sweet and my desired son,
These eyes they see, these hands of mine thee touch,
Yet scarsly can this mind believe the same,
And scarsly can this bruised breast sustain
The sodeyne joy that is inclosde therein:
O gladsome glass, wherein I see my self.

Chor. So grant the Gods, for our common good,
You friendly may your sons both friends behold.

Iocast. At thy depart, O lovely child, thou left
My house in tears, and me thy wretched dame,
Myrrour of martyrdom, Lamenting.
waymenting still
Th'vnworthie exile thy brother to thee gave:
Ne was there ever son or friend far off,
Of his dear friends or mother so desired,
As thy return, in all the town of Thebes.
And of my self more than the rest to speak,
I have as thou may see, clean cast aside
My princely roabes, and thus in woeful weed,
Bewrapped have these lustlesse limbs of mine:
Naught else but tears have trickled from mine eyes,
And eke thy wretched blind and aged sire,
Since first he heard what war tweene you there was,
As one that did his bitter curse repent,
Or that he prayed to Jove for your decay,
With stretching string, or else with bloody knyfe
Has sought full often to end his loathed life.
Thou this mean while my son, have lingered long
In far and forreyn coasts, and wedded eke,
By whom thou may, (when heavens appoyntes it so)
Strange issue have by one a stranger borne,
Which greeues me sore, and much the more dear child,
Because I was not present at the same,
There to perform thy loving mothers due.
But for I find thy noble match so meet,
And worthy both for thy degree and birth,
I seek to comfort thee by mine advise,
That thou return this city to inhabit,
Which best of all may seem to be the bower,
Both for thy self and for thy noble spouse.
Forget thou then thy brothers injuries,
And know dear child, the harm of all missehap
That happes twixt you, must hap likewise to me:
Ne can the cruel sword so slightly touch
Your tender flesh, but that the self same wound
Shall deeply bruise this aged breast of mine.

Cho. "There is no love may be comparde to that,
"The tender mother bears unto her child:
"For even somuche the more it does increase,
"As their grief grows, or contentations cease.

Poli. I know not mother, if I praise deserve,
(That you to please, whom I ought not displease)
Have trained my self among my trustlesse foes:
But Nature draws (whether he will or nill)
Each man to love his native country soil:
And who should say, that otherwise it were,
His tongue should never with his heart agree.
This has me drawn beside my bounden due,
To set full light this lucklesse life of mine:
For of my brother, what may I else hope,
But traynes of treason, force and falshoode both?
Yet neither peril present, nor to come,
Can hold me from my due obedience:
I grant I can not grieflesse, well behold
My fathers palace, the holy aultars,
Ne lovely lodge wherein I fostred was:
From whence driven out, and chaste unworthily,
I have to long aboade in forreyn coasts:
And as the growing green and pleasant plant,
Does bear fresh branches one above another,
Even so amidde the huge heap of my woes,
Does grow one grudge more grievous than the rest,
To see my dear and doleful mother, cladde
In mourning tire, to tire her mourning mind,
Wretched alonely for my wretchedness,
So lykes that enemy my brother best:
Soon shall you see that in this wandering world,
No enmity is equal unto that
That dark disdain (the cause of every evil)
Does breed full often in consanguinitie.
But Jove, he knows what dole I do endure,
For you and for my fathers wretched woe,
And eke how deeply I desire to know
What weary life my loving sisters lead,
And what anoye mine absence them has given.

Iocast. Alas, alas, how wrekefull wrath of Gods
Does still afflicte Oedipus progeny:
The first cause was thy fathers wicked bed,
And then (oh why do I my plagues recompte?)
My burden borne, and your unhappy birth:
"But needs we must with pacient hearts abide,
"What so from high the heavens do provide.
With thee my child, feign would I question yet
Of certain things me would I that my words
Might thee anoye, ne yet renew thy grief.

Poli. Say on, dear mother, say what so you please:
What pleases you, shall never me disease.

Iocast. And seems it not a heavy hap my son,
To be deprived of thy country coasts?

Poly. So heavy hap as tongue can not express.

Iocast. And what may most molest the mind Exile an exceeding grief to an
honest mind.
of man
This is exiled from his native soil?

Poli. The liberty he with his country lost,
"And that he lacks freedom for to speak,
"What seems best, without control or check.

Iocast. Why so? each servant lacks liberty
To speak his mind, without his masters leave.

Poli. "In exile, All exyles are like bondmen.
every man, or bond or free,
"Of noble race, or meaner parentage,
"Is not in this unlike unto the slave,
"That must of force obey to each man's will,
"And praise the peevishness of each man's pride.

Iocast. And seemed this so grievous unto thee?

Poli. What grief can greater be, than so constraynde
Slauelike to serve gaynst right and reason both,
Yea much the more, to him that noble is,
By stately line, or yet by virtuous life,
And has a heart like to his noble mind.

Iocast. What helps most in such adversity?

Poli. Hope helps most to comfort misery. Hope the help in miserye.


Ioca. Hope to return from whence he first was driven?

Poli. Yea, hope that happens oftentimes to late,
And many die before such hap may fall.

Iocast. And how did thou before thy marriage son,
Mainteyne thy life, a stranger so bestad?

Poli. Sometime I found (though seldom so it were)
Some gentle heart, that could for curtesye,
Content himself to succor mine estate.

Iocast. Thy fathers friends and thine, did they not help
For to relieve that naked need of thine?

Poli. "Mother, he has a foolish fantasy,
"That thinks to find a friend in misery. Fuw friends in miserye.


Iocast. Thou might have help by thy nobility.

Poli. "Covered alas, in cloak of poverty?

Iocast. "Well ought we then that are but mortal here,
"Above all treasure count our country dear:
Yea let me know my son, what cause thee moved
To go to Greece?

Poli. The flying fame that thundered in mine ears,
How king Adrastus, governor of Greece,
Was answered by Oracle, that he
Should knitte in linkes of lawful marriage,
His two fair daughters, and his only heirs,
One to a Lion, the other to a Boar:
An answer such as each man wondered at.

Iocast. And how belongs this answer now to thee?

Poli. I took my guess even by this ensign here,
A Lion lo, which I did always bear:
Yet think I not, but Jove alonely brought
These hands of mine to such an high exploite.

Iocast. And how yet came it to this strange effect?

Poli. The shining day had run his hasted course,
And deawie night bespread her mantell dark,
When I that wandered after weary toil,
To seek some harbrough for mine irked limbs,
Began find at last a little cabin, close
Adjoined fast unto the stately walls,
Where king Adrastus held his royal towers.
Scarce was I there in quiet well ycought,
Small causes may move the needy to contend.
But thither came another exile eke,
Named Tydeus, who straue perforce to drive
Me from this sorry seat, and so at last,
We settled us to fell and bloody fight,
Whereof the rumor grew so great forthwith,
That straight the king informed was thereof,
Who seeing then the ensigns that we bare,
To be even such as were to him foresaid,
Chose each of us to be his son by law,
And since did solemnize eke the same.

Iocast. Yet would I know, if that thy wife be such
As thou can joy in her? or what she is?

Pyli. O mother dear, fayrer ne wyser dame
Is none in Greece, Argia is her name.

Iocast. How could thou to this doubtful enterprise,
So many bring, thus armed all at once?

Poli. Adrastus swear, that he would soon restore
Unto our right both Tydeus, and me:
And first for me, that had the greater need,
Whereby the best and boldest bloods in Greece,
Have followed me unto this enterprise.
A thing both just and grievous unto me,
Grievous I say, for that I do lament
To be constrained by such open wrong,
To war against mine own dear country feeres.
But unto you (O mother) does pertain
To stinte this strife, and both deliver me
From exile now, and eke the town from siege:
For otherwise, I swear you here by heavens,
Eteocles, who now does me disdain
For brother, shortly shall see me his lord*
I ask the seat, whereof I ought of right
Possess the half, I am Oedipus son,
And yours, so am I true son to you both.
Wherefore I hope that as in my defense,
The world will weygh, so Jove will me assiste.

Eteocles comes in here by the gates Electrae, himself armed, and before
him.xx. gentlemen in armor, his two pages, whereof the one bears his Target,
the other his helm. Chor. Behold O queen, behold O worthy queen, The
dames did love Polynice and hate Eteocles.

Unworthy he, Eteocles here co^mes,
So, would the Gods, that in this noble realm
Should never long unnoble tyrant reign,
Or that with wrong the right and doutlesse heir,
Should banished be out of his princely seat.
Yet thou O queen, so fyle thy sugared tongue.
And with such counsel deck thy mothers tale,
That peace may both the brothers hearts inflame,
And rancour yield, that erst possess the same.

Eteocl. Mother, behold, your hestes for to obey,
In person now am I resorted hither:
In haste therefore, feign would I know what cause
With hasty speed, so moved has your mind
To call me now so causeless out of time,
When common wealth most craves my only aid:
Feign would I know what quent commodity
Persuades you thus to take a truce for time,
And yield the gates wide open to my foe,
The gates that might our stately state defend,
And now are made the path of our decay.

Ioca. "Repress dear son, those raging storms of wrath,
"That so bedimme the eyes of thine intent,
"As when the tongue (a ready Instrument)
"Would feign pronounce the meaning of the mind,
"It cannot speak one honest seemly word.
"But when disdain is shrunk, or set aside,
"And mind of man with leisure can discourse
"What seemly words his tale may best beseem,
"And that the tongue vnfoldes without affectes
"Then may proceed an answer sage and grave,
"And every sentence sawst with soberness:
Wherefore vnbende thine angry brows dear child,
And cast thy rolling eyes none other way,
One of the furies.
That here do not Medusaes (a) face behold,
But him, even him, thy blood and brother dear.
And thou behold, my Polinices eke,
Thy brothers face, wherein when thou may see
Thine own image, remember therewithal,
That what offense thou would to him were done,
The blows thereof rebounde unto thy self.
And hereof eke, I would you both forewarne,
When friends or brethren, kinsfolk or allies,
(Whose hasty hearts some angry mood had moved)
Be face to face by some of pity brought,
Who seeks to end their discord and debate:
Rehersall of old grudges do^ h^^der al reconcilition.
They only ought consider well the cause
For which they come, and cast out of their mind
For evermore the old offenses past:
So shall sweet peace drive pleading out of place.
Wherefore the first shall Polinices be,
To tell what reason first his mind did rule,
That thus our walls with foreign foes enclosde
In sharp revenge of causeless wrong received,
As he alleges by his brothers doom:
And of this wicked woe and dire Cruel or vengeable.
debate,
Some God of pity be the equal judge,
Whom I beseech, to breath in both your breasts
A yelding heart to deep desire of peace.

Poli. Truth pleads simply when falssehood uses eloquence.
"My worthy dame, I find that tried truth
"Does best beseem a simple naked tale,
"Ne needs to be with painted process pricked,
"That in her self has no diversity,
"But always shows one vndisguised face,
"Where deep deceit and lies must seek the shade,
"And wrap their words in guilefull eloquence,
"As ever fraught with contrariety:
So have I often said, and say again,
That to avoid our fathers foul reproach
And bitter curse, I parted from this land
With right good will, yet thus with him agreed,
That while the whirling wings of flying time
Might roll one year about the heavenly sphere,
So long alone he might with peace possess
Our fathers seat in princely Crown (...)
Diadem,
And when the year should eke his course renew,
Might I succeed to rule again as long.
And that this law might still be kept for aye,
He bound him self by vow of solemn oath
By Gods, by men, by heaven, and eke by earth:
Yet that forgot, without all reverence
Unto the Gods, without respect to right,
Without respect that reason ought to rule,
His faith and troth both trodden under foot,
He still vsurps most tyrantlike with wrong
The right that does of right to me belong.
But if he can with equal doom consent,
That I return into my native soil
To sway with him alike the kingly seat
And euenly bear the bridle both in hand,
Dear mother mine I swear by all the Gods
To raise with speed the siege from these our walls,
And send the soldiers home from whence they came:
Which if he grant me not, then must I do
(Though loath) as much as right and reason would,
To venge my cause that is both good and just.
Yet this in heaven the Gods my records be,
And here in earth each mortal man may know,
That never yet my giltlesse heart did fail
Brotherly duty to Eteocles,
And that causlesse he holds me from mine own.
Thus have I said O mother, even as much
As needful is, wherein I me assure:
That in the judgment both of good and badde,
My words may seem of reason to proceed,
Constrained thus in my defense to speak.

Chor. None may deny, O pere of princely race,
But that thy words, are honest, good and just,
And such as well beseem that tongue of thine.

Eteo. "If what to some seems honest good and just,
Sundry men sundry minds.
"Could seem even so in every doubtful mind,
"No dark debate nor quarrel could arise:
"But look, how many men so many minds,
"And that, that one man judges good and just,
"Some other deemes as deeply to be wrong.
To say the truth (mother) this mind of mine
Does fleet full far from that farfetch of his,
Ne will I longer cover my conceit:
If I could rule or reign in heaven above,
And eke command in depth of darksome hell,
No toil ne travel should my sprites abashe,
To take the way unto my restless will,
To climb aloft, nor down for to descend.
Then think you not, that I can give consent
To yield a part of my possession,
Wherein I live and lead the Only rule.
monarchy.
"A witless fool may every man him guess,
"That leaves the more and takes him to the less.
With this, reproach might to my name redound,
If he, that has with foreign power spoilde
Our pleasant fields, might reaue from me perforce,
What so he list by force of arms demand.
No less reproof the citizens ensewes,
If I, for dread of Greekish hosts, should grant
That he might climb to height of his desire.
In fine, he ought not thus of me to crave
Accord, or peace, with bloody sword in hand,
But with humility and prayer both,
For often is it seen, and proof does teach,
"Sweet words prevail, where sword and fire do fail.
Yet this, if here within these stately walls
He list to live, the son of Oedipus,
And not as king of Thebes, I stand content.
But let him think, since now I can command,
This neck of mine shall never yield to yoke
Of servitude: let bring his banners splayde,
Let spear and shield, sharp sword, and cyndring flames
Procure the part that he so vainly claims:
As long as life within this breast does last,
I nill Will not.
consent that he should reign with me.
If law of right may any way be broke,
"Desire of rule within a climbing breast
"To break a vow may bear the buckler best.

Cho. "Who once has past the bounds of honesty Tullyes opinyon.

"In ernest deeds, may pass it well in words.

Ioca. O son, amongst so many miseries
This benefit has crooked age, I find,
That as the tracke of trustlesse time has taught,
"It sees much, and many things discernes, Youth sees not so much as age.

"Which recklesse youth can never rightly judge,
Oh, cast aside that vain ambition,
That corosiue, that cruel pestilence,
That most infects the minds of mortal men:
"In princely palace and in stately towns Ambition does destroy al: equalytte
does maynteyne al things.

"It crepeth often, and close with it conuayes,
"(To leave behind it) damage and decays:
"By it be love and amity destroyde,
"It breaks the laws and common concord beats,
"Kingdoms and realms it topsie turuie turns,
And now, even thee, her gall so poisoned has,
That the weak eyes of thine affection
Are blinded quite, and see not to them self
But worthy child, drive from thy doubtful breast
This monstrous mate, in stead whereof embrace
"Equality, which stately states defends
"And binds the mind with true and trusty knots
"Of friendly faith which never can be broke,
"This man, of right should properly possess,
And who that other does the more embrace,
Shall purchase pain to be his just reward
By wrathful woe, or else by cruel death.
"This, first divided all by equal bonds
"What so the earth did yield for our avail?
"This, did divide the nights and days alike,
"And that the veil of dark and dreadful night)
"(Which shrowds in misty clouds the pleasant light,
"Ne yet the golden beams of Phoebus rays
"(Which cleares the dimmed air with gladsome gleams)
"Can yet heap hate in either of them both.
If then the days and nights to serve our turn
Content themselves to yield each other place,
Well ought thou with weighty dome to grant
Thy brothers right to rule the reign with thee,
Which heavens ordained common to you both:
If so thou nill O son, O cruel son,
If the head be evil the body cannot be good.
"In whose high breast may justice build her hour
"When princes hearts wide open lie to wrong?
Why likes thee so the tipe of tyranny
With others loss to gather greedy gain?
"Alas how far he wanders from the truth
"That compts a pomp, all other to command,
"Yet can not rule his own unbridled will,
"A vain desire much riches to possess
"Whereby the breast is brusde and battered still,
"With dread, with danger, care and cold suspecte.
"Who seeks to have the thing we call enough,
"Acquainte him first with contentation, Content to rich

"For plenteousnesse is but a naked name.
"And what suffiseth use of mortal men,
"Shall best apay the mean and modest hearts.
"These hoorded heaps of gold and worldly wealth
"Are not the proper goods of any one,
"But pawnes which Jove powers out abundantly Riches are but borrowed ware.

"That we likewise might use them equally,
"And as he seems to lend them for a time,
"Even so in time he takes them home again,
"And would that we acknowledge every hour,
"That from his hands we did the same receive:
"There nothing is so firm and stayde to man,
"But whyrles about with wheels of restless time.
Now if I should this one thing thee demand,
Which of these two thou would choose to keep,
The town quiet or unquiet tyranny?
And would thou say I choose my kingly chair?
O witless answer sent from wicked heart,
For if so fall (which mighty God defend)
Thine enemies hand should overcome thy might,
And thou should see them sack the town of Thebes,
The chastest virgins ravished for wrecke, More care to loose than pleasure to
posses.

The worthy children in captivity,
"Then should thou feel that scepter, crown, and wealth
"Yield deeper care to see them taken away,
"Than to possess them yeldeth deep content.
Now to conclude my son, Ambition
Is it that most offends thy blinded thought,
Blame not thy brother, blame ambition
From whom if so thou not redeem thy self,
I fear to see thee buy repentance dear.

Cho. Yea dear, too dear when it shall come too late.

Ioc. And now to thee my Polinices dear,
I say that silly was Adrastus read,
And thou God knows a simple silly soul,
He to be ruled by thy heady will,
And thou, to war against the Thebane walls,
These walls I say whose gates thy self should guard:
Tell me I pray thee, if the City yield,
Or thou it take by force in bloody fight,
(Which never grant the Gods I them beseeke)
What spoils? what Palms? what sign of victory
Small glory for a rebel to see his own country spoiled.
Can thou set up to have thy country woonne?
What title worthy of immortal fame,
Shall blased be in honor of thy name?
O son, dear son, believe thy trusty dame,
The name of glory shall thy name refuse,
And fly full far from all thy fond attemptes.
But if so fall thou should be overcome,
Then with what face can thou return to Greece,
That here have left so many Greeks on ground*
Each one shall curse and blame thee to thy face,
As him that only caused their decay,
And eke condemn Adrastus simple head,
That such a pheere had chosen for his child.
So may it fall, in one accursed hour,
That thou may loose thy wife and country both,
Both which thou may with little toil attain,
If thou can leave high mind and dark disdain.

Cho. O mighty Gods of goodness, never grant
Unto these euilles, but set desired peace
Between the hearts of these two friendly foes.

Ete. The question that betwixt us two is grown,
Believe me mother, can not end with words:
You waste your breath, and I but loose my time,
And all your travel lost and spent in vain:
For this I swear, that peace you never get
Between us two, but with condition,
That whilst I live, I will be Lord of Thebes.
Then set aside these vain forwasted words,
And yield me leave to go where need does press:
And now good sir, get you out of these walls,
Unless you mean to buy abode with blood.

Po. And who is he that seeks to have my blood,
And shall not shed his own as fast as mine?

Ete. By thee he stands, and thou standst him before:
Lo here the sword that shall perform his word.

Po. And this shall eke maintain my rightful cause.

Ioc. O sons, dear sons, away with glittring arms:
And first, before you touch each others flesh,
With doubled blows come pierce this breast of mine.

Po. Ah wretch, thou art both vile and cowarde like,
Thy high estate esteems thy life to dear.

Ete. If with a wretch or coward should thou fight,
Oh dastard villain, what first moved thee
With swarms of Greeks to take this enterprise?

Po. For well I wist, that cankred heart of thine
Could safely keep thy head within these walls,
And flee the field when combat should be callde.

Ete. This truce assures thee Polynices,
And makes thee bold to give such bosting words:
So be thou sure, that had this truce not been,
Then long erethis, these hands had been embrude,
And eke this soil besprinkled with thy blood.

Po. Not one small drop of my blood shall thou spill,
But buy it dear against thy cankred will.

Ioc. O sons, my sons, for pity yet refrain.

Chapter Good Gods, who ever saw so strange a sight?
True love and frindship both be put to flight.

Po. Yield villein, yield my right which thou witholdst.

Ete. Cut of thy hope to reign in Thebane walls,
Naught have thou here, nor naught shall ever have,
Away.

Po. O aultars of my country soil.

Ete. Whom thou art come to spoil and to deface.

Po. O Gods, give ear unto my honest cause.

Ete. With foreign power his country to invade.

Po. O holy temples of the heavenly Gods.

Ete. That for thy wicked deeds do hate thy name

Po. Out of my kingdom am I driven by force.

Ete. Out of the which thou camst me for to drive.

Po. Punish O Gods this wicked tyrant here.

Ete. Pray to the Gods in Greece and not in Thebes.

Po. No savage beast so cruel nor unjust.

Ete. Not cruel to my country like to thee.

Po. Since from my right I am with wrong deprived.

Ete. Eke from thy life if long thou tarry here.

Po. O father hear what injuries I take.

Ete. As though thy diuelishe deeds were hid from him.

Po. And you mother.

Eteo. Have done thou not deseruest
With that false tongue thy mother once to name.

Po. O dear City.

Eteo. When thou ariuest in Greece,
Choose out thy dwelling in some mustie Moors.

Po. I must depart, and parting must I praise
Oh dear mother the depth of your good will.

Ioc. O son.

Eteo. Away I say out of these walls.

Po. I can not choose but must thy will obey,
Yet grant me once my father for to see.

Ete. I hear no prayers of my enemy.

Po. Where be my sweet sisters?

Eteo. And can thou yet
With shameless tongue once name thy noble race
That art become a common foe to Thebes?
Be sure thou shall them never see again,
Nor other friend that in these walls remain.

Po. Rest you in peace, O worthy mother mine.

Ioc. How can that be and thou my joy in war?

Po. Hence forth n'am I your join yet your son.

Ioc. Alas the heavens me whelme with all mishap.

Po. Lo here the cause that stirs me by wrong.

Ete. Much more is that he profereth unto me.

Po. Well, speak, dare thou come armed to the field?

Ete. So dare I come, wherefore do thou demand?

Po. For needs or thou must end this life of mine,
Or quench my thirst with pouring out thy blood.

Eteo. Ah wretch, my thirst is all as dry as thine.

Ioc. Alas and welaway, what hear I sons?
How can it be? dear children can it be
That brethrens hearts such rancour should enrage?

Eteo. And that right soon the proof shall plainly show.

Io. Oh say not so, yet say not so dear sons.

Po. O royal race of Thebes now take thine end.

Cho. God shield.

Eteo. O slow and sluggish heart of mine,
Why do I stay t'embrew these slothful hands?
But for his greater grief I will depart,
And at return if here I find my foe,
This hasty hand shall end our hot debate.

Eteocles here goes out by the gates Electrae. Po. Dear Citizens, and you
eternal Gods,
Bear witness with me here before the world,
How this my fierce and cruel enemy,
Whom causeless now my brother I do call,
With threats of death my lingering steps does drive
Both from my right and from my country soil,
Not as beseemes the son of Oedipus,
But as a slave, an abject, or a wretch:
And since you be both pitiful and just,
Vouchsafe O Gods, that as I part with grief,
So may I yet return with joyful spoil
Of this accursed tyrant and (he slain)
I may recover quietly mine own.

Polynice goes out by the gates Homoloides. Io. O wretched wretch Iocasta,
where is found
The misery that may compare to thine?
O would I had nor gasing eyes to see,
Nor listening ears to hear that now I dread:
But what remains, save only to entreat
That cruel dole would yet so courteous be
To reaue the breath out of this woeful breast,
Before I harken to some woeful news.
Rest you here dames, and pray unto the Gods
For our redress, and I in that mean while
Will shut my self from sight of loathsome light.

Iocasta goes into her Palace. Cho. O mighty God, the governor of Thebes
Pity with speed the pain Iocasta bydes,
And eke our needs O mighty Bacchus help,
Bend willing ear unto our just complaint:
Leave them not comfortless that trust in thee,
We have no gold nor silver thee to give,
Ne sacrifice to those thine aultars due,
In steed whereof we consecrate our hearts
To serve thy will, and hestes for to obey.

VVhyles the Chorus is thus praying to Bacchus, Eteocles returns by the gates
called Electrae. Actus. 2.
Scena. 2.
ETEOCLES. CREON. SInce I have rid mine enmie out of sight,
The best shall be for Creon now to send,
(My mothers brother) that with him I may
Reason, consulte, confer, and counsel both,
What shall be best to use in our defense,
Before we venture forth into the field.
But of this travail, lo, he me acquites
That comes in haste toward these royal towers.
Here Creon attended by four gentlemen, comes in by the gates Homoloydes.
Cre. O mighty king, not causeless now I come,
To find, that long have sought your maistie.
So to discharge the duty that I owe
To you, by comfort and by counsel both.

Ete. No less desire this heart of mine did press,
To send for thee Creon, since that in vain
My mother has her words and travail spent,
To reconcile Polynices and me:
For he (so dull was his caparitie)
Did think, he could by dread of danger, win
My princely heart to yield to him his realm.

Cre. I understand, the army that he brings
Against these walls, is such, that I me doubt
Our cities force may scarce the same resist.
Yet true it is, that right and reason both
Are on our side, which bring the victory
Oftetimes: for we our country to defend,
They to subdue the same in arms are come.
But what I would unto your highness show,
Is of more weight, and more behoues to know.

Ete. And what is that? oh quickly tell it me.

Cre. A Greek prisner is come unto my hands.

Ete. And what says he that does so much importe?

Cre. That even already by their ranks in raye,
And straight will give assault to these our walls.

Ete. Then must I straight prepare our Citizens
In glittring arms to march into the field.

Cre. O Prince (and pardon me) thy youthful yers
Nor see them self, ne let thee once discern,
What best behooves in this doubtful case.
"For Prudence, she that is the mighty queen
"Of all good works, grows by experience,
"Which is not found with few days seeking for.

Ete. And were not this both sound and wise advise,
Boldly to look our foemen in the face,
Before they spread our fields with hugie host,
And all the town beset by siege at once?

Cre. We be but few, and they in number great.

Ete. Our men have yet more courage far than they.

Cre. That know I not, nor am I sure to say.

Ete. Those eyes of thine in little space shall see
How many I my self can bring to ground.

Cre. That would I like, but hard it is to do.

Eto. I nill pen up our men within the walls.

Cre. In counsel yet the victory consistes.

Ete. And will thou then I use some other read?

Cre. What else? be still a while, for have makes wast.

Ete. By night I will the Cammassado give.

Cre. So may you do and take the overthrow.

Ete. The vauntage is to him that does assault.

Cre. Yet skirmishe given by night is perilous.

Ete. Let set upon them as they sit at meat.

Cre. Sudden assaults affray the mind no doubt,
But we had need to overcome.

Ete. So shall we do.

Cre. No sure, unless some other counsel help.

Ete. Amid their trenches shall we them invade?

Cre. As who should say, were none to make defense.

Ete. Should I then yield the City to my foes?

Cre. No, but advise you well if you be wise.

Ete. That were thy part, that know more than I.

Cre. Then shall I say that best does seem to me?

Ete. Yea Creon yea, thy counsel hold I dear.

Cre. Seven men of courage have they chosen out.

Ete. A slender number for so great emprise.

Cre. But they them chose for guides and capitaynes.

Ete. To such an host? why they may not suffice.

Cre. Nay, to assault the seven gates of the city.

Ete. What then behooves so bestad to done?

Cre. With equal number see you do them match.

Ete. And then commit our men in charge to them?

Cre. Choosing the best and boldest bloods in Thebes.

Ete. And how shall I the City then defend?

Cre. Well-with the rest,, for one man sees not all.

Ete. And shall I choose the boldest or the wisest?

Cre. Nay both, for one without that other fayles.

Ete. Force without wisdom then is little worth.

Cre. "That one must be fast to that other ioynde.

Ete. Creon I will thy counsel follow still,
For why, I hold it wise and trusty both,
And out of hand for now I will depart
That I in time the better may provide
Before occasion slip out of my hands,
And that I may this Polynices Kill.
quell:
For well may I with bloody knife him slay
That comes in arms my country for to spoil.
But if so please to fortune and to fate
That other end than I do think may fall,
To thee my friend it rests to procure
The marriage twixt my sister Antygone
And thy dear son Haemone, to whom for dowre
At parting thus I promise to perform
As much as late I did Promise.
beheste to thee:
My mothers blood and brother dear thou art,
Ne need I crave of thee to guard her well,
As for my father care I not, for if
So chance I dye, it may full well be said
His bitter curses brought me to my bane.

Cre. The Lord defend, for that unworthy were.

Ete. Of Thebes town the rule and scepter lo
I need nor ought it otherwise dispose
Than unto thee, if I dye without heir.
Yet longs my lingering mind to understand,
The doubtful end of this unhappy war:
Wherefore I will thou send thy son to seek
Tyresias the divine, and learn of him,
For at my call I know he will not come
That often have his arts and him reprovde.

Cre. As you command, so ought I to perform.

Ete. And last, I thee and city both command,
If fortune friendly favor our attemptes,
And make our men triumphant victors all,
That none there be so hardy ne so bold
For Polynices bones to give a grave:
And who presumes to break my best herein,
Shall dye the death in penance of his pain:
For though I were by blood to him conioynde
I part it now, and justice goes with me
To guide my steps victoriously before.
Pray you to Jove he deigne for to defend,
Our City safe both now and evermore.

Cre. Gramercie worthy prince, for all thy love
And faithful trust thou do in me repose,
And if should hap, that I hope never shall,
I promise yet to do what best behoues,
But chiefly this I swear and make a vow,
For Polynices now our cruel foe,
To hold the hest that thou do me command.

Creon attends Eteocles to the gates Electrae he returns and goes out by
the gates called Homoloydes. CHORUS. O Fierce and furious Mars, whose harmefull
heart,
Rejoices most to shed the giltlesse blood,
Whose headie will does all the world subvert,
And does envy the pleasant merry mood,
Of our estate that erst in quiet stood.
Why do thou thus our harmless town annoye,
Which mighty Bacchus governed in joy?
Father of war and death, that do remove
With wrathful wrecke from woeful mothers breast,
The trusty pledges of their tender love,
So grant the Gods, that for our final rest,
Dame Venus pleasant looks may please thee best,
Whereby when thou shall all amazed stand,
The sword may fall out of thy trembling hand.
And thou may prove some other way full well
The bloody prowess of thy mighty spear,
Wherewith thou raisest from the depth of hell,
The wrathful sprites of all the furies there,
Who when the weak, do wander every where,
And never rest to range about the coasts,
Tenriche that pit with spoil of damned ghostes.
And when thou have our fields forsaken thus,
Let cruel discord bear thee company,
Engirt with snakes and serpents venomous,
Even she that can with red virmilion dye
The gladsome green that florisht pleasantly,
And make the greedy ground a drinking cup,
To sup the blood of murdered bodies up.
Yet thou return O joy and pleasant peace,
From whence thou did against our will depart,
Ne let thy worthy mind from travel cease,
To chase disdain out of the poysned heart,
That raised war to all our pains and smarte,
Even from the breast of Oedipus his son,
Whose swelling pride has all this jar begone.
And thou great God, that do all things decree,
And sitst on high above the starrie skies,
Thou chiefest cause of causes all that be,
Regard not his offense but hear our cries,
And spedily redress our miseries,
For what cause we poor woeful wretches do
But crave thy aid, and only cleave thereto?
Finis Actus secundi.
Done by G. Gascoygne.
The order of the third dumb shevve.
BEfore the beginning of this.iij. Act did sound a very doleful noise of
cornettes, during the which there opened and appeared in the stage a great
Gulf. Immediately came in.vj. gentlemen in their dublets and hose, bringing
upon their shulders baskets full of earth and threw them into the Gulf to
fill it up, but it would not so close up nor be filled. Then came the ladies
and dames that stood by, throwing in their cheynes and Jewels, so to cause it
stop up and close it self: but when it would not so be filled, came in a
knighte with his sword drawn, armed at all points, who walking twice or
thrice about it, and perusing it, seeing that it would nether be filled with
earth nor with their Jewels and ornaments, after solemn reverence done to
the gods, and courteous leave taken of the Ladies and standers by, sodeinly
lepte into the Gulf, the which did close up immediately: betokning unto us the
love that every worthy person owes unto his native country, by the historye
of Curtins, who for the like cause adventured the like in Rome. This done,
blind Tyresias the divine prophet led in by his daughter, and conducted by
Meneceus the son of Creon, enters by the gates Electrae, and says as
follows.

Actus. iij.
Scena. 1.
TYRESIAS. CREON. MANTO. MENECEVS. SACERDOS. THou trusty guide of my so
trustlesse steps
Deer daughter mine go we, lead thou ye way,
For since the day I first did leese this light
Thou only art the light of these mine eyes:
And for thou know I am both old and weak
And ever longing after lovely rest,
Direct my steps amyd the playnest paths,
That so my febled feet may feel less pain.
Meneceus thou gentle child, tell me,
Is it far hence, the place where we must go,
Where as thy father for my coming stays?
For like unto the slothful snayle I draw,
(Dear son) with pain these aged legs of mine,
Creon returns by the gates Homoloydes. And though my mind be quick, scarce
can I move.
Cre. Comfort thy self divine, Creon thy friend
Lo stands here, and came to meet with thee
To ease the pain that thou might else sustain,
"For unto elde each travel yeldes annoy
And thou his daughter and his faithful guide, Age must be helped by youth.

Lo rest him here, and rest thou there withal
Thy virgins hands, that in sustayning him
Do well acquit the duty of a child.
"For crooked age and hory silver hears
"Still craves help of lusty youthful years.

Tyr. Gramercie Lord what is your noble will?

Cre. What I would have of thee Tyresias
Is not a thing so soon for to be said.
But rest a while thy weak and weary limbs
And take some breath now after weary walk,
And tell I pray thee, what this crown does mean,
That sits so kingly on thy skillful head?

Tyr. Know this, that for I did with grave advise,
Foretell the Citizens of Athens town,
How they might best with loss of little blood,
Have victories against their enemies,
Has been the cause why I do wear this Crown,
As right reward and not unmeet for me.

Cre. So take I then this thy victorious crown,
For our avail in token of good luck,
That know, how the discord and debate
Which late is fallen between these brethren twain,
Has brought all Thebes in danger and in dread.
Eteocles our king, with threatening arms,
Is gone against his greekish enemies,
Commanding me to learn of thee (who art
A true divine of things that be to come)
What were for us the safest to be done,
From peril now our country to preserve.

Tyr. Long have I been within the town of Thebes,
Since that I tied this trusty tongue of mine
From telling truth, fearing Eteocles:
Yet, since thou do in so great need desire
I should reveal things hidden unto thee,
For common cause of this our common weal,
I stand content to pleasure thee herein.
But first (that to this mighty God of yours
There might some worthy sacrifice be made)
Let kill the fairest goat that is in Thebes
Within whose bowelles when the Priest shall look,
And tell to me what he has there espied,
I trust t'aduise thee what is best to done.

Cre. Lo here the temple, and ere long I look
To see the holy priest that hither co^mes,
Bringing with him the pure and fair offerings,
Which thou requirest: for not long since, I sent
For him, as one that am not ignorant
Of all your rytes and sacred ceremonies:
He went to choose amid our herd of goats,
The fattest there: and look where now he commes.

Sacerdos accompanied with.xvj. Bacchanales and all his rytes and ceremonies,
enters by the gates Homoloydes. Sacer. O famous Citizens, that hold full dear
Your quiet country: Lo where I do come
Most joyfully, with wonted sacrifice,
So to beseech the supreme Citizens,
To stay our state that staggringly does stand,
And plant us peace where war and discord grows:
Wherefore, with heart devout and humble cheer,
Whiles I break up the bowels of this beast,
(That often thy veneyarde Bacchus has destroyed,)
Let every wight crave pardon for his faults,
With bending knee about his aultars here.

Tyr. Take here the salt, and sprincle therwithall
About the neck: that done, cast all the rest
Into the sacred fire, and then annoynte
The knife prepared for the sacrifice.
O mighty Jove, preserve the precious gift
That thou me gave, when first thine angry Queen, Venus made him blind for
giving sentence against her.

For deep disdain did both mine eyes do out,
Grant me, I may foretell the truth in this,
For, but by thee, I know that I ne may,
Ne will, ne can, one trusty sentence say.

Sa. This due is done.

Tyr. With knife then stick ye kid,

Sac. Thou daughter of divine Tyresias,
With those unspotted virgins hands of thine
Receive the blood within this vessel here,
And then devoutly it to Bacchus yield.

Man. O holy God of Thebes, that do both praise
Sweet peace, and do in heart also disdain
The noisome noise, the furies and the fight
Of bloody Mars and of Bellona both:
O thou the giver both of joy and health,
Receive in gree and with well willing hand
These holy whole brunt offerings unto thee:
And as this town does wholly thee a door,
So by thy help do grant that it may stand
Safe from the enemies outrage evermore.

Sac. Now in thy sacred name I bowell here
This sacrifice.

Tire. And what entralls has it?

Sac. Fair and welformed all in every point,
The liver clean, the heart is not infect,
Save lo, I find but only one heart string
By which I find something I wot nere what,
That seems corrupt, and were not only that,
In all the rest, they are both sound and hole.

Tyr. Now cast at once into the holy flame
The sweet incense, and then advertise me
What hew it bears, and every other ryte
That ought may help the truth for to coniecte.

Sac. I see the flames do sundry colors cast,
Now bloody sanguine, straight way purple, blew,
Some parts seem black, some gray, and some be green.

Tyr. Stay there, suffyseth this for to have seen.
Know Creon, that these outward seemly signs
(By that the Gods have let me understand
Who know the truth of every secret thing)
Betoken that the City great of Thebes
Shall Victor be against the Greekish host,
If so consent be given: but more than this
I list not say.

Cre. Alas, for courtesy
Say on Tyresias, never have respect
To any living man, but tell the truth.

Sacerdos returns with the Bacchanales, by the gates Homoloides. Sac. In this
mean while I will return with speed
From whence I came: for lawful is it not,
That such as I should hear your secresies.

Tyr. Contrary then to that which I have said,
The incest foul, and childbirth monstrous
Of Iocasta, so stirs the wrath of Jove,
This city shall with bloody channels swim,
And angry Mars shall overcome it all
With famine, flame, rape, murder, dole and death:
These lusty towers shall have a headlong fall,
These houses burnde, and all the rest be razde,
And soon be said, here whilome Thebes stood.
One only way I find for to escape,
Which both would thee displease to hear it told,
And me to tell percase were perilous.
Thee therefore with my travel I commend
To Jove, and with the rest I will endure,
What so shall chance for our adversity.

Cre. Yet stay a while,

Tyr. Creon make me not stay
By force.

Cre. Why fleest thou?

Tyr. Sir it is not from thee
I flee, but from this fortune foul and fell.

Cre. Yet tell me what behoues the city do?

Tyr. Thou Creon seem now desirous still
It to preserve: but if as well as I
Thou knew that which is to thee unknown,
Then would thou not so soon consent thereto.

Cre. And would not I with eagre mind desire
The thing that may for Thebes ought avail?

Tyr. And do thou then so instantly request
To know which way thou may the same preserve?

Cre. For nothing else I sent my son of late
To seek for thee.

Tyr. Then will I satisfy
Thy greedy mind in this: but first tell me,
Menetius where is he?

Cre. Not far from me.

Tyr. I pray thee send him out some other where.

Cre. Why would thou that he should not be here?

Tyr. I would not have him hear what I should say.

Cre. He is my son, ne will he it reveal.

Tyr. And shall I then while he is present speak?

Cre. Yea, be thou sure that he no less than I,
Does wish full well unto this common weal.

Tyr. Then Creon shall thou know: the mean to save
This City, is, that thou shall flea thy son,
And of his body make a sacrifice
For his country: lo here is all you seek
So much to know, and since you have me forced
To tell the thing that I would not have told,
If I have you offended with my words,
Blame then your self, and eke your froward fate.

Cre. Oh cruel words, oh, oh, what have thou said,
Thou cruel sothsayer?

Tyr. Even that, that heaven
Has ordained once, and needs it must ensue.

Cre. How many evils have thou knit up in one?

Tyr. Though evil for thee, yet for thy country good.

Cre. And let my country perish, what care I?

"Tyr. Above all things we ought to hold it dear.

Cre Cruel were he, that would not love his child.

"Tyr. For commonweal, were well, that one man wail.

Cre. To loose mine own, I list none other save.

"Tyr. Best Citizens care least for private gain.

Cre. Depart, for now, with all thy prophecies.

"Tyr. Lo, thus the truth does always hatred get.

Cre. Yet pray I thee by these thy silver hears,

"Tyr. The harm that co^mes from heaven can not be escaped.

Cre. And by thy holy spirit of prophecy,

"Tyr. What heaven has done, that cannot I undo.

Cre. That to no more this secret thou reveal.

Tyr. And would thou have me learn to make a lie?

Cre. I pray thee hold thy peace.

Tyr. That will I not:
But in thy woe to yield thee some relief,
I tell thee once, thou shall be Lord of Thebes,
Which hap of thine this string did well declare,
Which from the heart does out alonely grow.
So did the piece corrupted plainly show,
An argument most evident to prove
Thy son his death.

Cre. Well, yet be thou content
To keep full close this secret hidden grief.

Tyr. I neither ought, ne will keep it so close.

Cre. Shall I be then the murderer of mine own?

Tyr. Ne blame not me, but blame the stars for this.

Cre. Can heavens condemn but him alone to dye?

Tyr. We ought believe the cause is good and just.

"Cre. Unjust is he condemns the innocent. Great follye to accuse the gods.


"Tyr. A fool is he accuses heavens of wrongs.

"Cre. There can no ill thing come from heavens above.

Tyr. Then this that heaven commands can not be ill.

Cre. I not believe that thou have talked with God.

Tyr. Because I tell thee that does thee displease.

Cre. Out of my sight accursed lying wretch.

Tyr. Go daughter go, A thankles office to foretell a mischief.
oh what fool is he
That puts in ure to publish prophecies?
"For if he do fore tell a froward fate,
"Though it be true, yet shall he purchase hate:
"And if he silence keep, or hide the truth,
"The heavy wrath of mighty Gods ensuth.
Appollo he might well tell things to come,
That had no dread the angry to offend.
But hye we daughter hence some other way.

Tyresias with Manto his daughter, returns by the gates called Electrae.
Scena. 2.
CREON. MENECEVS. OH my dear child, well have thou heard with ear
These weery news, or rather wicked tales
That this divine of thee deuined has:
Yet will thy father never be thy foe,
With cruel doom thy death for to consent.
Me. You rather ought, O father, to consent
Unto my death, since that my death may bring
No greater honor than to dye for thy country.
Unto this town both peace and victory.
"Ne can I purchase more praise worthy death
"Than for my countries wealth to lose my breath

Cre. I cannot praise this witless will of thine.

Me. "You know dear father, that this life of ours
"Is brittle, short, and nothing else in deed
"But tedious toil and pangs of endless pain:
"And death, whose darte to some men seems so fell,
Death (indeed) yeldeth more pleasure than life.
"Brings quiet end to this unquiet life.
"Unto which end who soonest does arrive,
"Fi^^s soonest rest of all his restless grief.
"And were it so, that here on earth we felt
"No prick of pain, nor that our flattring days
"Were never dashed by froward fortunes frown,
"Yet being borne (as all men are) to dye,
"Were not this worthy glory and renown,
"To yield the country soil where I was borne,
"For so long time, so short a time as mine?
I can not think that this can be denied.
Then if to shun this haughty high behest,
Mine only cause, O father, does you move,
Be sure, you seek to take from me your son,
The greatest honor that I can attain:
But if your own commodity you move,
So much the less you ought the same allow:
For look, how much the more you have in Thebes,
So much the more you ought to love the same:
Here have you Hemone, he that in my stead
(O my dear father) may with you remain,
So that, although you be deprived of me
Yet shall you not be quite deprived of heirs.

Cre. I can not choose, dear son, but disalowe
This thy too hasty, hot desire of death:
For if thy life thou set all so light,
Yet ought thou thy father me respect,
Who as I draw the more to lumpishe age,
So much more need have I to crave thine aid:
Ne will I yet, with stubborn tongue deny,
"That for his common weal to spend his life,
"Does win the subject high renoumed name.
"But how? in armor to defend the state,
"Not like a beast to bleed in sacrifice:
And therwithal, if any should consent
To such a death, then should the same be I,
That have prolonged life even long enough,
Nay many days have I now to draw on.
And more avail might to the country come,
Dear son, to hold that lusty life of thine,
That art both young and eke of courage stout.
Than may by me that feeble am and old.
Then live dear son in high prosperity,
And give me leave that worthy am to dye.

Mean. Yet worthy were not that unworthy change.

Cre. If such a death bring glory, give it me.

Mean. Not you, but me, the heavens call to die.

Cre. We be but one in flesh and body both.

Mean. I father ought, so ought not you, to die.

Cre. If thou son die, think not that I can live:
Then let me die, and so shall he first die,
That ought to die, and yet but one shall die.

Me. Although I, father, ought to obey your bestes,
Yet evil it were in this to yield your will.

Cre. Thy wit is wily for to work thy woe.

Me. Oh, tender pity moves me thereto.

"Cre. A beast is he, that kills himself with a knife,
"Of pity to preserve an others life.

"Me. Yet wise is he, that does obey the Gods

Cre. The Gods will not the death of any wight.

"Me. Whose life they take, they give him life also.

Cre. But thou do strive to take thy life thy self.

Me. Nay them to obey, that will I shall not live.

Cre. What fault, O son, condemns thee to death?

"Me. Who lives (father) here without a fault?

Cre. I see no gylte in thee that death deserves.

Me. But God it sees that every secret sees.

Cre. How should we know what is the will of God?

Me. We know it then, when he reueales the same.

Cre. As though he would come down to tell it us,

Me. By diverse means his secrets he discloseth.

Cre. Oh, fond is he, whothinkes to understand
The mysteries of Jove his secret mind:
And for to end this controversy here,
Lo thus I say, I will we both live yet:
Comaundements.
Prepare thee then, my (*) hestes to hold and keep,
And pull a down that stubborn heart of thine,

Me. You may of me, as of your self dispose,
And since my life does seem so dear to you,
I will preserve the same to your avail,
That I may spend it always to your will.

Cre. Then, thee behoues out of this town to fly:
Before the bold and blind Tyresias
Do publish this that is as yet unknown.

Me. And where, or in what place shall I become?

Cre. Where thou may be hence furthest out of sight.

Me. You may command, and I ought to obey.

Cre. Go to the land of Thesbeoita.

Me. Where Dodona does sit in sacred chair?

Cre. Even there my child.

Me. And who shall guide my wandering steps?

Cre. high Jove.

Me. Who shall give sustenance for my relief?

Cre. There will I send thee heaps of glistring gold.

Me. But when shall I eftesoones my father see?

Cre. Ere long I hope: but now, for now depart.
For every lingering let or little stay,
May purchase pain and torment both to me.

Me. First would I take my conge of the Queen,
That since the day my mother lost her life,
Has nourisht me as if I were her own.

Creon goes out by the gates Homoloydes. Cre. Oh, tarry not my dear son,
tarry not.

Me. Behold father, I go. You dames of Thebes,
Pray to almighty Jove for my return:
You see how mine unhappy stars me drive
To go my country fro: and if so chance,
I end in woe my pryme and lusty years
Before the course of Nature do them call,
Honor my death yet with your drery plaints:
And I shall eke, where so this carkas come,
Pray to the Gods that they preserve this town.

Meneceus departs by the gates Electrae. CHORUS. WHen she that rules the
rolling wheel of chance,
Does turn aside her angry frowning face,
On him, whom erst she deigned to advance,
She never leaves to gaulde him with disgrace,
To toss and turn his state in every place,
Till at the last the hurl him from on high
And yield him subject unto misery:
And as the branch that from the root is rest,
He never winnes like life to that he left:
Yea though he do, yet can not taste of joy
Compare with pangs that past in his annoy.
Well did the heavens ordeine for our behoof
Necessity, and fates by them alowde,
That when we see our high mishappes aloof
(As though our eyes were mufled with a cloud)
Our froward will does shrink it self and shrowde
From our avail wherewith we run so faree:
As none amends can make that we do mar:
Then draws evil hap and strives to show his strength,
And such as yield unto his might, at length
He leads them by necessity the way
That destiny preparde for our decay.
The Mariner amidde the swelling seas
Who sees his bark with many a billowe beaten,
Now here, now there, as wind and waves best please,
When thundering Jove with tempest list to threaten,
And dreades in depest gulf for to be eaten,
Yet learnes a mean by mere necessity
To save himself in such extremity:
For when he sees no man has wit nor power
To fly from fate when fortune list to lowre,
His only hope on mighty Jove does cast,
Whereby he winnes the wished heaven at last.
How fond is that man in his fantasy,
Who thinks that Jove the maker of us al,
And he that tempers all in heaven on high,
The sun, the moon, the stars celestial,
So that no leaf without his leave can fall,
Has not in him omnipotence also
To guide and govern all things here below?
O blinded eyes, O wretched mortal wights,
O subject slaves to every ill that lights,
To escape such woe, such pain, such shame and scorn,
Happy were he that never had bin borne.
Well might duke Creon driven by destiny,
(If true it be that old Tyresias says)
Redeem our city from this misery,
By his consent unto Meneceus death,
Who of himself would feign have lost his breath:
"But every man is loath for to fulfill
"The heavenly hest that pleases not his will.
"That public weal must needs to ruin g^
"Where private profit is preferred so.
Yet mighty God, thy only aid we crave,
This town from siege, and us from sorrow save.
Finis Actus tertij.
done by G. Gascoygne.
The order of the fourth dumb shevve.
BEfore the beginning of this fourth Act, the Trumpets, drums and fifes
sounded, and a great peale of ordinance was shot of: in the which there entered
upon the stage.vj. knights armed at al points: whereof three came in by the
Gates Electrae, and the other three by the Gates Homoloides: either part
being accompanied with.vij. other armed men: and after they had marched twice
or thrice about the Stage, the one party menacing the other by their furious
looks and gestures, the.vj. knights caused their other attendants to stand by,
and drawing their Swords, fell to cruel and courageous combat, continuing
therein, till two on the one side were slain. The third perceiving, that he
only remained to withstand the force of.iij. enemies, did politiquely ru^ne
aside: wherewith immediately one of the.iij. followed after him, and when he had
drawn his enemy thus from his company, he turned again and slew him. Then
the second also ran after him, whom he slew in like manner, and
consequently the third, and then triumphantly marched about the Stage with
his sword in his hand. Hereby was noted the incomparable force of concord
between brethren, who as long as they hold together may not easily by any
means be overcome, and being once disseuered by any means, are easily
overthrown. The history of the brethren Horatij and Curiatij, who agreed to
like combat and came to like end. After that the dead carcasses were carried
from the Stage by the armed men on both parties, and that the victor was
triumphantly accompanied out, also came in a messanger armed from the camp,
seeking the Queen, and to her spoke as follows.

Actus.iiij.
Scena.j.
NVNCIVS IOCASTA. Nuncius comes in by the gates Homoloides. O Sage and sober
dames, O shamefast maids,
O faithful servants of our aged Queen,
Come lead her forth, fith unto her I bring
Such secret news as are of great importe.
Come forth, O Queen, surceasse thy woeful plaint,
And to my words vouchsafe a willing ear.
The Queen with her train comes out of her Palace. Ioca. My servant dear,
do thou yet bring me news
Of more mishappe? ah werie wretch, alas,
How does Eteocles? whom heretofore
In his increasing years, I wonted ay
From dangerous hap with favor to defend,
Does he yet live? or has untimely death
In cruel fight herefte his flowring life?

Nun. He lives (O Queen) hereof have ye no doubt,
From such suspecte my self will quit you soon.

Ioca. The ve^trous Greeks have happily taken the town?

Nun. The Gods forbid.

Ioca. Our soldiers then, perchance,
Dispersed been and yelden to the sword.

Nun. Not so, they were at first in danger sure,
But in the end obtained victory.

Ioca. Alas, what then becomes of Polynice?
Oh can thou tell? is he dead or alive?

Nun. You have (O Queen) yet both your sons alive

Ioca. Oh, how my heart is eased of his pain.
Well, then proceed, and briefly let me hear,
How ye repulst your proud presuming foes,
That thereby yet at least I may assuage
The swelling sorrows in my doleful breast,
In that the town is hitherto preserude:
And for the rest, I trust that might Jove
Will yield us aid.

Nun. No sooner had your worthy valiant son,
Seuerde the Dukes into seven several parts,
And set them to defense of several gates,
And brought in brave arraye his horssemen out,
First to encounter with their mighty foen,
And likewise pitched, the footmen face to face
Against the footmen of their enemies,
But fiercely straight, the armies did approach,
Swarming so thick, as couerde clean the field,
When dreadful blast of braying trumpets sounds,
Of doleful drums, and thundering cannon shot,
Gave hideous sign of horror of the fight,
Then began the Greeks to give their sharp assault,
Then from the walls our stout courageous men,
With rolling stones, with paisse of hugie beams,
With flying darts, with flakes of burning fire,
And deadly blows, did beat them back again:
Thus striving long, with stout and bloody fight,
(Whereby full many thousand slaughtered were)
The hardy Greeks came underneath the walls:
Of whom, first Capaney (a lusty Knight)
Did scale the walls, and on the top thereof
Did vaunt himself, when many hundred more,
With fierce assaults did follow him as fast.
Then lo, the Captains seven bestirrde themselves,
(Whose names ye have already understood)
Some here, some there, naught dreading loss of life,
With new relief to feed the fainting breach:
And Polynice, he bended all the force
Of his whole charge, against the greatest gate,
When suddenly a flashe of lightning flame
From angry skies struck captain Capaney
That there down dead he fell: at sight whereof
The gazers on were fraught with soden fear.
The rest, that strove to mount the walls so fast,
From ladders top did headlong tumble down.
Herewith our men encouragde by good hap,
Took hardy hearts, and so repulst the Greeks.
There was Eteocles, and I with him,
Who setting first those soldiers to their charge,
Ran straight to the other gates: unto the weak
He manly comfort gave: unto the bold
His lusty words increased courage still:
In so much as th'amased Grecian king
When he did hear of Capaney his death,
Fearing thereby the Gods became his foen,
Out from the trench withdrewe his weary host.
But rash Eteocles (presuming too too much
Upon their flight) did issue out of Thebes,
And forward straight with strength of chivalry,
His flying foes courageously pursude.
Too long it were to make recompt of all
That wounded been, or slain, or captive now:
The cloudy air was filled round about
With houling cries and woeful wayling plaints:
So great a slaughter (O renowned Queen)
Before this day I think was never seen.
Thus have we now cut of the fruitless hope
The Grecians had, to sack this noble town.
What joyful end will happen hereunto
Yet know I not: the gods turn all to good.
"To conquer, lo, is doubtless worthy praise,
"But wisely for to use the conquest got,
"Has ever won immortal sound of fame.
Well, yet therewhile in this we may rejoice,
Since heaven and heavenly powers are pleased therewith.

Ioca. This good success was luckie sure, and such,
As for my part I little looked for:
To save the town and eke to have my sons
(As you report) preserved yet alive.
But yet proceed, and further let me know
The final end that they agreed upon.

Nun. No more (O queen) let this for now suffice,
Since hitherto your state is safe enough.

Ioca. These words of tdine, do whelme my jealous mind
With great suspecte of other mischiefs hid.

Nun. What would you more, already being sure
That both your sons in safety do remain?

Ioca. I long to know the rest, or good or bad.

Nun. O let me now return to Eteocles,
That of my service greatly stands in need.

Ioca. Right well I see, thou do conceal the woorst.

Nun. Oh force me not, the good now being past,
To tell the ill.

Ioca. Tell it I say, on pain of our displeasure.

Nun. Since thus ye seek to hear a doleful tale,
I will no longer stay: wit ye therefore,
Your desperate sons together be agreed
For to attempt a wicked enterprise:
To private fight they have betroutht themselves,
Of which conflicte, the end must needs be this,
That one do live, that other die the death.

Ioca. Alas, alas, this did I ever fear.

Nun. Now, since in sum I have revealed that,
Which you have heard with great remorse of mind,
I will proceed, at large to tell the whole.
When your victorious son, with valiant force
Had chaste his foes into their joining tents,
Even there he staide, and straight at sound of trumpe
With stretched voice the herault thus proclaimde:
You princely Greeks, that hither be arrived
To spoil the fruit of these our fertile fields,
And us to drive from this our Native soil,
O suffer not so many giltlesse souls
By this debate descend in Stygian lake,
For private cause of wicked Polynice,
But rather let the brethren, hand to hand,
By mutual blows appease their furious rage,
And so to cease from sheding further blood:
And, to the end you all might understand
The profit that to every side may fall,
Thus much my Lord thought good to profer you,
This is his will, if he be overcome,
Then Polynice to rule this kingly realm:
If so it hap (as reason would it should)
Our rightful prince to conquer Polynice,
That then no one of you make more adoo,
But straight to Argos I Will have home again.
This, thus pronounst unto the noble Greeks,
No sooner did the sound of trumpet cease,
But Polynice stepped forth before the host,
And to these words this answer did he make:
O thou, (not brother) but my mortal foe,
Thy profer here has pleased me so well,
As presently, without more long delay,
I yield my self prepared to the field.
Our noble King no sooner heard this vaunt,
But forth as fast he pressed his princely steps,
With eger mind, as hoouering falcon woonts
To make her stoop, when pray appears in sight:
At all assayes they both were bravely armed,
To eithers side his sword fast being girt,
In eithers hand was put a sturdy lance:
About Eteocles our soldiers cloong,
To comfort him, and put him then in mind,
He fought for safety of his country soil,
And that in him consisted all their hope.
To Polynice the king Adrastus swore,
If he escaped victor from the field,
At his return he would in Greece erecte
A golden Image unto mighty Jove
In sign of his triumphing victory.
But all this while seek you (O noble queen)
To hinder this your furious sons attempt:
Entreat the Gods it may not take effect,
Else must you needs ere long deprived be
Of both your sons, or of the one at least.
Nuncius returns to the camp by the gates Homoloydes. IOCASTA. ANTIGONE.
ANtigone my sweet daughter, come forth
Out of this house, that naught but woe retains,
Come forth I say, not for to sing or dance,
But to prevent (if in our powers it lie)
That thy malicious brethren (swollen with ire)
And I alas, their miserable mother,
Be not destroide by stroke of dreadful death.

Antigone comes out of her mothers Palace. Anti. Ah sweet mother, ah my
beloved mother,
Alas alas, what cause does move ye now
From trembling voice to send such careful cries?
What painful pang? what grief does gripe you now?

Ioca. O dear daughter, thy most unhappy brethren
That sometimes lodgde within these wretched loins
Shall die this day, if Jove prevent it not.

Anti. Alas what say you? alas what do you say?
Can I (alas) endure to see him dead,
Whom I thus long have sought to see alive?

Ioca. They both have vowde (I quake alas to tell)
With trenchant blade to spill each others blood.

Antig. O cruel Eteocles, ah ruthlesse wretch,
Of this outrage thou only art the cause,
Not Polynice, whom thou with hateful spite
Have reaued first of crown and country soil,
And now do seek to reaue him of his life.

Ioca. Daughter no more delay, lets go, lets go.

Anti. Ah my sweet mother, whither shall I go?

Ioca. With me, dear daughter, to the greekish host.

Anti. Alas how can I go? unless I go
In danger of my life, or of good name?

Ioca. Time serves not now (my well beloved child)
To way the loss of life or honest name,
But rather to prevent (if so we may)
That wicked deed, which only but to think,
Does hale my heart out of my heavy breast.

Anti. Come then, lets go, good mother let us go.
But what shall we be able for to do,
You a weak old woman forworne with years,
And I God knows a silly simple maid?

Ioca. Our woeful words, our prayers and our plaintes,
Pourde out with streams of ouerflowing tears,
(Where Nature rules) may happen to prevail,
When reason, power, and force of arms do fail.
But if the glowing heat of boiling wrath
So furious be, as it may not relent,
Then I atwixt them both will throw my self,
And this my breast shall bear the deadly blows,
That otherwise should light upon my sons:
So shall they shead my blood and not their own.
Well now dear daughter, let us hasten hence,
For if in time we stay this raging strife,
Then happily may my life prolonged be:
If ere we come the bloody deed be done,
Then must my ghost forsake this feeble corpse:
And thou, dear child, with dolor shall bewail,
Thy brothers death and mothers all at once.
Iocasta with Antigone, and all her train (except the Chorus) goes toward
the camp, by the gates Homoloydes. CHORUS. WHo so has felt, what faith and
fervent love
A mother bears unto her tender sons,
She and none other sure, can comprehend
The doleful grief, the pangs and secret pain,
That presently does pierce the princely breast
Of our afflicted Queen: alas, I think
No martyrdom might well compare with hirs.
So often as I record her restless state,
Alas me thinks I feel a shiuering fear
Flit to and fro along my flushing veins.
Alas for ruth, that thus two brethren should,
Enforce themselves to shed each others blood.
Where are the laws of nature now become?
Can flesh of flesh, alas can blood of blood,
So far forget it self, as slay it self?
O lowering stars, O dim and angry skies,
O geltie fate, such mischief set aside.
But if supernall powers decreed have,
That death must be the end of this debate,
Alas what floudes of tears shall then suffice,
To weep and wail the near approaching death.
I mean the death of sons and mother both,
And with their death the ruin and decay,
Of Oedipus and his princely race:
But lo, here Creon co^mes with careful cheer:
It Is time that now I end my just complaint.
Creon comes in by the gates Homoloydes. CREON. NVNCIVS. ALthough I
straightly charge my tender child
To flee from Thebes for safegarde of him self,
And that long since he parted from my sight,
Yet do I greatly hang in lingering doubt,
Least passing through the gates, the privy watch
Has stayed him by some suspect of treason.
And so therewhile, the prophets having skride
His hidden fate, he purchased have the death
Which I by all means sought he might eschew:
And this mischaunce so much I fear the more,
How much the wished conquest at the first,
Fell happily unto the town of Thebes,
"But wise men ought with patience to sustain
"The sundry haps that slipperie fortune frames.

Nuncius comes in by the gates Electrae. Nun. Alas, who can direct my hasty
steps
Unto the brother of our woeful Queen?
But lo where carefully he stands here.

Cre. If so the mind may dread his own mishap,
Then dread I much, this man that seeks me thus,
Has brought the death of my beloved son.

Nun. My Lord, the thing you fear is very true,
Your son Meneceus no longer lives.

Cre. Alas who can withstand the heavenly powers?
Well, it beseemes not me, ne yet my years,
In bootelesse plaint to wast my wailefull tears:
Do thou recount to me his lucklesse death,
The order, form, and manner of the same.

Nun. Your son (my Lord) came to Eteocles,
And told him this in presence of the rest:
Renoumed King, neither your victory,
Ne yet the safety of this princely Realm
In armor does consist, but in the death
Of me, of me, (O most victorious King)
So heavenly dome of mighty Jove commands.
I (knowing what avail my death should yield
Unto your grace, and unto native land)
Might well be deemde a most ungrateful son
Unto this worthy town, if I would shun
The sharpest death to do my country good:
In mourning weed now let the vestall Nymphs,
With fainyng tunes commend my faultlesse ghost
To highest heavens, while I despoyle my self,
That afterward (since Jove will have it so)
To save your lives, I may receive my death,
Of you I crave, O courteous Citizens,
To shrine my corpse in tomb of marble stone:
Whereon grave this: Meneceus here does lie,
For countries cause that was content to die.
This said, alas, he made no more a do,
But drew his sword, and sheathde it in his breast.

Cre. No more, I have enough, return ye now
From whence ye came.
Nuncius returns by the gates Electrae. Well, since the blood of my beloved
son,
Must serve to slake the wrath of angry Jove,
And since his only death must bring to Thebes
A quiet end of her unquiet state,
Me thinks good reason would, that I henceforth
Of Thebane soil should bear the kingly swaye:
Yea sure, and so I will ere it belong,
Either by right, or else by force of arms.
Of al mishap lo here the wicked brood,
My sister first espoused has her son
That slew his fire, of whose accursed seed
Two brethren sprang, whose raging hateful hearts,
By force of boiling ire are bolne so sore
As each do thyrst to suck the others blood:
But why do I sustain the smart hereof?
Why should my blood be spilt for others gilte?
Oh welcome were that messenger to me
That brought me word of both my nephews deaths: Any messe^ger is welcome
that brings tidings of advancement.

Then should it soon be seen in every eye,
Twixt prince and prince what difference would appear,
Then should experience show what grief it is
To serve the humors of unbridled youth.
Now will I go for to prepare with speed
The funerals of my young giltlesse son,
The which perhaps may be accompanied
With th'obsequies of proud Eteocles.

Creon goes out by the gates Homoloydes. Finis Actus. 4.
Actus. 4.
CHORUS. O Blisful concord, bredde in sacred breast
Of him that guides the restless rolling sky,
That to the earth for man's assured rest
From height of heavens vouchsafest down to fly,
In thee alone the mighty power does lie,
With sweet accord to keep the frouning stars
And every planet else from hurtful wars.
In thee, in thee such noble virtue bydes,
As may command the mightiest Gods to bend,
From thee alone such sugared friendship slydes
As mortal wightes can scarcely comprehend,
To greatest strife thou setst delightful end,
O holy peace, by thee are only found
The passing joys that every where abound.
Thou only thou, through thy celestial might,
Did first of al, the heavenly pole divide
From the old confused heap that Chaos hight:
Thou madste the Sun, the Moon, and stars to glide,
With ordered course about this world so wide:
Thou have ordainde Dan Tytans shining light,
By dawne of day to chase the darkesome night.
When tract of time returns the lusty Ver.
By thee alone, the buddes and blossoms spring,
The fields with flowers be garnisht every where,
The blooming trees, abundant fruit do bring,
The cherefull birds melodiously do sing,
Thou do appoint, the crop of summers seed
For man's relief, to serve the winters need.
Thou do inspire the hearts of princely peers
By providence, proceeding from above,
In flowring youth to choose their worthy feeres,
With whom they live in league of lasting love,
Till fearful death does flitting life remove,
And look how fast, to death man pays his due,
So fast again, doste thou his stock renew.
By thee, the basest thing advanced is,
Thou every where, do graffe such golden peace,
As fills man, with more than earthly bliss,
The earth by thee, does yield her sweet increase
At beck of thee, all bloody discords cease,
And mightiest Realms in quiet do remain,
Whereas thy hand does hold the royal rain.
But if thou fail, then al things gone to wrack,
The mother then, does dread her natural child,
Then every town is subject to the sack,
Then spotless maids, the virgins be defilde,
Then rigor rules, then reason is exilde:
And this, thou woeful Thebes, to our great pain,
With present spoil, art likely to sustain.
Me think I hear the wailfull weeping cries
Of wretched dames, in every coast resound,
Me thinks I see, how up to heavenly skies
From battred walls, the thundering clappes rebound,
Me think I hear, how all things go to ground,
Me think I see, how soldiers wounded lie
With gasping breath, and yet they can not dye.
By means whereof, oh sweet Meneceus he,
That gives for countries cause his guiltless life,
Of others all, most happy shall he be:
His ghost shall flit from broiles of bloody strife,
To heavenly bliss, where pleasing joys be rife:
And would to God, that this his fatal end
From further plagues, our city might defend.
O sacred God, give ear unto thy thrall,
That humbly here upon thy name does call,
O let not now, our faultlesse blood be spilt,
For hot revenge of any others gilt.
Finis Actus quarti.
Done by F. Kinwelmarshe.
The order of the last dumb shevve.
FIrst the Stillpipes sounded a very mournful melody, in which time came upon
the Stage a woman clothed in a white garment, on her head a pillar, double
faced, the foremost face fair and smiling, the other behind black and louring,
muffled with a white laune about her eyes, her lap full of Iewelles, sitting in
a charyot, her legs naked, her fete set upon a great round bal, and being
drawn in by.iiij. noble personages, she led in a string on her right hand.ij.
kings crowned, and in her left hand.ij. poor slaves very meanly attyred.
After she was drawn about the stage, she stayed a little, changing the kings
unto the left hand and the slaves unto the right hand, taking the crowns from
the kings heads she crowned therewith the ij. slaves, and casting the vile
clothes of the slaves upon the kings, she despoyled the kings of their robes,
and therewith apparelled the slaves. This done, she was drawn eftsoon about
the stage in this order, and then departed, leaving unto us a plain Type or
figure of unstable fortune, who does oftentimes raise to heighte of dignity
the vile and unnoble, and in like manner throws down from the place of
promotio^, even those who^ before she her self had thither advanced: after
her departure came in Duke Creon with four gentlemen waiting upon him and
lamented the death of Meneceus his son in this manner.

Actus.iij.
Scena.1.
CREON. CHORUS. ALas what shall I do? bemone my self?
Or rue the ruin of my Native land,
About the which such clouds I see enclosde,
As darker cannot cover dreadful hell.
With mine own eyes I saw my own dear son
All gorde with blood of his too bloody breast,
Which he has shed full like a friend, too dear
To his country, and yet a cruel foe
To me, that was his friend and father both.
Thus to him self he gaynde a famous name,
And glory great, to me redoubled pain:
Whose hapless death in my afflicted house,
Has put such playnt, as I ne can epsy
What comfort might acquiet their distress.
I hither come my sister for to seek,
Iocasta, she that might in woeful wise
Amid her high and over pining cares,
Prepare the baynes for his so wretched corpse,
And eke for him that now is not in life,
May pay the due that to the dead pertaynes,
And for the honor he did well deserve,
To give some gifts unto infernal Gods.
Cho. My Lord, your sister is gone forth long since,
Into the camp, and with her Antigone,
Her daughter dear.

Cre. Into the camp? alas and what to do?

Cho. She understood, that for this realm forthwith
Her sons were greed in combat for to join.

Cre. Alas, the funerals of my dear son
Dismayed me so, that I ne did receive,
Ne seek to know these new unwelcome news.
But lo, behold a plain apparent sign
Of further fears: the furious troubled looks
Of him that comes here so hastilye.

Scena. 2.
NVNCIVS. CREON. CHORUS. ALas, alas, what shall I do? alas,
What shriching voice may serve my woeful words?
O wretched I, ten thousand times a wretch,
The messanger of dread and cruel death
Cre. Yet more mishap? and what unhappy news:

Nun. My Lord, your nephues both have lost their lives.

Cre. Out and alas, to me and to this town,
Thou do account great ruin and decay,
You royal family of Oedipus:
And hear you this? your liege and sovereign Lords
The brethren both are slain and done to death.

Cho. O cruel news, most cruel that can come,
O news that might these stony walls provoke
For tender ruthe to brust in bitter tears,
And so they would, had they the sense of man.

Cre. Cesers tears.
O worthy young Lords, that unworthy were
Of such unworthy death, O me most wretch.

Nun. More wretched shall ye deem your self, my lord,
When you shall hear of further misery.

Cre. And can there be more misery than this?

Nun. With her dear sons the queen her self is slain.

Cho. Bewail ladies, alas good ladies wail,
This hard mischaunce, this cruel common evil,
Ne henceforth hope for ever to rejoice.

Cre. O Iocasta, miserable mother,
What hapless end thy life alas has hent?
Percase the heavens purueyed had the same,
Moved thereto by the wicked wedlock
Of Oedipus thy son yet might thy scuse
But justly made, that knew not of the crime.
But tell me messanger, We harken somtimee willingly to woeful news.
oh tell me yet
The death of these two brethren, driven thereto,
Not thus all only by their drearie fate,
But by the banning and the bitter curse
Of their cruel sire, borne for our annoy,
And here on earth the only soursse of evil.

Nun. Then know my Lord, the battle that begone
Under the walls, was brought to luckie end.
Eteocles had made his fotemen flee
Within their trenches, to their foul reproach:
But herewithall the brethren both straightway
Each other challenge forth into the field,
By combat so to stinte their cruel strife,
Who armed thus amid the field appeard,
First Polynice turning toward Greece
His lovely looks, began Juno thus beseech:
O heavenly queen, thou see, that since the day
I first did wedde Adrastus daughter dear,
And stayde in Greece, thy servant have I been:
Then (be it not for mine unworthiness)
Grant me this grace, the victory to win,
Grant me, that I with high triumphant hand,
May bathe this blade within my brothers breast:
I know I crave unworthy victory,
Unworthy triumphs, and unworthy spoils,
Lo he the cause, my cruel enemy.
The people wept to bear the woeful words
Of Polynice, foreseeing eke the end
Of this outrage and cruel combat taken,
Each man began look upon his drouping mate,
With minds amazed, and trembling hearts for dread,
Whom pity perced for these youthful knights.
Eteocles with eyes up cast to heaven,
Thus said:
O mighty love his daughter grant to me,
That this right hand with this sharp armed lance
(Passing amid my brothers cankred breast,)
It may eke pierce that cowarde heart of his,
And so him slay that thus unworthily
Disturbes the quiet of our common weal.
So said Eteocles, and trumpets blown,
To send the summons of their bloody fight,
That one the other fiercely did encounter,
Like Lions two yfraught with boiling wrath,
Both coucht their lances full against the face,
But heaven it would not
nolde that there they should them teinte:
Upon the battred shields the mighty spears
Are both ybroke, and in a thousand shiuers
Amid the air flowne up into the heavens:
Behold again, with naked sword in hand,
Each one the other furiously assaults.
Here they of Thebes, there stood the Greeks in doubt,
Of whom does each man feel more chilling dread,
Least any of the twain should lose his life,
Than any of the twain did feel in fight.
Their angry looks, their deadly daunting blows.
Might witness well, that in their hearts remaynde
As cankred hate, disdain, and furious mood,
As ever bred in bear or tigers breast.
The first that hapt to hurt was Polinice,
Who smote the right thighe of Eteocles:
But as we deem, the blow was nothing deep,
Then cried the Greeks, and lepte with lightened hearts,
But straight again they held their peace, for why?
Eteocles began thrust his wicked sword
In the left arm of unarmed Pollinice,
And let the blood from bare unfenced flesh.
With falling drops distill upon the ground,
Ne long he stays, but with an other thrust
His brothers belly boweld with his blade,
Then wretched he, with bridle left at large,
From of his horse fell pale upon the ground,
Ne long it was, but down our duke dismountes
From of his startling steed, and runs in have,
His brothers hapless helm for to unlace,
And with such hungry mind desired spoil,
(As one that thought the field already woonne)
That at unawares, his brothers dagger drawn,
And griped fast within the dying hand,
Under his side he recklesse does receive,
That made the way to his wide open heart.
Thus falls Eteocles his brother by,
From both whose breasts the blood fast bubling, gave
A sorry show to Greeks and Thebanes both.

Cho. Oh wretched end of our unhappy Lords.

Cre. Oh Oedipus, I must bewail the death
Of thy dear sons, that were my nephews both,
But of these blows thou ought feel the smarte,
That with thy wonted prayers, thus have brought
Such noble bloods to this unnoble end.
But now tell on, what followed of the Queen?

Nun. When thus with piecced hearts, by their own hands
The brothers fell and wallowed in their blood,
(That one still tumbling on the others gore)
Came their afflicted mother, then to late,
And eke with her, chaste child Antygone,
Who saw no sooner how their fates had fallen,
But with the doubled echo of alas,
She dymmde the air with loud complaints and cries:
Oh sons (quod she) too late came all my help,
And all to late have I my succor sent:
And with these words, upon their carcas cold
She shriched so, as might have stayed the Sun
To mourn with her: the woeful sister eke,
(That both her chekes did bathe in flowing tears)
Out from the depth of her tormented breast,
With scalding sighs began draw thief weary words,
O my dear brethren, why abandon ye
Our mother dear, when these her aged years,
(That of themselves are weak and grown with grief,)
Stood most in need of your sustaining help?
Why do you leave her thus disconsolate?
At sound of such her weeping long lament,
Eteocles our king held up his hand,
And sent from bottom of his woeful breast
A doubled sighe, divided with his grief,
In faithful token of his feeble will
To recomfort his mother and sister both:
And in stead of sweet contenting words,
The trickling tears raynde down his paled chekes:
Then claspt his hands, and shut his dying eyes.
But Polynice, that turned his rolling eyes
Unto his mother and his sister dear,
With hollow voice and fumbling tongue, thus spoke:
Mother, you see how I am now arrived
Unto the heaven of mine unhappy end:
Now nothing does remain to me, but this,
That I lament my sisters life and yours,
Left thus in everlasting woe and grief:
So am I sorry for Eteocles,
Who though he were my cruel enemy,
He was your son, and brother yet to me:
But since these ghostes of ours must needs go down
With staggring steps into the Stigian reign,
I you beseech, mother and sister both,
Of pity yet, that you will me procure
A royal tomb within my native realm:
And now shut up with those your tender bands,
These grieffull eyes of mine, whose dazeled light
Shadows of dreadful death be come to close.
Now rest in peace, this said, he yielded up
His fainting ghost, that ready was to part.
The mother thus beholding both her sons
Ydone to death, and overcome with dole,
Drew out the dagger of her Pollinice,
From brothers breast, and gorde therewyth her throt^,
Falling bet ween her sons:
Then with her feebled arms, she does unfold
Their bodies both, as if for company
Her discontented corpse were yet content
To pass with them in Charons ferrie boat.
When cruel fate had thus with force bereft
The woeful mother and her two dear sons,
All suddenly alarm, alarm, they cry,
And hot conflict began for to arise
Between our army and our enemies:
For either part would have the victory.
A while they did with equal force maintain
The bloody fight, at last the Greeks do fly,
Of whom could hardly any one escape,
For in such hugie heaps our men them slew.
The ground was couerde all with carcases:
And of our soldiers, some began spoil the dead,
Some other were that parted out the pray,
And some pursuing. Antigone took up
The Queen Iocasta, and the brethren both,
Whom in a chariot hither they will bring
Ere long: and thus, although we gotten have
The victory over our enemies,
Yet have we lost much more than we have won.

Creon exit. Cho. O hard mishap, we do not only hear
The weary news of their untimely death,
But eke we must with wayling eyes behold
Their bodies dead, for look where they be brought.

Scena. 3.
ANTIGONE. CHORUS. MOst bitter plaint, O ladies, us behoues
Behooves eke not only bitter plainte,
But that our hears dysheuylde from our heads
About our shoulders hang, and that our breasts
With bouncing blows be all be battered,
Our ghastly faces with our nails defaced:
Behold, your Queen twixt both her sons lies slain,
The Queen whom you did love and honor both,
The Queen that did so tenderly bring up
And nourishe you, each one like to her own,
Now has she left you all (O cruel hap)
With her too cruel death in dying dread,
Pyning with pensifenesse without all help.
O weary life, why bydste thou in my breast
And I contented be that these mine eyes
Should see her dye that gave to me this life,
And I not venge her death by loss of life?
Who can me give a fountain made of moan,
That I may weep as much as is my will,
To sowsse this sorrow up in swelling tears?
Cho. What stony heart could leave for to lament?

Anti. O Polinice, now have thou with thy blood
Bought all too dear the title to this realm,
That cruel he Eteocles thee refte,
And now also has rest thee of thy life,
Alas, what wicked deed can wrath not do?
And out alas for me.
While thou yet liuedst, I had a lively hope
To have some noble wight to be my pheere,
By whom I might be crownde a royal Queen:
But now, thy hasty death has done to dye
This dying hope of mine, that hope henceforth
None other wedlock, but tormenting woe,
If so these trembling hands for cowarde dread
Dare not presume to end this wretched life.

Cho. Alas dear dame, let not thy raging grief
Heap one mishap upon another head.

Anti. O doleful day, wherein my sorry sire
Was borne, and yet O more unhappy hour
When he was crowned king of stately Thebes
The Hymenei in unhappy bed,
And wicked wedlock, wittingly did join,
The giltlesse mother with her guilty son,
Out of which root we be the branches borne,
To bear the scourge of their so foul offense:
And thou, O father, thou that for this fact,
Haste torn thine eyes from thy tormented head,
Give ear to this, come forth, and bend thine ear
To bloody news, that can not them behold:
Happy in that, for if thine eyes could see
Thy sons both slain, and even between them both
Thy wife and mother dead, bathed and imbrude
All in one blood, then would thou dye for dole,
And so might end all our unlucky stock.
But most unhappy now, that lack of sight
Shall linger life within thy lucklesse breast,
And still tormented in such misery,
Shall always dye, because thou can not dye.

Oedipus enters. Scena. 4.
OEDIPVS. ANTIGONE. CHORUS. WHy do thou call out of this darkesome den,
(The lustleste lodge of my lamenting years,)
(O daughter dear) thy fathers blinded eyes,
Into the light I was not worthy of?
Or what such sight (O cruel destenie)
Without tormenting cares might I behold,
That image am of death and not of man?
Anti. O father mine, I bring unlucky news
Unto your ears, your sons are now both slain,
Ne does your wife (that wonted was to guide
So piteously your staylesse stumbling steps)
Now see this light, alas and welaway.

Oed. O heap of infinite calamities,
And can thou yet increase when I thought least
That any grief more great could grow in thee?
But tell me yet, what kind of cruel death
Had these three sorry souls?

Anti. Without offense to speak, dear father mine,
The lucklesse lotte, the froward frowning fate
That gave you life to end your fathers life,
Have led your sons to reaue each others life.

Oed. Of them I thought no less, but tell me yet
What causeless death has caught from me my dear,
(What shall I call her) mother or my wife?

Anti. When as my mother saw her dear sons dead,
As pensive pangs had pressed her tender heart,
With bloudlesse cheeks and ghastly looks she fell,
Drawing the dagger from Eteocles side,
She gorde hirselfe with wide recurelesse wound:
And thus, without mo words, gave up the ghost,
Embracing both her sons with both her arms.
In these affrightes this frosen heart of mine,
By fear of death maynteines my dying life.

Cho. This drearie day is cause of many evils,
Poor Oedipus, unto thy progeny,
The Gods yet grant it may become the cause
Of better hap to this afflicted realm.

Scena. 5.
CREON. OEDIPVS. ANTIGONE. GOod Ladies leave your bootelesse vain complaynt,
Leave to lament, cut off your woeful cries,
High time it is as now for to provide
The funerals for the renowned king:
And thou Oedipus hearken to my words,
And know thus much, that for thy daughters dower,
Antigone with Hemone shall be wedde.
Thy son our king not long before his death
Assigned has the kingdom should descend
To me, that am his mothers brother borne,
And so the same might to my son succeed.
Now I that am the lord and king of Thebes,
Will not permit that thou abide therein:
Ne marvel yet of this my heady will,
Ne blame thou me, for why, the heavens above
(Which only rule the rolling life of man,)
Have so ordeynde, and that my words be true,
Tyresias he that knows things to come,
By trusty tokens has foretold the town,
That while thou did within the walls remain,
It should be plagned still with penury:
Wherefore depart, and think not that I speak
These woeful words for hate I bear to thee,
But for the weal of this afflicted realm.
Oedipus. O foul accursed fate, that have me bredde
To bear the burden of the misery
Of this cold death, which we account for life:
Before my birth my father understood
I should him slay, and scarcely was I borne,
When he me made a pray for savage beasts.
But what? I slew him yet, then caught the crown,
And last of all defilde my mothers bed,
By whom I have this wicked offspring got:
And to this heinous crime and filthy fact
The heavens have from high enforced me,
Against whose doom no counsel can prevail.
Thus hate I now my life, and last of all,
Lo by the news of this so cruel death
Of both my sons and dear beloved wife,
Mine angry constellation me commaundes
Withouten eyes to wander in mine age,
When these my weery, weak, and crooked limme:
Have greatest need to crave their quiet rest.
O cruel Creon, will thou slay me so,
For cruelly thou doste but murder me,
Out of my kingdom now to chase me thus:
Yet can I not with humble mind beseech
Thy courtesy, ne fall before thy feet.
Let fortune take from me these worldly gifts,
She can not conquer this courageous heart,
That never yet could well be overcome,
To force me yield for fear to villainy:
Do what thou can I will be Oedipus.

Cre. So have thou reason Oedipus, to say,
And for my part I would thee counsel eke,
Still to maynteine the high and hawtie mind,
That has been ever in thy noble heart:
For this be sure, if thou would kiss these knees,
And practice eke by prayer to prevail,
No pity could persuade me to consent
That thou remain one only hour in Thebes.
And now, prepare you worthy Citizens,
The funerals that duly do pertayne
Unto the Queen, and to Eteocles,
And eke for them provide their stately tombs.
But Pollynice, as common enemy
Unto his country, carry forth his corpse
Out of the walls, ne none so hardy be
On peine of death his body to engraue,
But in the fields let him unburied lie,
Without his honor, and without complaynte,
An open pray for savage beasts to spoil.
And thou Antigone, dry up thy tears,
Pluck up thy sprites, and cheer thy harmless heart
To marriage: for ere these two days pass,
Thou shall espouse Hemone mine only heir.

Antig. Father, I see us wrapped in endless woe,
And now much more do I your state lamente,
Than these that now be dead, not that I think
Their great missehappes too little to bewail,
But this, that you (you only) do surpass
All wretched wightes that in this world remain.
But you my Lord, why banishe you with wrong
My father thus out of his own perforce?
And why will you deny these guiltless bones
Of Polinice, their grave in country soil?

Creon. So would not I, so would Eteocles.

Anti. He cruel was, you fond to hold his hestes.

Creon. Is then a fault to do a kings command?

Anti. When his command is cruel and unjust.

Creon. Is it unjust that he unburied be?

Anti. He not deserved so cruel punishment.

Creon. He was his countries cruel enemy.

Anti. Or else was he that held him from his right.

Cre. Bare he not arms against his native land?

Anti. Offends he that sekes to win his own?

Cre. In spite of thee he shall unburied be.

Anti. In spite of thee these hands shall bury him.

Cre. And with him eke then will I bury thee.

Anti. So grant the gods, I get none other grave,
Then with my Polinices dear to rest.

Cre. Go sirs, lay hold on her, and take her in.

Anti. I will not leave this corpse unburied.

Cre. Can thou undo the thing that is decreed?

Anti. A wicked foul decree to wrong the dead.

Cre. The ground ne shall ne ought to cover him.

Anti. Creon, yet I beseech thee for the love,

Cre. Away I say, thy prayers not prevail.

Anti. That thou did bear Iocasta in her life,

Cre. Thou do but waste thy words amid the wind.

Anti. Yet grant me leave to wash his wounded corpse.

Cre. It can not be that I should grant thee so.

Anti. O my dear Polinice, this tirant yet
She shows ye fruits of true kyndly love.
With all his worongfull force can not fordoe,
But I will kiss these cold pale lips of thine,
And wash thy wounds with my waymenting tears.

Cre. O simple wench, O fond and foolish girl,
Beware, beware, thy tears do not foretell
Some sign of hard mishap unto thy marriage.

Anti. No, no, for Hemone will I never wed.

Cre. Do thou refuse the marriage of my son?

Anti. I will nor him, nor any other wed.

Cre. Against thy will then must I thee constrain.

Anti. If thou me force, I swear thou shall repent.

Cre. What can thou cause that I should once repent?

Anti. With bloody knife I can this knot unknit.

Cre. And what a fool were thou to kill thy self?

Anti. I will ensue some worthy woman's steps.

Cre. Speak out Antigone, that I may hear.

Anti. This hardy hand shall soon dispatch his life.

Cre. O simple fool, and darste thou be so bold?

Anti. Why should I dread to do so doughtie deed?

Cre. And wherefore do thou wedlock so despise?

Anti. In cruel exile for to follow him. pointing to Oedipus

Cre. What others might beseem, beseemes not thee.

Anti. If need require with him eke will I die.

Cre. Depart, depart, and with thy father die,
Rather than kill my child with bloody knife:
Go hellish monster, go out of the town.

Creon exit. Oed. Daughter, I must commend thy noble heart.

Anti. Father, The duty of a child truly performed.
I will not live in company
And you alone wander in wilderness.

Oed. O yes dear daughter, leave thou me alone
Amid my plagues: be merry while thou may.

Anti. And who shall guide these aged feet of yours,
That banished been, in blind necessity?

Oed. I will endure, as fatal lot me drives:
Resting these crooked sorry sides of mine
Where so the heavens shall lend me harborough.
And in exchange of rich and stately towers,
The woods, the wilderness, the darkesome dens,
Shall be the bower of mine unhappy bones.

Anti. O father now where is your glory gone?

"Oed. "One happy day did raise me to renoune,
"One hapless day has thrown mine honor down.

Anti. Yet will I bear a part of your mishappes.

Oed. That sits not amid thy pleasant years.

"Anti. Dear father yes, let youth give place to age.

Oed. Where is thy moother? let me touch her face,
That with these hands I may yet feel the harm
That these blind eyes forbid me to behold.

Anti. Here father, here her corpse, here put your hand.

Oed. O wife, O moother, O both woeful names,
O woeful mother, and O woeful wife,
O would to God, alas, O would to God
Thou nere had been my mother, nor my wife.
But where lie now the paled bodies two,
Of mine unlucky sons, Oh where be they?

Anti. Lo here they lie one by an other dead.

Oedip. Stretch out this hand, dear daughter, stretch this hand
Upon their faces.

Anti. Lo father, here, lo, now you touch them both.

Oedi. O bodies dear, O bodies dearly boughte
Unto your father, bought with high missehap.

Anti. O lovely name of my dear Pollinice,
Why can I not of cruel Creon crave,
Ne with my death now purchase thee a grave?

Oedi. Now commes Apollos oracle to pass,
That I in Athens town should end my days:
And since thou do, O daughter mine, desire
In this exile to be my woeful mate,
Lend me thy hand, and let us go together.

Anti. Lo, here all pressed my dear beloved father,
A feeble guide, and eke a simple scowte,
To pass the perils in a doubtful way.

Oedi. Unto the wretched, be a wretched guide.

Anti. In this all only equal to my father.

Oedi. And where shall I set forth my trembling feet?
O reach me yet some surer staff, to steye
My staggryng pace amidde these ways unknown.

Anti. She gives him a staff, and stays him her self also.
Here father here, and here set forth your feet.

Oedi. Now can I blame none other for my harms
But secret spite of foredecreed fate,
Thou art the cause, that crooked, old and blind,
I am exilde far from my country soil,
And suffer dole that I ought not endure.

"Anti. O father, father, Justice lies on sleep,
"Ne does regard the wrongs of wretchedness,
"Ne princes swelling pride it does redress. Justice sleeps.


Oedi. O careful raytife, how am I now changd
From that I was? I am that Oedipus, A Glass for brittel Beutie and for iusty
limbs.

That whylome had triumphant victory,
And was both dread and honored eke in Thebes:
But now (so pleases you my froward stars)
Down headlong hurlde in depth of myserie,
So that remaynes of Oedipus no more
As now in me, but even the naked name,
And lo, this image, that resembles more
Shadows of death, than shape of Oedipus.

Antig. O father, now forgette the pleasant days
And happy life that you did whylom lead,
The muse whereof redoubleth but you grief:
Sustain the smarte of these your present pains
With patience, that best may you preserve.
Lo where I come, to live and die with you,
Not (as sometimes) the daughter of a king,
But as an abject now in poverty,
That you, by presence of such faithful guide,
May better bear the wrecke of misery.

Oedi. O only comfort of my cruel hap.

Anti. Your daughters pity is but due to you?
Would God I might as well ingraue the corpse
Of my dear Pollinice, but I ne may,
And that I can not, doubleth all my do^e.

Oedi. This thy desire, that is both good and just,
Imparte to some that be thy trusty friends,
Who movde with pity, may procure the same.

"Anti. Believe me father, when dame fortune frowns,
"Be few that find trusty companions.

Oedi. And of those few, yet one of those am I:
Wherefore, go we now daughter, lead the way
Into the stony rocks and highest hills,
Where fewest trackes of steppings may be spyde.
"Who once has sit in chair of dignity,
"May shame to show himself in misery.

Anti. From thee, O country, am I forced to part,
Despoiled thus in flower of my youth,
And yet I leave within my enemies rule,
Ismene my unfortunate sister.

Oed. Dear citizens, behold your Lord and King
A mirror for Magistrates.
That Thebes set in quiet government,
Now as you see, neglected of you all,
And in these ragged ruthful weeds bewrapt,
Ychased from his native country soil,
Betakes himself (for so this tirant will)
To everlasting banishment: but why
Do I lament my lucklesse lot in vain?
"Since every man must bear with quiet mind,
"The fate that heavens have erst to him assignde.

CHORUS. EXample here, lo take by Oedipus,
You Kings and Princes in prosperity,
And every one that is desirous
To sway the seat of worldly dignity,
How fickle it is to trust in Fortunes whele:
For him whom now she hoyseth up on hie,
If so he chance on any side to reele,
She hurles him down in twinkling of an eye:
And him again, that grovleth now on ground,
And lies low in dungeon of despair,
Her whirling wheel can heave up at a bound,
And place aloft in stay of stately chair.
As from the Sun the Moon withdrawes her face,
So might of man does yield dame Fortune place.
Finis Actus quinti.
Done by G. Gascoigne.
Epilogus.
LO here the fruit of high aspiring mind,
Who weenes to mount above the moving Skies:
Lo here the trap that titles proud do find,
See, ruin grows, when most we reach to rise:
Sweet is the name, and stately is the reign
Of kingly rule, and swey of royal seat,
But bitter is the taste of Princes gain,
When climbing heads do hunte for to be great.
Who would forecast the bank of restless toil,
Ambitious wightes do freight their breasts withal,
The growing cares, the fears of dreadful foil,
To ill success that on such flightes does fall,
He would not streyne his practice to atchieue
The largest limits of the mightiest states.
But oh, what fancies sweet do still relieve
The hungry humor of these swelling hates?
What poison sweet inflameth high desire?
How soon the hautie heart is pufft with pride?
How soon is thirst of scepter set on fire?
How soon in rising minds does mischief slide?
What bloody sturres does glut of honor breed?
Thambitious son does often surpresse his sire:
Where natures power unfeigned love should spread,
There malice reigns and reaches to be higher.
O blind unbridled search of Souereintie,
O tickle train of evil attained state,
O fond desire of princely dignity,
Who climbes too soon, he often repentes too late.
The golden mean, the happy does suffice,
They lead the posting day in rare delight,
They fill (not feed) their discontented eyes,
They reap such rest as does beguile the might,
They not envy the pomp of haughty train,
Ne dread the dinte of proud usurping swoorde,
But plaste allow, more sugared joys attain,
Than swaye of lofty Scepter can afoorde.
Cease to aspire then, cease to soar so hie,
And shun the plague that pierces noble breasts.
To glittring courts what fondness is to fly,
When better state in baser Towers rests?
Finis Epilogi.
Done hy Chr. Yeluerton.
NOte (Reader) that there were in Thebes four principal gates, vvherof the
chief and most commonly used were the gates called Electrae and the gates
Homoloydes. This I have thought good to explane: as also certain words which
are not common in use are noted and expounded in the margent. I did begin those
notes at request of a gentlevvoman who understood not poetycall words or
terms. I trust those and the rest of my notes throughout the book, shall not
be hurtful to any Reader.

The Fruit of reconciliation, Written upon a reconciliation between two
friends.
THe hateful man that heapeth in his mind,
Cruel revenge of wrongs forepast and done,
May not (with ease) ye pleasant pathway find,
Of friendly verse which I have now begone,
Unless at first his angry breast vntwinde,
The crooked knot which canckred choler knit,
And then recule with reconciled grace.
Likewise I find it said in holy write,
If thou entend to turn thy fearful face,
To God above: make thine agreement yet,
First with thy Brother whom thou did abuse,
Confess thy faults, thy frowardness and all,
So that the Lord thy prayer not refuse.
When I consider this, and then the brall,
Which raging youth (I will not me excuse)
Did whilome breed in mine vnmellowed brain,
I thought it meet before I did assay,
To write in ryme the double golden gain,
Of amity: first yet to take away
The grutch of grief, as thou do me constrayne.
By due desert whereto I now must yield,
And drown for aye in depth of Lethes lake,
Disdaynefull moodes whom friendship cannot weelde:
Pleading for peace which for my part I make
Of former strife, and henceforth let us write
The pleasant fruits of faithful friends delight.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Two gentlemen did run three courses at the Ring for one kiss to be taken of a
fair gentlewoman being then present, with this condition, that the winner
should have the kiss, and the loser be bound to write some verses upon the
gain or loss thereof. Now it fortuned that the winner triumphed, saying, he
much lamented that in youth he had not seen the wars. Whereupon the loser
compyled these following, in discharge of the condition above rehearsed.
THis vain avail which thou by Mars have woonne,
Should not allure thy flitting mind to feelde,
Where sturdie steeds in depth of dangers roonne,
By guts welgnawen by clappes that Canons yield.
Where faithless friends by warrefare waxen ware,
And run to him that gives best reward:
No fear of laws can cause them for to care,
But rob and reaue, and steal without regard,
The fathers coat, the brothers steed from stall:
The dear friends purse shall picked be for pence,
The native soil, the parents left and all,
With Tant tra tant, the Camp is marching hence.
But when bare beggrie bidds them to beware,
And late repentance rules them to retire,
Like hiuelesse Bees they wander here and there,
And hang on them who (erst) did dread their ire.
This cut throto life (me seems) thou should not like,
And shun the happy haven of mean estate:
High Jove (perdy) may send what thou do seek,
And heap up pounds within thy quiet gate.
Nor yet I would that thou should spend thy days
In idleness to tear a golden time:
Like country loutes, which count none other praise,
But grease a sheep, and learn to serve the swine.
In vain were then the gifts which nature lent,
If Pan so press to pass dame Pallas lore:
But my good friend, let thus thy youth be spent,
Serve God thy Lord, and praise him evermore.
Search out the skill which learned books do teach,
And serve in feeld when shadows make thee sure:
Hold with the head, and row not past thy reach.
But plead for peace which plenty may procure.
And (for my life) if thou can run this race,
Thy bags of coin will multiply apace.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Not long after the writing hereof: he departed from the company of his said
friend (whom he entirely loved) into the west of England, and feeling himself
so consumed by women's craft that he doubted of a safe return: wrote before his
departure as follows.
THe feeble thread which Lachesis has sponne,
To draw my days in short abode with thee,
Has wrought a web which now (welneare) is done,
The wale is worn: and (all to late) I see
That lingering life does dally but in vain,
For Atropos will cut the twist in twain.
I not discern what life but loathsome were,
When faithful friends are kept in twain by want:
Nor yet perceive what pleasure does appear,
To deep desires where good success is skant.
Such spite yet shows dame fortune (if she frown,)
The haughty hearts in high mishaps to drown.
Hot be the flames which boil in friendly minds,
Cruel the care and dreadful is the doom:
Slipper the knot which tract of time vntwynds,
Hateful the life and welcome were the toome.
Blessed were the day which might devour such youth,
And cursed the want that seeks to choke such truth.
This wayling verse I bathe in flowing tears,
And would my life might end with these my lines:
Yer strive I not to force into thine ears,
Such feigned plaints as fickell faith resignes.
But high forsight in dreams has stopped my breath,
And causde the Swanne to sing before his death.
For lo these naked walls do well declare,
My latest leave of thee I taken have:
And unknown coasts which I must seek with care
Do well divine that there shall be my grave:
There shall my death make many for to moan,
Skarce known to them, well known to thee alone.
This bowne of thee (as last request) I crave,
When true report shall sound my death with fame:
Vouchsafe yet then to go unto my grave,
And there first write my birth and then my name:
And how my life was shortened many years,
By women's wyles as to the world appears.
And in reward of grant to this request,
Permit O God my tongue these words to tell:
(When as his pen shall write upon my chest)
With shriking voice mine own dear friend farewell:
No care on earth did seem so much to me,
As when my corpse was forced to part from thee.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He wrote to the same friend from Excester, this Sonet following.
A Hundredth sons (in course but not in kind)
Can witness well that I possess no joy:
The fear of death which fretteth in my mind
Consumes my heart with dread of dark anoye.
And for each son a thousand broken sleeps
Divide my dreams with fresh recourse of cares:
The youngest sister sharp her sheare she keeps,
To cut my thread, and thus my life it wears.
Yet let such days, such thousand restless nights,
Spit forth their spite, let fates eke show their force:
Deaths daunting dart where so his buffet lights,
Shall shape no change within my friendly corse:
But dead or live, in heaven, in earth, in hell
I will be thine where so my carkase dwell.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He wrote to the same friend from Founteine belle eau in France, this Sonnet
in commendation of the said house of Fountain bel'eau.
NOt stately Troy though Priam yet did live,
Could now compare Founteine bel'eau to pass:
Nor Syrian towers, whose lofty steps did strive,
To climb the throne where angry Saturn was.
For outward show the ports are of such price,
As skorne the cost which Caesar spilt in Room:
Such works within as stayne the rare devise,
Which whilome he Apelles wrought on toome.
Swift Tiber flood which fed the Romayne pooles,
Puddle to this where Crystal melts in streams,
The pleasant place where Muses kept their schools,
(Not parcht with Phoebe, nor banished from his beams)
Yield to those Dames, nor sight, nor fruit, nor smell,
Which may be thought these gardens to excel.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He wrote unto a Skotish Dame whom he chose for his Mistress in the French
Court, as follows.
LAdy receive, receive in gracious wise,
This ragged verse, these rude ill skribled lines:
Too base an object for your heavenly eyes,
For he that writes his freedom (lo) resignes
Into your hands: and freely yields as thrall
His sturdy neck (erst subject to no yoke)
But bending now, and headlong pressed to fall,
Before your feet, such force has beauties stroke.
Since then mine eyes (which skornd our English) dames
In forrayne courts have chosen you for fair,
Let be this verse true token of my flames,
And do not drench your own in deep despair.
Only I crave (as I nill change for new)
That you vouchsafe to think your servant true.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
A Sonet written in praise of the brown beauty, compiled for the love of
Mistress E. P. as follows.
THe thristles thread which pampred beauty spinnes,
In thraldom binds the foolish gazing eyes:
As cruel Spiders with their crafty ginnes,
In worthless webbes do snare the simple Flies.
The garments gay, the glittring golden gite,
The tysing talk which flows from Pallas pooles:
The painted pale, the (too much) red made white,
Are smiling baytes to fish for loving fools.
But lo, when eld in toothlesse mouth appears,
And hoary hears in steed of beauties blaze:
Than had I wist, does teach repenting years,
The tickle track of crafty Cupides maze.
Twixt fair and foul therefore, twixt great and small,
A lovely nuthrowne face is best of all.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Now to begin with another man, take these verses written to be sent with a
ryng, wherein were engraued a Partrich in a Merlines foot.
THe Partridge in the pretty Mertines foot,
Who feels her force suppressed with fearfulness,
And finds that strength nor strife can do her boot,
To escape the danger of her deep distress:
These woeful words may seem for to rehearse
Which I must write in this waymenting verse.
What helps now (says she) dame natures skill,
To die my feathers like the dustie ground?
Or what preuayles to lend me wings at will
Which in the air can make my body bound?
Since from the earth the dogs me drove perforce,
And now aloft the Hawk has caught my corse.
If change of colors, could not me convey,
Yet might my wings have escaped the dogs despite:
And if my wings did fail to fly away,
Yet might my strength resist the Merlines might.
But nature made the Merline me to kill,
And me to yield unto the Merlines will.
My lot is like (dear Dame) believe me well,
The quiet life which I full closely kept.
Was not content in happy state to dwell,
But forth in have to gaze on thee it lept.
Desire thy dog did spring me up in have,
Thou were the Hawk, whose tallents caught me fast.
What should I then, seek means to fly away?
Or strive by force, to break out of thy feet?
No, no, perdie, I may no strength assay,
To strive with thee ywis, it were not meet.
Thou art that Hawk, whom nature made to hent me,
And I the Byrd, that must therewith content me.
And since Dame nature has ordained so,
Her happy hest I gladly shall embrace:
I yield my will, although it were to woe,
I stand content to take my grief for grace:
And seal it up within my secret heart,
Which seal receive, as token of my smart.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
A loving Lady being wounded in the spring time, and now galded eftsoon with
the remembrance of the spring, does therefore thus bewail.
THis tenth of March when Aries receyud
Dame Phoebus rays, into his horned head:
And I my self, by learned lore perceyu'd,
That Ver approcht, and frostie winter fled.
I crossed the Thames, to take the cherefull air,
In open feeldes, the weather was so fair.
And as I rowed, fast by the further shore,
I heard a voice, which seemed to lament:
Whereat I stayed, and by a stately door,
I left my Boat, and up on land I went:
Till at the last by lasting pain I found,
The woeful wight, which made this doleful sound.
In pleasant garden (placed all alone)
I saw a Dame, who sat in weary wise,
With scalding sighs, she vttred all her moan,
The ruefull tears, down rayned from her eyes:
Her lowering head, full low on hand she laid,
On knee her arm: and thus this Lady said.
Alas (quod she) behold each pleasant green,
Will now renew, his summers livery,
The fragrant flowers, which have not long been seen,
Will flourish now, (ere long) in bravery:
The tender buddes, whom cold has long kept in,
Will spring and sproute, as they do now begin.
But I (alas) within whose mourning mind,
The graffes of grief, are only given to grow,
Cannot enjoy the spring which others find,
But still my will, must wither all in woe:
The cold of care, so nippes my joys at root,
No sun does shine, that well can do them boot.
The lusty Ver, which whilome might exchange
My grief to joy, and then my joys increase,
Springs now else where, and shows to me but strange,
My winters woe, therefore can never cease:
In other coasts, his sun full clear does shine,
And comforts lends to every mould but mine.
What plant can spring, that feels no force of Ver?
What flower can flourish, where no sun does shine?
These Bales (quod she) within my breast I bear,
To break my bark, and make my pith to pine:
Needs must I fall, I fade both root and rind,
My branches bow at blast of every wind.
This said: she cast a glance and spied my face,
By sight whereof, Lord how she changed hew?
So that for shame, I turned back a pace
And to my home, my self in have I drew:
And as I could her woofull words rehearse,
I set them down in this waymenting verse.
Now Ladies you, that know by whom I sing,
And feel the winter, of such frozen wills:
Of courtesy, yet cause this noble spring,
To send his sun, above the highest hills:
And so to shine, upon her fading sprayes,
Which now in woe, do wyther thus always.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
An absent Dame thus complayneth.
MVch like the seely Byrd, which close in Cage is pent,
So sing I now, not notes of joy, but lays of deep lament.
And as the hooded Hawk, which hears the Partrich spring,
Who though she feel her self fast tied, yet beats her bating wing:
So strive I now to show, my feeble forward will,
Although I know my labor lost, to hop against the Hill.
The drops of dark disdain, did never drench my heart,
For well I know I am beloved, if that might ease my smart.
Ne yet the privy coals, of glowing iellosie,
Could ever kindle needless fear, within my fantasy.
The rigor of repulse, does not renew my playnt,
Nor choice of change does move my moan, nor force me thus to faint.
Only that pang of pain, which passes all the rest,
And cankerlike does fret the heart, within the giltlesse breast.
Which is if any be, most like the panges of death,
That present grief now gripeth me, and strives to stop my breath.
When friends in mind may meet, and heart in heart embrace,
And absent yet are feign to plain, for lack of time and place:
Then may I count, their love like seed, that soon is sown,
Yet lacking drops of heavenly dew, with weeds is ouergrowe^.
The Greyhound is agreeu'd, although he see his game,
If still in slip he must be stayde, when he would chase the same.
So fares it now by me, who know my self beloved
Of one the best, in each respect, that ever yet was proved.
But since my lucklesse lot, forbids me now to taste,
The dulcet fruits of my delight, therefore in woes I wast.
And Swallow like I sing, as one enforced so,
Since others reap the gaineful crop, which I with pain did sow.
Yet you that mark my song, excuse my Swallows voice,
And bear with her unpleasant tunes, which cannot well rejoice.
Had I or luck in love, or lease of liberty,
Then should you hear some sweeter notes, so clear my throat would be.
But take it thus in gree, and mark my playnsong well,
No heart feels so much hurt, as that, which does in absence dwell.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
In praise of a Countess.
DEsire of Fame would force my feeble skill,
To praise a Countess by her dew desert:
But dread of blame holds back my forward will,
And quenched the coals which kindled in my heart.
Thus am I plongd twene dread and deep desire,
To pay the dew which duty does require.
And when I call the mighty Gods in aid
To further forth some fine invention:
My bashefull spirits be full ill afraid
To purchase pain by my presumption.
Such malice reigns (sometimes) in heavenly minds,
To punish him that prayseth as he finds.
For Pallas first, whose filed flowing skill,
Should guide my pen some pleasant words to write,
With angry mood has framed a froward will,
To dashe devise as often as I endite.
For why? if once my Ladies gifts were known,
Pallas should loose the praises of her own.
And bloody Mars by change of his delight
Has made Jove's daughter now mine enemy:
In whose conceit my Countess shines so bright,
That Venus pines for burning jealousy:
She may go home to Vulcane now again,
For Mars is sworn to be my Ladies swayne.
Of her bright beams Dan Phoebus stands in dread,
And shames to shine within our Horizon:
Dame Cynthia holds in her horned head,
For fear to loose by like comparison:
Lo thus she lives, and laughes them all to skorne,
Countess on earth, in heaven a Goddess borne.
And I sometimes her servant, now her friend,
Whom heaven and earth for her (thus) hate and blame:
Have yet presume in friendly wise to spend,
This ragged verse, in honor of her name:
A simple gift compared by the skill,
Yet what may seem so dear as such good will.
Meritum petere, grave.
The Lover declares his affection, together with the cause thereof.
WHen first I thee beheld in colors black and white,
Thy face in form well framde with favor blooming still:
My burning breast in cares did choose his chief delight,
With pen to painte thy praise, contrary to my skill:
Whose worthiness compared with this my rude devise,
I blush and am abasht, this work to enterprise.
But when I call to mind thy sundry gifts of grace,
Full fraught with manners meek in happy quiet mind:
My hasty hand forthwith does scribble on apace,
Least willing heart might think, it meant to come behind:
Thus do both hand and heart these careful meetres use,
Twixt hope and trembling fear, my duty to excuse.
Wherefore accept these lines, and banish dark disdain,
Be sure they come from one that loves thee in chief:
And guerdon me thy friend in like with love again,
So shall thou well be sure to yield me such relief,
As only may redress my sorrows and my smart:
For proof whereof I pledge (dear Dame) to thee my heart.
Meritum petere, grave.
A Lady being both wronged by false suspect, and also wounded by the durance of
her husband, does thus bewray her grief.
Give me my Lute in bed now as I lie,
And lock the doors of mine unlucky bower:
So shall my voice in mournful verse discrie
The secret smart which causes me to lower:
Resound you walls an Echo to my moan,
And thou cold bed wherein I lie alone,
Bear witness yet what rest thy Lady takes,
When other sleep which may enjoy their makes.
In prime of youth when Cupide kindled fire,
And warmd my will with flames of fervent love:
To further forth the fruit of my desire,
My friends deuisde this mean for my behoue.
They made a match according to my mind,
And cast a snare my fancy for to blind:
Short tale to make: the deed was almost done,
Before I knew which way the work begone.
And with this lot I did my self content,
I lent a liking to my parents choice:
With hand and heart I gave my free consent,
And hung in hope for ever to rejoice.
I lived and loved long time in greater joy,
Than she which held king Priams son of Troy:
But three lewd lots have changed my heaven to hell
And those be these, give ear and mark them well.
First slander he, which always bears hate,
To happy hearts in heavenly state that bide:
Began play his part to stir up some debate,
Whereby suspect into my choice might glide.
And by his means the slime of false suspect,
Did (as I fear) my dearest friend infect.
Thus by these twayn long was I plungd in pain,
Yet in good hope my heart did still remain.
But now (aye me) the greatest grief of all,
(Sound loud my Lute, and tell it out my tongue)
The hardest hap that ever might befall,
The only cause wherefore this song is soong,
Is this alas: my love, my Lord, my Roy,
My chosen pheare, my gemme, and all my joy,
Is kept perforce out of my daily sight,
Whereby I lack the stay of my delight.
In lofty walls, in strong and stately towers,
(With troubled mind in solitary sort,)
My lovely Lord does spend his days and hours,
A weary life deuoyde of all disport.
And I poor soul must lie here all alone,
To tire my truth, and wound my will with moan:
Such is my hap to shake my blooming time,
With winters blastes before it pass the prime.
Now have you heard the sum of all my grief,
Whereof to tell my heart (oh) rends in twain:
Good Ladies yet lend you me some relief,
And bear a part to ease me of my pain.
My sorts are such, that waying well my truth,
They might provoke the craggy rocks to rueth,
And move these walls with tears for to lament,
The loathsome life wherein my youth is spent.
But thou my Lute, be still, now take thy rest,
Repose thy bones upon this bed of down:
Thou have dischargd some burden from my breast,
Wherefore take thou my place, herelie thee down.
And let me walk to tire my restless mind,
Until I may entreat some courteous wind
To blow these words unto my noble make,
That he may see I sorrow for his sake.
Meritum petere, grave.
A Riddle.
A Lady once did ask of me,
This preatie thing in priuitie:
Good sir (quod she) feign would I crave,
One thing which you your self not have:
Nor never had yet in times past,
Nor never shall while life does last.
And if you seek to find it out,
You loose your labor out of doubt:
Yet if you love me as you say,
Then give it me, for sure you may.
Meritum petere, grave.
The shield of Love. etc.
L'Escu d'amour, the shield of perfect love,
The shield of love, the force of steadfast faith,
The force of faith which never will remove,
But stands fast, to bide the brunts of death:
That trusty targe, has long borne off the blows,
And broke the thrusts, which absence at me throws.
In doleful days I lead an absent life,
And wound my will with many a weary thought:
I plead for peace, yet sterue in storms of strife,
I find debate, where quiet rest was sought.
These panges with mo, unto my pain I prove,
Yet bear I all upon my shield of love.
In colder cares are my conceits consumd,
Than Dido felt when false Aeneas fled:
In far more heat, than trusty Troylus fumde,
When crafty Cressyde dwelt with Diomed:
My hope such frost, my hot desire such flame,
That I both fryse, and smoulder in the same.
So that I live, and die in one degree,
Healed by hope, and hurt again with dread:
Fast bound by faith when fancy would be free,
Untied by trust, though thoughts enthrall my head:
Revived by joys, when hope does most abound,
And yet with grief, in depth of dolors drowned.
In these assaults I feel my feebled force
Begins to faint, thus weried still in woes:
And scarcely can my thus consumed corse,
Hold up this Buckler to bear of these blows:
So that I crave, or presence for relief,
Or some supply, to ease mine absent grief.
Lenuoie.
To you (dear Dame) this doleful plaint I make,
Whose only sight may soon redress my smart:
Then show your self, and for your servant sake,
Make have post have, to help a faithful heart:
Mine own poor shield has me defended long,
Now lend me yours, for else you do me wrong.
Meritum petere, grave.
A gloze upon this text, Dominus ijs opus habet.
MY recklesse race is run, green youth and pride be past,
My riper mellowed years begin to follow on as fast.
My glancing looks are gone, which wonted were to pry
In every gorgeous garish glass that glistred in mine eye.
My sight is now so dim, it can behold none such,
No mirror but the merry mean, can please my fancy much.
And in that noble glass, I take delight to view,
The fashions of the wonted world, compared by the new.
For mark who list to look, each man is for him self,
And beats his brain to hord and heap this trash and worldly pelf.
Our hands are closed up, great gifts go not abroad,
Few men will lend a lock of heye, but for to gain a load.
Give gave is a good man, what need we lash it out,
The world is wo^drous fearful now, for danger bids men doubt.
And ask how chances this? or what means all this meede?
Forsooth the common answer is, because the Lord has need.
A noble jest by gisse, I find it in my glass,
The same freehold our Savior Christ conveyed to his ass.
A text to try the truth, and for this time full fit,
For where should we our lessons learn, but out of holy writ?
First mark our only God, which rules all the roast,
He sets aside all pomp and pride, wherein fond wordlings boast.
His train is not so great, as filthy Satan's band,
A smaller heard may serve to feed, at our great masters hand.
Next mark the heathens Gods, and by them shall we see,
They be not now so good fellows, as they were wont to be.
Jove, Mars, and Mercury, Dame Venus and the rest,
They ba^quet not as they were wont, they know it were not best:
So kings and Princes both, have left their halles at large,
Their privy chambers cost enough, they cut off every charge:
And when an office falls, as chance sometimes may be,
First keep it close a year or twain, then geld it by the fee.
And give it out at last, but yet with this prouiso,
(A bridle for a brainsicke Jade) durante been placito.
Some think these ladders low, to climb alofte with speed:
Well let them creep at leisure then, for sure the Lord has need.
Dukes Earls and Barons bold, have learnt like lesson now,
They break up house and come to court, they live not by the plow.
Percase their rooms be skant, not like their stately hour,
A field bed in a corner coucht, a pallad on the flower.
But what for that? no force, they make thereof no boast,
They feed themselves with delycates, and at the princes cost.
And as for all their men, their pages and their swaynes,
They choke the^ up with chynes of beef, to multiply their gains.
Themselves lie near to look, when any lease does fall,
Such croomes were wont to feed poor grooms, but now ye Lords lick al.
And why? oh sir, because, both Dukes and Lords have need,
I mock not I, my text is true, believe it as your creed.
Our Prelates and our Priests, can tell this text with me,
They can hold fast their fattest fermes, and let no lease go free.
They have both wife and child, which may not be forgot,
The scriptures say the Lord has need, and therefore blame them not.
Then come a little lower, unto the country knight,
The Squier and the Gentleman, they leave the country quite,
Their halles were all to large, their tables were to long,
The clouted shoes came in so fast, they kept to great a throng,
And at the porters lodge, where lubbers wont to feed,
The porter learnes to answer now, hence hence the Lord has need.
His gests came in too thick, their diet was to great,
Their horses eat up all the hey, which should have fed his neat:
Their teeth were far to fine, to feed on porke and souse,
Five flocks of sheep could scarce maintain good mutton for his house.
And when this count was cast, it was no biding here,
Unto the good town is he gone, to make his friends good cheer.
And welcome there that will, but shall I tell you how?
At his own dish he feeds them, that is the fashion now:
Side bords be laid aside, the tables end is gone,
His cook shall make you noble cheer, but ostler has he none.
The chargers now be changde, wherein he wont to eat,
An old fruit dish is big enough to hold a joint of meat,
A sallad or a sauce, to taste your cates withal,
Some strange devise to feed men's eyes, men's stomachs now be small.
And when the tenauntes come to pay a quarters rent,
They bring some foul at Midsommer, and a dish of fish in Lent,
At Christmasse a capon, at Mighelmasse a goose:
And somewhat else at Newyeres tide, for fear their lease fly loose.
Good reason by my troth, when Gentlemen lack groates,
Let Plowmen pinch it out for pens, and patch their russet coats:
For better Formers fast, than Manor houses fall,
The Lord has need, then says the text, bring old Ass, colt and all.
Well, lowest now at last, let see the country loute,
And mark how he does swink and sweat to bring this gear about:
His feastings be but few, cast whipstockes, cloute his shoone,
The wheaten loaf is locked up, as soon as dinners done:
And where he wont to keep a lubber, two or three,
Now has he learnd to keep no more but Sim his son and he,
His wife and Mawde his maid, a boy to pitche the carte,
And turn him up at Hallontide, to feel the winters smarte:
Dame Alyson his wife does know the price of meal,
Her bridecakes be not half so big as she was wont to steal:
She wears no silver hooks, she is content with w^^sse,
Her pendants and her silver pinnes she puts in her pursse.
Thus learn I by my glass, that merry mean is best,
And he most wise that finds the mean to keep himself at rest.
Perchance some open mouth will mutter now and than,
And at the market tell his mate, our landlords a zore man:
He racketh up our rentes, and keeps the best in hand,
He makes a wondrous deal of good out of his own measne land:
Yea let such pelters prate, saint Needam be their speed,
We need no text to answer them, but this, The Lord has need.
Ever or Never.
Council to Duglasse Diue written upon this occasion. She had a book wherein
she had collected sundry good ditties of diverse men's doings, in which book
she would needs entreat the aucthor to write some verses. And thereupon he
wrote as follows.
TO bind a bushe of thorns amongst sweet smelling flowers,
May make the posie seem the worse, and yet the fault is ours:
For throw away the thorn, and mark what will ensew?
The posie then will show it self, sweet, fair, and fresh of hew.
A puttocke set on perch, fast by a falcons side,
Will quickly show it self a kight, as time has often tried.
And in my musing mind, I fear to find like fall,
As just reward to recompense my rash attempts withal.
Thou bidst, and I must bow, thou will that I shall write,
Thou can command my weary muse some verses to endite.
And yet perdie, thy book is fraught with learned verse,
Such skill as in my musing mind I can none like rehearse.
What follows then for me? but if I must needs write,
To set down by the falcons side, my self a silly kight.
And yet the fillie kight, well woyde in each degree,
May serve sometimes (as in his kind) for man's commodity.
The kight can weed the worm, from corn and costly seeds,
The kight ca^ kill the mowldiwarpe, in pleasant meads ye breeds:
Out of the stately streets, the kight can cleanse the filth,
As me^ can cle^se the worthless weeds, from fruteful fallowed tilth.
And only set aside the hens poor progeny,
I cannot see who can accuse the kight for fellonie.
The falcon, she must feed on partritch, and on quayle,
On pigeon, plouer, ducke and drake, hearne, lapwing, teale, and rail,
Her hungry throat deuours both food and deintie fare,
Whereby I take occasion, thus boldly to compare.
And as a silly kight, (not falcon like that fly,
Nor yet presume to houer by mount Hellycon The Hill where poets feign that
the Muses sleep.
on hie)
I friendly yet presume, upon my friends request,
In barreine verse to show my skill, then take it for the best.
And Douty Douglasse thou, that art of faulcons kind,
Give willing ear yet to the kight, and bear his words in mind,
Serve thou first God thy Lord, and praise him evermore,
Obey thy Prince and love thy make, by him set greatest store.
Thy Parents follow next, for honor and for awe,
Thy friends use always faithfully, for so commands the law.
Thy seemly self at last, thou shalt likewise regard,
And of thy self this lesson learn, and take it as reward:
That look how far deserts, may seem in thee to shine,
So far thou may set out thy self, without empeach or crime.
For this I dare auow, without self love (alight)
It can scarce be that virtue dwell, in any earthly wight.
But if in such self love, thou seem to wade so far,
As fall to foul presumption, and judge thy self a star,
Beware betimes and think in our A true exposition.
Etymology,
Such faults are plainly called pride, and in french Querweening
Surcuydrye,
Lo thus can I pore kight, adventure for to teach
The falcon fly, and yet forewarne, she row not past her reach.
Thus can I weed the worm, which seeks to devour
The seeds of virtue, which might grow within thee every hour.
Thus can I kill the mowle, which else would overthrow
The good foundation of thy fame, with every little blow.
And thus can I convey, out of thy comely breast,
The sluttish heaps of peevish pride, which might defile the rest.
Perchance some falcons fly, which will not greatly grutch,
To learn thee first to love thy self, and then to love to mutch,
But I am none of those, I list not so to range,
I have ma^s meat enough at home, what need I the^ seek change.
I am no peacocke I: my feathers be not gay,
And though they were, I see my feet such fond affectes to stay,
I list not set to sale a thing so little worth,
I rather could keep close my creast, than seek to set it forth.
Wherefore if in this verse, which thou commandst to flow,
Thou chance to fall on construing, whereby some doubts may grow,
Yet grant this only boon, peruse it twice or thrice,
Digest it well ere thou condemn the depth of my devise.
And use it like the nut, first crack the outward shell,
Then try the kirnell by the taste, and it may please thee well.
Do not as barbers do, which wash beards curiously,
Then cut them off, then cast them out, in open streets to lie.
Remember therewithal, my muze is tied in chains,
The goonshot of calamity has battred all my brains.
And though this verse escape out, take thou thereat no mark,
It is but like a hedlesse fly, that tumbleth in the dark.
It was thine own request, remember so it was,
Wherefore if thou dislike the same, then license it to pass
Into my breast again, from whence it flew in have,
Full like a kight which not deserves by falcons to be plast:
And like a stubbed thorn, which may not seem to serve,
To stand with such sweet smelling flowers, like praises to deserve.
Yet take this harmless thorn, to pick thy teeth withal,
A tooth pick serves some use perdie, although it be but small.
And when they teeth therewith, be piked fair and clean,
Then bend thy tongue no worse to me, than mine to thee has been.
Ever or Never.
Council given to master Bartholmew Withipoll a little before his latter
journey to Geane. 1572.
MIne own good Bat, before thou hoyse up sail,
To make a furrowe in the foming seas,
Content thy self to hear for thine avail,
Such harmless words, as ought thee not displease.
First in thy journey, iape not over much,
What? laughest thou Batte, because I write so plain?
Believe me now it is a friendly touch,
To use few words where friendship does remain.
And for I find, that fault has run to fast,
Both in thy flesh, and fancy too sometime,
Me thinks plain dealing bids me to cast
This bone at first amid my dogrell rhyme.
But shall I say, to give thee grave advise?
(Which in my head is (God he knows) full geazon)?
Then mark me well, and though I be not wise,
Yet in my rhyme, thou may perhaps find reason.
First every day, beseech thy God on knee,
So to direct thy staggring steps always,
That he which every secret thought does see
May hold thee in, when thou would go astray:
And that he deigne to send thee safe retoure,
And quick dispatche of that which is thy due:
Let this (my Batte) be both thy prime and hour,
Wherein also commend to Nostre Dieu,
Thy good Companion and my very friend,
To whom I should (but time would not permit)
Have taken pain some ragged ryme to send
In trusty token, that I not forget
His courtesy: but this is debte to thee,
I promysde it, and now I mean to pay:
What was I saying? sir, will you see
How soon my wits were wandering astraye?
I say, pray thou for thee and for thy mate,
So shipmen sing, and though the note be plain,
Yet sure the music is in heavenly state,
When friends sing so, and know not how to feign.
The next to GOD, thy Prince have still in mind
There are to many of them in every country.
Thy countries honor, and the common wealth:
And flee from them, which fled with every wind
From native soil, to foreign coasts by stealth:
Their traynes are trustlesse, tending still to treason,
Their smoothed tongues are lyned all with guyle,
Their power slender, scarsly woorthe two peason,
Their malice much, their wits are full of wyle:
Eschew them then, and when thou see them, say,
Da, da, sir K, I may not come at you,
You cast a snare your country to betraye,
And would you have me trust you now for true?
Remember Batte the foolish blink eyed boy
A Mystery.
Which was at Rome, thou know whom I mean,
Remember eke the preatie beardlesse toye,
Whereby thou foundst a safe return to Geane,
Do so again: (God shield thou should have need,)
But rather so, than to forswear thy self:
A loyal heart, (believe this as thy Creed)
Is evermore more worth than worldly pelf.
And for one lesson, take this more of me,
There are three Ps almost in every place,
From which I counsel thee always to flee,
And take good head of them in any case,
The first is poison, perilous in deed
To such as travail with a heavy pursse:
And thou my Batte beware, for thou have need,
Thy pursse is lynde with paper, which is wursse:
Thy bills of credit will not they think thou,
Be bayte to set Italyan hands on work?
Yes by my faye, and never worse than now,
When every knave has leisure for to lurk,
And knows thou come for the shelles of Christ:
Beware therefore where ever that thou go,
It may fall out that thou shalt be entiste
To suppe sometimes with a Magnifico,
And have a Fico foysted in thy dishe,
Because thou should disgeste thy meat the better:
Beware therefore, and rather feed on fish,
Than learn to spell fine flesh with such a Letter.
Some may present thee with a pound or twain
Of Spanishe soape to wash thy lynnen white:
Beware therefore, and think it were small gain,
To save thy shirte, and cast thy skin off quite:
Some cunning man may teach thee for to ride,
And stuff thy saddle all with Spanishe wool,
Or in thy stirrops have a toye so tide,
As both thy legs may swell thy buskins full:
Beware therefore, and bear a noble port,
Drink not for thyrste before an other taste:
Let none outlandishe Taylour take disporte
To stuff thy doublet full of such Bumbaste,
As it may cast thee in unkindly sweat,
And cause thy hair per company to glyde,
Strangers are fine in many a propre feate:
Beware therefore: the second P. is Pride,
More perilous than was the first by far,
For that infects but blood and leaves the bones,
This poisons all, and minds of men does mar,
It finds nookes to creep in for the nones:
First from the mind it makes the heart to swell,
From thence the flesh is pampred every part,
The skin is taught in Dyers shoppes to dwell,
The hair is curlde or frilled up by art:
Believe me Batte, our Countrymen of late
Have caughte such knackes abroad in forayne land,
That most men call them Devils incarnate,
So singular in their conceits they stand:
Now sir, if I shall see your maistershippe
Come home disguysde and cladde in queynt array,
As with a piketoothe biting on your lip,
Your brave Mustachyos turnde the Turkey way,
A Coptanckt hatte made on a Flemmish block,
A nightgowne cloak down trayling to your toes,
A slender sloppe close couched to your docke.
A curtold slipper, and a short silk hose:
Bearing your Rapier point above the hilte,
And looking big like Marquise of all Beef,
Then shall I coumpte your toil and travail spilte,
Because my second P, with you is chief.
But forwards now, although I stayde a while,
My hindmost P, is worsse than both these two,
For it both bones and body does defile,
With fouler blots than both those other do.
Short tale to make, this P, can bear no blocks,
(God shield me Batte, should bear it in his breast)
And with a dashe it spelleth piles and pockes
A perlous P, and woorsse than both the rest:
Now though I find no cause for to suspect
My Batte in this, because he has been tryde,
Yet since such Spanish buttons can infect
Kings, Emperors, Princes and the world so wide.
And since those suns do mellowe men so fast
As most that travail come home very ripe
Although (by sweat) they learn to live and last
When they have daunced after Guydoes pype:
Therefore I thought it meet to warn my friend
Of this foul P, and so an end of Ps.
Now for thy diet mark my tale to end,
And thank me then, for that is all my fees.
See thou exceed not in three double Us,
The first is Wine, which may inflame thy blood,
The second Women, such as haunte the stews,
The third is Wilfulness, which does no good.
These three eschew, or temper them always:
So shall my Batte prolong his youthful years,
And see long George again, with happy days,
Who if he be as faithful to his feeres,
As he was wont, will daily pray for Batte,
And for Sir William Morgan of Pencoyde.
Pencoyde: and if it fall out so,
That James a Parrye do but make good that,
Which he has said: and if he be (no, no)
The best companion that long George can find,
Then at the Spawe I promise for to be
In Auguste next, if God turn not my mind,
Where as I would be glad thyselfe to see:
Till then farewell, and thus I end my song,
Take it in gree, for else thou do me wrong.
Haud ictus sapio.
Gascoignes woodmanship written to the L. Gray of Wilton upon this occasion,
the said L. Gray delighting (amongst many other good qualities) in choosing of
his winter dear, and killing the same with his bow, did furnishe the Aucthor
with a crossebowe cum pertinencijs and vouchsaued to use his company in the
said exercise, calling him one of his woodmen. Now the Aucthor shooting very
often, could never hitte any dear, yea and oftentimes he let the heard pass
by as though he had not seen the^. VVhereat when this noble Lord took some
pastime, and had often put him in remembrance of his good skill in choosing,
and readiness in killing of a winter dear, he thought good thus to excuse it
in verse.
MY worthy Lord, I pray you wonder not,
To see your woodman shoot so often awrie,
Nor that he stands amassed like a sot,
And lets the harmless dear (unhurt) go by.
Or if he strike a Do which is but carren,
Laugh not good Lord, but favor such a fault,
Take will in worth, he would feign hit the barren,
But though his heart be good, his hap is naught:
And therefore now I crave your Lordships leave,
To tell you plain what is the cause of this:
First if it please your honor to perceive,
What makes your woodman shoot so often amiss,
Believe me L. the case is nothing strange,
He shootes awrie almost at every mark,
His eyes have been so used for to raunge,
That now God knows they be both dim and dark.
For proof he bears the note of folly now,
Who shot sometimes to hit Philosophy,
And ask you why? forsooth I make auow,
Because his wanton wits went all awrie.
Next that, he shot to be a man of law,
And spent sometime with learned Litleton,
Yet in the end, he proved but a daw^,
For law was dark and he had quickly done.
Then could he wish Fitzharbert such a brain,
As Tully had, to write the law by art,
So that with pleasure, or with little pain,
He might perhaps, have caught a trewants part.
But all to late, he most mislikte the thing,
Which most might help to guide his arrow straight*
He winked wrong, and so let slip the string,
Which cast him wide, for all his queint conceit.
From thence he shot to catch a courtly grace,
And thought even there to wield the world at will,
But out alas he much mistook the place,
And shot awrie at every rouer still.
The blasing baits which draw the gazing eye,
Vnfethered there his first affection,
No wonder then although he shot awrie,
Wanting the feathers of discretion.
Yet more than them, the marks of dignity,
He much mistook and shot the wronger way,
Thinking the purse of prodigality,
Had been best mean to purchase such a pray.
He thought the flattring face which fleareth still,
Had been full fraught with all fidelity,
And that such words as courtiers use at will.
Could not have varied from the verity.
But when his bonet buttened with gold,
His comely cape begarded all with gay,
His bumbast hose, with linings manifold,
His knit silk stocks and all his queint array,
Had picked his purse of all the Peter pence,
Which might have paid for his promotion,
Then (all to late) he found that light expense,
Had quite quenched out the courts devotion.
So that since then the taste of misery,
Has been always full bitter in his bit,
And why? forsooth because he shot awrie,
Mistaking still the marks which others hit,
But now behold what mark the man does find,
He shootes to be a soldier in his age,
Mistrusting all the virtues of the mind,
He trusts the power of his personage.
As though long limbs led by a lusty heart,
Might yet suffice to make him rich again,
But Flushyng fraies have taught him such a part,
That now he thinks the wars yield no such gain.
And sure I fear, unless your lordship deigne,
To train him yet into some better trade,
It will be long before he hit the vein,
Whereby he may a richer man be made.
He cannot climb as other catchers can.
To lead a charge before himself be led,
He cannot spoil the simple sakeles man,
Which is content to feed him with his bread.
He cannot pinch the painful soldiers pay,
And sheare him out his share in ragged sheets,
He cannot stoop to take a greedy pray
Upon his fellows groueling in the streets,
He cannot pull the spoil from such as pill,
And seem full angry at such foul offense,
Although the gain content his greedy will,
Under the cloak of contrary pretense:
And now adays, the man that shootes not so,
May shoot amiss, even as your Woodman does:
But then you marvel why I let them go,
And never shoot, but say farewell forsooth:
Alas my Lord, while I do muze hereon,
And call to mind my youthful years myspente,
They give me such a boane to gnawe upon,
That all my senses are in silence pente.
My mind is rapte in contemplation,
Wherein my dazeled eyes only behold,
The black hour of my constellation,
Which framed me so lucklesse on the molde:
Yet therewithal I can not but confess,
That vain presumption makes my heart to swell,
For thus I think, not all the world (I guess,)
Shootes bett^^
bet than I, nay some shootes not so well.
In Aristotle somewhat did I learn,
To guide my manners all by comeliness,
And Tullie taught me somewhat to discern
Between sweet speech and barbarous rudeness.
Old Parkyns, Rastall, and Dan Bractens books,
Did lend me somewhat of the lawless Law,
The crafty Courtiers with their guylefull looks,
Must needs put some experience in my mawe:
Yet can not these with many maystries mo,
Make me shoot straight at any gaynfull prick,
Where some that never handled such a bow,
Can hit the white, or touch it near the quick,
Who can nor speak, nor write in pleasant wise,
Nor lead their life by Aristotle's rule,
Nor argue well on questions that arise,
Nor plead a case more than my Lord Mairs mule,
Yet can they hit the marks that I do miss,
And win the mean which may the man mainteyne.
Now when my mind does mumble upon this,
No wonder then although I pine for pain:
And whiles mine eyes behold this mirror thus,
The heard goes by, and farewell gentle does:
So that your Lordship quickly may discuss
What blindes mine eyes so often (as I suppose.)
But since my Muse can to my Lord rehearse
What makes me miss, and why I do not shoot,
Let me imagine in this woorthlesse verse,
If right before me, at my standings foot
There stood a Do, and I should strike her dead,
And then she prove a carrian carkas too,
What figure might I find within my head,
To scuse the rage which ruled me so to do?
Some might interpret by plain paraphrase,
That lack of skill or fortune led the chance,
But I must otherwise expound the case,
I say Iehoua did this Do advance,
And made her bold to stand before me so,
Till I had thrust mine arrowe to her heart,
That by the sudden of her overthrow,
I might endeavor to amend my part,
And turn mine eyes that they no more behold,
Such guylefull marks as seem more than they be:
And though they glister outwardely like gold,
Are inwardly but brass, as men may see:
And when I see the milk hang in her teate,
Me thinks it says, old babe now learn to suck,
Who in thy youth could never learn the feate
To hitte the whytes which live with all good luck.
Thus have I told my Lord, (God grant in season)
A tedious tale in rhyme, but little reason.
Haud ictus sapio.
Gascoignes gardnings, whereof were written in one end of a close walk which
he has in his Garden, this discourse following.
THe figure of this world I can compare,
To Garden plots, and such like pleasant places,
The world breeds men of sundry shape and share,
As herbs in gardens, grow of sundry graces:
Some good, some bad, some amiable faces,
Some foul, some gentle, some of froward mind,
Subject like bloome, to blast of every wind.
And as you see the flowers most fresh of hew,
That they prove not always the holesomest,
So fairest men are not always found true:
But even as withred weeds fall from the rest,
So flatterers fall naked from their neast:
When truth has tried, their painting tising tale,
They loose their gloss, and all their jests seem stale.
Yet some do present pleasure most esteem,
Till beams of bravery wither all their wealth,
And some again there be can rightly deem,
Those herbs for best, which may maintain their health.
Considering well, that age draws on by stelth,
And when the fairest flower is shronke and gone,
A well grown root, will stand and shifte for one.
Then thus the restless life which men here lead,
May be resembled to the tender plant,
In spring it sprouts, as babes in cradle breed,
Flourish in May, like youths that wisdom want,
In Autumn ripes and roots, least store wax skante
In winter shrinks and shrowdes from every blast,
Like crooked age when lusty youth is past.
And as the ground or grace whereon it grew,
Was fat or lean, even so by it appears*
If barreyn soil, why then it changes hew,
It fades fast, it flits to fumbling years,
But if he gathered root amongst his feeres,
And light on land that was well muckte in deed,
Then stands it still, or leaves increase of seed.
As for the rest, fall sundry ways (God wot)
Some faint like froathe at every little puff,
Some smarte by swoorde, like herbs that serve the pot,
And some be weeded from the finer stuff,
Some stand by proppes to maynteyne all their ruff:
And thus (under correction be it told)
Has Gascoigne gathered in his Garden molde.
Haud ictus sapio.
In that other end of his said close walk, were written these toys in ryme.
IF any flower that here is grown,
Or any herb may ease your pain,
Take and account it as your own,
But recompense the like again:
For some and some is honest play,
And so my wife taught me to say.
If here to walk you take delight,
Why come, and welcome when you will:
If I bid you suppe here this night,
Bid me an other time, and still
Think some and some is honest play,
For so my wife taught me to say.
Thus if you suppe or dine with me,
If you walk here, or fit at ease,
If you desire the thing you see,
And have the same your mind to please,
Think some and some is honest play,
And so my wife taught me to say.
Haud ictus sapio.
In a chair in the same Garden was written this followyng.
IF thou sit here to view this pleasant garden place,
Think thus: at last will come a frost, and all these flowers deface:
But if thou sit at ease to rest thy weary bones,
Remember death brings final rest to all our grievous groans.
So whether for delight, or here thou sit for ease,
Think still upon the latter day, so shall thou God best please.
Haud ictus sapio.
Upon a stone in the wall of his Garden he had written the year wherein he did
the cost of these devises, and therewithal this posie in Latin.
Quoniam etiam humiliatos, amoena delectant.

Gascoignes voyage into Hollande. An. 1572. written to the right honorable the
Lord Gray of Wilton.
A Strange conceyte, a vain of new delight,
Twixt weal and woe, twixte joy and bitter grief,
Has pricked forth my hasty pen to write
This woorthlesse verse in hazard of repreefe:
And to mine best beloved
Alderlieuest Lord I must endite
A woeful case, a chippe of sorry chance,
A tipe of heaven, a lively hew of hell,
A fear to fall, a hope of high advance,
A life, a death, a drearie tale to tell.
But since I know the pith of my pastaunce
Shall most consist in telling of a truth,
Vouchsafe my Lord in good worth
(en bon gre) for to take
This trusty tale the story of my youth,
This Chronicle which of my self I make,
To show my Lord what healplesse hap ensewth,
When heddy youth will gad without a guide,
And raunge untied in leas of liberty,
Or when bare need a starting hole has spide
To peep abroad from mother Misery,
And builds Castles in the Welkin wide,
In hope thereby to dwell with wealth and ease.
But he the Lord (whom my good Lord does know)
Can bind or lose, as best to him shall please,
Can save or spill, raise up or overthrow,
Can gauld with grief, and yet the pain appease.
Which thing to prove if so my L. take time,
(When greater cares his head shall not possess)
To sit and read this raunging ragged rhyme,
I doubt not then but that he will confess,
What falls I found when last I leapt to clime.
In March it was, that cannot I forget,
In this last March upon the nintenth day,
When from Grauesend in boat I began to iette
To boorde our ship in Quinborough that lay,
From whence the very twentieth day we set
Our sails abroad to slice the Salt sea foam,
And ancors weyde began trust the trustlesse flood:
That day and night amid the waves we rome
To seek the coast of Holland where it stood.
And on the next when we were far from home,
And near the haven whereto we sought to sail,
A fearly chance: (whereon alone to think)
My hand now quakes, and all my senses fail)
Began us befall: the Pylot began to shrink,
And all agaste his courage seemde to quayle.
Whereat amazed, the Master and his mate
Began ask the cause of his so sodeyne change.
And from alofte the Steward of our state,
(The sounding plumbe) in haste post have must raunge,
To try the depth and goodness of our gate.
Me thinks (even yet) I hear his heavy voice,
Fadom and a half, three ho.
Fadome three, four, foot more, foot less, that cride:
Me thinks I hear the fearful whispring noise,
Of such as said full softely (me beside)
God grant this journey cause us to rejoice.
When I poor soul, which close in caban lay,
And there had reached till gaul was welneare burst,
With giddie head, my stumbling steps must stay
To look abroad as boldly as I durst.
And whiles I hearken what the Sailors say,
The sownder sings, fadame two full no more.
Aloof, aloof, then cried the Master out,
The Stearesmate strives to send us from the shore,
And trustes the stream, whereof we erst had doubt,
Tweene two extreme thus were we tossed sore,
And went to When all sails are taken down.
Hull, until we leyzure had
To talk at large, and eke to know the cause
What mood had made our Pylot look so sad.
At last the Dutche with butterbitten jaws,
(For so he was a Dutche, a Devil, a swadde,
A fool, a drunkarde, or a traitor tone)
Began answer thus: You be to soon
Ghy zijt te vroegh here come,
It is not good tide
Tuniet goet tijt and standing all alone,
Began preach to us, which fools were all and some
To trust him fool, in whom there skill was none.
Or what knew we if Albaes subtle brain
(So to prevent our enterprise by treazon)
Had him subornde to tice us to this train
And so him self ( per Company and seazon)
For spite, for hate, or else for hope of gain.
This must we think that the Duke
Alba would not spare
To give out gold for such a sinful deed:
And glistring gold can oftentimes ensnare,
More perfect wits than Holland soil does breed.
But let that pass, and let us now compare
Our own fond fact with this his foul offense.
We knew him not, nor where he wond that time,
Nor if he had Pylots experience,
Or Pylats craft, to clear him self from crime.
Yea more than that (how void were we of sense)
We had small smacke of any tale he told,
He powrde out Dutch to drown us all in drink,
And we (wise men) upon his words were bold,
To run on head: but let me now bethink
The masters speech: and let me so unfold
The depth of all this foolish oversight.
The master spoke even like a skillful man,
And said I sail the Seas both day and night,
I know the tides as well as other can,
From pole to pole I can the courses plight:
I know France, Spain, Greece, Denmark, Dasisk and all,
Frize, Flaunders, Holland, every coast I know,
But truth to tell, it seldom does befall,
That English merchants ever bend their bow
To shoot at Breyll, where now our flight should fall,
They send their shafts farther for greater gain.
So that this haven is yet (quoth he) unknown
uncouth,
And God grant now that England may attain
Such gains by Breyll, (a gospel on that mouth)
As is desired: thus spoke the master plain.
And since (said he) my self knew not the sown,
How could I well a better Pylot find,
Than this (which first) did say he dwelt in town,
And knew the way where ever sat the wind?
While we thus talk, all sails are taken down,
And we to Hull (as erst I said) began wend,
Till full two hours and somewhat more were past,
Our guide then spoke in Dutch and bad us bend
All sails again: for now quod he (at last)
It is good tide that know I well
Die tijt is goet, dat heb ick weell bekend.
Why stay I long to end a woeful tale?
We trust his Dutch, and up the foresayle goes,
We fall on knees amyd the happy gale,
(Which by Gods will full kind and calmely blows)
And unto him we there unfold our bale,
Whereon to think I write and weep for joy,
That pleasant song the hundredth and seventh Psalm,
There did we read to comfort our annoye,
Which to my soul (me thought) was sweet as balm,
Yea far more sweet than any worldly joy.
And when he had with prayers praysd the Lord,
Our Lusty gallants
Edell Bloetts, began fall to eat and drink,
And for their sauce, at taking up the board
The ship so struck (as all we thought to sink)
Against the ground. Then all with one accord
We fell again on knees to pray apace,
And therewithal even at the second blow,
(The number cannot from my mind outpace)
Our helm struck of, and we must fleet and flow,
Where wind and waves would guide us by their grace.
The wind waxt calm as I have said before,
(O mighty God so did thou swage our woes)
The selly ship was sowst and smitten sore,
With counter buffetts, blows and double blows.
At last the keele which might endure no more,
Began rende in twain and sucked the water in:
Then might you see pale looks and woeful cheer,
Then might you hear loud cries and deadly dinne:
Well noble minds in perils best appear,
And boldest hearts in bale will never blinne.
For there were some (of whom I will not say
That I was one) which never changed hew,
But pumpt apace, and labord every way
To save themselves, and all their lovely crew,
Which cast the best freight ouerboorde away,
Both corn and cloth, and all that was of weight.
Which halde and pulde at every helping cord,
Which prayed to God and made their conscience straight.
As for my self: I here protest my Lord,
My words were these: O God in heaven on height,
Behold me not as now a wicked wight,
A sack of sin, a wretch ywrapt in wroth,
Let no fault past (O Lord) offend thy sight,
But weye my will which now those faults does loathe,
And of thy mercy pity this our plight.
Even thou good God which of thy grace did say
That for one good, thou would all Sodom save,
Behold us all: thy shyning beams displaye,
Some here (I trust) thy goodness shall engraue,
To be chaste vessels unto thee always,
And so to live in honor of thy name:
Believe me Lord, thus to the Lord I said.
But there were some (alas the more their blame)
Which in the pumpe their only comfort laid,
And trusted that to turn our grief to game.
Alas (quod I) our pumpe good God must be,
Our sail, our stern, our tackling, and our trust.
Some other cried to clear the shipboate free,
To save the chief and leave the rest in dust.
Which word once spoke (a wondrous thing to see)
All have post have, was made to have it done:
And up it commes in have much more than speed.
There did I see a woeful work begone,
Which now (even now) does make my heart to bleed.
Some made such have that in the boat they won,
Before it was above the hatches brought.
Strange tale to tell, what have some men shall make
To find their death before the same be sought.
Some twixt the boat and ship their bane do take,
Both drowned and slain with brains for have crushed out.
At last the boat half fraighted in the air
Is hoyst alofte, and on the seas down set,
When I that yet in God could not despair,
Still plide the pumpe, and patiently did let
All such take boat as thither made repair.
And herewithall I safely may protest
I might have won the boat as well as one,
And had that seemed a safety for the rest
I should percase even with the first have gone.
But when I saw the boat was over pressed
And pestred full with more than it might bear,
And therwithall with cherefull look might see
My chief companions whom I held most dear
(Whofe company had thither trained me)
Abiding still aboorde our ship yfeare: York and Herle.

Nay then (quoth I) good God thy will be done,
For with my feeres I will both live and dye.
And ear the boat far from our sight was gone
The wave so wrought, that they (which thought to flee
And so to escape) with waves were over run.
Lo how he strives in vain that strives with God
For there we lost the flower of the band,
And of our crew full twenty souls and odd,
The Sea sucks up, whils we on hatches stand
In smarting fear to feel that self same rod.
Well on (as yet) our battred bark did pass,
And brought the rest within a mile of land,
Then thought I sure now need not I to pass,
For I can swymme and so escape this sand.
Thus did I deem all careless like an Ass,
When sodaynely the wind our foresayle took,
And turned about and brought us eft to Seas.
Then cried we all, cast out the ancor hook,
And here let bide such help as god may please:
Which ancor cast, we soon the same forsook,
And cut it off, for fear least thereupon
Our ship should bowge, then callde we fast for fire,
And so dischargde our great gunnes euerychone,
To warn the town thereby of our desire:
But all in vain, for succor sent they none.
At last a Hoy from Sea came flinging fast,
And toward us held course as straight as line.
Then might you see our hands to heaven up cast
To render thanks unto the power divine,
That so vouchsafte to save us yet at last:
But when this Hoy began (welneere) boorde our bark,
And might perceive what peril we were in,
It turned away and left us still in care
carke,
This tale is true (for now to lie were sin)
It left us there in dread and dangers dark.
It left us so, and that within the sight
And hearing both of all the pear at Breyll.
Now ply thee pen, and paint the foul despite
Of drunken Dutchmen standing there even still,
For whom we came in their cause for to fight,
For whom we came their state for to defend,
For whom we came as friends to grieve their foes,
They now disdaynd (in this distress) to lend
One helping boat for to assuage our woes:
They saw our harms the which they would not mend,
And had not been that God even then did raise
Some instruments to succor us at need,
We had been sunk and swallowed all in Seas.
But Gods will was (in way of our good speed)
That on the pear (lamenting our mysease)
Some english were, whose naked swords did force
The drunken dutch, the cankred churles to come,
And so at last (not moved by remorce,
But forced by fear) they sent us succor some:
Some must I say: and for to tell the course,
They sent us succor saust with sour despite,
They saved our lives and spoylde us of the rest,
They stale our goods by day and eke by night,
They showed the worst and closely kept the best.
And in this time (this treason must I write)
Our Pylot fled, but how? not empty handed:
He fled from us, and with him did conueye
A Hoy full fraught (whiles we mean while were landed)
With powder, shot, and all our best array:
This skill he had, for all he set us sanded.
And now my Lord, declare your noble mind,
Was this a Pylot, or a Pilate judge?
Or rather was he not of Judas kind:
Which left us thus and close away could trudge?
Well, at the Bryell to tell you what we find,
The Governor was all bedewed with drink,
His truls and he were all laid down to sleep,
And we must shift, and of our selves must think
What mean was best, and how we best might keep
That yet remaynd: the rest was close in clinke.
Well, on our knees with trickling tears of joy,
We gave God thanks: and as we might, did learn
What might be found in every A Small bote.
pynke and hoye.
And thus my Lord, your honor may descerne
Our perils past, and how in our anoye
God saved me (your Lordshippes bound for ever)
Who else should not be able now to tell,
The state wherein this country does persevere,
Ne how they seem in careless minds to dwell.
(So did they erst and so they will do ever)
And to my Lord for to bewray my mind
Me thinks they be a race of Bulbeefe borne,
Whose hearts their Butter mollyfieth by kind,
And so the force of beef is clean outworne:
And eke their brains with double beer are lynd^:
So that they march bumbast with buttred beer,
Like soppes of browesse puffed up with froth,
Where inwardely they be but hollow geere,
As weak as wind, which with one puff up goes:
And yet they brag, and think they have no peer,
Because Harlem has hitherto held out,
Although in deed (as they have suffered Spain)
The end thereof even now does rest in doubt.
Well, as for that, let it (for me) remain
In God his hands, whose hand has brought me out,
To tell my Lord this tale now taken in hand,
As how they train their trezons all in drink,
And when them selves for drunk can scarcely stand,
Yet suck out secrets (as them selves do think)
From guests. The best (almost) in all their land,
(I name no man, for that were broad before)
Will (as men say) enure the same sometime,
But surely this (or I mistake him sore)
Or else he can (but let it pass in rhyme)
Dissemble deep, and mock sometimes the more:
Well, drunkenness is here good company,
And therewithal per consequens it falls
That whordome is accounted iollitie:
A gentle state, where two such Tenisballes
Are tossed still and better bowls let lie.
I cannot herewith from my Lord conceal,
How God and Mammon here do dwell yfeare,
And how the Mass is cloked under veale
Of policy, till all the coast be clear.
Ne can I choose, but I must ring a peale,
To tell what hypocrytes the Nuns here be:
And how the old Nuns be content to go,
Before a man in streates like mother B,
Until they come whereas there dwells a Ho,
( Re: ceyue that half, and let the rest go free)
There can they point with finger as they pass,
Yea sir, sometimes they can come in themself,
To strike the bergaine tweene a wanton less,
And Edel bloets: now is not this good pelf?
As for the young Nuns, they be bright as glass,
And chaste forsooth, met v: and anders niet:
What said I? what? that is a mystery,
I may no verse of such a theme endite,
Young Rowlande York may tell it bet than I:
Yet to my Lord this little will I write,
That though I have (my self) no skill at all,
To take the countnance of a Colonel,
Had I a good Lieutenant general,
As good John Zuche whereuer that he dwell,
Or else Ned Dennye (fair might him befall)
I could have brought a noble regiment
Of smugskinnde Nuns into my country soil:
But farewell they as things impertinent,
Let them (for me) go dwell with master Moyle,
Who has behight to place them well in Kent.
And I shall well my silly self content,
To come alone unto my lovely Lord,
And unto him (when riming sport is spent)
To tell some sad and reasonable word,
Of Hollandes state, the which I will present,
In Carts, in Mappes, and eke in Models made,
If God of heaven my purpose not prevent.
And in mean while although my wits do wade
In ranging rhyme, and fling some folly forth,
I trust my Lord will take it well in worth.
Haud ictus sapio.
WEEDS.
Tam Marti quam Mercurio.
In this division are contained:

The fruit of Fetters. Folio. 175 The complaynt of the green Knight. Folio.
178 The farewell to Fancy. Folio. 190 The fable of Ferdinando Ieronimi and
Leonora de Valasco. Folio. 193 The praise of a Gentlewoman neither fair nor
welfauored. The praise of Phillip Sparrowe. Folio. 279 Farewell with a mischief.
Folio. 281 The doale of disdain. Folio. 282 Mars in despite of Vulcane. folio.
284 Patience perforce. Folio. 286 A letter for a young lover. Folio. 287 David
saluteth Bersabe. Folio. 288 Sone acquainted, sone forgotten. Folio. 289
The fruit of Fetters: with the complaint of the green Knight, and his
Farewell to Fancy.
GReat be the greefes which bruze the boldest breasts,
And al to seelde we see such burdens borne,
For cruel care (which reaueth quiet rests)
Has oftentimes the woorthiest wills foreworne,
And laid such weight upon a noble heart,
That wit and will have both given place to smarte.
For proof whereof I tell this woeful tale,
(Give ear that list, I force no frolic minds)
But such as can abide to hear of bale,
And rather rue the rage which Fancy finds,
Than scorn the pangs which may procure their pine,
Let them give ear unto these rimes of mine.
I tear my time (ay me) in prison pent,
Wherein the flower of my consuming years,
With secret grief my reason does torment,
And frets it self (perhaps) with needless fears:
For whiles I strive against the stream too fast,
My forces fail, and I must down at last.
The hasty Vine for sample might me serve,
Which climbes too high about the lofty tree,
But when the twist his tender iointes does carue,
Then fades he fast, that sought full fresh to be:
He fades and faintes before his fellows fail,
Which lay full low, and never hoyst up sail.
Ay me, the days which I in dole consume,
Ah las, the nights which witness well my woe,
O wrongful world which makst my fancy fume,
Fie fickle Fortune, fie thou art my foe,
Out and alas, so froward is my chance,
No days nor nights, nor worlds can me advance.
In recklesse youth, the common plague of Love
Infected me (al day) with careless mind,
Entising dames my patience still did prove,
And blearde mine eyes, till I became so blind,
That seeing not what fury brought me forth,
I followed most (always) that least was worth.
In middle years, the reach of Reasons reine
No sooner began to bridle in my will,
Nor naked need no sooner began constreine
My rash decay to break my sleeps by skill,
But straight therewith hope set my heart on flame,
To win again both wealth and worthy name.
And thence proceeds my most consuming grief,
For whiles the hope of mine vnyolden heart
In endless toils did labor for relief,
Came crabbed Chance and marrde my merry mart:
Yea, not content with one foul overthrow,
So tied me fast for tempting any mo.
She tied me fast (alas) in golden chains,
Wherein I dwell, not free, nor fully thrall,
Where guilefull love in double doubt remains,
Nor honey sweet, nor bitter yet as gall:
For every day a pattern I behold
Of scortching flame, which makes my heart full cold.
And every night, the rage of restless thought
Does raise me up, my hope for to renew,
My quiet bed which I for solace sought,
Does yrke mine ears, when still the warlike crewe
With sound of drums, and trumpets braying shrill
Relieve their watch, yet I in thraldom still.
The common joy, the cheer of company,
Twixt mirth and moan does plundge me evermore:
For pleasant talk, or Musicks melody,
Yield no such salve unto my secret sore,
But that therewith this corsiue coms me too,
Why live not I at large as others do?
Lo thus I live in spite of cruel death,
And die as fast in spite of lingering life,
Fed still with hope which does prolong my breath.
But choakte with fear, and strangled still with strife,
Stark staring blind because I see too much,
Yet gasing still because I see none such.
Amid these pangs (O subtle Cordial)
Those farrefet sighs which most men's minds eschew,
Recomforte me, and make the fury fall,
Which fed the root from whence my fits renew:
They comfort me (ah wretched doubtful clause)
They help the harm, and yet they kill the cause.
Where might I then my careful corpse convey
From company, which works all my woe?
How might I wink or hide mine eyes always,
Which gaze on that whereof my grief does grow?
How might I stop mine ears, which hearken still,
To every joy, which can but wound my will?
How should I seem my sighs for to suppress,
Which help the heart that else would swelt in sunder?
Which hurt the help that makes my torment less?
Which help and hurt (oh woeful weary wonder)
One seely hearty thus toste twixt help and harm,
How should I seem, such sighs in time to charm?
How? how but thus? in sollitarie wise
To step aside, and make high way to moan:
To make two fountains of my dazzled eyes,
To sigh my fill till breath and all be gone:
So sighed the knight of whom Bartello writes,
All cladde in Green, yet banished from delights.
And since the storye is both new and true,
A dreary tale much like these lottes of mine
I will assaye my muze for to renew,
By ryming out his froward fatal fine.
A doleful speech beco^mes a dumpish man,
So semde by him, for thus his tale begane.
The complaint of the green Knight.
WHy live I wretch (quoth he) alas and wellaway,
Or why behold my heavy eyes, this gladsome sunny day?
Since never sun yet shone, that could my state advance,
Why live I wretch (alas quoth he) in hope of better chance?
Or wherefore tells my tongue, this drearye doleful tale,
That every ear might hear my grieefe and so bemone my bale?
Since ear was never yet, that harkened to my playnte,
Why live I wretch (alas quoth he) my pangs in vain to paint?
Or wherefore dotes desire, that does his wish disclose,
And shows the sore that seeks recure, thereby to ease my woes?
Since yet he never found, the heart where pyttie dwelt,
Why live I wretch (alas quoth he) alone in woe to swelt?
Why strive I with the stream, or hoppe against the hill,
Or search that never can be found, or loose my labor still?
Since destenies decreed, must always be obeyde,
Why live I wretch alas (quoth he) with luck thus ouerleyde?
Why feeds my heart on hope? why tire I still on trust?
Why does my mind still muse on mirth? why leanes my life on lust?
Since hope had never hap, and trust always found treason,
Why live I wretch alas (quoth he) where all good luck is geazon?
The fatal Sisters three, which spun my slender twine,
Knew well how rotten was the yarne, from whence they drew their line:
Yet have they wouen the web, with care so manifold,
(Alas I woeful wretch the while) as any cloth can hold:
Yea though the threeds be cowrse, and such as others loathe,
Yet must I wrap always therein, my bones and body both:
And wear it out at length, which lasts but too long.
O weauer weauer work no more, thy warp has done me wrong:
For therein have I lapt my light and lusty years,
And therein hapless have I hapt, mine age and hoarie hears:
Yet never found I warmth, by ietting in thy iaggs,
Nor never can I wear them out, although they rende like rags.
The May-moone of mine age, I mean the gallant time
When coals of kind first kindled love, and pleasure was in prime,
All bitter was the fruit, which still I reaped then,
And little was the gain I got, comparde by other men.
Teare-thirstie were the Dames, to whom I sued for grace,
Some stony stomackt, other some, of high disdainful race.
But all unconstant (ay) and (that to think) I die,
The guerdon which Cosmana gave, can witness if I lie.
Cosmana was the wight to whom I wished well,
To serve Cosmana did I seem, in love to bear the bell:
Cosmana was my god, Cosmana was my joy,
Ay me, Cosmana turnde my mirth, to dole and dark anoy:
Revenge it Radamanth, if I be found to lie,
Or if I slander her at all, condemn me then to die.
Thou know I honored her, no more but all too much,
Alas thou know she cast me off, when I deservde no grutch.
She dead (I dying yet) ay me my tears were dried,
And teeth of time gnew out the grief, which al to long I tried,
Yet from her ashes sprung, or from such subtle molde,
Ferenda she, whom every eye, did judge more bright than gold.
Ferenda then I saw, Ferenda I beheld,
Ferenda servde I faithfully, in town and eke in field:
Ferenda could not say, the green Knight was untrue,
But out alas, the green Knight fayde, Ferenda changde for new:
Ferenda did her kind: then was she to be borne,
She did but wear Cosmanes cloutes, which she in spite had torn:
And yet between them both they waare the threeds so near,
As were they not of steel or stone, they could not hold yfeere.
But now Ferenda mine, a little by thy leave:
What moved thee to madding mood? why did thou me deceive?
Alas I was al thine, thy self can say no less,
And for thy fall, I bathed often in many a deep distress:
And yet to do thee right, I neither blame thy race,
Thy shining self, the golden gleames that glistred on thy face,
Nor yet thy fickle faith, shall never bear the blame,
But I, whom kind has framd to find, a grief in every game:
The high decrees of heaven, have limited my life,
To linger still where Love does lodge, yet there to sterue in strife.
For proof, who list to know what makes me now complain,
Give ear unto the green Knights tale: for now begins his pain.
When rash unbridled youth had run his recklesse race,
And carried me with careless course, to many a great disgrace,
Then riper mellowed years, thought good to turn their trade,
And bad Repentance holds the reins, to rule the brainsicke jade:
So that with much to do, the bridle held him back,
And Reason made him byte on bit, which had a better smacke:
And for I felt my self, by feebleness fordoonne,
And panting still for lack of breath, as one much ouerroonne.
Therefore I took advise, to walk him first awhile,
And so at length to set him up, his trauayles to beguile:
Yea when he curried was, and dusted slicke and trim,
I causde both hey and prouander to be allowde for him:
Whereat (alas to think) he gathered flesh so fast,
That still he played his coltish pranks, when as I thought the^ past:
He winched still always, and whisked with his tail,
And leaping over hedge and ditch, I saw it not prevail
To pamper him so proud: Wherefore I thought it best,
To travail him (not as I wont) yet nay to give him rest.
Thus well resolved then, I kept him still in heart,
And found a pretty prouander appointed for his part,
Which once a day, no more, he might a little taste:
And by this diet, made I youth a gentle jade at last:
And forth I might him ride, an easy iourneying pace,
He never straue with middle age, but gently gave him place:
Then middle age stepped in, and took the helm in hand,
To guide my Bark by better skill, into some better land.
And as each noble heart is evermore most bent,
To high exploites and worthy deeds, where honor may be hent:
So mine vnyolden mind, by Arms began seek renown,
And sought to raise, that recklesse youth had rashly tu^bled down.
With sword and trusty targe, then sought I for to carue
For middle age and hoarie hairs, and both their turns to sarue:
And in my Caruers room, I began to cut such cuttes,
And made such morsels for their mouths, as well might fill their guts,
Beside some overplus, (which being kept in store)
Might serve to welcome al their friends, with foison evermore:
I mean no more but this: my hand began find such hap,
As made me think, that Fortune meant, to play me in her lap:
And hope therewith had heavde, my heart to be so hie,
That still I hoapt, by force of arms, to climb above the Sky:
I bathed still in bliss, I led a lordelie life,
My Soldiers lovde and fearde me both, I never dreaded strife:
My board was furnished still, with cates of dainty cost,
My back well clad, my purse well lynde, my woonted lack was lost,
My bags began to fill, my debtes for to discharge,
My state so stood, as sure I seemde to swim in good lucks barge:
But out and well away, what pleasure breeds not pain?
What sun ca^ shine without a cloud, what thu^der brings not rain?
Such is the life of man, such was the luck of me,
To fall so fast from hiest hap, where sure I seemde to be.
Five hundred sundry suns (and more) could scarcely serve,
By sweat of brows to win a room, wherein my knife might carue:
One only dismal day, suffised (with despite)
To take me from my caruers place, and from the table quite.
Five hundred broken sleeps, had busied all my brains,
To find (at last) some worthy trade, that might increse my gaynes:
One black unlucky hour, my trade has overthrown,
And marrde my mart, and broke my bank, and al my bliss oreblowen.
To wrappe up all in woe, I am in prison pent,
My gains possessed by my foes, my friends against me bent:
And all the heavy haps, that ever age yet bare,
Assembled are within my breast, to choke me up with care.
My modest middle age, which lacks of youth the lust,
Can bear no such great burde^s now, but throws them in the dust:
Yet in this piteous plight, behold me Lovers all,
And rewe my grieves, least you your selves do light on such a fall.
I am that weary wretch, whom love always has tired,
And fed me with such strange conceytes, as never man desired.
For now (even now) ay me: I love and cannot choose,
So strangely yet, as well may move the wisest minds to muse.
No blasing beauty bright, has set my heart on fire,
No ticing talk, no gorgeous gyte, tormenteth my desire,
No body finely framde, no haggarde Falcons eye,
No ruddie lip, no golden locks, has drawn my mind awrie:
No teeth of shining pearl, no gallant rosy hiew,
No dimpled chinne, no pit in cheek, presented to my view:
In fine, no such delights, as lovers often allure,
Are cause why thus I do lament, or put my plaintes in ure:
But such a strange affect, as both I shame to tell,
And all the world may wonder much, how first therein I fell.
Yet since I have begone (quoth he) to tell my grief,
I will naught hide, although I hope to find no great relief.
And thus (quoth he) it is: Amongst the sundry joys
Which I conceivde in feats of war, and all my Martial toys,
My chance was late to have a peerlesse firelock piece,
That to my wits was nay the like, in Turkey nor in Greece:
A piece so cleanly framde, so straight, so light, so fine,
So tempred and so polished, as seems work divine:
A piece whose lock yet past, for why it it never failde,
And though I bent it night and day, the quickness never quailde:
A piece as well renforst, as ever yet was wrought,
The brauest piece for breech and bore, that ever yet was bought:
The mounture so well made, and for my pitch so fit,
As though I see fair pieces more, yet few so fine as it:
A piece which shot so well, so gently and so straight,
It neither bruzed with recule, nor wroong with ouerweight.
In fine and to conclude, I know no fault thereby,
That either might be thought in mind, or well discernde with ey.
This piece then late I had, and therein took delight,
As much as ever proper piece did please a warlike wight.
Now though it be not lost, nor rendered with the rest,
Yet being shut from sight thereof, how can I think me blessed?
Or which way should I hope, that such a jewel rare,
Can pass unseen in any camp where cunning shooters are?
And therewith am I sure, that being once espied,
It never can escape their hands, but that it will be tried:
And being once but proved, then farewell frost for me,
My piece, my lock, and all is lost, and I shall never see
The like again on earth. Now Lovers speak your mind,
Was ever man so strangely stroke, or caught in such a kind?
Was ever man so fond? was ever man so mad?
Was ever man so woe begone? or in such cares yclad?
For restless thus I rest, the wretchedst man on live,
And when I think upon this piece, then still my woes revive.
Nor ever can I find good plaster for my pain,
Unless my luck might be so good, to find that piece again.
To make my mourning more, where I in prison pine,
I daily see a pretty piece, much like that piece of mine,
Which helps my hurt, much like unto a broken shinne,
That when it heales, begins to ytch, and then rubs off the skin,
Thus live I still in love, alas and ever shall,
As well content to loose my piece, as glad to find my fall:
A wonder to the world, a grief to friendly minds,
A mocking stock to Momus race, and al such scornful hindes,
A love (that think I sure) whose like was never seen,
Nor never warlike wight shall be in love as I have been:
So that in sooth (quoth he) I cannot blame the Dames,
Whom I in youth did most esteem, I list not foil their fames,
But there to lay the fault, from whence it first did flow:
I say my Fortune is the root, whence all these griefs did grow.
Since Fortune then (quoth he) has turnde to me her back,
Shall I go yield to mourning moan, and cloth my self in black^?
No no, for noble minds can bear no thraldom so,
But rather show a merry cheer, when most they wade in woe.
And so will I in green, my careful corpse array,
To set a brag amongst the best, as though my heart were gay:
Not green because I hope, nor green because I joy,
Nor green, because I can delight in any youthful toy:
But green, because my greenes are always fresh and green,
Whose root is such it cannot rot, as by the fruit is seen.
Thus said, he gave a groan, as though his heart had broke,
And from the furnace of his breast, sent scalding sighs like smoke:
And sighing so, he sat in solitary wise,
Conueying floods of brynish tears, by conduct of his eyes.
What end he had God knows, Battello writes it not,
Or if he do, my wits are short, for I have it forgot.
The continuance of the Author, upon the fruit of Fetters.
THus have you heard the green Knight make his moan,
Which well might move the hardest heart to melt:
But what he meant, that knew himself alone,
For such a cause, in weerie woes to swelt:
And yet by like, some peerlesse piece it was,
That brought him so in raging storms to pass.
I have heard tell, and read it therewithal,
That near the Alps a kind of people be,
Which serve with shot, whereof the very ball
Is big of bulk, the piece but short to see:
But yet it shootes as far, and eke as fast,
As those which are yframde of longer last.
The cause (say some) consists in the lock,
Some other judge, because they be so strong,
Renforced well, and breeched like a brocke,
Stiff, straight, and stout, which though they be not long,
Yet spit they forth their pellets such a pace,
And with such force, as seems a woondrous case.
Some other think, the metal makes all,
Which tempred is both round and smooth to see:
And sure me thinks, the bigness of the ball,
Ne yet the lock, should make it shoot so free,
But even the breech of metal good and sound,
Which makes the ball with greater force to bound.
For this we see, the stiff and strongest arm,
Which gives a ierke, and has a cunning loose,
Shootes furdest still, and does always most harm,
For be his flights yfeathred from the goose,
Or Peacockes quilles, or Raven, or Swanne, or Crow,
His shafts go swifte, when others fly but slow.
How so it be, the men that use to shoot
In these short gunnes, are praised for the best:
And Princes seek such shot for to promoote
As perfectest and better than the rest:
So that (by like) their pieces bear the sway,
Else other men could shoot as far as they.
Their pieces then are called Petronels,
And they themselves by sundry names are called:
As Bandolliers, for who in mountains dwells,
In trowpes and bands, often times is stoutly stalld:
Or of the Stone wherewith the lock does strike,
Petronelliers, they called are by like.
And so percase this peerless piece of his
For which he mournde and made such ruefull moan,
Was one of those: and therefore all his bliss,
Was turned to bale when as that piece was gone:
Since Martial men do set their chief delight,
In arms which are both free and fair in sight.
My self have seen some piece of such a price,
As worthy were to be esteemed well:
For this you know in any strange devise,
Such things as seem for goodness to excel,
Are holden dear, and for great Jewels deemd,
Because they be both rare and much esteemd.
But now to turn my tale from whence I came,
I say his lottes and mine were not unlike:
He spent his youth (as I did) out of frame,
He came at last (like me) to trayle the pike.
He pynde in prison pinchte with privy pain,
And I likewise in prison still remain.
Yet some good fruit in fetters can I find,
As virtue rules in every kind of vice:
First prison brings repentance to the mind,
Which wandered erst in lust and lewd device.
For hardest hearts by troubles yet are taught,
That God is good when all the world is naught.
If thou have led a careless life at large,
Without regard what liberty was worth:
And then come down to cruel Gaylours charge,
Which keeps thee close and never lettes thee forth:
Learn then this fruit in Fetters by thy self,
That liberty is worth all worldly pelf.
Whose hap is such to yield himself in war,
Remember then that peace in pleasure dwelles:
Whose hearts are high and know not what they are
Let such but mark the gingling of their belles:
When fetters frette their anckles as they go,
Since none so high but that may come as low.
To tell a truth and therein to be short,
Prysons are plagues that fall for man's offense.
Which makes some in good and godly sort,
With contrite heart to grope their conscience.
Repentance then steps in and pardon craves,
These fruits (with mo) are found in darksome caves.
If thou have friends, there shall thou know them right,
Since fastest friends in troubles show their faith:
If thou have foes, there shall thou see their spite
For all to true it is that Proverb says:
Where hedge is low, there every man treads down,
And friendship fails when Fortune list to frown.
Patience is found in prison (though perforce)
And Temprance taught where none excess does dwell,
Exercise calls, least flouth should kill thy corse:
Diligence drives thy busy brains to swell,
For some devise which may redeem thy state,
These fruits I found in fetters all too late.
And with these fruits another fruit I found,
A strange conceyt, and yet a trusty truth:
I found by proof, there is no kind of ground,
That yeeldes a better croppe to retchlesse youth,
Than that same molde where fetters serve for mucke,
And wit still works to dig up better luck.
For if the seed of grace will ever grow,
Then sure such soil will serve to bear it best,
And if Gods mercy therewithal do flow,
Then springs it high, and ruffles with the rest:
Often has been seen such seed in prison cast,
Which long kept close, and prospred yet at last.
But therewithal there springs a kind of Tares,
Which are vile weeds, and must be rooted out,
They choke up grace, and lap it fast in snares,
Which oftentimes do draw it deep in dout,
And hinders plants which else would grow full hie,
Yet is this weed an easy thing to spy.
Men call it Fancy, sure a woorthlesse weed,
And of the same full many sorts are found,
Some fancies are, which think a lawful deed
To escape away, though faith full fast be bound:
Some think by love, (nay lust in cloak of love)
From fetters fast their selves for to remove.
Some be, that mean by murder to prevail,
And some by fraud, as fancy rules the thought:
Sometimes such frightes men's fancies do assail,
(That when they see their freedom must be bought)
They vow to take a stand on Shooters hill,
Till rents come in to please their wicked will.
Some fancies hopes by lies to come on floate,
As for to tell their friends and kin great tales,
What wealth they lost in coin, and many a coat,
What powder packt in coffers and in males,
What they must pay, and what their charge will be,
Wherein they mean to save themselves a fee.
Some fancies eke forecast what life to weelde,
When liberty shall granted be at last,
And in the air such castles began they build,
That many times they fall again as fast:
For Fancy hinders Grace from glories crown,
As Tares and Byndes can pluck good grain adowne.
Who list therefore by Fetters fruit to have,
Take Fancy first out of his privy thought,
And when thou have him, cast him in the wave
Of Lethes lake: for sure his seed is naught.
The green Knight he, of whom I late did tell,
(Mine Author says) badde Fancy thus farewell.
The green Knights farewell to Fancy.
Fancy (quoth he) farewell, whose badge I long did bear,
And in my hat full harebrayndly, thy flowers did I wear:
To late I find (at last), thy fruits are nothing worth,
Thy blossoms fall and fade full fast, though bravery bring the^ forth:
By thee I hoapt always, in deep delights to dwell,
But since I find thy fickleness, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
Thou madste me live in love, which wisdom biddes me hate,
Thou bleardst mine eyes and madste me think, yt faith was mine by fate:
By thee those bitter sweetes, did please my taste always,
By thee I thought that love was light, and pain was but a play:
I thought that Bewties blase, was meet to bear the bell,
And since I find my self deceived, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
The gloss of gorgeous courts, by thee did please mine eye,
A stately fight me thought it was, to see the brave go by:
To see their feathers flaunte, to mark their strange devise,
To lie along in Ladies lappes, to lispe and make it nice:
To fawn and flatter both, I liked sometimes well,
But since I see how vain it is, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
When court had cast me off, I toyled at the plowe
My fancy stood in strange conceits, to thrive I wot not how:
By mils, by making malte, by sheep and eke by swyne,
By ducke and drake, by pigge and goose, by calves and keeping kine:
By feeding bullockes fat, when price at markets fell,
But since my swains eat up my gains, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
In hunting of the dear, my fancy took delight,
All forests knew my folly still, the mooneshine was my light:
In frosts I felt no cold, a sunneburnt hew was best,
I sweat and was in temper still, my watching seemed rest:
What dangers deep I past, it folly were to tell,
And since I sigh to think thereon, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
A fancy fed me ones, to write in verse and rhyme,
To wray my grief, to crave reward, to cover still my crime:
To frame a long discourse, on sturring of a straw,
To rumble rhyme in raffe and ruff, yet all not worth an hawe:
To hear it said there goes, the Man that writes so well,
But since I see, what Poets be, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
At Musickes sacred sound, my fancies eft begone,
In concordes, discordes, notes and cliffes, in tunes of vnisonne:
In Hyerarchies and straynes, in restes, in rule and space,
In monacordes and moving moodes, in Burdens under base:
In descants and in chants, I streined many a yel,
But since Musicians be so mad, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
To plant strange country fruits, to sow such seeds likewise,
To dig and delue for new found roots, where old might well suffice:
To proyne the water bows, to pick the mossie trees,
(Oh how it pleased my fancy ones) to kneel upon my knees,
To griffe a pippine stock, when sap begins to swell:
But since the gaynes scarce quite the cost, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
Fancy (quoth he) farewell, which made me follow drommes,
Where powdered bullets serves for sauce, to every dish that co^mes:
Where treason lurkes in trust, where Hope all hearts beguiles,
Where mischief lies still in wait, when fortune friendly smiles:
Where one days prison prones, that all such heavens are hell,
And such I feel the fruits thereof, Fancy (quoth he) farewell.
If reason rule my thoughts, and God vouchsafe me grace
Then comfort of Philosophy, shall make me change my race:
And fond I shall it find, that Fancy settes to show,
For weakly sta^ds that building still, which lacks grace by low:
But since I must accept, my fortunes as they fell,
I say God send me better speed, and Fancy now farewell,
Epilogismus.
SEe sweet deceit, that can it self beguile,
Behold self love, which walks in a net:
And seems unseen, yet shows it self therewhile,
Before such eyes, as are in science set.
The Green knight here, leaves out his firelocke piece
That Fancy has not yet his last farewell.
When Foxes preach, good folk beware your geese,
But holla here, my muse to far does mell:
Who list to mark, what learned preacher says,
Must learn withal, for to believe his lore:
But what he does, that touches nomans faith,
Though words with works, (agreed) persuade the more,
The mounting kite, often lights on homely pray
And wisest wits, may sometimes go astray.
FINIS.
Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
The pleasant Fable of Ferdinando Ieronomi and Leonora de Valasco, translated
out of the Italian riding tales of Bartello.
IN the pleasant Country of Lombardie, (and not far from the City of
Florence) there was dwelling sometimes a Lord of many rich Seignories and
dominions, who nevertheless bare his name of the Castle of Valasco: this Lord
had one only son and two daughters: his son was called (during the life of
his father) the heir of Valasco, who married a fair Gentlewoman of the house
of Bellauista named Leonora: the elder daughter of the Lord of Valasco was
called Francischina, a young woman very toward, both in capacity and other
active qualities. Now the Lord of Valasco having already married his son and
heir, and himself drawing in age, was desirous to see his daughters also
bestowed before his death, and especially the eldest, who both for beutie and
ripeness of age might often put him in remembrance that she was a collop of
his own flesh: and therefore sought means to draw unto his house Ferdinando
Ieronimi a young gentleman of Venice, who delighting more in hawking, hunting,
and such other pastimes than he did in study, had left his own house in
Venice, and was come into Lombardie to take the pleasures of the country. So
that the Lord of Valasco knowing him to be of a very good parentage, and
therewithal not only rich but adorned with sundry good qualities, was
desirous (as is said) to draw him home to his house (under pretense of hunting
and hawking) to the end he might behold his fair daughter Francischina: who
both for parentage and other worldly respects, might no less content his
mind, than her beauty was likely to have allured his liking. But it fell out
far contrary to his desire, for Ferdinando Ieronimi beholding the Lady
Leonora, who was in deed very fair, and of a very courtlike behavior, became
enamoured of her, and forgetting the courtesy that the Lord of Valasco had
showed him in entertayning him and his servant, with their horses, by the
space of.iiij. months (which is a rare courtesy now adays, and especially
in such a country) he sought all means possible to make the heir of Valasco
a Becco. And to the end that all men may perceive what fruits grow on such
trees, and what issues come of such intents, I will set down in English the
fable as it is written in Italian by Bartello. And because I do suppose that
Leonora is the same name which we call Elinor in English, and that
Francischina also does import none other than Fraunces, I will so entitle them
as to our own countriemen may be most perspicuous. Understand you then, that
Ferdinando having now a hot affection unto the said Dame Elynor, and
thinking it meeter to utter his first conceits in writing than in speech,
did write unto her as follows.

Fair Lady I pray you understand that (being altogether a stranger in this
Country) my good hap has been to behold you to my no small contentation.
And my evil hap accompanies the same with such imperfection of my deserts,
as that I find always a ready repulse in mine own forwardness: So that
considering the natural clymate of the country, The air of that Country did
(by all likelihood) seem colder to him than ye streets of Venice.
I must say that I have found fire in frost. And yet comparing the inequality
of my deserts, with the least part of your worthiness, I feel a continual
frost, in my most fervent fire. Such is the^ the extremity of my passions, the
which I could never have been content to commit unto this teltale paper,
were it not that I am destitute of all other help. Accept therefore I beseech
you, the earnest good will of a more trusty (than worthy) servant, who being
thereby encouraged, may supply the defects of his ability with ready trial
of duetifull loyalty. And let this poor paper (besprent with salt tears,
and blown over with skalding sighs) be saved of you as a safegarde for your
sampler, or a bottom to wind your sowing silk, that when your last
needelfull is wrought, you may return to reading thereof and consider the
care of him who is

More youres than his own. F. I.


THis letter by her received, her answer was this: She took occasion one
day, at his request to dance with him: the which doing, she bashfully began
to declare unto him, that she had read over the writing which he delivered
unto her: with like protestation, that (as at delivery thereof, she
understood not for what cause he thrust the same into her bosom,) so now she
could not perceive thereby any part of his meaning: nevertheless at last
seemed to take upon her the matter, and though she disabled her self, yet
gave him thanks as etc. Whereupon he brake the braule, and walking abroad,
devised immediately these few verses following.

Fair Bersabe the bright once bathing in a Well,
With deawe bedimmd King David's eyes that ruled Israel.
And Solomon himself, the source of sapience,
Against the force of such assaults could make but small defense:
To it the stoutest yield, and strongest feel like woe.
Bold Hercules and Sampson both, did prove it to be so.
What wonder seems then? when stars stand thick in skies,
If such a blasing star have power to dim my dazzled eyes?
Lenuoie.
To you these fevve suffice, your vvittes be quick and good,
You can coniect by change of hevv, what humors feed my blood.
F. I.

BEfore he culd put these verses in legible writing, it pleased M. Elinor of
her courtesy thus to deal with him. Walking in a garden among diverse other
gentlemen and gentlewomen, with a little frowning smyle in passing by him, she
delivered unto him a paper, with these words. For that I understand not (quoth
she) the intent of your letters, I pray you take them here again, and bestow
them at your pleasure. The which done and said, she passed by without change
either of pace or countenance. Ferdinando somewhat troubled with her angry
look, did suddenly leave the company, and walking into a park near
adjoining, in great rage began to wreake his malice on this poor paper, and
the same did rend and tear in pieces. When suddenly at a glaunce he perceued it
was not of his own hand writing, and therewithal abashed, upon better regard
he perceived in one piece thereof written in Roman these letters Colei: which
in english betokens SHE: wherefore placing all the pieces thereof, as orderly
as he could, he found therein written, these few lines hereafter following.

YOur sodeyn departure, from our pastime yesterday, did enforce me for lack
of chosen company too return unto my work, wherein I did so long continue,
till at the last the bare bottom did draw unto my remembrance your strange
request. And although I found therein no just cause to credit your colored
words, yet have I thought good hereby too requite you with like courtesy, so
that at least you shall not condemn me for ungrateful. But as to the matter
therein contained: if I could persuade my self, that there were in me any
coals to kyndle such sparks of fire, I might yet peradventure be drawn to
believe that your mind were frosen with like fear. But as no smoke arises,
where no cole is kindled, so without cause of affection the passion is easy to
be cured. This is all that I understand of your dark letters: and as much as I
mean to answer.

Colei: in english: SHE.


FErdinando immediately upon receyte heerof, grew in ielosie that the same was
not her own devise. And therein I have no less allowed his judgment, than
commended his invention of the verses, and letters before rehearsed. For as by
the style this letter of hirs bewrays that it was not penned by a woman's
capacity, so the sequel of her doings may discipher, that she had mo ready
clearkes than trusty servants in store. Well yet as the perfect hound, when he
has chased the hurt dear, amidde the whole heard, will never give over till
he have singled it again. Even so Ferdinando though somewhat abashed with this
doubtful show, yet still constant in his former intention, ceased not by all
possible means, too bring this Dear yet once again to the bows, whereby she
might be the more surely stryken: and so in the end enforced to yield. Wherefore
he thought not best to commit the said verses willingly into her custody, but
privily lost them in her chamber, written in counterfeit. And after on the next
day thought better to reply, either upon her, or upon her Secretary in this
wise as here follows.

THE much that you have answered is very much, and much more than I am able to
reply unto: nevertheless in mine own defense, thus much I allege: that if my
sodein departure pleased not you, I cannot my self therewith be pleased, as one
that seeks not to please many, and more desirous to please you than any. The
cause of mine affection, I suppose you behold daily. For (self love avoided)
every wight may judge of themselves as much as reason persuades: the which if
it be in your good nature suppressed with bashfulnesse, then mighty love
grant, you may once behold my wan cheeks washed in woe, that therein my salt
tears may be a myrrour to represent your own shadow, and that like unto
Nacissus you may be constrained to kiss the cold waves, wherein your
counterfeit is so lively purtrayed. For if abundance of other matters failed
to draw my gazing eyes in contemplation of so rare excellency, yet might these
your letters both frame in me an admiration of such divine esprite, and a
confusion too my dull understanding, which so rashly presumed too wander in
this endless Laberinth. Such I esteem you, and thereby am become such, and even

HE. F.I.


THis letter finished and fair written over, his chance was to meet her
alone in a Gallery of the same house: (where his manhood in this kind of
combat was first tried:) and therein I can compare him to a valiant Prince,
who distressed with power of enemies had committed the safeguard of his person
to treaty of Ambassade, and suddenly (surprised with a Camassado in his own
trenches) was enforced to yield as prisoner. Even so Ferdinando Ieronimi lately
overcome by the beautiful beams of this Dame Elynor, and having now committed
his most secret intent to these late rehearsed letters, was at unawares
encountered with his friendly foe, and constrained either to prepare some new
defense, or else like a recreant to yield himself as already vanquished.
Wherefore (as in a trance) he lifted up his dazzled eyes, and so continued in a
certain kind of admiration, not unlike the Astronomer, who (having after a whole
nights travail, in the gray morning found his desired star) has fired his
hungry eyes to behold the Comete long looked for: whereat this gracious Dame (as
one that could discern the sun before her chamber windows were wide open)
did deign to embolden the fainting Knight with these or like words.

I perceive now (quod she) how mishap does follow me, that having chosen this
walk for a simple solace, I am here disquieted by the man that means my
destruction: and therwithall, as half angry, began to turn her back, when
Ferdinando (now awaked) began thus salute her.

Mistress (quod he) and I perceive now, that good hap hau^ts me, for being by
lack of oportuni^ie constreined to commit my welfare unto these blabbing
leaves of bewraying paper (showing that in his hand) I am here recomforted with
happy view of my desired joy: and therewithal reverently kissing his hand, did
softly distreyne her slender arm, and so slayed her departure. The first blow
thus proffered and defended, they walked and talked traversing diverse ways,
wherein I doubt not but that the Venetian could quite himself resonably
well. For after long talk she was contented to accept his proffered service,
but yet still disabling her self, and seeming to marvel what cause had moved
him to subject his liberty so wilfully, or at least in a prison (as she
termed it) so unworthy. Whereunto I need not rehearse his answer, but suppose
now, that thus they departed: saving I had forgotten this: she required of him
the last rehearsed letter, saying that his first was lost, and now she
lacked a new bottom for her silk, the which I warrant you, he granted: and
so preffering to take an humble conge by Bezolas manos, she graciously gave him
the Zuccado dez labros: and so for then departed. And there upon recompting
her words, he compiled these following, which he termed Terza sequenza, too
sweet Mistress SHE.

OF thee dear Dame, three lessons would I learn:
What reason first persuades the foolish Fly
(As soon as she a candle can discern)
To play with flame, till she be burnt thereby?
Or what may move the Mouse to byte the bayte
Which strikes the trappe, that stops her hungry breath?
What calls the bird, where snares of deep deceit
Are closely coucht to draw her to her death?
Consider well, what is the cause of this,
And though percase thou will not so confess,
Yet deep desire, to gain a heavenly bliss,
May drown the mind in dole and dark distress:
Often is it seen (whereat my heart may bleed)
Fools play so long till they be caught in deed.
And then
It is a heaven to see them hop and skip,
And seek all shifts to shake their shackles off:
It is a world, to see them hang the lip,
Who (erst) at love, were wont to skorne and skoff.
But as the Mouse, once caught in crafty trap,
May bounce and beat against the boorden wall,
Till she have brought her head in such mishap,
That down to death her fainting lymbes must fall:
And as the Fly once singed in the flame,
Cannot command her wings to wave away:
But by the heel, she hangs in the same
Till cruel death her hasty journey stay:
So they that seek to break the linkes of love
Strive with the stream, and this by pain I prove.
For when
I first beheld that heavenly hew of thine,
Thy stately stature, and thy comely grace,
I must confess these dazzled eyes of mine
Did wincke for fear, when I first viewd thy face:
But bold desire did open them again,
And had me look till I had looked to long,
I pitied them that did procure my pain,
And loved the looks that wrought me all the wrong:
And as the byrd once caught (but woorks her woe)
That strives to leave the limed twigges behind:
Even so the more I straue to part thee fro,
The greater grief did grow within my mind:
Remediless then must I yield to thee,
And crave no more, thy servant but to be.
Till then and ever. HE. F.I.

WHen he had well sorted this sequence, he sought opportunity to leave it where
she might find it before it were lost. And now the coals began to kindle,
whereof (but ere while) she feigned her self altogether ignorant. The flames
began to break out on every side: and she to quench them, shut up her self in
her chamber solitarily. But as the smithie gathers greater heat by casting on
of water, even so the more she absented her self from company, the fresher was
the grief which galded her remembrance: so that at last the report was
spredde thorough the house, that Mistress Elinor was sick. At which news
Ferdinando took small comfort: nevertheless Dame Venus with good aspect did
yet thus much further his enterprise. The Dame (whether it were by sudden
change, or of wonted custom) fell one day into a great bleeding at the nose.
For which accident the said Venetian, amongst other pretty conceits, had a
present remedy: Whereby he took occasion (when they of the house had all in
vain sought many ways to stop her bleeding) to work his feate in this
wise: First he pleaded ignorance, as though he knew not her name, and
therefore demanded the same of Mistress Fraunces, who when she had to him
declared that her name was Elinor, he said these words or very like in
effect: If I thought I should not offend Mistres Elynor, I would not doubt
to stop her bleeding, without either pain or difficulty. This Gentlewoman
somewhat tickled with his words, did incontinent make relation thereof to the
said Mistress Elynor: who immediately (declaring that Ferdinando was her late
received servant) returned the said messanger unto him with especial charge,
that he should employ his deuoyre toward the recovery of her health: with
whom the same Ferdinando repaired to the chamber of his desired: and finding
her set in a chair, leaning on the one side over a Silver basin: After his due
reverence, he laid his hand on her Temples, and privily rounding her in her
ear, desired her to command a Hazell stick and a knyfe: the which being
brought, he delivered unto her, saying on this wise. Mistress I will speak
certain words in secret to my self, and do require no more: but when you
hear me say openly this word Amen, that you with this knyfe will make a
nicke upon this Hazell stick: and when you have made five nickes, command
me also to cease. The Dame partly of good will to the Knight, and partly to be
stenched of her bleeding, commanded her maid, and required the other Gentiles,
somewhat to stand aside: which done, he began his Oraisons, wherein he had
not long muttered before he pronounced Amen, wherewith the Lady made a nicke on
the stick with her knyfe. The said Ferdinando continued to an other Amen,
when ye Lady having made an other nick, felt her bleeding began to steynch: and
so by the third Amen thoroughly steinched. Ferdinando then changing his prayers
into private talk, said softly unto her: Mystres, I am glad that I am hereby
enabled to do you some service, and as the staunching of your own blood may
some way recomfort you, so if the shedding of my blood may any way content you,
I beseech you command it, for it shall be evermore readily employed in your
service: and therwithal with a loud voice pronounced Amen: wherewith the good
Lady making a nick, did secretly answer thus: Good servant (quod she) I must
needs think my self right happy to have gained your service and good will,
and be you sure, that although there be in me no such desert as may draw you
into this depth of affection: yet such as I am, I shall be always glad to show
my self thankful unto you. And now, if you think your self assured that I
shall bleed no more, do then pronounce your fifth Amen: the which pronounced,
she made also her fifth nicke, and held up her head, calling the company unto
her, and declaring unto them, that her bleeding was thoroughly steinched. And
Ferdinando tarying a while in the chamber, found opportunity to loose his
sequence near too his desired Mistres: And after conge taken, departed. After
whose departure the Lady arose out of her chair, and her maid going about to
remove the same, espied, and took up the writing: the which her mistres
perceiving, began suddenly conjecture that the same had in it some like matter to
the verses once before left in like manner, and made semblant to mistrust that
the same should be some words of coniuration: and taking it from her maid, did
peruse it, and immediately said too the company, that she would not forgo the
same for a great treasure. But to be plain, I think that ( Ferdinando excepted)
she was glad to be rid of all company, until she had with sufficient leisure
turned over and retossed every card in this sequence. And not long after being
now tickled thorough all the veins with an unknown humor, adventured of her
self to commit unto a like Ambassador the discyphring of that which hitherto
she had kept more secret: and thereupon wrote with her own hand and head in
this wise.

GOod servant, I am out of al doubt much beholding unto you, and I have great
comfort by your means in the steinching of my blood, and I take great comfort
too read your letters and I have found in my chamber diverse songs which I
think too be of your making, and I promise you, they are excellently made: and
I assure you that I wilbee ready to do for you any pleasure that I can, during
my life: wherefore I pray you come to my chamber once in a day, till I come
abroad again, and I will be glad of your company: and for because that you have
promised to be my HE: I will take upon me this name, your SHE.


THis letter was doubtless of her own hand writing: and as therein the Reader
may find great difference of Style, from her former letter, so may you now
understand the cause. She had in the same house a friend, a servant, a
Secretary: what should I name him? such one as she esteemed in time past more
than was cause in time present. And to make my tale good, I will (by the same
words that Bartello uses) discribe him unto you. He was in height the
proportion of two Pigmeis, in breadth the thickness of two bacon hogs, of
presumption a Giant, of power a Gnatte, Apishly wytted, Knauishly mannered, and
crabbedly fauord. What was there in him then to draw a fair Ladies liking?
Marry sir even all in all, a well lyned pursse, wherewith he could at every
call, provide such pretty conceytes as pleased her peevish fantasy: and by
that means he had thoroughly (long before) insinuated him self with this
amorous dame. This manling, this minion, this slave, this secretary, was now
by occasion rydden too Florence forsothe: and though his absenee were unto her
a disfurnishing of eloquence: it was yet unto Ferdinando Ieromini an
opportunity of good advantage: for when he perceived the change of her
style, and thereby grew in some suspicion that the same proceeded by absence
of her chief Chauncellor, he thought good now to smite while the iron was
hot, and to lend his Mistress such a pen in her Secretaries absence, as
he should never be able (at his return) to amend the well writing thereof.
Wherefore according to her command he repaired once every day to her chamber,
at the least whereas he guided himself so well, and could devise such store of
sundry pleasures and pastymes, that he grew in favor not only with his
desired, but also with the rest of the gentlewomen. And one day passing the
time amongst them, their play grew to this end, that his Mistress, being
Queen, demanded of him these three questions. Servant (quod she) I charge
you, as well upon your allgiance being now my subject, as also upon your
fidelity, having vowed your service unto me, that you answer me these three
questions, by the very truth of your secret thought. First, what thing in this
universal world does most rejoice and comfort you? Ferdinando Ieronimi abasing
his eyes toward the ground, took good aduisement in his answer, when a
fair gentlewoman of the company clapped him on the shoulder, saying, how now
sir, is your hand on your halfpeny? To whom he answered, no fair Lady, my
hand is on my heart, and yet my heart is not in mine own hands: wherewithal
abashed, turning toward dame Elinor he said: My sovereign and Mistress,
according to the charge of your command, and the duty that I owe you, my
tongue shall bewraye unto you the truth of mine intent. At this present a
reward given me without desert, does so rejoice me with continual
remembrance, that though my mind be so occupied to think thereon, as that
day nor night I can be quiet from that thought, yet the joy and pleasure
which I conceive in the same is such, that I can neither be cloyed with
continuance thereof, nor yet afraid, that any mishappe can counteruayle so
great a treasure. This is to me such a heaven to dwell in, as that I feed by
day, and repose by night upon the fresh record of this reward. This (as
Bartello says) he meant by the kiss that she lent him in the Gallery, and by
the profession of her last letters and words. Well, though this answer be
somewhat mistie, yet let his excuse be: that taken upon the sudden, he
thought better to answer darkly, than to be mistrusted openly. Her second
question was, what thing in this life did most grieve his heart, and disquiet
his mind, whereunto he answered. That although his late rehearsed joy were
incomparable, yet the greatest enemy that disturbed the same, was the privy
worm of his own guilty conscience, which accused him evermore with great
unworthiness: and that this was his greatest grief. The Lady biting upon the
bitte at his cunning answers made unto these two questions, ganne thus reply.
Servant, I had thought to have touched you yet nearer with my third question,
but I will refrain to attempt your patience: and now for my third demand,
answer me directly in what manner this passion does handle you? and how
these contraries may hang together by any possibility of concord? for your
words are strange. Ferdinando now rousing himself boldly, took occasion
thus to handle his answer. Mistress (quod he) my words in deed are
strange, but yet my passion is much stranger: and thereupon this other day to
content mine own fantasy I devised a Sonet, which although it be a piece of
Cocklorels music, and such as I might be ashamed to publish in this company,
yet because my truth in this answer may the better appear unto you, I pray
you vouchsafe to receive the same in writing: and drawing a paper out of his
pocket, presented it to her, wherein was written this Sonet.

Love, hope, and death, do stir in me such strife,
As never man but I led such a life.
First burning love does wound my heart to death,
And when death comes at call of inward grief,
Cold lingering hope does feed my fainting breath
Against my will, and yeeldes my wound relief:
So that I live, but yet my life is such,
As death would never grieve me half so much.
No comfort then but only this I taste,
To salve such sore, such hope will never want,
And with such hope, such life will ever last,
And with such life, such sorrows are not skant.
Oh strange desire, O life with torments tossed
Through too much hope, mine only hope is lost.
Even HE F.I.

THis sonet was highly commended, and in my judgment it deserves no less.
His duty thus performed, their pastimes ended, and at their departure for a
watch word he cou^selled his Mistress by little and little to walk abroad:
saying, that the Gallery near adjoining was so pleasant, as if he were half
dead he thought that by walking therein he might be half and more revived.
Think you so servant (quod she?) and the last time that I walked there, I
suppose I took the cause of my malady: but by your advise (for that you have so
clerkly steynched my bleeding) I will assay to walk there to morrow. Mistres
quod he, and in more full accomplishment of my duty toward you, and in sure
hope that you will use the same only to your own private commodity, I will
there awaite upon you, and between you and me will teach you the full order how
to steynch the bleeding of any creature, whereby you shall be as cunning as my
self. Gramercy good servant, quod she, I think you lost the same in writing
here yesterday, but I cannot understand it: and therefore to morrow (if I feel
my self any thing amended) I will send for you thither to enstruct me
thoroughly: thus they departed. And at supper time, the Lord of Valasco finding
fault yt his gestes stomach served him no better, began too accuse the
grosnesse of his vyands, to whom one of the ge^tlewomen which had passed ye
afternoon in his company, answered. Nay sir, quod she, this gentleman has a
passion, the which once in a day at the least does kill his appetite. Are you
so well acquainted with the disposition of his body (quod the Lord of ye
house?) by his own saying, quod she, and not otherwise. Fair lady quod
Ferdina^do, you either mistoke me or ouerheard me the^: for I told of a
comfortable humor which so fed me with continual remembrance of joy, as that
my stomach being full thereof does desire in manner none other vittayles. Why sir,
(quod the host,) do you the^ ^iue by love? God forbid sir quod Ferdinando, for
then my cheeks would be much thinner tha^ they be: but there are diverse other
greater causes of joy, than the doubtful lots of love: and for mine own part,
to be plain, I cannot love, and I dare not hate. I would I thought so, quod the
gentlewoman. And thus with pretty nyppes, they passed over their supper: which
ended, the Lord of the house required Ferdinando Ieronimi to dance and pass
the time with the gentlewomen, which he refused not to do. But suddenly, before
the music was well tuned, came out Dame Elynor in her night attire, and said
to the Lord, ye (supposing the solitariness of her chamber had increased her
malady) she came out for her better recreatio^ to see them dance. Well done
daughter (quod the Lord.) And I Mistres (quod Ferdinando) would gladly bestow
the leading of you about this great chamber, to drive away ye faintness of
your fever. No good servant, (quod the Lady,) but in my steed, I pray you
dance with this fair Gentlewoman, pointing him too the Lady that had so taken
him up at supper. Ferdinando to avoid mistrust, did agree too her request
without further entreaty. The dance begone, this Knight marched on with the
Image of S. Frances in his hand, and S. Elynor in his heart. The violands at end
of the pauion stayed a while: in which time this Dame said to Ferdinando
Ieronimi on this wise: I am right sorry for you in two respects, although the
familiarity have hitherto had no great continuance between us: and as I do
lament your case, so do I rejoice (for mine own contentation) that I shall now
see a due trial of the experime^t which I have long desired. This said, she
kept silence: When Ferdinando (somewhat astonished with her strange speech) thus
answered: Mistress although I cannot conceive the meaning of your words, yet
by courtesy I am constrained to yield you thanks for your good will, the which
appears no less in lamenting of mishappes, than in rejoicing at good
fortune. What experiment you mean to try by me, I know not, but I dare
assure you, that my skill in experiments is very simple. Herewith the
Instruments sounded a new Measure, and they passed forthwards, leaving to
talk, until the noise ceased: which done, the Gentlewoman replied. I am
sorry sir, that you did erewhile, deny love and all his laws, and that in so
open audience. Not so (quod Ferdinando) but as the word was roundly taken, so
can I readely answer it by good reason. Well quod she, how if the hearers
will admit no reasonable answer? My reasons yet be nevertheless (quod he) in
reasonable judgment. Herewith she smiled, and he cast a glance toward dame
Elinor, as who says
askances art thou pleased? Again the viols called them forthwardes, and
again at the end of the braule said Ferdinando Ieronimi to this Gentlewoman:
I pray you Mistres, and what may be the second cause of your sorrow sustained in
my behalf? Nay soft (quod she) percase I have not yet told you the first, but
content your self, for the second cause you shall never know at my hands,
until I see due trial of the experiment which I have long desired. Why then
(quod he) I can but wish a present occasion to bring the same to effect, to
the end that I might also understand the mystery of your meaning. And so might
you fail of your purpose (quod she) for I mean to be better assured of him
that shall know the depth of mine intent in such a secret, than I do suppose
that any creature (one except) may be of you. Gentlewoman (quod he) you speak
Greek, the which I have now forgotten, and mine instructers are to far from
me at this present to expound your words. Or else to near (quod she) and so
smiling stayed her talk, when the Music called them to another dance.
Which ended, Ferdinando half afraid of false suspect, and more amazed at this
strange talk, gave over, and bringing Mistress Fraunces to her place, was
thus saluted by his Mistress. Servant (quod she) I had done you great wrong
to have daunced with you, consideringe that this gentlewoman and you had former
occasion of so weighty conference. Mistress said Ferdinando you had done me
great pleasure, for by our conference I have but brought my brains in a busy
conjecture, I doubt not (said his Mistress) but you will end that business
easily. It is hard said he to end the thing, whereof yet I have found no
begininge. His Mistress with change of countenance kept silence whereat dame
Fraunces reioycinge, cast out this bone to gnawe on. I perceive (quod she) it
is evil to halte before a Creple. Ferdinando perceiving now that his Mistress
waxed angry, thought good on her behalf thus to answer: and it is evil to
hop before them that run for the Bell: his Mistress replied, and it is evil
to hang the Bell at their heels which are always running. The Lord of he
Castle ouerhearing these proper quippes, rose out of his chair, and coming
toward Ferdinando required him to dance a Gallyard. Sir said he I have
hitherto at your apoyntme^t but walked about the house, now if you be desirous
to see one tomble a turn or twain, it is like enough that I might provoke
you to laugh at me, but in good faith my dancing days are almost done, and
therefore sir (quod he) I pray you speak to them that are more nymble at
trippinge on the toe. Whilst he was thus saying dame Elynor had made her
Congey, and was now entering the door of her chamber when Ferdinando al amazed
at her sodeyne departure followed to take leave of his Mistress: but she more
then angry, refused to hear his good night, and entering her chamber caused
her maid to clappe to the door. Ferdinando with heavy cheer returned to his
company, and Mistress Fraunces to toutch his sore with a corosiue, said to him
softly in this wise. Sir you may now perceive that this our country cannot
allow the French manner of dancing, for they (as I have heard tell) do more
commonly dance to talk, then entreat to dance. Fardenando hoping to drive
out one nail with another and thinking this a mean most convenient to
suppress all ielous supposes, took Mistress Fraunces by the hand and with a
heavy smile answered. Mistress and I (because I have seen the french manner
of dancing) will eftsonnes entreat you to dance a Bargynet: what mean you by
this quod mistress Fraunces. If it please you to follow (quod he) you shall
see that I can jest without joy, and laugh without lust, and calling the
musitions, caused them softly to sound the Tynternall, when he clearing his
voice did Alla Napolitana apply these verses following, unto the measure.

IN prime of lusty years, when Cupid caught me in,
And nature taught the way to love, how I might best begin:
To please my wandering eye, in beauties tickle trade,
To gaze on each that passed by, a careless sport I made.
With sweet entising bait, I fisht for many a dame,
And warmed me by many a fire, yet felt I not the flame:
But when at last I spied, that face that pleased me most,
The coals were quick, the wood was dry, and I began to tossed.
And smiling yet full often, I have beheld that face,
When in my heart I might bewail mine own unlucky case:
And often again with lokes that might bewraie my grief,
I pleaded hard for just reward, and sought to find relief.
What will you more? so often my gazing eyes did seek,
To see the rose and Lilly strive upon that lively cheek:
Till at the last I spied, and by good proof I found,
That in that face was painted plain, the pearcer of my wound
Then (all to late) aghast, I did my foot retire,
And sought with secret sighs to quench my gredie skalding fire
But lo, I did prevail as much to guide my will,
As he that seeks with halting heel, to hop against the hill.
Or as the feeble sight, would search the sunnie beam,
Even so J found but labor lost, to strive against the stream.
Then began I thus resolve, since liking forced love.
Should I mislike my happy choice, before I did it prove?
And since none other joy I had but her to see,
Soulde I retire my deep desire? no no it would not be:
Though great the duty were, that she did well deserve,
And I poor man, unworthy am so wotthie a wight to serve.
Yet hope my comfort staide, that she would have regard,
To my good will that nothing craved, but like for just reward:
I see the faucon gent sometime will take delight.
To seek the folace of her wing, and dally with a kite.
The fairest VVoulf will choose the foulest for her make,
And why? because he does endure most sorrow for her sake:
Even so had like I hope, when doleful days were spent
When weary words were wasted well, to open true intent.
When fluddes of flowing tears, had washed my weeping eyes,
When trembling tongue had troubled her, with loud lamenting cries:
At last her worthy will would pity this my plaint,
And comfort me her own poor slave, whom fear had made so faint.
Wherefore I made a vow, the stoany rock should start,
Ere I presume, to let her slip out of my faithful heart.
Lenuoie.
And when she savve by proof, the pith of my good will,
She took in vvorth this simple song, for want of better skill:
And as my just deserts, her gentle heart did move,
She was content to answer thus: I am content to love:
F. I.

BY these verses he meant in clouds to discipher unto Mistress Fraunces such
matter as she would snatch at, and yet could take no good hold of the same.
Furthermore, it answered very aptly to the note which the music sounded, as
the skillful reader by due trial may approve. This singing dance, or daunsing
song ended, Mistress Fraunces giving due thanks, seemed weary also of the
company, and profering to depart, gave yet this farewell to Ferdinando not
vexed by choler, but pleased with contentation, and called away by heavy
sleep: I am constreyned (quod she) to bid you good night, and so turning to
the rest of the company, took her leave. Then the Master of the house
commanded a torch to light Ferdinando to his lodging, where the sudden
change of his Mistress countenance, together with the strangeness of
Mistress Fraunces talk, made such an encounter in his mind, that he could
take no rest that night: wherefore in the morning rising very early (although
it were far before his Mistress hour) he cooled his choler by walking in
the Gallery near to her lodging, and there in this passion cepiled these
verses following.

A Cloud of care has coured all my cost,
And storms of strife do threaten to appear:
The waves of woo, which I mistrusted most,
Have broke the banks wherein my life lay clear:
Chippes of ill chance, are fallen amyd my choice,
To mar the mind, that meant for to rejoice.
Before J sought, J found the haven of hap,
VVherin (once found) I sought to shroud my ship,
But lowering love has lift me from her lap,
And crabbed lot begins to hang the lip:
The proppes of dark mistrust do fall so thick,
They pearce my coat, and touch my skin at quick.
What may be said, where truth cannot prevail?
What plea may serve, where will it self is judge?
What reason rules, where right and reason fail?
Remediless then must the guiltless trudge:
And seek out care, to be the caruing knife,
To cut the thread that lingreth such a life.
F. I.

THis is but a rough meeter, and reason, for it was devised in great disquiet
of mind, and written in rage, but to the matter. When he had long (and all in
vain) looked for the coming of his Mistress into her appointed walk: he
wandered into the Park near adjoining to the Castle wall, where his chance
was to meet Mistres Fraunces, accompanied with one other Gentlewoman, by whom
he passed with a reverence of courtesy: and so walking on, came into the side
of a thicket, where he satte down under a tree to allay his sadness with
solitarines. Mystresse Fraunces, partly of courtesy and affection, and partly
to content her mind by continuance of such talk as they had commenced over
night, entreated her companion to go with her unto this Tree of reformation,
whereas they found the Knight with his arms foulded in a heavy kind of
contemplation, unto whom Mistress Fraunces stepped a pace (right softhlye)
and at unawares gave this salutation. I little thought Sir Knight (quoth she)
by your Euensong yesternight, to halte found you presentlye at such a Morrow
Mass, but I perceive you serve your Saint with double devotion: and I p^ny God
grant you trouble meede for your true intent. He being taken thus upon the
sudden, could none otherwise answer but thus: I toulde you mistres (quod
he) that I could laugh without lust, and ^est without joy: and therewithal
starting up, with a more bold countenance came toward the Dames, proffering
unto them his service, to weight upon them homewardes. I have heard say often
times (quod Mistress Fraunces) that it is hard to serve two Masters at one
time, but we will be right glad of your company. I thank you (quod he) and so
walking on with them, fell into sundry discourses, still refusing to touch
any part of their formor communication, until Mystresse Fraunces said unto
him: by my troth (quod she) I would be your debtour these two days, to
answer me truly but unto one question that I will propound: fair
Gentlewoman (quod he) you shall not need to become my debtour, but if it
please you to quit question by question, I will be more ready to gratify you
in this request, then either reason requires, or than you would be willing to
work my contentation Master Fardinando Ieronomij (quod she, and that sadly)
peradventure you know but a little how willing I would be to procure your
contation, but you know that hitherto familliarytie has taken, no deep root
beetwixt us twain. And though I find in you no manner of cause whereby I
might doubt to commit this or greater matter unto you, yet have I stayed
hitherto so to do, in doubt least you might thereby justly condemn me both
of arrogance and lack of discretion, wherewith I must yet foolishlye affirm,
that I have with great pain brydeled my tongue from disclosing the same unto
you. Such is then the good will that I bear toward you, the which if you
rather judge to be impudency, then a friendely meaning, I may then curse the
hour that I first concluded thus to deal with you: herewithall being now
read for chaste bashefulnesse, she abased her eyes, and slaied her taulke: to
whom Fardinando thus answered. Mystresse Fraunces, if I should with so
exceeding villanye requight such and so exceeding great courtesye, I might not
only seem to digenerate from all gentrye, but also to differ in behavior
from all the rest of my life spent: wherefore to be plain with you in few
words I think my self so much bound unto you for diverse respects, as if
ability do not fail me, you shall find me mindful in requital of the
same, and for disclosing your mind to me, you may if so if please you adventure
it without adventure, for by this Sun quod he, I will not deceive such trust
as you shall lay upon me, and furthermore, so far forth as I may, I will
be yours in any respect: wherefore I beseech you accept me for your faithful
friend, and so shall you surely find me. Not so, quod she, but you shall be my
Trust, if you vouchsafe the name, and I will be to you as you shall please to
term me: my Hope (quod he) if you be so pleased: and thus agreed, they two
walked a part from the other Gentlewoman, and fell into sad talk, wherein
Mistress Fraunces did very curteousely declare unto him, that in d^ede, one
cause of her sorrow sustained in his behalf, was that he had said so openly
over night, that he could not love, for she perceived very well the
affection between him and Madame Elynor, and she was also advertised that
Dame Elynor stood in the portall of her chamber, harkening to the talk that
they had at supper that right, wherefore she seemed to be sorry that such a
word (rashely escaped) might become great hinderaunce unto his desire: but a
greater cause of her grief was (as she declared) that his hap was to bestow
his liking so vnworthylye, for she seemed to accuse Dame Elinor, for the most
unconstant woman living: In full proof whereof, she bewrayed unto him, how she
the same Dame Elynor, had long time been yielded to the Minion Secretary, whom I
have before described: in whom though the robe (quod the) no one point of
worthiness, yet shameth she not to use him as her dearest friend, or rather
her holi^st Idol and that this not withstanding Dame Elynor had been also
sundry times woone to choice of change, as she named unto Ferdinando two
Gentlemen whereof the one was named Hercule Donaty. and the other Haniball de
Cosmis. by whom she was during sundry times of their several abode in those
countries, entreated to like courtisie, for these causes the Dame Fraunces
seemed to mislike his choice, and to lament that she doubted in process of
time to see him abused.

The experiment she meant was this, for that she thought Ferdenando (I use
Bartelloes words) a man in every respect very worthy to have the several use
of a more commodious common, she hopped now to see if his enclosure there of
might be defensible against her said Secretary, and such like. These things
and diverse other of great importance, this courteouse Lady Fraunces did
friendly disclose unto him, and further more, did both instruct and advise him
to proceed in his enterprise. Now to make my talk good, and least the Reader
might be drawn in a ielose suppose of this Lady Fraunces, I must let you
understand yt she was a virgin of rare chastity, singular capacity, notable
modesty, and excelent beauty: and though Ferdenando Ieronimij had cast his
affection on the other (being a merry woman) yet was there in their beauties no
great difference: but in all other good gifts a wonderful diversity, as much
as might between constancy and flattring fantasy, between womanly
countenance and girlish garishnes, between hot dissimulation and temperat
fidelity. Now if any man will curiously ask the question why he should choose
the one and leave ye other, over and besides ye common proverb (So mani men so
many minds) thus may be answered we see hy common experience, that the
highest flying faucon, does more commonly pray upon the corn fed crow and the
simple shiftles dove, then on ye mounting kyte: and why? because the one is
overcome with less difficultye then that other. Thus much in defense of this
Lady Fraunces, and to excuse the choice of Ferdenando who thought himself now
no less beholding to good fortune, to have found such a trusty friend, then
bounden to Dame Venus, to have won such a Mistres. And to return unto my
pretense, understand you, that he (being now with these two fair Ladies come
very near the castle) grew in some jealous doubt (as on his own behalf)
whether he were best to break company or not. When his assured Hope, perceiving
the same, began thus reco^fort him: good sir (quod she) if you trusted your
trusty friends, you should not need thus cowardly to stand in dread of your
friendly enemies. Well said in faith (quod Ferdina^do) and I must confess, you
were in my bosom before I wist: but yet I have heard said often, that in Trust
is treason. Well spoken for your self quod his Hope. Ferdinando now remembering
that he had but erewhile taken upon him the name of her Trust, came home per
misericordiam, when his Hope entering the Castle gate, caught hold of his lap,
and half by force led him by the gallery unto his Mistres chamber: whereas after
a little dissembling disdain, he was at last by the good help of his Hope,
right tha^kfully received: and for his Mistress was now ready to dine, he was
therefore for yt time arested there, and a supersedias sent into the great
chamber unto the Lord of the house, who expected his coming out of the park.
The dinner ended, and he thoroughly contented both with welfare and welcome,
they fell into sundry devices of pastime: at last Ferdinando taking into his
hand a Lute that lay on his Mistress bed, did unto the note of the Venetian
galliard apply the Italian dittie written by the worthy Bradamant unto ye noble
Rugier, as Ariosto has it. Rugier qual semper fui, etc. but his Mistres could
not be quiet until she heard him repeat the Tinternell which he used over
night, the which he refused not at that end, whereof his Mistres thinking how
she had showed her self to use any further dissimulation, especially
perceyuyng the toward enclination of her servants Hope, fell to flat and plain
dealing and walked to the window, called her servant apart unto her, of whom
she demanded secretly and in sad earnest, who devised this Tinternell? My
Fathers Sisters brothers son (quod he) His mistres laughing right heartily,
demanded yet a gain, by whom the same was figured: by a niece to an Aunt of
yours, Mistres (quod he). Well then servant quoth she, I swear unto you by
my Fathers Soul, yt my mothers youngest daughter, does love your fathers
eldest sone above any ceature living. Fardenando hereby recomforted began thus
reply. Mistres, though my fathers eldest son be far unworthy of so noble a
match, yet since it pleases her so well to except him, I would thus much say
behind his bark, yt your mothers daughter has done him some wrong: and wherein
servant (quod she) by my troth Mistres (quod he) it is not yet xx. hours,
since with out touch of breast, she gave him such a nip by the heart, as did
altogether bereave him his nights rest with the bruise thereof. Well servant
(quod she) content your self, for your sake, I will speak to her to provide
him a plaster, the which I my self will apply to his hurt: And to the end
it may work the better with him, I will puruay a lodging for him, where
hereafter he may sleep at more quiet.

This said: the rosy hew, disdained her sikely chekes, and she returned to
the company, leaving Ferdinando ravished between hope and dread, as on that
could neither conjecture the meaning of her mystical words, nor assuredly
trust unto the knot of her sliding affectiones. When the Lady Fraunces, coming
to him, demanded, what dream you sir? Yea mary do I fair Lady (quod he). And
what was your dream, sir (quod she?) I dreamt (quod he) that walking in a
pleasant garden garnished with sundry delights, my hap was to epsy hanging
in the air, a hope wherein I might well behold the aspectes and face of the
heavens, and calling to remembrance the day and hour of my natiuety. I did
thereby (according to my small skill in Astronomy) try the conclusion of mine
adventures. And what found you therein (quod Dame Fraunces?) you awaked me out
of my dream (quod he) or else peradventure you should not have known. I
believe you well (quod the lady Fraunces) and laughing at his quick answer
brought him by the hand unto the rest of his company: where he tarried not long
before his gracious Mystresse badde him to farewell, and to keep his hour
there again when he should by her be sommoned. Hereby he passed the rest of
that day in hope awayting the happy time when his Mystresse should send for
him. Supper time came, and passed over, and not long after came the handemayde
of the Lady Elynor into the great chamber desiering him to repair unto their
Mistress, the which he willingly acomplished: and being now entered into her
chamber, he might perceive his Mystresse in her nights attire, preparing her
self toward bed, to whom Fardinando said: Why how now mystresse? I had
thought this night to have seen you dance (at least or at last) amongst us?
By my troth good Servant (quoth she) I adventured so soon unto the great
Chamber yeasternyght, that I find my self somewhat sickelye disposed, and
therefore do strain courtesye (as you see) to go the sooner to my bed this
night: but before I sleep (quoth she) I am to charge you with a matter of
wayght, and taking him a part from the rest, declared that (as that present
night) she would talk with him more at large in the gallery near adjoining
to her chamber. Hereupon Ferdinando discreetely dissimuling his joy, took his
leave and returned into the great chamber, where he had not long continued
before the Lord of the Castle commanded a torch to light him unto his
lodging, whereas he prepared himself and went to bed, commanding his servant
also to go to his rest. And when he thought as well his servant, as the rest of
the household to be safe, he arose again, and taking his night gown, did under
the same convey his naked sword, and so walked to the gallerie, where he found
his good Mistress walkyng in her night gown and attending his coming. The
Moon was now at the full, the skies clear, and the weather temperate, by
reason whereof he might the more plainly had with the greater contentation
behold his long desired joys: and spreading his arms abroad to embrace his
loving Mistress, he said: oh my dear Lady when shall I be able with any
deserte to counteruayle the least part of this your bountiful goodness? The
Dame (whether it were of fear in deed, or that the wiliness of womanhoode
had taught her to cover her conceits with some fine dissimulation) stert back
from the Knight, and shriching (but softly) said unto him. Alas servant what
have I deserved, that you come against me with naked sword as against an open
enemy. Ferdinando perceiving her intent excused himself, declaryng that he
brought the same for their defense, and not to offend her in any wise. The
Lady being therewith somewhat apeased they began with more comfortable gesture
to expel the dread of the said late affright, and sithence to become bolder of
behavior, more familiar in speech, and most kind in accomplishing of common
comfort. But why hold I so long discourse in describyng the joys which (for
lack of like experience) I cannot set out to the full? Well, remedy was there
none, but dame Elynor must return unto her chamber, and he must also convey
himself (as closely as might be) into his chamber, the which was hard to do,
the day being so far sprung, and he having a large base court to pass over
before he could recover his staire foot door. And though he were not much
perceived, yet the Lady Fraunces being no less desirous to see an issue of
these interprises, then he was willing to cover them in secrecy, laid watch,
and even at the entering of his chamber door, perceived the point of his naked
sword glistring under the skyrt of his night gown: whereat she smiled and
said to her self, this gear goes well about. Well Ferdenando having now
recovered his chamber he went to bid, there let him sleep, as his mistress
did on the other side. Although the Lady Fraunces being thoroughly tickled now
in all the veins, could not enjoy such quiet rest, but arising took another
gentle woman of the house with her, and walked into the park to take the fresh
air of the morning. They had not long walked there, but they returned, and
thought Ferdenando Ieronimij had not yet slept sufficiently, for one which had
so far trauayled in the night past, yet they went in to his chamber to raise
him, and coming to his beds side, found him fast on slep. Allas quod that
other gentle woman, it were pitye to awake him: even so it were quod dame
Fraunces, but we will take away some what of his, whereby he may perceive that we
were here, and loking about the chamber, his naked sword presented it self to
the hands of dame Fraunces, who took it with her, and softly shutting his
chamber door again, went down the stayres and recovered her own lodging, in
good order and vnperceyued of any body, saving only that other gentle woman
which accompanied with her. At the last Ferdenando awaked, and apparrelling him
self, walked out also to take the air, and being thoroughly recomforted as well
with remembrance of his joys forepassed, as well with the pleasant hermony
which the Brides made on every side, and the fragrant smell of the redolent
flowers and blossoms which budded on every branch: he did in these
delights compyle these verses following called a mooneshyne banquete.

DAme Cinthia her self (that shines so bright,
And dayneth not to leave her lofty place:
But only then, when Phoebus shows his face.
Which is her brother borne and lendes her light,)
Disdaind not yet to do my Lady right:
To prove that in such heavenly wightes as she,
It fitteth best that right and reason be.
For when she spied my Ladies golden rays,
Into the clouds,
Her head she shroudes,
And shamed to shine where she her beams dissplaies.
Good reason yet, that to my simple skill,
I should the name of Cynthia adore:
By whose high help, I might behold the more,
My Ladies lovely looks at mine own will,
With deep content, to gare, and gaze my fill:
Of courtesy and not of darcke disdain,
Dame Cythia disclosde my Lady plain.
She did but lend her light (as for a lite)
With friendely grace,
To show her face,
That else would show and shine in her dispight.
Dan Phoebus he with many a lowering look,
Had her beheld in yore in angry wise:
And when he could none other mean devise
To stain her name, this deep deceit he took,
To be the bait that best might hide his hook:
Into her eyes his parching beams he cast,
To skorche their skins, that Gazed on her full fast:
Whereby when many a man was sun burnt so
They thought my Queen,
The son had been.
with skalding flames, which wrought them all that woe,
And that when many a look had looked so long,
As that their eyes were dim and dazaled both:
Some fainting hearts that were both leude and loath
To look again from whence that error sprung,
Began close their eye for fear of farther wrong:
And some again once drawn into the maze,
Began leudly blame the beams of beauties blaze:
But I with deep foresight did soon epsy,
How phoebus meant,
By false intent,
To slander so her name with cruelty.
wherefore at better leisure thought I best,
To try the treason of his treachery:
And to exalt my Ladies dignity
when Phoebus fled and drew him down to rest.
Amid the waves that walter in the west,
J began behold this lovely Ladies face.
whereon dame nature spent her gifts of grace:
And found therein no parching heat at all,
But such bright hew,
As might renew,
An Angels joys in reign celestial.
The courteouse Moon that wished to do me good,
Did shine to show my dame more perfectly,
But when she saw her passing iollitie,
The Moon for shame, did blush as red as blood,
And shrounke a side and kept her horns in hoode:
So that now when Dame Cynthia was gone,
J might enjoy my Ladies lokes alone,
Yet honored still the Moon with true intent?
Who taught us skill,
To work our will,
And gave us place, till all the night was spent.
F. I.

ANd now to return to my tale, by that time, that he returned out of the
park, it was dinner time, and at dynner they all met. I mean both dame
Elynor, dame Fraunces and Ferdenando. I leave to discribe that the Lady
Fraunces was gorgiously attyered, and set forth with very brave apparel, and
Madame Elynor only in her night gown gyrt to her, with a coyfe trymmed Alla
Piedmonteze, on the which she ware a little cape crossed over the crow with
two bands of yellowe Sarcenet or Cipresse, in the midst whereof she had
placed (of her own hand writing) in paper this word, Contented. This attire
pleased her then to use, and could not have displeased Mistress Fraunces, had
she not ben more privy to the cause, then to the thing it self: at least the
Lord of the Castle, of ignnoraunce, and dame Fraunces, of great temporaunce,
let it pass with out offense. At dinner, because the on was pleased with all
former reconinges, and the other party privy to the account, there passed no
word of taunt or grudged, but omnia been. After dynner dame Elinor being no
less desirous to have Ferdinandos compani, then dame Frances was to take him
in some pretty trippe, they began to question how they might best pass the day,
the Lady Elinor seemed desirous to keep her chamber, but Mistress Fraunces
(for another purpose) seemed desirous to ride abroad, thereby to take the open
air, they greed to ride a mile or twain for solace, and requested Ferdinando
to accompany them, the which willingly granuted. Each one parted from other, to
prepare them selves and now began the sport, for when he was booted, his
horses sadled, and he ready to ride, he began miss his Rapier, whereat al
astonished he began to blame his man, but blame whom he would, found it could not
be. At last the Ladies going toward the horseback called for him in the base
Court, and demanded if he were ready: to whom he answered. Madame, I am
more than ready, and yet not so ready as I would be, and immediately taking him
self in trip, he thought best to utter no more of his conceit, but in have
more than good speed mounted his horse, and coming toward ye dames presented
himself, turning, bounding, and taking up his courser to the uttermost of his
power in bravery: after suffering his horse to breath him self, he began also
allay his own choler, and to the dames he said. Fair Ladies I am ready when
it pleases you to ride where so you command. How ready so ever you be
servant, quod dame Elynor, it seems your horse is readier at your command
then at ours. If he be at my command Mistress (quod he) he shall be at
yours Gramercye good servant (quod she) but my meaning is, that I fear he
be to stirring for our company. If he prove so mistres (quod he) I have here a
soberer palfray to serve you on. The Dames being mounted they rode forthwardes
by the space of a mile or very near, and Ferdinando (whether it were of his
horses courage or his own choler came not so near them as they wished) at
last the Lady Fraunces said unto him, master Ieronomy you said that you had
a sober horse, which if it be so, we would be glad of your company but I
believe by your countenance your horse and you are agreed. Ferdinando alighting
called his servant, changed horses with, him and over taking the Dames, said
to Mistres Fraunces: And why do you think fair Lady that my horse and I are
agreed? Because by your countenance (quod she) it seems your patience is
stirred. In good faith, quod he, you have gessed aright, but not with any of
you. The^ we care the less servant, quod Dame Elynor. By my troth Mistress,
quod he (looking well about him that none might hear but they two) it is with
my servant, who has lost my sword out of my chamber. Dame Elinor little
remembering the occasion, replied it is no matter servant, quod she, you shall
hear of it again, I warrant you, and presently we ride in Gods peace, and I
trust shall have no need of it: yet Mistres quod he, a weapon serves both
uses, as well to defend, as to offend. Now my by troth, quod Dame Fraunces, I
have now my dream, for I dreamt this night that I was in a pleasant meadow
alone, where I met with a tall Gentleman, apparrelled in a night gown of
silk, all embroadered about with a guard of naked swords, and when he came
toward me I seemed to be afraid of him, but he recomforted me saying, be not
afraid fair Lady, for I use this garment only for mine own defense: and in
this sort went that warrelike God Mars, what time he taught Dame Venus to make
Vulcan a hammer of the new fashion. Notwithstanding these comfortable words,
the fright of the dream awaked me, and since unto this hour I have not
slept at al. And what time of the night dreamt you this quod Fardinando? In the
gray morning about dawning of the day, but why ask you quod Dame Frances?
Ferdenando with a great sigh answered, because that dreams are to be marked
more at some hour of the night, then at some other? why are you so cunning at
the interpretation of dreams servant (quod the Lady Elinor?) not very
conning Mistres quod he, but guess like a young scholar. The Dames continued
in these and like pleasant talks: but Ieronomij could not be merry, as on
that esteemed the preservation of his mistres honor, no lose then the obteyning
of his own delights, and yet to avoid further suspicion, he repressed his
passions, as much as he could. The Lady Elynor (more careless then
consideratiue of her own case) pricking forwards said softly to him, I had
thought you had received small cause servant to be thus dumpish, when I would
be merry. Alas dear mistress quod he, it is altogether for your sake, that I
am pensife: Dame Fraunces of courtesy with drew her self and gave them
leave, when as Ferdina^do declared unto his Mistres, that his sword was taken
out of his chamber, and that he dreaded much by the words of the Lady
Fraunces, that she had some understanding of the matter. Dame Elynor now calling
to remembrance what had passed the same night, at the first was abashed, but
immediately (for these women be redily witted) chered her servant, and willed
him to commit unto her the saluing of that sore. Thus they passed the rest of
the way in pleasant talk with dame Fraunces, and so returned toward the
Castle where Ieronimy suffered the two dames to go together, and he alone unto
his chamber to bewail his own misgouernment. But dame Elynor (whether it were
according to old custom, or by wilye pollycye) found mean that night, that
the sword was conveyed out of Mistres Fraunces chamber, and brought unto hirs:
and after redeliuerye of it unto her servant, she warned him to be more wary
from that time forthwardes: afterward when he grew more bold and better
aquaynted with his Mistress disposition, he adventured one Frydaye in the
morning to go unto her Chamber, and thereupon wrote as follows: which he
termed a Frydayes Breakefast.

THat self same day, and of that day that hour,
When she does reign, that mocked Vulcan the smith,
And thought it meet to harbor in her bower,
Some gallant gest for her to dally with,
That blessed hour, that blist and happy day,
I thought it meet, with hasty steps to go:
Unto the lodge, wherein my Lady lay,
To laugh for joy, or else to weep for woe.
And lo, my Lady of her wonted grace,
First lent her lips to me (as for a kiss)
And after that her body to embrace,
Wherein dame nature wrought nothing amiss.
What followed next, guess you that know the trade,
For in this sort, myr Fydaies feast I made.
F. I.

MAny days passed these two lovers with great delight, their affairs being no
less politiquely governed, then happilye atchiued. And surely it should seem
in sad earnest, that he did not only love her, but was furthermore so
ravished in ecstasies with continual remembrance of his delights, that he made
an Idol of her in his inward conceyte. So seems it by this challenge to
beauty, which be wrote in her praise and upon her name.

Beauty shut up thy shop, and trusse up all thy trash,
My Nell has stolen thy finest stuff, and left thee in the lash got
Thy market now is marde, thy gains are gone god wot,
Thou have no ware, that may compare, with this that J have
As for thy painted pale, and wrinckles surfted up:
Are dear enough, for such as lust to drink of every cup:
Thy bodies bolstred out, with bumbact and with bags,
Thy rowles, thy ruffes, thy, caules, thy coifes, thy Ierkins and thy Jagges.
Thy curling, and thy cost, thy friesling and thy fare,
To court to court with all those tois, and there set forth such ware
Before their hungry eyes, that gaze on every gest,
And choose the cheapest chaffaire still, to please their fancy best.
But I whose steadfast eyes, could never cast a glaunce,
With wa^dring look, amid the prese, to take my choice by chance
Have won by due desert, a piece that has no peer,
And left the rest as refuse all, to serve the market there:
There let him choose that list, there catch the best who can:
A painted blazing bait may serve, to choke a gazing man.
But I have slipped thy flower, that freshest is of hew:
I have thy corn, go sell thy chafe, I list to seek no new,
The windows of mine eyes, are Glazed with such delight,
As each new face seems full of faults, that blaseth in my sight:
And not without just cause, I can compare her so,
Lo here my glove I challenge him, that can, or dare say no.
Let Theseus come with clubbe, or Paris brag with brand,
To prove how fair their Hellen was, that skourg'd the Grecia^ land:
Let mighty Mars himself, come armed to the field:
And vaunt dame Venus to defend, with helmet, spear, and shield.
This hand that had good hap, my Hellen to embrace,
Shall have like luck to still her foes, and dau^t them with disgrace.
And cause them to confess by verdict and by oath,
How far her lovely looks do steine, the beauties of them both.
And that my Hellen is more fair then Paris wife,
And does deserve more famous praise, then Venus for her life.
Which if I not perform, my life then let me leese,
Or else be bound in chains of change, to beg for beuties feese.
F. I.

BY this challenge I guess, that either he was than in an ecstasy, or else,
sure I am now in a lunacie, for it is a proud challenge made to Beauty her
self, and all her companions: and imagining that Beauty having a shop where
she uttered her wares of all sundry sorts, his Lady had stolen the fynest
away, leaving none hehind her, but paynting, bolstring, forcing and such like,
the which in his rage he judges good enough to serve the Court: and
thereupon grew a great quarrel. When these verses were by the negligence of
his Mistress dispersed into sundry hands, and so at last to the reading of a
Courtier. Well Ferdinando had his desire, if his Mistress lyked them, but as
Bartello writes, she grew in jealousy, that the same were not written by
her, because her name was Elynor and not Hellen. And about this point have been
diverse and sundry opinions among the Venetians, for this and diverse other of
his most notable Poems, have come to view of the world. And some have
attributed this praise unto a Hellen, who deserved not so well as this dame
Elynor should seem to deserve, and yet never a barrel of good herring
between them both: But that other Hellen, because she was says Bartello, of
so base conditions, as may deserve no manner commendation in any honest
judgment, therefore he thinks that he would never bestow verse of so mean a
subject. And yet some of his acquaintance knowing also that he was sometimes
acquainted with Hellen, have stoade in argument, that it was written by Hellen,
and not by Elynor. Well mine aucthor affirms that it was written by this Dame
Elynor, and that unto her he thus alleged, that he took it all for one name,
or at least he never read of any Elynor such matter as might sound worthy like
commendation, for beauty. And in deed considering all circumstaunces of
histories, and comparing also the time that such reports do spread of his
acquaintance with Hellen, it cannot be written less then six or seven years
before he knew Hellen: marrye peradventure if there were any acquaintance
between him and that Hellen afterward, he might adapt it to her name, and so
make it serve boath their turns, as elder lovers have done before, and still
do, and will do world without end. Well by whom he wrote it I know not, and
to return to the purpose, he sought more certainelye to please his Mistress
Elynor with this Sonet written in her praise as follows.

THE stately Dames of Rome, their Pearls did wear.
About their necks to beautify their name:
But she (whom I do serve) her pearls does bear,
Close in her mouth, and smiling show, the same.
No wonder then, though every word she speaks,
A Jewel seem in judgment of the wise,
Since that her sugared tongue the passage breaks,
Between two rocks, bedeckt with pearls of price.
Her hair of gold, her front of Juory,
(A bloody heart within so white a breast)
Her teeth of Pearl lips Rubie, crystal eye,
Needs must J honor her above the rest:
Since she is fourmed of none other moulde,
But Rubie, Crystal, Iuory, Pearl, and Gold.
Ferdinando Ieronimy.

OF this Sonet, were it not a little to much praise (as the Italians do most
commonly offend in the superlatiue) I could no more commend it: but I hope the
party to whom it was dedicated: had rather it were much more, than any thing
less. Well, thus these two Lovers passed many days in exceeding contentation,
and more than speakable pleasures, in which time Ferdinando did compile very
many verses according to sundry occasions proffred, and they were for the most
part fauced with a taste of glory, as you know that in such cases a lover
being charged with inexprimable joys, and therewith enjoined both by duty and
discrecion to keep the same covert, can by no means devise a greater
consolation, than to commit it into some cyphred words, and figured speeches,
in verse, whereby he feels his heart half (or more than half) eased of
swelling. For as sighs are some present ease to the pensive mind, even so we
find by experience, that such secreete enteredmoning of joys does increase
delight. I would not have you conster my words to this effect, that I think a
man cannot sufficientlye rejoice in the luckie lottes of love, unless he
empart the same to others: God forbid that ever I should enter into such an
herisie, for I have always been of this opinion, that as to be fortunate in
love, is one of the most inward contentations to man's mind of all earthly
joys: even so if he do but once bewray ye same to any living creature,
immediately either dread of discovering does bruise his breast with an
intolerable burden, or else he leeseth the principal virtue which gave effect
to his gladness, not unlike to a Poticares pot, which being filled with sweet
oyntmentes or perfumes, does retain in it self some sent of the same, and
being powered out does return to the former state, hard, harsh, and of small
savor: So the mind being fraught with delights, as long as it can keep them
secretly enclosed, may continually feed upon the pleasant record thereof, as
the well wylling and ready horse byteth on the bridle, but having once
disclosed them to any other, straight way we loose the hidden treasure of the
same, and are oppressed with sundry doubtful opinions and dreadful
conceiptes. And yet for a man to record unto him self in the inward
contemplation of his mind, the often remembrance of his late received joys,
does as it were ease the heart of burden, and ad unto the mind a fresh supply
of delight, yea, and in vearse principally (as I conceive) a man may best
contriue his way of comfort in him self. Therefore as I have said Ferdinando
swimming now in delights did nothing but writ such verse as might acumilat
his joys, to the extremity of pleasure, the which for that purpose he kept
from sight of ye world, as one more desirous to seem obscure and defective,
than overmuch to glory in his adventures, especially for yt in the end his hap
was as heavy, as hitherto he had been fortunate. And here I will surcease to
rehearse any more of his verses until I have expressed how yt his joys being
exalted to the highest degree began to bend toward declinatio^. For now the
unhappy Secretary whom I have before remembered, was returned from Florence, on
whom Fardinando had no sooner cast his eyes, but immediately he fell into a great
passion of mind, which might be compared unto a fever. This fruit grew of the
good instructions yt his Hope had planted in his mind, whereby I might take
just occasion to forwarn every lover, how they suffer this venomous serpent
jealousy to creep into their conceits: for surely, of al other diseases in
love, I suppose that to be incurable, and would hold longer discourse therein,
were it not yt both this tale and the verses of Ferdinando him self hereafter
to be recited, shall be sufficient to speak for me in this behalf. The lover (as
I say upon the sudden) was drouen into such a malladie, as no meat might
nourishe his body, no delights please his mind, no remembrance of joys
forepassed content him, nor any hope of the like to come might recomfort him:
hereat (some unto whom I have imparted this tale) have taken occasion to
disco^mend his fainting heart, yet surely the cause inwardly and deeply
considered, I cannot so lightly condemn him: for an old saying is, that
every man can give council better than follow it: and needs must the
conflicts of his thoughts be strange: between the remembrance of his
forepassed pleasure, and the present sight of this monster, whom before (for
lack of like instruction) he had not so throughlye marked and beheld. Well,
such was the grief unto him, that he became sickly and kept his chamber. The
Ladies having received the news thereof, began al at once lament his misfortune,
and of common consent agreed to visit him: they marched thither in good
equipage, I warant you, and found Ferdinando lying upon his bed languishing,
who^ they all saluted generally, and sought to recomfort: but especially his
Mistress, having in her hand a braunce of wyllow, wherewith she defended her
from the whot air, began thus say unto him: Servant (quod she) for that I
suppose your mallady to proceed of none other cause but only slothfulness, I
have brought this preaty rod to beat you a little: nothing doubting, but when
you feel the smart of a twig or twain, you will like a tractable young
scholar, pluck up your quickened spirits, and cast this drowsinesse apart.
Ferdinando with a great sigh answered: Alas good Mistres (quod he) if any like
chastisement might quicke^ me, how much more might the presence of all you
lovely Dames recomfort my dulled mind? whom to behold, were sufficient to
revive an eye now dazzled with the dread of death: and that not only for the
heavenly aspects which you represent, but also much the more for your
exceeding courtesy, in that you have deigned to visit me so unworthy a
servant. But good Mistress (quod he) as it were shame for me to confess that
ever my heart could yield for fear, so I assure you that my mind cannot be
content to induce infirmity by sluggishe conceyt: But in truth Mistress I am
sick (quod he,) and therewithal the trembling of his heart had sent up such
throbbing into his throat, as that his voice (now deprived of breath)
commanded the tongue to be still. When Dame Elynor for compassion distilled into
tears, and drew toward the window, leaving the other Gentlewomen about his
bed, who being no less sorye for his grief, yet for that they were none of
them so touched in their secret thoughts, they had bolder sprits and freeer
speech to recomfort him, amongst the rest the Lady Fraunces, (who in deed
loved him deeply, and could best conjecture the cause of his conceits) said
unto him: Good Trust (quod she) if any help of Physic may cure your malady,
I would not have you hurt your self with these doubts which you seem to
retain: If choice of Diet may help, behold us here (your cooks) ready to
minister all things needful: if company may drive away your anoye, we mean
not to leave you solitary, if grief of mind be cause of your infirmity, we
all here will offer our deuoyre to turn it into joy: if mishap have given you
cause to fear or dread any thing, remember Hope, which never fails to
recomfort an afflicted mind. And good Trust (quod she) (distreining his hand
right heartily) let this simple proof of our poor good wills be so excepted
of you, as that it may work thereby the effect of our desires. Ferdinando (as
on in a trance) had marked very little of her curteouse talk, and yet gave her
thanks, and so held his peace whereat the Ladies (being all amazed) there
became a silence in the chamber on all sides. Dame Elynor fearing thereby that
she might the more easily be espied, and having now dried up her tears,
returned to her servant, recomforting him by all possible means of common
courtesy, promising that since in her sickness he had not only staunched her
bleding, but also by his gentle company and sundry devices of honest pastime,
had driven a way the pensiuenes of her mind, she thought her self bound with
like willingness to do her best in any thing that might restore his health, and
taking him by the hand said further. Good servant, if thou bear in deed any
true affection to thy poor Mistres, start upon thy feet again, and let her
enjoy thine accustomed service to her comfort, for sure (quod she) I will
never leave to visit this chamber once in a day, until I may have thee down
with me, Ferdinando hearing the hearty words of his Mistress, and perceiuyng
the earnest manner of her pronunciation, began to receive unspeakable comfort
in the same, and said: Mistress, your exceedyng courtesy were able to revive a
man half dead, and to me it is both great comfort, and it does also glad my
remembrance, with a continual smart of mine own unworthiness: but as I would
desire no longer life, than til I might be able to deserve some part of your
bou^ty, so I will endeavor my self to live, were it but only unto ye end, yt I
might merit some part of your favor with acceptable service, and requight
some deal the courtesy of all these other fair Ladies, who have so far
(above my deserts) deigned to do me good. Thus said, the Ladies tarried not
long before they were called to Euensong, when his Mistres taking his hand,
kissed it saying: Farewell good servant, and I pray thee suffer not the
malice of thy sickness to overcome the gentleness of thy good heart.
Fardinando ravished with joy, suffered them all to depart, and was not able to
pronounce one word. After their departure, he began cast in his mind the
exceeding courtesy used toward him by them all, but above all other the
bounty of his Mystresse: and therwithall took a sound and firm opinion, that
it was not possible for her to cou^terfeite so deeply (as in deed I believe
that she then did not) whereby he suddenly felt his heart greatly eased, and
began in himself thus to reason. Was ever man of so wretched a heart? I am the
most bounden to love (quod he) of all them that ever possessed his service, I
enjoy one the fairest that ever was found, and I find her the kindest that
ever was heard of: yet in mine own wicked heart, I could vilanously conceive
that of her, which being compared with the rest of her virtues, is not possible
to harbor in so noble a mind. Herby I have brought my self without cause into
this feebleness: and good reason that for so high an offense, I should be
punished with great infirmity: what shall I then do? yield to the same? no,
but according to my late protestation, I will recomfort this languishing mind
of mine, to the end I may live but only to do penance for this so notable a
crime so rashly committed: and thus saying, he start from his bed, and began to
walk toward the window: but the venomous serpent which (as before I
rehearsed) had stong him, could not be content that these medicines applied by
the mouth of his gentle Mistress, should so soon restorte him to guerison.
And although in deed they were such Nythrydate to him as that they had now
expelled the rancour of the poison yet that ougly hellishe monster had left
behind her in the most secret of his bosom, (even between the mind and the
man) one of her familiers named suspect, which began work in the weak spirits
of Ferdinando efectes of no lose peril than before he had received, his head
swelling with these troublsome toys, and his heart swimming in the tempests of
tossing fantasy: he felt his legs so feeble, that he was constrained to lie
down on his bed again, and repeating in his own remembrance every word that
his mistres had spoken unto him, he began to dread, that she had brought the
willow branch to beat him with, in token that he was of her forsaken: for so
lovers do most commonly expound the willow garlande, and this to think, did
cut his heart in twain. A wonderful change: and here a little to stay you, I
will discribe as I find it in Bartello the beginning, the fall, the return,
and the being of this hellish bird, who in deed may well be counted a very
lymbe of the Diuill. Many years since, one of the most dreadful dasterdes in
the world, and one of them that first deuissed to wear his beard at length,
lest the Barbor might do him a good turn sooner then he looked for it, and yet
not so soon as he deserved, had builded for his security a pile on the highest
and most inaccessible mount of all his Territores: the which being fortyfied
with strong walls, and enuyroned with deep ditches, had no place of entire,
but one only door so straight and narrow, as might by any possibility receive
the body of one living man: from which he asended up a ladder, and so creeping
through a marvelous strait hole, attained to his lodging, yt which was so dark
and obscure, as scarcely either sun or air could enter into it: thus he
devised to lodge in safety, and for the more suertye gane trust none other
letting down this ladder but only his wife: and at the foot thereof kept
always by day light, a fierce mastife close enkeneled which never saw nor
heard the face or voice of any other creature but only of them two: him by
night he trusted with the scout of this pretty passage, having nevertheless
between him and this dog, a double door with treble locks, quadrible
bars, and before all a port coulez of Iron: neither yet could he be so
hardye as to sleep, until he had caused a guard of servants (whom he kept
abroad for that purpose) to search all the corners adjoining to all his
fortress, and that between fearful sweat and chyuering cold, with one eye
opened and the other closed, he stole sometimes a broken sleep, divided with
many terrible dreams. In this sort the wretch lived all to long, until at
last his Wife being not able any longer to supporte this hellishe life, grew
so hardye, as with his own knife to dispatche his carkas out of this earthlye
purgatory: the which being done, his soul (and good reason) was quickly
conveyed by Carone unto hell: there Radamanthus Judge of that benche,
commanded him quicklye to be thrust into a boiling poole: and being therein
plonged very often, he never shryked or cried, I skalde, as his other
companions there cried, but seemed so lightlye to esteem it, that the Judge
thought meet to condemn him unto the most terrible place, where are such
torments, as neither pen can write, tongue express, or thought conceive:
but the myser (even there) seemed to smyle and to make small account of his
punishment. Radamanthus hereof informed, sent for him, and demanded the cause
why he made so light of his duraunce? he answered that whiles he lived on
earth, he was so continually afflicted and oppressed with suspicion, as that
now (only to think that he was out of those meditations) was sufficient armor
to defend him from all other torments. Radamanthus astonished hereat, began call
together the Senators of that kingdom, and propounded this question, how and
by what punnishment they might devise to touch him according to his deserts?
and hereupon fell great disputation: at last being considered, that he had
already him plonged in the most unspeakable torments, and thereat little or
nothing had changed countenance, there withal yt no soul was sent unto the^ to
be relieved of his smart, but rather to be punished for his former delights: it
was concluded by ye general counsel, yt he should be eftsoon sent into ye
world and restored to the same body wherein he first had his resiance, so to
remain for perpetuity, and never to depart nor to perish. Thus this body and
soul being once again united, and now eftsoon with the same pestilence
infected, he became of a suspicious man, Suspicion it self: and now the wretch
remembering the treason of his wife, who had so willingly dispatched him once
before, began utterly abhor her, and fled her company, searching in all
countries some place of better assurance, and when he had in vain trod over
ye most part of the earth, he embarked himself to find some unknown Island,
wherein he might frame some new habitation: and finding none so commodious as
he desired, he fortuned (^^yling aloane by the shore) to espy arock, more
than six hundredth Cubits high, which hong so suspiciously over the seas, as
though it would threate^ to fall at every little blast: this did Suspicion
Imagin^ to be a fit foundation whereon he might build his secon^ Bower: he
forsook his boat, and travailed by land to epsy what entrye or access
might be made unto ye same, and found from land no manner of entry or
access, unless it were that some curteouse Byrd of the air would be
Ambassador, or convey some Engines, as whilom the Eagle did carry Ganymedes
into heaven. He then returned to Seas, and approaching near to this rock,
found a small stream of fresh water issuing out of the same into the Seas:
the which, although it were so little and so straight, as might uneaths receive
a boat of bygnesse to carry one living creature at once, yet in his conceypt
he thought it more large and spacious than that broad way called of our
forefathers Via appia, or than that other named Elaminia, he abandoned his
bark, and putting of his clothes adventured (for he was now asured not to
drown) to wade and swim against the stream of this unknown brook, the which
(a wondrous thing to tell, and skarcelye to be believed) came down from the
very top and height of this rock: and by the way he found six strayghts and
dangerous places, where the water seemed to stay his course, passing under six
straight and low bridges, and hard by every of those places, a pyle raised up
in manner of a Bulworke, the which were hollow, in such sort as lodginges and
other places necessary might in them commodiously be devised, by such one as
could endure the hellishnes of the place. Passing by these he attained with
much pain unto the top of the Rock, the which he found hollowed as the
rest, and far more fite for his security, than otherwise apt for any
commodity. There began Suspicion, determine to nestle himself, and having now
placed six chosen porters, to wit, (Dread, Mistrust, Wrath, Desperation,
Frenzy, and Fury:) at these six straung Bulworkes, he lodged himself in that
vii. al alone, for he trusted no company, but ever mistrusting that his wife
should eftsonnes find him out therein, he shricketh comtynually like to a
shrich owl to keep the watch wakyng, never content to sleep by day nor by
night. But to be sure that he should not over sleep him self, gane stuff his
couch with Porpentines quilles, to the end that when heavy sleep overcame him,
and he thereby should be constrained to charge his pallad with more heavy
burden, those plumes might then prick through and so awake him. His garments
were steel upon iron, and that iron upon Iron, and Iron again, and the more
he was armed, the less he trusted to be out of danger. He chopped and changed
continually now this, now that, now keys, now locks, ditches new skowred,
and walls newlye fortified, and thus always discontented lives this wretched
helhound Suspicion, in this hellish dungion of habitation: from whence he never
remoueth his foot, but only in the dead and silent nights, when he may be
assured that all creatures (but him self) are whelmed in sound sleep. And
then with stealing steps he stalketh about the earth, enfecting, tormenting,
and vexing all kinds of people with some part of his afflictions: but
especially such as either do sit in chair of greatest dignity and
estimation, or else such as have atchiued some dear and rare emprise. Those
above al others he continually gauleth with fresh wounds of dread, least they
might lose and forgo the rooms whereunto with such long travail and good
happes they had attained, and by this means percase he had crept into the
bosom of Ferdinando, who (as is before declared) did erst swim in the
deepest seas of earthly delights. Now then I must think it high time to
return unto him, who (being now through feebleness eftsoon cast down upon
his bed) began cast in his inward meditations all things passed, and as one
thoroughly puffed up and filled with one peeuishe conceipte, could think upon
nothing else, and yet accusing his own guilty conscience to be infected with
ielosie, did compile this as follows.

WHat state to man, so sweet and pleasant wear,
As to be tied, in linkes of worthy love?
What life so blist and happy might appear,
As for to serve Cupid that God above?
If that our minds were not sometimes infect,
With dread, with fear, with care, with cold suspect:
With deep despair, with furious frenzy,
Handmaides to her, whom we call ielosie.
For every other sop of sower chance,
Which lovers taste amid their sweet delight:
Increases joy, and does their love advance,
In pleasures place, to have more perfect plight.
The thirsty mouth thinks water has good taste,
The hungry jaws, are pleased, with each repaste:
Who has not proved what dearth by wars does grow,
Cannot of peace the pleasant plenties know.
And though with eye, we see not every joy,
Yet may the mind, full well support the same,
And absent life long led in great annoye.
(When presence comes) does turn from grief to game,
To serve without reward is thought great pain,
But if despair do not therewith remain,
It may be borne for right rewards at last,
Follow true service, though they come not fast.
Disdaines, repulses, finally each ill,
Each smart, each pain, of love each bitter taste,
To think on them began frame the lovers will,
To like each joy, the more that comes at last:
But this infernal plague if once it tutch,
Or venom once the lovers mind with grutch,
All festes and joys that afterward befall,
The lover comptes them light or naught at all.
This is that sore, this is that poisoned wound,
The which to heal, nor salve, nor ointmentes serve,
Nor charm of words, nor Image can be found,
Nor obseruaunce of stars can it preserve,
Nor all the art of Magic can prevail,
Which Zoroactes found for our avail,
Oh cruel plague, above all sorrows smart,
With desperate death thou sleast the lovers heart.
And me even now, thy gall has so enfect,
As all the joys which ever lover found,
And all good haps, that ever Troylus sect,
Achieved yet above the luckles ground:
Can never sweeten once my mouth with mell,
Nor bring my thoughts, again in rest to dwell.
Of thy mad moodes, and of naught else J think,
Jn such like seas, fair Bradamant did sincke
Ferdinando. Ieronimy.

THus Ferdinando continued on his bed, until his bountiful Mistress with
the company of the other courteous dames returned after supper to his chamber.
At their first entry: Why how now servant (quod dame Elinor) we hoped to
have found you one foot? Mistress quod he, I have assayed my feet since
your departure, but I find them yet unable too suport my heavy body, and
therefore am constrained as you see, to acquaint my self with these pillowes.
Servant said she I am right sorry thereof, but since it is of necessity to
bear sickness, I will employ my endeuoyre to allay some part of your pains,
and to refreshe your weary limbs with some comfortable matter: and
therewithal calling her hand maid, delivered unto her a bounch of pretty
littell keys, and whispering in her ear, dispatched her toward her chamber:
The maid tarried not long, but returned with a little Casket, the which her
mistress took, opened and drew out of the same much fine linen, amongst the
which she took a pillowebere very fine and sweet, which although it were of it
self as sweet as might be (being of long time kept in that odoriferous chest)
yet did she with damask water and that of the best that might be (I warrant
you) al to sprinkle it with her own hands, which in my conceit might much
amend the matter. Then calling for a fresh pillowe, sent her maid to air the
same and at her return put on this, thus perfumed pillowebeere. In mean time
also she had with her own hands attyred her servant head in a fair wrought
kerchife taken out of the same Casket: then laid him down upon this fresh
and pleasant place, and pretelye as it were in sport, bedewed his temples
with sweet water which she had ready in a casting bottle of Gold, kissing
his cheek and saying: Good servant be whoale, for I might not long endure
thus to attend thee, and yet the love that I bear toward thee, cannot be
content to see thee languishe. Mistress said Ferdinando (and that with a
trembling voice) assure your self, that if there remain in me any spark of
life or possibillity of recovery, then may this excellent bounty of yours be
sufficient to revive me without any further travail or pain unto your person:
for whom I am highlye to blame, in that I do not spare to put you unto this
trouble, and better it were that such a wretch as I had died unknown, than yt
by your exceeding courtesy, you should fall into any malladye, either by
resorting unto me, or by these your pains taken about me. Servant (quod she)
all pleasures seem painful to to them that take no delight therein, and
likewise all toil seems pleasant to such as set their felicity in the
same: but for me be you sure, I do it with so good a will that I can take no
hurt thereby, unless I shall perceive that it be rejected or neglected, as
unprofitable or uncomfortable unto you. To me Mistress quod Fardinando, it is
such pleasure, as neither my feeble tongue can express, nor my troubled mind
conceive. Why? are you troubled in mind, the^ servant quod dame Elynor?
Ferdinando now blushing answered, but even as al sick men be Mistress.
Herewith they stayed their talk a while, and the first that brake silence was
the Lady Fraunces: who said, and to drive away ye troubles of your mind good
Trust, I would be glad if we could devise some pastime amongst us to keep you
company: for I remember that with such devises you did greatly recomforte this
fair Lady when she languished in like sort. She languished in deed gentle
Hope quod he, but God forbide that she had languished in like sort. Every body
thinks their own grief greatest quoth dame Elynor, but in deed whether my
grief were the more or the less, I am right sorye that yours is such as it
is: And to assay whither our passions proceeded of like cause or not, I would we
could (according to this Ladies saying) devise some like pastimes to try if
your malladie would be cured with like medicines. A gentle woman of the company
whom I have not hitherto named, began thus propound. We have accustomed (quod
she) heretofore in most of our games to choose a King or Queen, and he or she
during their government, have charged every of us, either with commandments
or questions, as best seemed to their majesty. Wherein (to speak mine opinion)
we have given over larg a skope, neither seems it reasonable yt on should have
ye power to discover ye thoughts, or at least to bridle the affects of al ye
rest. And though in deed in questioning (which does of ye twain more nerely
touch the mind) every on is at free liberty to answer what they list: yet often
have I heard a question demanded in such sort, and upon such sudden, yt it
has been hardly answered without moving matter of contencion. And in
commaundes also, some times it happens one to be commanded unto such
service, as either they are unfit to accomplish (and then the parties weakness
is thereby detected) or else to do something that they would not, whereof ensues
more grutch than game. Wherefore in mine opinion, we shall do well to choose by
lot amongst us a governor, who (for that it shall be sufficient pre-eminence to
use the chair of majesty,) shall be bound to give sentence upon al such
arguments and questions as we shall orderly propound unto them: and from him or
her (as from an oracle (we will receive answer, and decyding of our
lytigious causes. This dame had stuff in her, an old courtier, and a wily
wenche, named Pergo. Well this proportion of Pergo pleased them well, and by lot
it happened that Ferdinando must be moderator of these matters, and colector of
these causes. The which being so constituted, the Lady Elynor said unto this
dame Pergo. You have devised this pastime (quod she) and because we think you
to be most expert in the handling thereof, do you propound the first question,
and we shall be both the more ready and able to follow your example ye Lady Pergo
refused not, but began on this wise. Noble governor (quod she) amongst the
adventures that have befallen me, I remember especially this one, that in
youth it was my chance to be beloved of a very courtlike young Gentleman, who
abode near the place wherein my parents had their resiaunce. This gentleman
(whether it were for beauty, or for any other respect that he saw in me, I
know not) but he was enamored of me, and that with an exceeding vehement
passion, and of such force were his effects, that notwithstanding many
repulses which he had received at my hands, he seemed daily to grow in the
renewing of his desires. I on the other side, although I could by no means
mislike of him by any good reason (considering that he was of birth no way
inferior unto me, of possessions not to be disdamed, of parson right
comelye, of behavior Courtly, of manners modest, of mind lyberall, and of
virtuous disposition) yet such was the gaitye of my mind, as that I could
not be content to lend him over large thonges of my love: but always
daungerouslye behaved my self toward him, and in such sort, as he could
neither take comfort of mine aunsweres, nor yet once find him self requited
with one good look for all his travail. This notwithstanding, the worthy
Knight continewed his suit with no less vehement affection than erst he had
begone it, even by the space of seven years, At the last, whether discomfited
by my dealings, or tried by long travail, or that he hade parcase light upon
the lake that is in the forest of Ardena, and so in haste and all thristie,
had drunk some drops of disdain, whereby his hot flames were quenched, or
that he had undertaken to serve no longer, but his just term of
apprenticehode, or that the teeth of time had gnawen and tired his dulled
spirits in such sort, as that all be nummed he was constrained to use some
other artificyal balm for the quickening of his senses, or by what cause moved
I know not he did not only leave his long continued suit, but (as I have
since perceived) grew to hate me more deadly than before I had disdained him.
At the first beginning of his retire I perceived not his hatred, but imagened
that being over wearied, he had withdrawn himself for a time. And considering
his worthiness, there withal his constancy of long time proved, I though that
I could not in the whole world find out a fitter match to bestow my self,
than one so worthy a person. Wherefore I do by all possible means procure that
he might eftsoon use his accustomed repraye unto my parents: And further, in all places where I hapened to meet him, I used all the courtesies toward him
that might be contained within the bonds of modesty. But al was in vain, for
he was now become more dangerous to be wone, than the haggard Faulcon. Our
lottes being thus vnluckely changed, I grew to burn in desire, and the more
dangerous that he showed him self unto me, the more earnest I was by all
means to procure his consent of love. At the last I might perceive that not
only he disdayned me, but (as me thought (boiled in hatred against me. And the
time that I thus continued tormented with these thoughts, was also just the
space of seven years. Finally when I perceived no remedy for my perplexityes,
I assayed by absence to were away this malady, and therefore utterly refused to
come in his presence, yea or almost in any other company. Whereby I have
consumed in lost time the flower of my youth, and am become as you see (what
with years, and what with the tormenting passions of love) pale, wane, and
full of wrinkles. Nevertheless, I have thereby gained thus much, that at last I
have wond my self clear out of Cupids chains, and remain careless at
liberty. Now mark to what end I tell you this: first vii. years passed in
the which I could never be content to yield unto his just desires: next other
vii. years I spent in seeking to recover his lost love: and since both those
vii. years, there are even now on saint Valentines day last, other vii. years
passed, in the which (neither I have desired to see him) nor he has coueted to
here of me. My parents now perceiving how the crows foot is crept under mine
eye, and remembering the long suit that this gentelema^ had in youth spent on
me, considering therewith all that grene youth is well mellowed in us both,
have of late sought to persuade a marriage between us, the which the Knighte
has not refused to here of, and I have not disdayned to think on. By their
mediation we have been eftsoons brought to Parlee, wherein over and be sides
the ripping up of many old griefs, this has been chiefly rehearsed and
objected between us, what wrong and injury each of us has done to other. And
here aboutes we have fallen to sharp contencion. He alleged, that much
greater is the wrong which I have done unto him, than that repulse which he
has fithenes used to me: and I have affirmed the contrary. The matter yet
hangs in varyence. Now, of you worthy Governor I would be most glad to hear
this question decided, remembering that there was no difference in the times
between us. And surely, unless your judgment help me, I am afraid my marryage
will he marred, and I may go lead Apes in hell. Ferdenando answered, good
Pergo, I am sorry to hear so lamentable a discourse of your luckles love, and
much the soryer, in yt I must needs give sentence against you. For surely
great was the wrong that either of you have done to other, and greater was the
needelesse grief which causeless each of you has conceived in this long
time, but greatest in my judgment has been both the wrong and the grief of
the Knight. In that notwithstanding his deserts (which your self confess) he
never enjoyed any guerdone of love at your hands. And you (as you allege) did
enjoy his love of long time to gether. So that by the reckoning, it will fall out
(although being builded in your own conceit, you see it not) that of the one
and twenty years you enjoyed his love vii. at the least, but that ever he
enjoyed yours we cannot perceive. And much greater is the wrong that rewards
evil for good, than that which requires tip for tap. Further, it seems that
where as you went obout in time to try him, you did altogether loose time
which can never be recovered. And not only lost your own time, whereof you
would seem now to lament, but also compelled him to lease his time, which he
might (be it spoken with out offense to you) have bestowed in some other worthy
place, and therefore, as that grief is much greater which has no kind of
comfort to allay it, so much more is that wrong which altogether without cause
is offered. And I (said Pergo) must needs think, that much easier is it for
them to endure grief which never tasted of joy, and much less is that wrong
which is so willingly proffered to be by recompense restored. For if this
Knight will confess that he never had cause to rejoice in all the time of his
service, then with better contentacion might he abide grief than I, who having
tasted of the delight which I did secretly conceive of his deserts, do think
each grief a present death by the remembrance of those for passed thoughts: and
less wrong seems it to be destitut of ye thing which was never obtained,
then to be deprived of a Jewel whereof we have been already possessed, so that
under your correction I might conclude, that greater has been my grief and
injury sustained, than that of the Knight. To whom Ieronimy replied, as
touching delight, it may not be denied but that every lover does take delight
in the inward contemplation of his mind, to think of the worthiness of his
beloved: and therefore you may not allege that the Knight had never cause to
rejoice, unless you will altogether condemn your self of worthiness. Mary if
you will say that he tasted not the delights that lovers seek, then mark,
who was the cause but your self? And if you would accuse him of like
ingratitude, for yt he disdained you in the later vij. years (when as he might
by accepting your love, have reco^penced him self of all former wrongs) you
must remember therewithal, that the cruelty by you showed toward him was
such, that he could by no means perceive that your change proceeded of good
will, but rather eftsons to hold him enchained in unknown linkes of subtle
dealings, and therefore not without cause he doubted you: and yet without cause
you rejected him. He had often sought occasion, but by your refusals he could
never find him, you having occasion fast by ye foretop, did dally with him so
long, till at the last he sliped his head from you, and then catching at the
bald noddle, you found your self the cause, and yet you would accuse another.
To conclude, greater is the grief that is sustained without desert, and much
more is the wrong that is offered without cause. Thus Ferdinando Ieronimy
decided the question propounded by Pergo, and expected that some other Dame
should propound another? but his Mistress (having her hand on another
halfpeny) began thus say unto him. Servant this pastime is good, and such as I
must needs like of, to drive away your pensive thoughts: but sleeping time
approaches, and I fear we disquiete you: wherefore the rest of this time we
will (if so like you) bestow in trimming up your bed, and to morrow we shall
meet here and renew this new begone game with Madame Pargo. Mistress (quod
he) I must obey your will, and most humbly thank you of your great goodness,
and all these Ladies for their courtesy. Even so requiring you that you will no
further trouble your selves about me, but let my Servant aloane with
conducting me to bed. Yes servant (quod she) I will see if you ^an sleep any
better in my sheets: and therewith commanded her handmayde to fetch a pair
of clean sheets, the which being brought (maruaylous fine and sweet) the
Ladies Fraunces and Elinor did courteously unfold them, and laid them on the
bed, which done, they also entreated him to unclothe him and go to bed, being
laid, his Mistress dressed and couched the clothes about him, since
moistened his temples with Rosewater, gave him handkerchewes and other fresh
linen about him, in doing whereof, she whispered in his ear, saying: Servant,
this night I will be with thee, and after with the rest of the Dames gave him
good night and departed, leaving him in a trance between hope and despair,
trust and mistrust. Thus he lay ravished, commanding his servant to go to
bed, and fayning that him self would assaye if he could sleep. About ten or
eleven of the clock came his mistress in her night gown: who knowing all
priuye ways in that house very perfectlye, had conveyed her self into his
chamber, unseen and unperceived: and being now come unto his beds side
kneeled down, and laying her arm over him said these or like words: My good
Servant, if thou knew what perplexities I suffer in beholding of thine
infirmities, it might then suffice, either utterly to drive away the mallady,
or much more to augment thy griefs: for I know thou ^ouest me: and I think
also that thou have had sufficient proof of mine unfeigned good will: in
remembrance whereof, I fall into sundry passions: First, I count the happy
lotes of our first acquaintance, and therein I call to mind the equality of
our affections, for I think that there were never two lovers conjoined with
freer concent on both parties: and (if my over basty delivery of yielding words
be not wrested hereafter to my condempnation) I can then assure my self to
escape for ever without desert of any reprofe. Here withal I cannot forget the
sundry adventures happened since we became one heart divided in two bodies, all
which have been both happily atchiued, and delectable enjoyed. What rests then
to consider but this thy present stat? The first corosiue that I have felt, and
the last cordial that I look forth end of my joys, and the beginning of my
torments. And here her salt tears began bath the dying lips of her servant:
who (hearing these words, and well considering her demeanor) began now to
accuse him self of such and so heinous treason, as that his gilty heart was
constrained to yield unto a just scourge for the same. He swooned under her
arm: the which when she perceived, it were hard to tell what fears did most
affright her.

And It were hard now to rehearse how he was reuyued, since there were none
present but he dying, (who could not declare) and she living, who would not
disclose so much as I mean to bewraye. For mine aucthor dreameth yt Ferdenando
returning to life, the first thing which he felt, was yt his good mistres lay
pressing his breast with the whole weight of her body, and biting his lips with
her friendly teeth. And peradventure she refrayned (either of courtesy toward
him, or for womanish fear, to hurt her tender hand) to strike him on the
cheeks in such sort, as they do that strive to call again a dying creature:
and therefore thought this the aptest mean to reduce him unto remembrance.
Ferdinando now awaked, could no less do, than of his courteous nature receive
his Mistress into his bed: Who (as one that knew that way better, than how
to help his swooning,) began gently strip of her clothes, and lovingly embracing
him, began demand of him in this sort. Alas good Servant (quod she) what
kind of malady is this that so extreemly does torment thee? Ieronimij with
fainting speech answered: Mistress as for my malady, it has been easelye
cured by your bountiful medicines applied. But I must confess, that in
receiving that guerison at your hands, I have been constrained to fall into an
Ecstasy, through the gauling remembrance of mine own unworthiness?
Nevertheless good Mistres, since I perceive such fidelitye remaining between
us, as that f^we words will persuade such trust as lovers ought to embrace,
let these few words suffice to crave your pardon: and do eftsoon power upon
me (your unworthy servant) the aboundaunt waves of your accustomed clemency,
for I must confess, that I have so highlye offended you, as (but your
goodness surpass the malice of my conceiptes) I must remain (and that right
woorthely) to the severe punishment of my deserts: and so should you but loose
him who has cast away him self, and neither can accuse you, nor darre to
excuse him self of the crime. Dame Elinor (who had rather have found her
servant perfectly revived, than thus with strange conceyptes encombred: and
musing much at his dark spech, became importunat to know ye sertaynty of his
thoughts. And Ferdenando as on not master of him self, began at the last
plainly confess how he had mistrusted the chaung of her vowed affections: Yea
and (that more was) he plainly expressed with whom, of whom, by whom, and too
whom she bent her better liking.

Now, here I would demand of such as are expert: Is there any greater
impedymente to the fruition of a Lovers delights, than to be mistrusted? or
rather, is it not the ready way to race all love and former good will out of
remembrance, to tell a guilty mind that you do mistrust it? It should seem
yes, by Dame Elynor, who began now to take the matter whotlye: and of such
vehemency were her fancies, that she now fell into flat defiance with
Ferdinando, who although he sought by many fair words to temper her
chollorike passions, and by yelding him self to get the conquest of an other,
yet could he by no means determine the quarrel. The soft pillowes being
present at al these whot speches, put forth them selves as mediators for a
truce between these enemies, and desired that (if they would needs fight) it
might be in their presence but one only blow, and so from thence forth to
become friends again for ever. But the Dame denied flatlye, alleging that
she found no cause at all to use such courtesy unto such a recreant: adding
further many words of great reproach: the which did so enrage Ferdinando, as
that having forgotten all former courtesies, he assayleth his enemies by force.
At last she rose sodainlye and determined to save her self by flight, leaving
him in bed, with many despitefull words, and swearing that he should never
(eftsoon) take her at the like advantage: the which oathe she kept better
than her fourmer professed good will: and having now recovered her Chamber
(because she found her hurt to be nothing dangerous) I doubt not, but she
slept quietlye the rest of the night. As Ferdinando also (persuading himself
that he should with convenient leisure recover her from this haggard conceit)
took some better rest toward the morning, than he had done in many nights
forepast. So let them both sleep whiles I turn my pen unto the before named
Secretary, who being (as I say) come latelye from Florence, had made many
proffers to renew his accustomed consultations: but the sorrow which his
Mistress had conceived in Ieronimy his sickness, together with her
continual repair to him during the same, had been such lettes unto his
attempts, as it was long time before he could obtain audience.

At the last these new accidents fell so favorably for the furtherance of
his cause, that he came to his Mistress presence and there pleaded for
himself. Now, if I should at large write his alligations, to gither with her
subtle aunsweres, I should but comber your ears with unpleasant rehearsal
of feminine frayltye.

To be short, the late disdayneful mood which she had conceived against
Ferdina^do together with a scrupule which lay in her conscience, touching the
xj. article of her belief. moved her presently with better will to consult
with this Secretary, as well upon the speedy revenge of her late received wrongs
as also upon the reformation of her religion. And in very deed, it fell out
that the Secretary (having been of long time absent, and there his quiles and
pens not worn so near as they were wont to be,) did now prick fair large
notes, that his mistres liked better to sing fa-burden under him, than to
descant any longer upon Ferdinandoes plain song, and thus they continued in
good accord, until it fortuned that Dame Fraunces came into her chamber upon
such sudden as she had like to have marred all the music, well they conveyed
their clifes as closely as they could, but yet not altogether without some
suspicion given to the said dame Fraunces, who although she could have been
content to take any pain in Ieronimies behalf, yet otherwise she could never
have bestowed the watching about so worthelesse a pryse. After womanly
salutations they fell into sundry discourses, the Secretary still abiding in
the chamber with them. At last two or three other gentlewomen of the Castle
came into Madam Elinores chamber, who after their Bon iour did all (vna voce)
seem to lament the sikenes of Ferdinando and called upon the Dames Elynor and
Fraunces, to go visit him again.

The Lady Fraunces courteously consented, but Madame Elynor first alleged that
she her self was also sickly, the which she attributed to her late pains
taken about him and said, that only for that cause she was constrained to keep
her bed longer than her accustomed hour. The Dames (but specially the Lady
Fraunces) began straight ways conjecture some great cause of sudden change,
and so leaving dame Elinor, walked altogether into the park to take the air
in the morning: And as they thus walked it chanced that Dame Pergo heard a
Cuckoe chaunt, who (because the pride of the spring was now past) cried Cuck
cuck Cuckoe in her stamering voice. A ha (quod Pergo) this foul byrd begines
to fly the country, and yet before her departure, see how spitfully she can
deuyse to salute us. Not so (quod Dame Fraunces) but some other whom she has
espied, wherewith Dame Pergo looking round about her, and espying none other
company said. Why here is no body but we few women, quoth she. Thanks be to God
the house is not far from us (quod Dame Fraunces.) Here at the wily Pergo
partly perceiving Dame Fraunces meaning, replied on this sort: I understand you
not (quod she) but to leap out of this matter, shall we go visit Master
Ieronimy and see how he does this morning. Why quod dame Fraunces, do you
suppose that the Cuckoe called unto him? Nay mary quod Pergo, for (as fare as I
know) he is not married. As who should say (quod Dame Fraunces,) that the
Cuckoe enuieth none but married folks. I take it so, said Pergo, the Lady
Frances answered. Yes sure I have noated as evil luck in love (after the
Cuckoes call) to have happened unto diverse unmarried folks, as ever I did unto
the married, but I can be well content that we go unto him, for I promised on ye
behalf of us al, that we would use our best deuoyre to recomfort him until he
had recovered health: and I do much marvel that ye Lady Elinor is now become
so unwilling to take any travail in his behalf, especially remembering that
but yesternight she was so diligent to bring him to bed. But I perceive that
all earthly things are subject unto change. Even so they be quod Pergo, for
you may behold the trees which but even this other day were clad in gladsome
green, and now their leaves begin to fade and change color. Thus they
passed talkeing and walking until they returned unto the Castle, whereas they
went straight unto Ferdinandoes chamber, and found him in bed. Why how now
Trust (quod Dame Fraunces,) will it be no better? Yes shortly I hope quod he.
The Ladies all saluted him: and he gave them the gra-mercy: at the last Pergo
popped this question unto him: And how have you slept in your Mistres shetes
Master Ieronemy quod she? reasonably well quod he, but I pray you where is my
mistress this morning? Mary said Pergo, we left her in bed scarce well at
ease. I am the more sorye quod he. Why Trust (said Mistress Fraunces be of
good comfort, and assure your self that here are others who would be as glad
of your well doing, as your mistres in any respect. I ought not to doubt there
of (quod Ferdina^do) having the proof that I have had of your great courtesies,
but I thought it my duty to ask for my mistress being absent. Thus they
passed some time with him until they were called away unto prayers, and that
being finished they went to dinner, where they met Dame Elynor attired in an
night kerchiefe after the soolenest (the solempnest fashion I should have
said,) who looked very drowsely upon all folks, unless it were her secretary,
unto whom she deigned sometime to lend a friendly glaunce. The Lord of the Castle
demanded of her how master Ieronemy did this morning. She answered that she
knew not for she had not seen him that day. You may do well then daughter quod
the Lord) to go now unto him, and to assay if he will eat any thing, and if
here be no meats that like him, I pray you command (for him) any thing
that is in my house, You must pardon me sir (quod she,) I am sickely disposed,
and would be loath to take the air, why then go you mistres Fraunces (quod he)
and take some body with you: and I charge you see that he lack nothing.
Mistres Fraunces was glad of the ambassege, and arysing from the table with one
other gentleman, took with her a dish of chikins boiled in white broth, saying
to her father: I think this meat meetest for master Ieronimy. Of any that is
here. It is so (quod he) daughter, and if he like not that, cause some what else
to be dressed for him according to his apetite. Thus she departed and came to
Ferdinando, who being plonged in sundry woes and thrilled with restless
thoughts, was now beginning to rise. But seeing the Dames, couched down
again, and said unto them. Alas fair Ladies you put your selves to more
pains than either I do desire, or can deserve. Good Trust quod Dame Fraunces,
our pains are no greater than duty requires, nor yet so great as we could
vouchsafee in your behalf. And presently my father has sent us unto you (quod
she) with this pittaunce, and if your apetite desire any on thing more than
other, we are to desire likewise that you will not refrain to call for it. Oh
my good Hope (quod he) I perceive that I shall not dye as long as you may make
me live. And being now some deal recomforted with the remembrance of his
mistres words which she had used over night at her first coming, and also
thinkinge that although she parted in choler, it was but iustlye provoked by
him self, and that at leisure he should find some salve for that sore also)
he determined to take the comfort of his assured Hope, and so to expel all
venomnes of mistrust before received. Wherefore raising him self in his bed, he
cast a night gown about his shoulders saying: It shall never be said that my
fainting heart can reject the comfortable Cordialles of so freendly physicians.
Now by me troth well said gentle Trust quod Dame Fraunces, and in so doing,
assure your self gueryson with speed. This thus said, the courteous Dame
become his keruer, and he with a bold spirit began taste of her cokerey. But the
late conflicts of his conceits had so disaquainted his stomach from repastes,
that he could not well a way with meat: and yet nevertheless by little and
little received some nouryture. When his Hope had crammed him as long as she
could make him seed, they delivered the rest to the other gentlewoman who
having not dyned, fell to her prouender. In which mean while the Lady Fraunces
had much comfortable speech with signor Ieronemy and declared yt she perceived
very well the malady. but my Trust (quod she) be all whole, and remember what
I foretold you in the beginning: nevertheless you must think that there are
remedies for all mischifes, and if you will be ruled by mine advise, we will
soon find the mean to ease you of this mishap. Ferdinando took comfort in
her discrecion, and freendly kissed her hand, gave her a cartlode of thanks
for her great good will, promising to put to his uttermost force, and evermore
to be ruled by her advice. Thus they passed the dinner while, the Lady Fraunces
always refusing to declare her conceit of the late chaung which she perceived
in his Mistress, for she thought best first to win his will unto
conformity, by little and little, and then in the end to persuade him with
necessitye. When the other gentlewoman had vytayled her, they departed,
requiring him to rise and boldly to resist the faintness of his fever. The
which he promised and so bad them a Dio. The Ladies at their return found the
court in Dame Elynores chamber, who had there assembled her secretary, Dame
Pergo and the rest: there they passed an hour or twain in sundry discourses,
wherein Dame Pergo did always cast out some bone for mistress Fraunces to
gnaw upon, for that in deed she perceived her hearty affection toward
Ferdinando whereat Mistress Fraunces changed no countenance, but reserved
her revenge until a better opportunity. At last (quod Dame Fraunces unto
Mistress Elinor) and when will you go unto your servant fair Lady? When he
is sick and I am whole, quod Dame Elinor. That is even now quod the other,
for how sick he is your self can witness: and how well you are we must
bear record. You may as well be deceived in my disposition (quod Dame
Elinor, as I was ouerseene in his sudden alteration: and if he be sick, you
are meet to be his physician: for you saw yesterday that my pains did little
profit toward his recomfort. Yes surely said the other, not only I but
all the rest had occasion to judge that your courtesy was his chief comfort.
Well, quod Dame Elinor, you know not what I know. Nor you what I think quod
Dame Fraunces. Think what you list quod Elinor. In deed quod Fraunces, I may
not think that you care, neither will I dye for your displeasure: and so half
angry she departed At supper they met again, and the master of the house
demanded of his daughter Fraunces how Fardinando did? Sir (quod she) he did
eat some what at dinner, and since I saw him not. The more to blame quod he,
and now I would have al you gentlewomen take of the best meats and go suppe
with him, for company drives away carfulness, and leave you me here with
your leauinges alone. Nay sir quod Mistress Elinor, I pray you give me leave
to bear you company, for I dare not adventure thither. The Lord of the Castle
was contented and dispatched away the rest: who taking with them such viandes
as they thought meetest, went unto Ieronimies chamber, fynding him up, and
walking about to recover strength: whereat Dame Fraunces reioysed, and declared
how her Father had sent that company to attend him at supper. Ferdinando gave
great thanks, and missing now nothing but his Mistress, thought not good yet
to ask for her, but because he partly gessed the cause of her absence, he
contented himself, hoping that when his lure was new garnished, he should
easily recleame her from those coy conceyptes. They passed over their supper
all in quyete, and sone after Mistress Fraunces, being desirous to requite
Dame Pargoes quibbes, requested that they might continue the pastime which Dame
Pergo had begone over night: whereunto they all consented, and the lot fell
unto Dame Fraunces to propounde the second question who adressing her speech
unto Ferdina^do said in this wise, Noble governor, I will rehearse unto you a
strange history, not feigned, neither borrowed out of any oulde authority, but
a thing done in deed of late days, and not far distant from this place where
we now remain. It chanced that a gentleman our neighbor being married to a
very fair gentlewoman, lived with her by the space of four or five years in
great contentacion, trusting her no less than he loved her, and yet loving
her as much as any man could love a woman. On that other side the gentlewoman
had woonne (unto her beauty) a singular commendation for her chaste and modest
behavior. Yet it happened in time that a lusty young gentleman (who very
often resorted to them) obtained that at her hands, which never any man could
before him attain: and to be plain, he won so much in her affections, that
forgetting both her own duty, and her husbands kindness, she yielded her body
at the commandment of this lover, in which pastime they passed long time by
their pollitycke government. At last the friends of this Lady (and especially
three sisters which she had) espied overmuch familliarity between the two
lovers, and dreading least it might break out to their common reproach took
their sister apart, and declared that the world did judge scarce well of the
repair of that Gentleman unto her house: and that if she did not foresee it in
time, she should not only leese the good credit which she her self had
hitherto possessed, but furthermore should distaine their whole race with
common obloquy and reproach. These and sundry other Godly admonitions of those
sisters, could not sink in the mind of this gentlewoman, for she did not only
stand in defiaunce what any man could think of her, but also seemed to accuse
them, that (because they saw her estimation (being their younger) to grow above
their own) they had therefore devised this mean to set variance between her
husband and her. The sisters seeing their wholesome counsel so rejected, and
her continue still in her obstinate opinion, adressed their speech unto her
husband, declaring that the world judged not the best, neither they
themselves did very well like of the familiarity between their sister and that
gentleman, and therefore advised him to forecast all perils, and in time to
forbid him his house. The husband (on the other side) had also conceived such
a good opinion of his gest, and had grown into such a stricte familliaritie
with him, yt you might with more ease have removed a stone wall, than once to
make him think amiss, either of his wife, or of her lover. Yea, and immediately
after this conference, he would not stick thus to say unto his wife. Lamia
(for so in deed was her name) thou have three such busy brained sisters, as I
think shortly their heads will break: they would have me to be iellous of
thee, no no Lamia. etc. so that he was not only far from any such belief, but
furthermore did every day increase his courtesies toward the lover. The
sisters being thus on all sides rejected, and yet perceiving more and more an
unseemly behavior between their sister and her minion, began to melt in
their own grease: and such was their enraged pretense of revenge, that they
suborned diverse servants in the house to watch so dilligentlye, as that this
treason might de discovered. Amongst the rest, one maid of subtle spirit had
so long watched them, that at last she spied them go into the chamber together,
and lockte the door to them: whereupon she ran with all have possible to her
Master, and toold him that if he would come with her, she would show him a
very strange sight. The gentleman (suspecting nothing) went with her, until
he came into a chamber near unto that wherein they had shut themselves. And
she pointing her master to the keyhole, bad him look through, where he saw
the thing which most might mislike him to behold. Where at he sodaynely drew
his Dagger, and turned toward the maid, who fled from him for fear of
mischief. But when he could not overtake her in the heat of his collar, he
commanded that she should forth with trusse up that little which she had, and
to depart his service. And before her departure, he found means to talk with
her, threatening that if ever she spoke any word of this mystery in any place
where she should come, it should cost her life. The maid for fear departed in
silence, and the Master never changed countenance to either his wife or to her
paramour, but feigned unto his wife that he had turned a way the maid upon
that sudden, for that she had thrown a Kitchen knife at him, whiles he went
about to correct a fault in her. etc. Thus the good gentleman drank up his
own swette unseen every day, increasing courtesy to the lover, and never
changing countenance to his wife in any thing, but only that he refrayned to
have such knowledge of her carnally, as he in tims past had, and other men have
of their wives. In this sort he continued by the space all most of half a
year, nevertheless lamenting his mishap in solytary places. At last (what
moved him I know not) he fell a gayn to company with his wife as other men do,
and (as I have heard it said) he used this policy. Every time that he had
knowledge of her, he would leave either in the bed, or in her cusshencloth, or
by her looking glass, or in some place where she must needs find it, a piece
of money which then was in Italy called a Caroline. Thus he dealt with her
continuallye by the space of four or five months, using her nevertheless
very kindly in all other respects, and providing for her all things necessary
at the first call. But unto his geast he still augmented his courtesy, in such
sort, that you would have thought them to be sworn brothers. All this
notwithstanding his wife much musing at these small pieces which she found in
this sort, and furthermore, having sundry times found her husband in solitarye
places making great lamentation, she grew inquisitiue, what should be ye
secreete cause of these alterations, unto whom he would none otherwise answer,
but ye any man should find occatio^ to be more pensive at one time than at
another. The wife notwithstanding increasing her suspect, imparted the same
unto her lover, alleging therewithal that she doubted very much least her
husband had some vehement suspicion of their affairs. The lover encoraged her,
and likewise declared, that if she would be importunate to enquire the cause,
her husband would not be able to keep it from her: and having now thoroughly
instructed her, she dealt with her husband in this sort. One day when she
knew him to be in his study alone, she came into him, and having fast locked
the door after her, and conveyed the keye into her pocket, she began first
with earnest entreaty, and then with tears to crave that he would no longer
keep from her the cause of his sudden alteration. The husband dissimuled the
matter still: at last she was so earnest to know for what cause he left money
in such sort at sundry times: That he answered on this wise: Wife (quod he)
thou know how long we have been married together, and how long I made
so dear account of thee as ever man made of his Wife: since which days, thou
know also how long I refrained thy company, and how long again I have
used thy company, leaving the money in this sort, and the cause is this. So
long as thou dyddest behave thy self faithfullye toward me. I never lothed
thy company: but since I have perceived thee to be a harlotte, and therefore
did I for a time refrain and forbear to lie with thee, and now I can no
longer forbear it, I give thee every time that I lie with thee, a Caroline,
which is to make thee under stand thine own whordome: and this reward is
sufficient for a whore. The wife began stoutlye to stand at defiaunce, but
the husband cut of her speech, and declared when, where, and how he had seen
it: hereat the woman being abashed, and finding her conscience guilty of as much
as he had aledged, fell down on her knees, and with most bitter tears craved
pardon, confessing her offense: whereat her husband (moved with pity) and
melting likewise in floods of lamentation, recomforted her, promising that if
from that day forwards she would be true unto him, he would not only forgive
all that was past, but become more tender and loving unto her then ever he was.
What do I tarrye so long? they became of accord: and in full accomplishment
thereof, the gentlewoman did altogether eschew the company, the speech, and
(as much as in her lay) the sight of her lover: although her husband did
continue his courtesy toward him, and often charged his wife to make him fair
resemblaunt. The Lover was now only left in perplexity, who knew nothing
what might be the cause of all these chaunges, and that most grieved him, he
could by no means optaine again the speech of his desired: he watched all
opportunities, he suborned messengers, he wroote letters, but all in vain.
In the end she caused to be declared unto him a time and place where she
would meet him and speak with him. Being met, she put him in remembrance of
all that had passed between them: she laid also before him how trusty she
had been unto him in all professions: she confessed also how faithfullye he
had discharged the duty of a friend in all respects, and therwithall she
declared that her late alteration and pensiveness of mind was not without
great cause, for that she had of late such a mishap, as might change the
disposition of any living creature: Yea, and that the case was such, as unless
she found present remedy, her death must needs ensue, and that spedely, for
the preventing whereof, she alleged that she had beaten her brains with all
devises possible, and that in the end she could think of no redress but one,
the which lay only in him to acomplish. Wherefore she besought him for all the
love and good will which had ever passed between them, now to show the
fruits of true friendship, and to gratify her with a free grant to this
request. The lover who had always been desirous to pleasure her in any thing,
but now especially to recover her wonted kindness, began franklye promise to
accomplish any thing that might be to him possible, yea, though it were to his
great detriment, and therewithal, did deeply blame her in that she would so
long torment her self with any grief, considering that it lay in him to help
it. The Lady answered, that she had so long kept it from his knowledge,
because she doubted whether he would be content to perform it or not,
although it was such a thing as he might easily grant without any manner of
hurt to himself, and yet now in the end she was forced to adventure upon his
courtesy, being no longer able to bear ye burden of her grief: the lover
solicited her most earnestly to disclose it: and she (as fast) seemed to
mistrust that he would not accomplish it. In the end she took out a book
(which she had brought for the nonce) and bound him by oath to accomplish it.
The lover mistrusting nothing less tha^ that ensued, took the oath willingly,
which done, she declared all that had passed between her and her husband: his
grief, her repentance, his pardon, her vow, and in the end of her tale
enjoined the lover, that from thenceforthwardes, he should never attempt to
break her constant determination, the lover replied that this was impossible.
But she plainlye assured him, that if he granted her that request, she would
be his friend in all honest and godly wise: if not, she put him out of doubt
that she would eschew his company and flee from his sight as from a scorpion.
The lover considering that her request was but just, accusing his own guiltye
conscience, remembering the great courtesies always used by her husband, and
therewithal seeing the case now brought to such an issue, as that by no other
means than by this it could be conceiled from the knowledge of the world: but
most of all, being urged by his oath, did at last give an unwilling consent,
and yet a faithful promise to yield unto her will in all things, and thus being
become of one assent, he remains the derest friend and most welcome gest that
may be, both to the Lady and her husband: and the man and the wife so kind
(each to other) as if there never had been such a breche between them. Now, of
you noble Governor I would feign learn, whether the perplexity of the husband
when he looked in at the keye hoole, or of the wife when she knew the cause
why the Carolines were so scattered, or of the lover when he knew what was his
mistres charge, was greater of ye three? I might have put in also ye troubled
thoughts of the sisters and the maid, when they saw their good will rejected,
but let these three suffice. Gentle Hope (quod Ferdinando) you have rehearsed
(and that right eloque^tly) a notable tale, or rather a notable history,
because you seem to affirm, that is was done in deed of late and not far
hence. Wherein I note five especial points: that is a maruailous patience in
the husband, no less repentance in the wife, no small boldness of the maid,
but much more rashness in the sisters, and last of al, a rare tractabilitie
in the lover. Nevertheless so return unto your question. I think the
husbands perplexity greatest, because his losses abounded above the rest, and
his injuries were vnco^parable. The Lady Fraunces did not seem to contrary him
but rather smiled in her sleeue at Dame Pergo, who had no less patience to
here the tale recited, then the Lady Fraunces had pleasure in telling of it. By
this time the sleeping hour aproched, and the Ladies prepared their departure,
when as mistres Frau^ces said unto ye Venetiane: Although percase I shall not
do it so ha^dsomly as your mistres, yet good Trust (quod she) if you vouchsafe
it, I can be content to trim up your bed in the best manner that I may, as on
who would be as glad as she to procure your quiet rest. Ferdinando gave her
great thanks desiring her not to trouble hirself, but to let his man alone with
yt charge. Thus they departed, and how al parties took rest that night I know
not: but in ye morning Ferdinando began to consider with himself that he might
lie long enough in his bed before his mistres would be apeased in her peuishe
conceits: wherefore he arose, and being aparelled in his night gown, took
occation to walk in the gallery near adjoining unto his mistres chamber: but
there might he walk long enough ere his Mistress would come to walk with
him. When dinner time came he went into the great chamber whereas the Lord of
the Castle saluted him, being joyful of his recouerye: Ieronimy giving due
thanks, declared that his frie^dly entertainment together with the great
courtesy of the gentlewomen was such, as might revive a man although he were
half dead. I would be loath (quod the host) that any Gentleman coming to
me for good will, should want any courtesy of intertainement that lies in my
power. When the meat was served to the table, the Gentlewomen came in all but
Dame Elynor and Mistress Pergo, the which Ferdinando marked very well, and it
did somewhat abate his apetite. After diner, his Hope came unto him and
demanded of him how he would pass the day for his recreation? to whom he
answered even as it best pleased her. She devised to walk into the park, and
so by little and little to acquaint himself with the air: he agreed, and they
walked together being accompanied with one or two other gentle women. And
although there were now more cause that he should mistrust his Mistress
than ever he had before received, yet the vehement passions which he saw in
her when she first came to visit him, and moreover the earnest words which she
pronounced in his extremity, were such a refreshing to his mind, as that he
determined no more to trouble him self with like conceiptes: concluding
further, that if his mistress were not faulty, then had he committed a foul
offense in needeles jealousy, and that if she were faulty (especially with
the Secretary) then no perswation could amend her, nor any passion help him?
and this was the cause that enabled him after such passing panges to abide the
doubtful conclusion: And thus manfully and valiantly to repress faintness of
his mind: nothing doubting but that he should have won his mistress to pardon
his presumption, and lovingly to embrace his service in wonted manner: but he
was far deceived, for she was now in a another tewne, the which Mistress
Fraunces began partly to discover unto him as they walked together: for she
burdened him that his mallady proceeded only of a disquiet mind. And if it did
so my gentle Hope (quod he) what remedy? My good Trust (quod she) none other
but to plant quiet where disquiet began to grow. I have determined (quod he)
but I must crave the help of your assured friendship. Thereof you may make
account (quod she) but wherein? Ferdinando walking apart with her, began to
declare that there was some contention hapened between his mistres and him:
the Lady told him that she was not ignorant thereof. Then he desired her to
treat so much in the cause, as they might eftsons come to Parlee: thereof I
dare assure you (quod Mistress Fraunces,) and at their return she led him
into his Mistress Chamber, whom they found lying on her bed, whether gauled
with any grief, or weary of the thing (which you woote of) I know not, but
there she lay: unto whom Ferdinando gave two or three salutations before she
seemed to mark him. At last said the Lady Fraunces unto her, your servant
hearing of your sickness, has adventured thus far into the air to see you. I
thank him (quod dame Elinor) and so lay still, refusing to give him any
countenance. Whereat he perceiving all the other Gentlewomen fall to
whispering, thought good, boldlye to plead his own case: and approaching the
bed began to enforce his vnwylling Mistress unto courtesy, wherein he used
such vehemence as she could not well by any means refuse to talk with him: but
what their talk was, I may not take upon me to tell you. Suffices this to be
known, that in the end she pretended to pass over all old grudges, and
thencefoorth to pleasuure him as occation might serve, the which occation was
so long in hapening, that in the end he being now eftsoon troubled with
unquiet fantasies, and forced to use his pen again as an Ambassador
between them: one day amongst the rest f^und oportunitye to thrust a letter
into her bosom, wherein he had earnestly requested another Mooneshine banquet
or frydayes breakfast to recomfort his dulled spirits, whereunto the Dame
yielded this answer in writing, but of whose endyting judge you.

I can but smyle at your simplicitye, who burden your friends with an
impossibility. The case so stood as I could not though I would. Wherefore from
hence forth either learn to frame your request more reasonablye, or else
stand content with a flat repulse. SHE.

Ferdinando liked this letter but a little: and being thereby drouen into his
accustomed vain, he compiled in verse this answer following, upon these
words contained in her letter, I could not though I would.

I could not though I would: good Lady say not so,
Since one good word of your good will might sone redress my woe,
Where would is free before, there could can never fail:
For proof, you see how galleys pass where ships ca^ bear no sail,
The weary mariner where skies are ouercast,
By ready will does guide his skill and wins the haven at last,
The pretty bird that singes with prick against her breast,
Does make a virtue of her need, to watch when others rest,
And true the proverb is, which you have laid apart,
There is no hap can seem to hard unto a willing heart.
Then lovely Lady mine, you say not as you should,
In doutful terms to answer thus: I could not though I would.
Yes yes, full well you know, your can is quick and good:
And wilful will is eke too swift, to shed my guiltless blood.
But if good will were bent as pressed as power is,
Such will would quickly find the skill to mende that is a miss.
Wherefore if you desire to see my true love spilt,
Command and I will slay my self, that yours may be the gilt,
But if you have no power to say your servant naie,
Write thus: I may not as I would, yet must I as I may.
Ferdinando. Ieronimy.

THus Ieronimy replied upon his Mistres answer, hoping thereby to recover some
favor at her hands, but it would not be: so that now he had been as likelye
(as at the first) to have fretted in fantasies, had not the Lady Fraunces
continually comforted him: and by little and little she drove such reason into
his mind, that now he began to subdue his humor with discretion, and to
determine that if he might epsy evident proof of his Mistres fraieltie, he
would then stand content with patience perforce, and give his Mistres the Bezo
la, mano. And it happened one day amongst others, that he resorted to his
mistress chamber and found her (allo solito) lying upon her bed, and the
Secretary with Dame Pergo and her bandmaide keeping of her company. Whereat
Ferdinando somewhat repyning, came to her and fell to dalliaunce, as one that
had now rather adventure to be thought presumptious than yield to be
accounted bashful, he cast his harm over his Mistress, and began to accuse
her of sluggishnes, using some other bold parts, as well to provoke her, as
also to grieve the other. The Lady seemed little to delight in his dallying,
but cast a glance at her Secretary, and therewith smiled, when as the
Secretary and Dame Pergo burst out into open laughter. The which Ferdinando
perceiving, and disdaining her ingratitude, was forced to depart, and in that
fantasy compiled this Sonet.

WIth her in arms that had my heart in hold,
I stood of late to plead for pity so:
And as I did her lovely looks behold,
She cast a glaunce upon my rival foe.
His fleering face provoked her to smile,
When my salt tears were drowned in disdain:
He glad, I sad, he laughed, (alas the while)
I wept for woe: I pined for deadly pain.
And when I saw none other boot prevail,
But reason rule must guide my skillful mind:
Why then (quod I) old proverbs never fail,
For yet was never good Cat out of kind.
Nor woman true but even as stories tell,
VVonne with an egg, and lost again with shell.
Ferdinando. Ieronimy.

THis Sonet declares that he began now to account of her as she deserved, for
it has a sharp conclusion, and it is somewhat too general. Well, as it is he
lost it, where his Mistress found it, and she immediately imparied the same
unto Dame Pergo, and Dame Pergo unto others: so that it quickly became common
in the house. Amongst others Mistres Fraunces having recovered a copy of it,
did seem to pardon the generallity, and to be well pleased with the
perticularity thereof, the which she bewraied one day unto Ferdinando in
this wise. Of all the joys that ever I had (my good Trust quod she) there is
none where in I take more comfort than in your conformity. And although your
present rage is such that you can be content to condemn a number unknown,
for the transgression of one to well known: yet I do rather rejoice that you
should judge your pleasure over many, than too be abused by any. My good Hope
(quod he) it were not reason that after such manyfold profes of your exceeding
courtesies, I should use straung or contencious speech with so dear a friend.
And in deed I must confess that the opinion which I have conceived of my
Mistress, has stirred my pen to write very hardly against all the feminine
gender. But I pray you pardon me (quod he) and if it please you I will recant
it, as also (parcase) I was but cloyd with surcuydrye, and presumed to think
more than may be proved. Yea but how if it were proved quod Dame Fraunces? If
it were so (which God forbid quod he) then could you not blame me to conceive
that opinion. Howsoever I might blame you (quod she) I mean not to blame you,
but I demand further, if it be as I think and you suspect, what will you then
do? Surely (quod he) I have determined to drink up mine own sorrow secretly,
and to bid them both a Dieu. I like your farewell better than your fantasy
(quod she) and whenever you can be content to take so much pains, as the
Knight (which had a night gown guarded with naked swords) did take, I think
you may put your self out of doubt of all these things. By these words and
other speech which she uttered unto him, Ferdinando smelt how the world went
about, and therefore did one day in the gray morning adventure to pass through
the gallery toward his Mistress Chamber, hoping to have found the door
open, but he found the contrary, and there attending in good devotion, heard
the parting of his Mistress and her Secretary, with many kind words:
whereby it appeared that the one was very loath to depart from the other. Poor
Ieronimy was enforced to bear this burden, and after he had attended there as
long as the light would give him leave, he departed also to his Chamber, and
apparelling himself, could not be quiet until he had spoken with his
mistress, whom he burdened flatly with this despitefull trecherye: and she as
fast denied it, until at last being still urged with such evident tokens as he
alleged, she gave him this bone to gnawe upon. And if I did so (quod she)
what than? Where unto Ferdinando made none answer, but departed with this
farewell. My loss is mine own, and your gain is none of yours, and sooner can
I recover my loss, than you enjoy the gain which you gape after. And when
he was in place sollitary, he compiled these following for a final end of
the matter.

And if I did what then?
Are you agreeued therefore?
The Sea has fish for every man,
And what would you have more?
Thus did my Mistress once,
Amaze my mind with doubt:
And popt a question for the nonce,
To beat my brains about.
VVhereto I thus replied,
Each Fisherman can wish,
That all the Seas at every tide,
Were his aloane to fish.
And so did I (in vain,)
But since it may not be:
Let such fish there as find the gain,
And leave the loss for me.
And with such luck and loss,
I will content my self:
Till tides of turning time may toss,
Such fishers on the shelfe.
And when they stick on sands,
That every man may see:
Then will I laugh and clappe my hands,
As they do now at me.
Ferdinando Ieronimy.

THus Ferdinando being no longer able to bear these extreme despites,
resolved to absent him self, swell for his own further quiet, as also to
avoid the occasion of greater mischiefs that might ensewe: And although the
exceeding courtesies and approved fidelity of Dame Fraunces had been
sufficient to allure the fast lyking of any man, especially considering that
she was reasonably fair, and descended of a worthy father, who now fell
flatlye to move and solicit the same, yet such sinistre conceyptes had he
taken by the frailtye of Dame Elinor, as that rejecting all proffers, and
contempning all courtesies, he took his leave, and (without pretense of
return) departed to his house in Venice: spending there ye rest of his days
in a dissolute kind of life: and abandoning the worthy Lady Fraunces Chima, who
(daily being gauled with the grief of his great ingratitude) did shortly
bring her self into a miserable consumption: whereof (after three years
languishing) she dyed: Notwithstanding al which occurements the Lady Elinor
lived long in ye continuance of her acustomed change: and thus we see that
where wicked lust does bear the name of love, it does not only infecte the
light minded, but it may also become confusion to others which are vowed to
constancy. And to that end I have recyted this Fable which may serve as
ensample to warn the youthful reader from attempting the like worthles
enterprise. I know not how my rude translation thereof will delight the
finest judgments: But sure as Bartello writteth it in Italian, it is both
pleasant and profitable: the which has made me adventure thus to publishe
the same in such simple style as I am able to endite: Desiring the gentle
reader, rather to take example of reformation therein, then to find fault at
the homelye handling of the same.

Ever or never.
In praise of a gentlewoman who though she were not very fair, yet was she as
hard favored as might be.
IF men may credit give, to true reported fames,
Who doubts but stately Rome had stoore of lustye loving Dames?
Whose ears have been so deaf, as never yet heard tell,
How far the fresh Pompeia, for beauty did excel.
And golden Marcus he, that swaide the Roman sword,
Bare witness of Boemia, by credit of his word.
What need I mo rehearse? since all the world did know,
How high the floods of beauties blaze, within those walls did flow.
And yet in all that choice a worthy Roman Knight,
Antonius who conquered proud Egypt by his might.
Not al to please his eye, but most to ease his mind,
Chose Cleopatra for his love, and left the rest behind.
A wondrous thing to read, in all his victory. She was an Egiptian.

He snapt but her for his own share, to please his fantasy.
She was not fair God wot, the countreye breades none bright,
Well may we judge her skin the foil, because her teeth were white.
Percase her louelye looks, some praises did deserve,
But brown I dare be bold she was, for so the soil did serve.
And could Antonius forsake the fair in Rome?
To love his nutbrowne Lady best, was this an equal doom?
I dare well say dames there, did bear him deadly grudge,
His sentence had been shortly said, if Faustine had been judge.
For this I dare auow, (without vaunt be it spoke)
So brave a knight as Anthony, held al their necks in yoke:
I leave not Lucrece out, believe in her who list,
I think she would have liked his lure, and stooped to his fist.
What moved the chieftain then, to lincke his liking thus?
I would some Roman dame were here, the question to discuss.
But that I read her life, do find therein by fame,
How clear her courtesy did shine, in honor of her name.
Her bounty did excel, her truth had never pere,
Her lovely lokes, her pleasant speech, her lusty loving chere.
And all the worthy gifts, that ever yet were found,
Within this good Egiptian Queen, did seem for to abound.
Wherefore he worthy was, to win the golden fleece,
Which scornd the blasing stars in Rome, to conquer such a piece.
And she to quite his love, in spite of dreadful death,
Enshrinde with Snakes within his Tomb, did yield her parting breath.
Allegoria.
IF fortune fauord him, then may that man rejoice,
And think himself a happy man by hap of happy choice.
Who loves and is beloved of one as good, as true,
As kind as Cleopatra was, and yet more bright of hew.
Her eyes as greye as glass, her teeth as white as milk,
A ruddy lip, a dimpled chyn, a skyn as smoth as silk.
A wight what could you more, that may content man's mind,
And has supplies for every want, that any man can find.
And may him self assure, when hence his life shall pass,
She will be stong to death with snakes, as Cleopatra was.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
The praise of Phillip Sparrowe.
OF all the birds that I do know,
Phillip my Sparow has no pear:
For sit she high or lie she low,
Be she far off, or be she near,
There is no bird so fair, so fine,
Nor yet so fresh as this of mine.
Come in a morning merely,
When Phillip has been lately fed,
Or in an evening soberlye,
When Phillip list to go to bed:
It is a heaven to hear my Phippe,
How she can chirpe with chery lip.
She never wanders far abroad,
But is at hand when I do call:
If I command she lays on load.
With lips, with teeth, with tongue and all.
She chants, she chirpes, she makes such cheer,
That I believe she has no peer.
And yet besides all this good sport,
My Phillip can both sing and dance:
With new found toys of sundry sort,
My Phillip can both prick and praunce:
As if you say but fend cut phippe,
Lord how the peat will turn and skippe.
Her feathers are so fresh of hew,
And so well proyned every day:
She lackes none oil, I warrant you:
To trim her tail both trick and gaye.
And though her mouth be somewhat wide,
Her tongue is sweet and short beside.
And for the rest I dare compare,
She is both tender, sweet and soft:
She never lacks dainty fare,
But is well fed and feeds often:
For if my phip have lust to eat,
I warrant you phip lacks no meat.
And then if that her meat be good,
And such as like do love always:
She will lay lips thereon by the rood,
And see that none be cast away:
For when she once has felt a fit,
Phillip will cry still, yet, yet, yet.
And to tell truth he were to blame,
Which had so fine a Bird as she,
To make him all this goodly game,
Without suspect or iellousie:
He were a churl and knew no good,
Would see her faint for lack of food.
Wherefore I sing and ever shall,
To praise as I have often proved
There is no byrd amongst them all,
So worthy for to be beloved.
Let other praise what byrd they will,
Sweet Phillip shall be my byrd still.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Farewell with a mischeife, written by a lover being disdaynefullye abiected by
a dame of high calling, Who had chosen (in his place) a play fellovv of
baser condition: and therefore he determined to step a side, and before his
departure gives her this farvvell in verse.
THy birth, thy beauty, nor thy brave attire,
(Disdaynfull Dame, which do me double wrong)
Thy high estate, which sets thy heart on fire,
Or new found choice, which cannot serve thee long
Shall make me dread, with pen for to rehearse,
Thy skittish deeds, in this my parting verse.
For why thou know, and I my self can tell,
By many vows, how thou to me were bound:
And how for joy, thy heart did seem to swell,
And in delight, how thy desires were drowned.
When of thy will, the walls I did assail,
Wherein fond fancy, fought for mine avail.
And though my mind, have small delight to vaunt,
Yet must I vow, my heart to thee was true:
My hand was always able for to daunt,
Thy slaundrous ^^oes, and keep their tongues in mew.
My head (though dull) was yet of such devise,
As might have kept thy name always in price.
And for the rest my body was not brave,
But able yet, of substance to allaye,
The raging lust, wherein thy limbs did rave,
And quench the coals, which kindled thee to play.
Such one I was, and such always will be,
For worthy Dames, but then I mean not thee.
For thou have caught a proper paragon,
A thief, a cowarde, and a Peacocke fool:
An Ase, a milkesop, and a minion,
Which has no oil thy furyous flames to cool,
Such on he is, a pheare for thee most fit,
A wandering gest, to please thy wavering wit.
A thief I count him for he robbes us both,
Thee of thy name, and me of my delight:
A coward is he noted where he goes,
Since every child is match to him in might.
And for his pride no more, but mark his plumes,
The which to princke, he days and nights consumes.
The rest thy self, in secret sort can judge,
He rides not me, thou know his sadell best:
And though these tricks of thine, might make me grudg,
And kindle wrath, in my revenging breast
Yet of my self, and not to please thy mind,
I stand content, my rage in rule to bind.
And far from thee now must I take my flight,
Where tongues may tell, (and I not see) thy fall:
Where I may drink these druggs of thy dispite,
To purge my Melancholic mind with all.
In secret so, my stomach will I sterue,
Wishing thee better than thou do deserve.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
The doale of disdain written by alouer disdainfully rejected contrary to
former promise.
THe deadly dropes of dark disdain,
Which daily fall on my deserte.
The lingering suit long spent in vain,
Whereof I feel no fruit but smart:
Enforce me now this words to write:
Not all for love but more for spite.
The which to the I must rehearse,
Whom I did honor, serve and trust.
And though the music of my verse,
Be plainsong tune both true and just:
Content thee yet to here my song,
For else thou do me doobble wrong.
I must allege, and thou can tell
How faithfully I vowed to serve,
And how thou seem to like me well:
And how thou saydest I did deserve,
To be thy Lord, thy Knight, thy King.
And how much more I list not sing.
And can thou now (thou cruel one)
Condemn desert to deep despair?
Is all thy promise past and gone?
Is faith so fled into the air?
If that be so, what rests for me?
But thus in song to say to thee.
If Cressydes name were not so known,
And written wide on every wall:
If brute of pride were not so blown,
Upon Angelica withal:
For hault disdain thou might be she, Angelica refusing the most famous
knights in the whole world, chose at last Medoro a poor serving man.

Or Cresside for inconstancy.
And in reward of thy desert,
I hope at last to see thee paid:
With deep repentance for thy part.
Which thou have now so lewedly played.
Medoro he must be thy make,
Since thou Orlando do for sake.
Such is the fruit that grows always,
Upon the root of ripe disdain:
Such kindly wages Cupide pays.
Where constant hearts cannot remain,
I hope to see thee in such bands,
When I may laugh and clappe my hands.
But yet for thee I must protest,
But sure the fault is none of thine,
Thou art as true as is the best,
That ever came of Cressedes line:
For constant yet was never none,
But in inconstancy alone.
Meritum petere, grave.
Mars in despite of Vulcane written for an absent lover (parted from his Lady
by Sea.)
BOth deep and dreadful were the Seas,
Which held Leander from his love,
Yet could no doubts his mind appease,
Nor save his life for her behoue:
But guiltless blood it self would spill,
To please the waves and work his will.
O greedye gulf, O wretched waves,
O cruel floods, O sink of shames,
You hold true lovers bound like slaves,
And keep them from their worthy Dames:
Your open mouth gapes evermore,
Till one or both be drowned therefore.
For proof whereof my self may sing,
And shrich to pearce the loftye skies,
Whose Lady left me languishing,
Upon the shore in woofull wise.
And crossed the Seas out of my sight,
Whereby I lost my chief delight.
She said that no such trustlesse flood,
Should keep our loves (long time) in twain*
She swear no bread should do her good.
Till she mighe see my self again.
She said and swore these words and mo,
But now I find them nothing so.
What rests then for me to do,
Thou salt sea foome come say thy mind
Should I come drown within thee to,
That am of true Leanders kind?
And headlong cast this corpse of mine,
Into this greedy guts of thine.
No cruel, but in spite of thee,
I will make Seas where erst were none,
My tears shall flow in full degree,
Till all my mirth may ebb to moan.
Into such drops I mean to melt,
And in such Seas my self to swelt.
Lenuoie.
Yet you dear Dame for whom I fade,
Thus staruing still in wretched state:
Remember once your promise made,
Perform it now though all to late.
Come home to Mars who may you please,
Let Vulcane bide beyond the Seas.
Meritum petere, grave.
Patience perforce, wherein an absent lover does thus encourage his Lady to
continue constant.
COntent thy self with patience perforce:
And quench no love with drops of darcke mistrust:
Let absence have no power to divorce,
Thy faithful friend which means to be just.
Bear but a while thy constance to declare,
For when I come one ynche shall break no square.
I must confess that promise did me bind,
For to have seen thy seemly self ere now:
And if thou knew what griefs did gaul my mind,
Because I could not keep that faithful vow.
My just excuse, I can my self assure,
With little pain thy pardon might procure.
But call to mind how long Ulysses was,
In lingering absence, from his loving make:
And how she deigned then her days to pass,
In solitary silence for his sake.
Be thou a true Penelope to me,
And thou shall sone thine own Ulysses see.
What said I? sone? yea sone I say again,
I will come sone and sooner if I may:
Believe me now it is a pinching pain,
To think of love, when lovers are away.
Such thoughts I have, and when I think on thee.
My thoughts are there, whereas my bones would be.
The longing lust which Priames son of Troy,
Had for to see his Cresside come again:
Could not exceed the depth of mine anoye,
Nor seem to pass the pattern of my pain.
I fryse in hope, I thaw in hot desire,
Far from the flame, and yet I burn like fire.
Wherefore dear friend, think on the pleasures past.
And let my tears, for both our pains suffice:
The lingering joys, when as they come at last,
Are bet then those, which pass in posting wise.
And I my self, to prove this tale is true,
In have, post have, thy comfort will renew.
Meritum petere, grave.
A letter devised for a young lover.
Receive you worthy Dame, this rude and ragged verse,
Lend wylling ear unto the tale, which I shall now rehearse.
And though my witless words might move you for to smile,
Yet trust to that which I shall tell, and never mark my style.
Amongst five hundredth Dames, presented to my view,
I find most cause by due desert, to like the best of you.
I see your beauty such, as seems to suffice,
To bind my heart in linckes of love, by judgment of mine eyes.
And but your bounty quench, the coals of quick desire,
I fear that face of yours will set, ten thousand hearts on fire.
But bounty so aboundes, above al my desert,
As that I quake and shrink for fear, to show you of my smart.
Yet since mine eye made choice, my heart shall not repent,
But yield it self unto your will, and therewith stand content.
God knowth I am not great, my power it is not much,
The greater glory shall you gain, to show your favor such.
And what I am or have, all that I yield to you,
My hand and sword shall serve always, to prove my tongue is true.
Then take me for your own, and so I will be still,
Believe me now. I make this vow, in hope of your good will.
Which if I may obtain, God leave me when I change,
This is the tale I meant to tell, good Lady be not strange.
Meritum petere, grave.
David's salutacions to Berzabe wherein are three sonets in sequence, written
upon this occation. The deviser hereof amongst other friends had named a
gentlevvoman his Berzabe, and she was content to call him her David. The man
presented his Lady with a book of the Golden Ass, written by Lucius
Apuleius, and in the beginning of the books vvrote this sequence. You must
confer it with the Historye of Apuleius, for else it will have small grace.
THis Apuleius was in Affricke borne.
And took delight to travail Thessaly,
As one that held his native soil in skorne.
In foraine coasts to feed his fantasy.
And such again as wandering wits find out,
This yonker won by will and weary toil,
A youth misspent, a doting age in doubt,
A body brusd with many a beastly broyle,
A presaunt pleasure passing on a pace,
And paynting plain the path of penitence.
A frollicke faudur foyld with foul disgrace,
When hoary hears should claim their reverence.
Such is the fruit that grows on gadding trees,
Such kind of mell most moves busy Bees.
For Lucius he.
Esteeming more one ounce of present sport,
Than elders do a pound of perfect wit:
First to the bower of beauty does resort,
And there in pleasure passed many a fit,
His worthy race he (recklesse) does forget,
With small regard in great affairs he reeles,
No counsel grave, nor good advise can set
His brains in brake that whirled still on wheels.
For if Byrhena could have held him back,
From Venus court where he now nufled was,
His lusty limbs had never found the lack
Of manly shape: the figure of an Ass,
Had not been blazed on his blood and bones,
To wound his will with torments all attones.
But Fotis she,
Who saw this Lording whitled with the cup
Of vain delight, whereof he began to taste:
Pourde out apace, and stilde the Mazor up,
With drunken dole: yea after that in have,
She greazde this guest with sause of Sorcerie,
And fed his mind with knacks both queint and strange:
Lo here the treazon and the treachery
Of gadding girls, when they delight to range.
For Lucius thinking to becoms a foul,
Became a fool, yea more than that, an Ass,
A bobbing block, a beating stock, an owl,
Well woondred at in place where he did pass:
And spent his time, his travail and his cost,
To purchase pain and all his labor lost.
Yet I pore I,
Who make of thee my Fotys and my friend,
In like delight my youthful years to spend:
Do hope thou will from such sour sause defend,
David thy King.
Meritum petere grave.
Soon acquainted, soon forgotten, As appears here by an discourteous
farewell to an inconstant Dame.
IF what you want, you (wanton) had at will,
A steadfast mind, a faithful loving heart:
If what you speak you would perform it still,
If from your word your deed did not reuerte:
If youthful years your thoughts did not so rule,
As elder days may scorn your friendship frail,
Your doubled fancy would not thus recule,
For peevish pride which now I must bewail.
For Cresside fair did Troilus never love,
More dear than I esteemde your freamed cheer,
Whose wavering ways (since now I do them prove)
By true report this witness with me bear:
That if your friendship be not to dear bought,
The price is great that nothing gives for naught.
Meritum petere grave.
FINIS.
Certain notes of Instruction concerning the making of verse or ryme in
English, written at the request of Master Edouardo Donati.
SIgnor Edouardo, since promise is debt, and you (by the law of friendship) do
burden me with a promise that I should lend you instructions toward the
making of English verse or ryme, I will assaye to discharge the same, though
not so perfectly as I would, yet as readily as I may: and therwithall I pray
you consider that Quot homines, tot Sententiae, especially in Poetry* wherein
(nevertheless) I dare not challenge any degree, and yet will I at your request
adventure to set down my simple skill in such simple manner as I have used,
referring the same hereafter to the correction of the Laureate. And you shall
have it in these few points followyng.

THe first and most necessary point that ever I found meet to be considered
in making of a delectable poem is this, to ground it upon some fine
invention. For it is not enough to roll in pleasant words, nor yet to thunder
in Rym, Ram, Ruff, by letter (quoth my master Chaucer) nor yet to abound in
apt vocables, or epythetes, unless the Invention have in it also aliquid
salis. By this aliquid salis, I mean some good and fine devise, showing the
quick capacity of a writer: and where I say some good and fine invention, I
mean that I would have if both fine and good. For many inventions are so
superfine, that they are Vix good. And again many Inventions are good, and yet
not finely handled. And for a general for warning what Theme soever you do
take in hand, if you do handle it but tanquam in oratione perpetua, and never
study for some depth of devise in ye Invention, and some figures also in the
handlyng thereof: it will appear to the skillful Reader but a tale of a tubbe.
To deliver unto you general examples it were almost impossible, sithence the
occasions of Inventions are (as it were) infinite: nevertheless take in worth
mine opinion, and perceive my further meaning in these few points. If I should
undertake to write in praise of a gentlewoman, I would neither praise her
crystal eye, nor her cherrie lip, etc. For these things are trita and obuia.
But I would either find some supernatural cause whereby my pen might walk
in the superlatiue degree, or else I would undertake to answer for any
imperfection that she has, and there upon raise the praise of her
commendacion. Likewise if I should disclose my pretense in love, I would either
make a strange discourse of some intolerable passion, or find occasion to
plead by the example of some history, or discover my disquiet in shadows per
Allegoriam, or use the couertest mean that I could to avoid the uncomely
customs of common writers. Thus much I adventure to deliver unto you (my
friend) upon the rule of Invention, which of all other rules is most to be
marked, and hardest to be prescribed in certain and infallible rules,
nevertheless to conclude therein, I would have you stand most upon the
excellency of your Invention, and stick not to study deeply for some fine
devise. For that being found, pleasant words will follow well enough and
fast enough.

2 Your Invention being once devised, take heed that neither pleasure of rhyme,
nor variety of devise, do carry you from it: for as to use obscure and dark
phrases in a pleasant Sonet, is nothing delectable, so to entermingle merry
jests in a serious matter is an Indecorum.

3 I will next advise you that you hold the just measure wherewith you begin
your verse, I will not deny but this may seem a preposterous order: but
because I covet rather to satisfy you particularly, than to undertake a
general tradition, I will not so much stand upon the manner as the matter of my
precepts. I say then, remember to hold the same measure wherewith you begin,
whether it be in a verse of six syllables, eight, ten, twelve, etc. and though
this precept might seem ridiculous unto you, since every young scholar can
conceive that he ought to continue in the same measure where with he begins,
yet do I see and read many men's Poems now adays, which beginning with the
measure of xij. in the first line, and xiiij. in the second (which is the
common kind of verse) they will yet (by that time they have passed over a few
verses) fall into xiiij. and fourtene, and sic de similibus, the which is either
forgetfulness or carelesnes.

4 And in your verses remember to place every word in his natural Emphasis or
sound, that is to say in such wise, and with such length or shortness,
elevation or depression of sillables, as it is commonly pronounced or used: to
express the same we have three manner of accents, grauis, lenis, and
circumflexa, the which I would english thus, the long accent, the short
accent, and that which is indifferent: the grave accent is marked by this
caracte,
/ the light accent is noted thus, \ and the circu^flexe or indifferent is thus
signified: the grave accent is drawn out or eleuate, and makes that syllable
long whereupon it is placed: the light acce^t is depressed or snatched up, and
makes that syllable short upon the which it lights: the circumflexe accent
is indifferent, sometimes short, sometimes long, sometimes depressed and
sometimes eleuate. For example of th'emphasis or natural sound of words, this
word Treasure, has the grave accent upon the first syllable, whereas if it
should be written in this sort, Treasure, now were the second syllable long,
and that were clean contrary to the common use wherewith it is pronounced. For
further explanation hereof, note you that commonly now a days in english rimes
(for I dare not call them English verses) we use none other order but a foot of
two sillables, whereof the first is depressed or made short, and the second is
eleuate or made long: and that sound or sca^ning continues throughout the
verse. We have used in times past other kinds of Meeters: as for example this
following:



No wight in this world, that wealth can attain,


Unless he believe, that all is but vain.
Also our father Chaucer has used the same liberty in feet and measures that
the Latinists do use: and who so ever do peruse and well consider his works,
he shall find that although his lines are not always of one self same number
of Syllables, yet being read by one that has understanding, the longest verse
and that which has most Syllables in it, will fall (to the ear) correspondent
unto that which has fewest sillables in it: and like wise that which has in
it fewest syllables, shall be found yet to consist of words that have such
natural sound, as may seem equal in length to a verse which has many more
sillables of lighter accentes. And surely I can lament that we are fallen into
such a plain and simple manner of writing, that there is none other foot
used but one: whereby our Poemes may justly be called Rithmes, and cannot by any
right challenge the name of a Verse. But since it is so, let us take the forde
as we find it, and let me set down unto you such rules or precepts that
even in this plain foot of two syllables you wreste no word from his
natural and usual sound, I do not mean hereby that you may use none other
words but of two sillables, for therein you may use discretion according to
occasion of matter: but my meaning is, that all the words in your verse be so
placed as the first syllable may sound short or be depressed, the second long
or eleuate, the third short, the fourth long, the fifth short, etc. For
example of my meaning in this point mark these two verses:



I understand your meaning by your eye.


Your meaning I understand by your eye.
In these two verses there seems no difference at all, since the one has the
very self same words that the other has, and yet the latter verse is
neither true nor pleasant, and the first verse may pass the musters. The fault
of the latter verse is that this word understand is therein so placed as the
grave accent falls upon der, and thereby makes der, in this word understand
to be elevated: which is contrary to the natural or usual pronu^ciation: for
we say



understand, and not understand.
5 Here by the way I think it not amiss to forewarne you that you thrust as
few words of many sillables into your verse as may be: and hereunto I might
allege many reasons: first the most ancient English words are of one
syllable, so that the more monasyllables that you use, the truer Englishman you
shall seem, and the less you shall smell of the Inkehorne. Also words of
many syllables do cloye a verse and make it unpleasant, whereas words of one
syllable will more easily fall to be short or long as occasion requires, or
will be adapted to become circumflexe or of an indifferent sound.

6 I would exhort you also to beware of rhyme without reason: my meaning is
hereby that your rhyme lead you not from your first Invention, for many
writers when they have laid the platform of their invention, are yet drawn
sometimes (by ryme) to forget it or at least to alter it, as when they cannot
readily find out a word which may rhyme to the first (and yet continue their
determinate Invention) they do then either botche it up with a word that will
ryme (how small reason soever it carry with it) or else they alter their first
word and so percase decline or trouble their former Invention: But do you
always hold your first determined Invention, and do rather search the bottom
of your brains for apt words, than change good reason for rumbling rhyme.

7 To help you a little with ryme (which is also a plain young scholars
lesson) work thus, when you have set down your first verse, take the last
word thereof and coumpt over all the words of the self same sound by order
of the Alphabete: As for example, the last word of your first line is care,
to ryme therewith you have bare, clare, dare, fare, gare, hare, and share, mare,
snare, rare, stare, and ware, etc. Of all these take that which best may serve
your purpose, carrying reason with rhyme: and if none of them will serve so, then
alter the last word of your former verse, but yet do not willingly alter the
meaning of your Invention.

8 You may use the same Figures or Tropes in verse which are used in prose, and
in my judgment they serve more aptly, and have greater grace in verse than
they have in prose: but yet therein remember this old adage, Ne quid nimis, as
many writers which do not know the use of any other figure than that which is
expressed in repeticion of sundry words beginning all with one letter, the
which (being modestly used) lends good grace to a verse: but they do so
hunte a letter to death, that they make it Crambe, and Crambe bis positum mors
est: therefore Ne quid nimis.

9 Also as much as may be, eschew strange words, or obsoleta and inusitata,
unless the Theme do give just occasion: marie in some places a strange word
does draw attentive reading, but yet I would have you therein to use
discretion.

10 And as much as you may, frame your style to perspicuity and to be sensible:
for the haughty obscure verse does not much delight, and the verse that is to
easy is like a tale of a roasted horse: but let your Poem be such as may both
delight and draw attentive readyng, and therewithal may deliver such matter as
be worth the marking.

11 You shall do very well to use your verse after thenglishe phrase, and not
after the manner of other languages: The Latinists do commonly set the adjective
after the Substantive: As for example Femina pulchra, aedes altae, etc. but if
we should say in English a woman fair, a house high, etc. it would have but
small grace: for we say a good man, and not a man good, etc. And yet I will not
altogether forbid it you, for in some places, it may be borne, but not so
hardly as some use it which write thus: Now let us go to Temple ours,
I will go visit mother mine etc.


Surely I smile at the simplicity of such deuisers which might as well have
said it in plain English phrase, and yet have better pleased all ears, than
they satisfy their own fancies by such superfinesse. Therefore even as I
have advised you to place all words in their natural or most common and
usual pronunciation, so would I wish you to frame all sentences in their
mother phrase and proper Idioma, and yet sometimes (as I have said before) the
contrary may be borne, but that is rather where rhyme enforces, or per
licentiam Poe^ticam, than it is otherwise lawful or commendable.

12 This poetical license is a shrewde fellow, and covers many faults in a
verse, it makes words longer, shorter, of mo sillables, of fewer, newer,
older, truer, falser, and to conclude it turkeneth all things at pleasure, for
example, ydone for done, adowne for down, overcome for overcome, taken for
taken, power for power, heaven for heaven, thewes for good parts or good
qualities, and a number of other which were but tedious and needelesse to
rehearse, since your own judgment and readyng will soon make you epsy such
aduauntages.

13 There are also certain pauses or restes in a verse which may be called
Ceasures, whereof I would be loathe to stand long, since it is at discretion
of the writer, and they have been first devised (as should seem) by the
Musicians: but yet thus much I will adventure to write, that in mine opinion in
a verse of eight sillables, the pause will stand best in the midst, in a
verse of ten it will best be placed at the end of the first four sillables:
in a verse of twelve, in the midst, in verses o^ ^welue, in the first and
fouretene in the second, we place the pause commonly in the midst of the
first, and at the end of the first eight sillables in the second. In Rithme
royal, it is at the writers discretion, and forces not where the pause be
until the end of the line.

14 And here because I have named Rithme royal, I will tell you also mine
opinion as well of that as of the names which other rymes have commonly borne
heretofore. Rythme royal is a verse of ten sillables, and seven such verses
make a staff, whereof the first and third lines do answer (acrosse) in like
terminations and rhyme, the second, fourth, and fifth, do likewise answer each
other in terminations, and the two last do combine and shut up the Sentence:
this has been called Rithme royal, and surely it is a royal kind of verse,
serving best for grave discourses. There is also another kind called Ballade,
and thereof are sundry sorts: for a man may write ballade in a staff of six
lines, every line containing eighte or six sillables, whereof the first and
third, second and fourth do rhyme acrosse, and the fifth and sixth do rhyme
together in conclusion. You may write also your ballad of ten sillables
rimyng as before is declared, but these two were wont to be most commonly used
in ballade, which propre name was (I think) derived of this word in Italian
Ballare, which signifies to dance. And in deed those kinds of rimes serve
best for daunces or light matters. Then have you also a rondlette, the which
does always end with one self same foot or repeticion, and was thereof (in my
judgment) called a rondelet. This may consist of such measure as best likes
the writer, then have you Sonnets, some think that all Poemes (being short)
may be called Sonets, as in deed it is a diminutiue word derived of Sonare,
but yet I can best allow to call those Sonets which are of fouretene lines,
every line containing ten syllables. The first twelve do ryme in staves of
four lines by cross meetre, and the last two ryming together do conclude the
whole There are Dyzaynes, and Syxaines which are of ten lines, and of six
lines, commonly used by the French, which some English writers do also term by
the name of Sonettes. Then is there an old kind of Rithme called Verlayes,
derived (as I have read) of this word Verd which betokens Green, and Lay
which betokens a Song, as if you would say green Songs: but I must tell
you by the way, that I never read any verse which I saw by authority called
Verlay, but one, and that was a long discourse in verses of ten sillables,
whereof the four first did ryme acrosse, and the fifth did answer to the
first and third, breaking off there, and so going on to another termination,
Of this I could show example of imitation in mine own verses written to ye
right honorable ye Lord Gray of Wilton upon my journey into Holland, etc.
There are also certain Poemes devised of ten syllables, whereof the first
answers in termination with the fourth, and the second and third answer
each other: these are more used by other nations than by us, neither can I tell
readily what name to give them. And the co^monest sort of verse which we use
now adays ( viz. the long verse of twelve and fourtene sillables) I know not
certainly how to name it, unless I should say that it does consist of
Poulters measure, which gives.xij. for one doze^ and xiiij. for another. But
let this suffice (if it be not to much) for the sundry sorts of verses which
we use now adays.

15 In all these sorts of verses when soever you undertake to write, avoid
prolixitie and tediousness, and ever as near as you can, do finish the
sentence and meaning at the end of every staff where you wright staves, and at
the end of every two lines where you write by cooples or poulters measure: for
I see many writers which draw their sentences in length, and make an end at
latter Lammas: for commonly before they end, the Reader has forgotten where he
begone. But do you (if you will follow my advise) eschew prolixitie and knit up
your sentences as compendiously as you may, since brevity (so that it be not
drowned in obscurity) is most commendable.

16 I had forgotten a notable kind of ryme, called ryding rhyme, and that is
such as our Master and Father Chaucer used in his Canterbury tales, and in
diverse other delectable and light enterprises: but though it come to my
remembrance somewhat out of order, it shall not yet come altogether out of
time, for I will now tell you a conceit which I had before forgotten to
write: you may see (by the way) that I hold a preposterous order in my
traditions, but as I said before I write moved by good will, and not to show
my skill. Then to return too my matter, as this riding rhyme serves most aptly
to write a merry tale, so Rythme royal is fittest for a grave discourse.
Ballades are best of matters of love, and rondlettes most apt for the beating
or handlyng of an adage or common proverb: Sonets serve as well in matters of
love as of discourse: Dizaymes and Sixames for short Fantazies: Verlayes for
an effectual proposition, although by the name you might otherwise judge of
Verlayes, and the long verse of twelve and fouretene sillables, although it be
now adays used in all Theames, yet in my judgment it would serve best for
Psalms and Himpnes.

I would stand longer in these traditions, were it not that I doubt mine own
ignorance, but as I said before, I know that I write to my freede, and
affying my self thereupon, I make an end.

FINIS.

