A Hundredth sundry Flowers bound up in one small Poesy.

Gathered partly (by translation) in the fine outlandish Gardins of Euripides,
Ovid, Petrarke, Ariosto, and others: and partly by invention, out of our own
fruitful Orchardes in England:

Yelding sundry svveete savors of Tragical, Comical, and Moral Discourses,
both pleasant and profitable to the well smellyng noses of learned Readers.

Meritum petere, grave.

AT LONDON, Imprinted for Richard Smith.

The contents of this Book.
FIrst an excellent and pleasante Comedy entitled Supposes. The second, the
woeful tragedy of Iocasta, containing the utter subversion of Thebes. 73.
Thirdly, a pleasant discourse of the adventures of master. F. I. containing
excellent letters, sonets, Lays, Ballets, Rondlets, Verlayes and verses. 201.
Fourthly, diverse excellent devises of sundry Gentlemen. 294. Fifthly, certain
devises of master Gascoyne, containing his anothamie, his arrignemente, his
praise of mistress Bridges now Lady Sands, the^ his praise of Zouch late the
Lady Gray of Wilton. 344. 345. 346. 347. 348. Gascoyne his passion. 349.
Gascoines libell of divorce. 351. Gascoines praise of his mistress 352.
Gascoines Lullabie. 353. Gascoines Recantation. 355. Gascoynes five notable
devises upon five sundry theames given to him by five sundry Gentlemen in five
sundry meeters. 365. Gascoines gloze upon Dominus ijs (...) haber. 365.
Gascoines good morrow. 368. Gascoines good night. 371. Gascoines council to
Douglas Diue. ^^5. Gascoines counsel to Bartholmew VVythipole. 376. Gascoines
Epitaph upon Captain Bourcher lately slain in Zelande, called the tale of the
stone. 381. Gascoines devise of a mask. 383 Gascoines wodmanship. 394*
Gascoines gardening. 399. Gascoines last voyage into Holland in March. 401.
1572. Lastly the dolorous discourse of Dan Bartholmew of Bathe, wherein is
contained his triumphs, his discourse of love, his extreme passion, his libell
of request to Care, his last will and testament, his farewell. 412. Last of all
the reporter.
The Printer to the Reader.
IT has bin an old saying, that vvhiles two dogs do strive for a bone, the
third may come and carry it away. And this proverb may (as I fear) be well
verefied in me which take in hand the imprinting of this poetical Poesy. For
the case seems doubtful, and I will disclose my conjecture. Master. H. VV.
in the beginning of this work, has in his letter (written to the Readers)
cunningly discharged himself of any such misliking, as the grauer sort of gray
heared iudgers might (perhaps) conceive in the publicatio^ of these pleasant
Pamphlets. And next unto that learned preamble, the letter of. G. T. (by
whom as seems, the first coppie hereof was unto the same. H. VV.
delivered, does with no less clerkly cunning seek to persuade the readers,
that he (also) vvoulde by no means have it published. Now I fear very much
(all these words notvvithsta^ding) that these two gentlemen were of one
assent compact to have it imprinted: And yet, finding by experience that
nothing is so well handled now adays, but that some malicious minds may
either take occasion to mislike it themselves, or else find means to make it
odious unto others: They have therefore (each of them) politiquely prevented
the danger of misreport, and suffered me the poor Printer to run away
with the palm of so perilous a victory. Notwithstanding, having well
perused the work, I find nothing therein amiss (to my judgment) unless it
be two or three vvanton places passed over in the discourse of an amorous
enterprise: The which for as much as the words are cleanly (although the
thing meant be somevvhat natural) I have thought good also to let them pass as
they came to me, and the rather because (as master. H. VV. has well alleged
in his letter to the Reader) the well minded man may reap some commodity out
of the most frivolous works that are written. And as the venomous spider vvil
suck poison out of the most wholesome herb, and the industrious Be can gather
honey out of the most stinking vveede: Even so the discrete reader may take a
happy example by the most lascivious histories, although the captious and
harebraind heads can neither be encoraged by the good, nor forevvarned by the
bad. And thus much I have thought good to say in excuse of some savors, which
may perchance smell unpleasantly to some noses, in some part of this poetical
poesy. Now it has with this fault a greater commodity than common poesies
have been accustomed to present, and that is this, you shall not be constreined
to smell of the flowers therein contained all at once, neither yet to take them
up in such order as they are sorted: But you may take any one flower by it
self, and if that smell not so pleasantly as you would wish, I doubt not yet
but you may find some other which may supply the defects thereof. As thus, he
which would have good moral lessons clerkly handled, let him smell to the
Tragedy translated out of Euripides. He that would laugh at a pretty conceit
closely conveyed, let him peruse the comedy translated out of Ariosto. He that
would take example by the unlawful affections of a lover bestovved upon an
unconstant dame, let them read the report in verse, made by Dan Bartholmevv of
Bathe, or the discourse in prose of the adventures passed by master F. I.
whom the reader may name Freeman Jones, for the better understanding of the
same: he that would see any particular pang of love lively displayed, may here
approve every Pamphlet by the title, and so remain contented. As also diverse
godly himnes and Psalms may in like manner be found in this record. To
conclude, the work is so universal, as either in one place or other, any man's
mind may therevvith be satisfied. The which I adventure (under pretext of this
promise) to present unto all indifferent eyes as follovveth.

Faults escaped. correction.
Folio. 17 line 7 passed a while read paused a while 25 line 29 haltersacke
read haltersicke 30 line 4 confort read consort Ib^de^. line 15 endue read
endowe 32 line 31 been read lain 33 line last, servant read fellow 35 line 3
now read you 65 line 33 town read house 66 line 18 you read your 86 line 23
whether read if 106 line 2 should read should guard 119 line 29 out read one 128
line 4 life read leaf 145 line 15 redoubted read redoubled 163 line 13 stayne
read streyne Ibide^. line 30 leave read lead 206 line 1 frowardness read
forwardness 211 line 23 caught read coucht 212 line 19 wings read twigges 221
line 18 she read he 245 line 30 peers read pearls 267 line 34 neuew read
renew 271 line 16 encorage read enrage 277 line 23 pleasure read displeasure
296 line 24 flyttring read flytting 348 for Lord Gray read Lady Gray 352 line
19 Dame read Dan 369 line 14 darksom storms read darksomnesse 374 line 29 domy
douglase read Doughty Douglasse 375 line 25 crease read creast Ibide^. line 34
money read muze

SVPPOSES: A Comedy written in the Italian tongue by Ariosto, and Englished by
George Gascoygne of Grayes Inn Esquire, and there presented.
The names of the Actors.
BAlia, the Nurse. Polynesta, the young woman. Cleander, the Doctor, suter to
Polynesta. Pasyphilo, the Parasite. Carrion, the Doctors man. Dulypo, feigned
servant and lover of Polynesta. Erostrato, feigned master and suter to
Polynesta. Dalio and Crapyno servants to feigned Erostrato. Scenaese, a
gentleman stranger. Paquetto and Petrucio his servants. Damon, father to
Polynesta. Neuola, and two other his servants. Psyteria, an old hag in his
house. Phylogano, a Scycilian gentleman, father to Erostrato. Lytio, his
servant. Ferrarese, an Inkeeper of Ferrara. The Comedy presented in Ferrara.
The Prologue or argument.
I Suppose you are assembled here, supposing to reap the fruit of my
trauayles: and to be plain, I mean presently to present you with a Comedy
called Supposes, the very name vvherof may peradventure drive into every of
your heads a sundry Suppose, to suppose the meaning of our supposes. Some
percase will suppose we mean to occupy your ears with sophistical
handling of subtle Suppositions. Some other will suppose we go about to
discipher unto you some queint conceiptes, which hitherto have been only
supposed as it were in shadows: and some I see smyling as though they
supposed we would trouble you with the vain suppose of some vvanton
Suppose. But understand, this our Suppose is nothing else but a mystaking or
imagination of one thing for an other: for you shall see the master supposed
for the servant, the servant for the master: the freeman for a slave, and the
bondslaue for a freeman: the stranger for a well known friend, and the
familiar for a stranger. But what? I suppose that even already you suppose me
very fond, that have so simply disclosed unto you the subtilties of these our
Supposes: where otherwise in deed I suppose you should have heard almost
the last of our Supposes, before you could have supposed any of them
arighte. Let this then suffice.

Supposes.
Actus primus.
Scena. j.
BALIA, the Nourse. POLYNESTA, the young woman. HEre is no body, come forth
Polynesta, let us look about, to be sure least any man hear our talk: for I
think within the house the tables, the plankes, the beds, the portals, yea and
the cupbords them selves have ears.

Pol. You might as well have said, the windows and the doors: do you not see
how they harken?


Ba. Well you jest fair, but I would advise you take heed, I have bidden you
a thousand times beware, you will be spied one day talking with Dulippo.


Po. And why should I not talk with Dulippo as well as with any other, I pray
you?


Ba. I have given you a wherefore for this why many times, but go too, follow
your own advise till you ouerwhelme us all with soden mishappe.


Po. A great mishappe I promise you: marie Gods blessing on their heart that
set such a brouche on my cappe.


Ba. Well, look well about you: a man would think it were enough for you
secretly to rejoice, that by my help you have passed so many pleasant nights
together, and yet by my troth I do it more than half against my will, for I
would rather you had settled your fancy in some noble family, yea and it is no
small grief unto me, that rejecting the suites of so many nobles and
gentlemen, you have chosen for your darling a poor servant of your fathers,
by whom shame and infamy is the best dower you can look for to attain.


Po. And I pray you whom may I thank but gentle nourse, that continually
praising him, what for his personage, his courtesy, and above all, the extreme
passions of his mind, in fine you would never cease till I accepted him,
delighted in him, and at length desired him with no less affection, than he
erst desired me.


Ba. I can not deny, but at the beginning I did recommende him unto you (as in
deed I may say that for my self I have a pitiful heart) seeing the depth of
his unbridled affection, and that continually he never ceased to fill mine
ears with lamentable complaynts.


Po. Nay rather that he filled your pursse with bribes and rewards.


Ba. Well you may judge of Nourse as you list: In deed I have thought it
always a deed of charity to help the miserable young men, whose tender youth
consumes with the furious flames of love: but be you sure if I had thought you
would have passed to the terms you now stand in, pity nor pencion, penny nor
pater noster should ever have made Nurse once to open her mouth in the cause.


Po. No of honesty, I pray you, who first brought him into my chamber? who
first taught him the way to my bed but you? fie Nourse fie, never speak of it
for shame, you will make me tell a wise tale anon.


Ba. And have I these thanks for my good will? why then I see well I shall be
counted the cause of all mishappe.


Po. Nay rather the author of my good hap gentle Nourse, for I would thou
knew I love not Dulipo, nor any of so mean estate, but have bestowed my
love more worthily than thou deemest, but I will say no more at this time.


Ba. Then I am glad you have changed your mind yet.


Po. Nay I neither have changed, nor will change it.


Ba. Then I understand you not, how said you?


Po. Mary I say that I love not Dulipo, nor any such as he, and yet I neither
have changed nor will change my mind.


Ba. I can not tell, you love to lie with Dulipo very well: this gear is
Greek to me, either it hangs not well together, or I am very dull of under
standing, speak plain I pray you.


Po. I can speak no plainer, I have sworn to y^ contrary.


Ba. How? make you so deintie to tell it Nourse, least she should reveal it?
you have trusted me as far as may be, I may show to you, in things that
touch your honor if they were known: and make you strange to tell me this? I
am sure it is but a trifle in comparison of those things whereof heretofore you
have made me privy.


Po. Well, it is of greater importance than you think Nourse, yet would I tell
it you under condition and promise that you shall not tell it again, nor give
any sign or token to be suspected that you know it.


Ba. I promise you of my honesty, say on.


Po. Well hear you me then: this young man whom you have always taken for
Dulipo, is a noble borne Sicilian, his right name Erostrato, son to
Philogono, one of the worthiest men in that country.


Ba. How Erostrato? is it not our neighbor, which?


Po. Hold thy talking nourse, and harken to me, that I may explane the whole
case unto thee: the man whom to this day you have supposed to be Dulipo, is
(as I say) Erostrato, a gentleman that came from Sicilia to study in this
City, and even at his first arrival met me in the street, fell enamored of me,
and of such vehement force were the passions he suffered, that immediately he
cast aside both long gown and books, and determined on me only to apply his
study: and to the end he might the more co^modiously both see me and talk
with me, he exchanged both name, habit, clothes and credit with his servant
Dulipo, who^ only he brought with him out of Sicilia, and so with the turning
of a hand, of Erostrato a gentleman, he became Dulipo a serving man, and soon
after sought service of my father, and obtained it.


Ba Are you sure of this?


Po. Yea out of doubt, on the other side Dulippo took^ upon him the name of
Erostrato his master, the habit, the credit, books, and all things
needful to a studente, and in short space profited very much, and is now
esteemed as you see.


Ba. Are there no other Sicylians here: nor none that pass this way, which
may discover them?


Po. Uery few that pass this way, and few or none that tarry here any time.


Ba. This has been a strange adventure, but I pray you how hang these
things together? that the studente whom you say to be the servant, and not
the master, is become an earnest suter to you, and requires you of your
father in marriage?


Po. That is a policy devised between them, to put Doctor Dotipole out of
conceit, the old dotarde, he that so instantly does lie upon my father for
me: but look where he comes, as God help me it is he, out upon him, what a
luskie yonker is this? yet I had rather be a Noonne a thousand times, than be
combred with such a Coystrell.


Ba. Daughter you have reason, but let us go in before he come any nearer.


Polynesta goes in, and Balya stays a little while after, speaking a word
or two to the doctor, and then departs. Scena. ij.
CLEANDER, Doctor. PASIPHILO, Parasite. BALYA, Nourse. WEre there dames here,
or did mine eyes dazzle?

Pa. Nay sir here were Polynesta and her nourse.


Cle. Was my Polynesta here? alas I knew her not.


Ba. He must have better eyesight that should marry your Polynesta, or else
he may chance to ouersee the best point in his tables sometimes.


Pa. Sir it is no marvel, the air is very mistie to day: I my self knew her
better by her apparel than by her face.


Cle. In good says and I thank God I have mine eye sight good and perfect,
little worsse than when I was but twenty years old.


Pa. How can it be otherwise? you are but young.


Cle. I am fifty years old.


Pa. He tells ten less than he is.


Cle. What say thou of ten less?


Pa. I say I would have thought you ten less, you look like one of six and
thirty, or seven and thirty at the most.


Cle. I am no less than I tell.


Pa. You are like enough to live fifty more, show m^ your hand.


Cle. Why is Pasiphilo a Chiromancer?


Pa. What is not Pasiphilo? I pray you show me it a little.


Cle. Here it is.


Pa. O how straight and infracte is this line of life, you will live to the
years of Melchisedech.


Cle. Thou would say, Methusalem.


Pa. Why is it not all one?


Cle. I perceive you are no very good Bibler Pasiphilo.


Pa Yes sir an excellent good Bibler, specially in a bottle: Oh what a mount
of Uenus here is, but this light serves not very well, I will behold it an
other day, when the air is clearer, and tell you somewhat, peradventure to
your contentation.


Cle. You shall do me great pleasure: but tell me, I pray the^ Pasiphilo, whom
doste thou think Polynesta likes better, Erostrato or me?


Pa. Why you out of doubt: She is a gentlewoman of a noble mind, and makes
greater account of the reputation she shall have in marrying your worship,
than that poor scholar, whose birthe and parentage God knows, and very few
else.


Cle. Yet he takes it upon him bravely in the country.


Pa. Yea, where no man knows the contrary: but let him brave it, bost his
birth, and do what he can, the virtue and knowledge that is within this body of
yours, is worth more than all the country he came from.


Cle. It becomes not a man to praise himself: but in deed I may say, and
say truly, that my knowledge has stood me in better steed at a pinche, than
could all the goods in the world. I came out of Otranto when the Turks
won it, and first I came to Padua, after hither; where by reading,
counsailing, and pleading, within twenty years I have gathered and gained as
good as ten thousand Ducats.


Pa. Yea mary, this is the right knowledge, Philosophy, Poetry, Logike, and
all the rest, are but pickling sciences in comparison to this.


Cle. But pyckling in deed, whereof we have a verse:

The trade of Law does fill the boystrous bags,
They svvimme in silk, when others royst in rags.

Pa. O excellent verse, who made it? Virgil?


Cle. Virgil? tushe it is written in one of our gloses.


Pa. Sure who so ever wrote it, the moral is excellent, and worthy to be
written in letters of gold: but to the purpose: I think you shall never
recover the wealth that you lost at Otranto.


Cle. I think I have doubled it, or rather made it four times as much: but
in deed, I lost mine only son there, a child of five years old.


Pa. O great pity.


Cle. Yea, I had rather lost all the goods in the world.


Pa. Alas, alas, by God and grafts of such a stock are very gayson in these
days.


Cle. I know not whether he were slayue, or the Turks took him and kept him as
a bond slave.


Pa. Alas, I could weep for compassion, but there is no remedy but patience,
you shall get many by this young damsel with the grace of God.


Cle. Yea, if I get her.


Pa. Get her? why doubt you of that?


Cle. Why, her father holds me off with delays, so that I must needs doubt.


Pa. Content your self sir, he is a wise man, and desirous to place his
Daughter well, he will not be too rash in his determination, he will think
well of the matter, and let him think, for the longer he thinks, the more
good of you shall he think: whose wealth, whose virtue, whose skill, or whose
estimation can he compare to yours in this City?


Cle. And have thou not told him that I would make his Daughter a dower of two
thousand Ducates?


Pa. Why, even now, I came but from thence since.


Cle. What said he?


Pa. Nothing, but that Erostrato had proffered the like.


Cle. Erostrato? how can he make any dower, and his father yet alive?


Pa. Think you I did not tell him so? yes I warrant you, I forgot nothing that
may further your cause, and doubt you not, Erostrato shall never have her unless
it be in a dream.


Cle. Well gentle Pasiphilo; go thy ways and tell Damon I require nothing but
his daughter, I will none of his goods: I shall enrich her of mine own: and if
this dower of two thousand Ducats seem not sufficient, I will make it five
hundredth more, yea a thousand, or what so ever he will dema^nd rather the^
fail: go to Pasiphilo, show thy self fre^dly in working this feate for me,
spare for no cost, since I have gone thus far, I will be loath to be out
^idden. Go


Pa. Where shall I come to you again?


Cle. At my house.


Pa. When?


Cle. When thou will.


Pa. Shall I come at dinner time?


Cle I would bid thee to dinner, but it is a Saints even which I have ever
fasted.


Pa. Fast till thou famishe.


Cle. Hark.


Pa. He speaks of a dead man's fast.


Cle. Thou hear me not.


Pa. Nor thou understand me not.


Cle. I dare say thou art angry I bid thee not to dinner, but come if thou
will, thou shall take such as thou find.


Pa. What? think you I know not where to dine?


Cle. Yes Pasiphilo thou art not to seek.


Pa. No be you sure, there are enowe will pray me.


Cle. That I know well enough Pasiphilo, but thou can not be better welcome
in any place than to me, I will tarry for thee.


Pa. Well, since you will ne^des, I will come.


Cle. Dispatche then, and bring no news but good.


Pa. Better than my reward by the rood.


Cleander exit, Pasiphilo restat. Scena. iij.
PASIPHILO. DVLIPO. O Miserable covetous wretch, he finds an excuse by S
Nicholas fast, because I should not dine with him, as though I should dine at
his own dishe: he makes goodly feasts I promise you, it is no wonder though
he think me bound unto him for my fare: for over and besides that his
provision is as skant as may be, yet there is great difference between his
diet and mine. I never so much as s^ppe of the wine that he tastes, I feed at
the bords end with broune bread: Marie I reach always to his own dishe, for
there are no more but that only on the table: Yet he thinks that for one such
diner I am bound to do him all the service that I can, and thinks me
sufficiently rewarded for all my travel, with one such festival promotion:
and yet peradventure some men think I have great gaynes under him: but I may
say and swear, that this dosen year I have not gained so much in value as the
points at my hose (which are but three with codpeece point and al): he thinks
that I may feed upon his favor and fair words: but if I could not otherwise
provide for one, Pasiphilo were in a wise case. Pasiphilo has mo pastures to
pass in than one, I warrant you: I am of household with this scholar
Erostrato, his riuale, as well as with Domine Cleander, now with the one, and
then with the other, according as I see their Caters provide good cheer at the
market: and I find the means so to handle the matter, that I am welcome to
both. If the one see me talk with the other, I make him believe it is to
harken news in the furtherance of his cause, and thus I become a broker on
both sides. Well, let them both apply the matter as well as they can, for in
deed I will travel for none of them both: yet will I seem to work wonders
on each hand. But is not this one of Damons servants that comes forth? it
is, of him I shall understand where his master is. Whither goes this ioyly
gallante?

Du. I come to seek some body that may accompany my master at dinner, he is
alone, and would feign have good company.


Pa. Seek no further, you could never have found one better than me.


Du. I have no commission to bring so many.


Pa. How many? I will come alone.


Du. How can thou come alone that have continually a legion of ravening
wolves within thee?


Pa. Thou do as servants commonly do, hate all that love to visit their
masters.


Du. And why?


Pa. Because they have too many teeth as you think.


Du. Nay because they have to many tongues.


Pa. Tongues? I pray you what did my tongue ever hurt you.


Du. I speak but merrily with you Pasiphilo, go in, my master is ready to
dine.


Pa. What? dines he so early?


Du. He that rises early, dines early.


Pa. I would I were his man, master doctor never dines till noone, and how
dilicately then god knows, I will be bold to go in, for I count my self
bidden.


Du. You were best so.


Hard hap had I when I first begone this unfortunate enterprise, for I supposed
the readiest medicine to my miserable effect^s had been to change name,
clothes, and credit with my servant, and to place my self in Damons service,
thinking that as sheuering cold by glowing fire, thurst by drink, hunger by
pleasant repasts, and a thousand such like passions find remedy by their
contraries, so my restles desire might have found quiet by continual
contemplation. But alas, I find that only love is insatiable, for as the fly
plays with the flame till at last she is cause of her own decay, so the
lover that thinks with kissing and colling to content his unbridled apetite,
is commonly seen the only cause of his own consumption: Two years are now
paste since under the color of Damons service I have been a sworn servant to
Cupid, of who^ I have received as much favor and grace as ever man found in
his service, I have free liberty at al times to behold my desired, to talk
with her, to embrace her, yea (be it spoken in secret) to lie with her, I
reap the fruits of my desire, yet as my joys abound, even so my pains
increase, I fare like the covetous man, that having all the world at will, is
never yet content, the more I have, the more I desire. Alas, what wretched
estate have I brought my self unto, if in the end of all my far fetches,
she be given by her father to this old doting doctor, this buzard, this
bribing villain, that by so many means seeks to obtain her at her fathers
hands? I know she loves me best of all others, but what may that prevail when
perforce she shall be constrained to marie another? Alas, y^ pleasant taste of my
sugared joys does yet remain so perfect in my remembrance, that the least
soppe of sorrow seems more sour th^^ gall in my mouth: if I had never known
delight, with better contentatio^ might I have passed these dreadful dolours.
And if this old.M. impsimus (whom the pockes consume) should wyn her, then may
I say, farewell the pleasant talk, the kind embracings, yea farewell the sight
of my Polynesta, for he like a jealous wretch will pen ^ir up, that I think
the birds of the air shall not win the sight of her. I hoped to have cast
a block in his way, by the means that my servant, who is supposed to be
Erostrato, and with my habit and credit is well esteemed, should proffer
himself a suter, at the least to counteruaile the doctors profers: but my
master knowing the wealth of the one, and doubting the state of the other, is
determined to be fed no longer with fair words, but to accept the doctor,
(whom he right well knows) for his son in law: well, my servant promised
me yesterday to devise yet again some new conspiracy to drive master doctor
out of conceit, and to lay a snare that the fox himself might be caughte
in, what it is, I know not, nor I saw him not since he went about it: I will
go see if he be within, that at least if he help me not, he may yet prolong
my life for this once. But here comes his lackie, ho Jack hark, where is
Erostrato?

Here must Crapine be coming in with a basket and a stick in his hand.
Scena. iiij.
CRAPINO the Lackie. DVLIPO. ERostrato? mary he is in his skin.

Du. Ah hooresone boy, I say, how shall I find Erostrato?


Cra. Find him? how mean you, by the week or by the year.


Du. You crack halter, if I catch you by the ears, I shall make you answer
me directly.


Cra. In deed?


Du. Tarry me a little.


Cra. In faith sir I have no leisure.


Du. Shall we try who can run fastest?


Cra. Your legs be longer than mine, you should have given me the advantage.


Du. Go to, tell me where is Erostrato?


Cra. I left him in the street, where he gave me this Casket, this basket I
would have said, and bad me bear it to Dalio, and return to him at the Dukes
Palace.


Du. If thou see him, tell him I must needs speak with him immediately: or
abide awhyle, I will go seek him my self, rather than be suspected by going
to his house.


Crapino departs, and Dulipo also: after Dulipo comes in again seeking
Erostrato. Finis Actus. 1.
Actus. ij.
Scena. j.
DVLIPO. ^ROSTRATO. I Think if I had as many eyes as Argus, I could not have
sought a man more narrowly in every street and every by lane, there are not
many gentlemen, scholars, nor Marcha^ntes in the City of Ferrara, but I have
met with them, except him, peradventure he is come home an other way: but
look where he comes at the last.

Ero. In good time have I spied my good master.


Du. For the love of God call me Dulipo, not master, maintain the credit that
thou haste hitherto kept, and let me alone.


Ero. Yet sir let me sometimes do my duty unto you, especially where no body
hears.


Du. Yea, but so long the Parat uses to cry knappe in sport, that at the
last she calls her master knave in earnest: so long you will use to call me
master, that at the last we shall be heard. What news?


Ero. Good.


Du. In deed?


Ero. Yea excellent, we have as good as won the wager.


Du. Oh, how happy were I if this were true.


Ero. Hear you me, yesternight in the evening I walked out, and found
Pasiphilo, and with small entreating I had him home to supper, where by such
means as I used, he became my great friend, and told me the whole order of
our adversaries determination: yea and what Damon does intend to do also, and
has promised me that from time to time, what he can epsy he will bring me
word of it.


Du. I can not tell whether you know him or no, he is not to trust unto, a very
flattering and a lying knave.


Ero. I know him very well, he can not deceive me, and this that he has told
me I know must needs be true.


Du. And what was it in effect?


Ero. That Damon had purposed to give his daughter in marriage to this doctor,
upon ye dower that he has proffered.


Du. Are these your good news? your excellent news?


Ero. Stay awhile, you will understand me before you hear me.


Du. Well, say on.


Ero. I answered to that, I was ready to make her the like dower.


Du. Well said.


Ero. Abide, you hear not the worst yet.


Du. O God, is there any worsse behind?


Ero. Worsse? why what assurance could you suppose that I might make without
some special consent from Philogono my father?


Du. Nay you can tell, you are better scholar than I.


Ero. In deed you have lost your time: for the books that you toss now a
days, treat of small science.


Du. Leave thy jesting, and proceed.


Ero. I said further, that I received letters lately from my father, whereby I
understood that he would be here very shortly to perform all that I had
proffered: therefore I required him to request Damo^ on my behalf, that he would
stay his promise to the doctor for a fourthnight or more.


Du. This is somewhat yet, for by this means I shall be sure to linger and live
in hope one fourthnight longer, but at the fourthnights end when Philogono
comes not, how shall I then do? yea and though he came, how may I any way
hope of his consent, when he shall see, that to follow this amorous enterprise,
I have set aside all study, all remembrance of my duty, and all dread of
shame. Alas, alas, I may go hang my self.


Ero. Comfort your self man, and trust in me: there is a salve for every
sore, and doubt you not, to this mischief we shall find a remedy.


Du. O friend revive me, that hitherto since I first attempted this matter have
been continually dying.


Ero. Well, harken a while then: this morning I took my horse and rode into
the fields to solace my self, and as I passed the foorde beyonds S. Anthonies
gate, I met at the foot of the hill a gentleman riding with two or three men,
and as me thought by his habit and his looks, he should be none of the
wise^^. He saluted me, and I him: I asked him from whence he came, and whither
he would? he answered that he had come from Venice, then from Padua, now was
going to Ferrara, and so to his country, which is Scienna: As soon as I
know him to be a Scenese, suddenly lifting up mine eyes, as it were with an
admiration I said unto him, are you a Scenese, and come to Ferrara? why not,
said he: quoth I, half and more with a trembling voice, know you the danger
that should ensue if you be known in Ferrara to be a Scenese? he more than
half amassed, desired me earnestly to tell him what I meant.


Du. I understand not whereto this tends.


Ero. I believe you, but hearken to me.


Du. Go too then.


Ero. I answered him in this sort: Gentleman, because I have heretofore found
very courteous entertaynement in your country, being a student there, I
account my self as it were bound to a Scenese, and therefore if I knew of
any mishappe toward any of that country, God forbid but I should disclose it:
and I marvel that you know not of the injury that your countrymen offered
this other day to the Ambassadors of County Hercule.


Du. What tales he tells me: what appertain these to me?


Ero. If you will harken a while, you shall find them no tales, but that they
appertain to you more than you think for.


Du. Forth.


Ero. I told him further, these Ambassadoures of County Hercule had diverse
Mules, Wagons, and Charettes, laden with diverse costly jewels, gorgious
furniture, and other things which they carried as presents, passing that way to
the king of Naples* the which were not only stayed in Sciene by the officers
who^ you call Customers, but serched, ransacked, tossed and turned, and in the
end exacted for tribute, as if they had been the goods of a mean merchant.


Du. Whither the devil will he? is it possible that this gear appertains
any thing to my cause? I find neither head nor foot in it.


Ero. O how impacie^t you are: I pray you stay a while.


Du. Go to yet a while then.


Ero. I proceeded, that upon these causes the Duke sent his Chauncelor to
declare the case unto the Senate there, of whom he had the most discourteous
answer that ever was heard, whereupon he was so enraged with all of that
country, that for revenge he had sworn to spoil as many of them as ever
should come to Ferrara, and to send them home in their dublet and their hose.


Du. And I pray thee how could thou upon the sudden devise or imagine such
a lie? and to what purpose?


Ero. You shall hear by and by a thing as fit for our purpose, as any could
have happened.


Du. I would feign hear you conclude.


Ero. You would feign leap over the style, before you come at the hedge: I
would you had heard me, and seen the gestures that I enforced to make him
believe this.


Du. I believe you, for I know you can counterfeit well.


Ero. Further I said, the duke had charged upon great penalties, that the
Inholders and vitlers should bring word daily of as many Sceneses as came to
their houses: the gentleman being (as I gessed at the first) a man of small
sapientia, when he heard these news, would have turned his horse an other way.


Du. By likelyhoode he was not very wise when he would believe that of his
cu^ntrey, which if it had been true, every man must needs have known it.


Ero. Why not? when he had not been in his country for a month paste, and I
told him this had happened within these seven days.


Du. Belike he was of small experience.


Ero. I think, of as little as may be: but best of all for our purpose, and
good adventure it was, that I met with such an one. Now harken I pray thee.


Du. Make an end I pray thee.


Ero. He, as I say, when he hard these words, would have turned the bridle, and
I say^ing a countenance as though I were somewhat pensive and careful for
him, passed a while, and after with a great sighe said to him: gentleman, for
the courtesy that (as I said) I have found in your country, and because your
affairs shall be the better dispatched, I will find the means to lodge you
in my house, and you shall say to every man, that you are a Sicilan of
Cathanea, your name Philogono, father to me that am in deed of that country
and city, called here Erostrato: and I (to pleasure you) will (during your
abode here) do you reverence as you were my father.


Du. Out upon me, what a gross hedded fool am I? now I perceive whereto this
tale tends.


Ero. Well, and how like you of it?


Du. Indifferently, but one thing I doubt.


Ero. What is that?


Du. Marie, that when he has been here two or three days, he shall hear of
every man that there is no such thing between the Duke and the Town of Sciene.


Ero. As for that let me alone, I do entertain and will entertain him so
well, that within these two or three days I will disclose unto him all the
whole matter, and doubt not but to bring him in for performance of as much as
I have promised to Damon: for what hurt can it be to him, when he shall bind
a strange name and not his own?


Du. What, think you he will be entreated to stand hounde for a dower of two
thousand Ducates by the year?


Ero. Yea why not, if it were ten thousand, as long as he is not in deed the
man that is bound?


Du. Well, if it be so, what shall we be the nerer to our purpose.


Ero. Why, when we have done as much as we can, how can we do any more?


Du. And where have you left him?


Ero. At the Inn, because of his horses, he and his men shall lie in my house.


Du. Why brought you him not with you?


Ero. I thought better to use your advise first.


Du. Well, go take him home, make him all the cheer you can, spare for no
cost, I will allow it.


Ero. Content, look where he comes.


Du. Is this he? go meet him, by my truth he lokes even like a go^d soul,
he that fisheth for him, might be sure to catch a cods head: I will rest
here a while to discipher him.


Erostrato espyeth the Scenese and goes toward him. Dulippo stands aside.
Scena. ij.
The SCENES^. FAVMLVS his servant. EROSTRATO. HE that trauaileth in this
world passes by many perilles.

Fa. You say true sir, if the boat had been a little more laden this morning
at the ferrie, we had been all drowned, for I think, there are none of us
that could have swomme.


Sc. I speak not of that.


Fa. O you mean the foul way that we had since we* came from this Pad^a, I
promise you, I was afraid twice or thrice, that your mule would have lien
fast in the mire.


Sc. Jesus, what a blockehead thou art, I speak of the peril we are in
presently since we came into this city.


Fa. A great peril I promise you, that we were no so^er arrived, than you
found a friend that brought you from the Inn, and lodged you in his own
house.


Sc. Yea marie, God reward the gentle young man that we met, for else we had
been in a wise case by this time. But have done with these tales, and take you
heed, and you also sir, take heed y^ none of you say we be Sceneses, and
remember that you call me Philogano of Cathanea.


Fa. Sure I shall never remember these outlandish words I could well remember
Haccanea.


Sc. I say, Cathaenea, and not Haccanea, with a vengeance.


Fa. Let another name it then when need is, for I shall never remember it.


Sc. Then hold thy peace, and take heed thou name not Scene.


Fa. How say you, if I feign my self dum as I did once in the house of
Crisobolus?


Sc. Do as thou think best: but look where comes the gentleman whom we
are so much bound unto.


Ero. Welcome, my dear father Philogano.


Sc. Gramercie my good son Erostrato.


Ero. That is well said, be mindful of your tongue, for these Ferareses be as
crafty as the devil of hell.


Sc. No, no, be you sure we will do as you have bidden us.


Ero. For if you should name Scene they would spoil you immediatlye, and turn
you out of the town, with more shame, than I would should befall you for a
thousand Crown^s.


Sc. I warant you, I was giving the^ warning as I came to you, and I doubt not
but they will take good heed.


Ero. Yea and trust not the servants of my householde to far, for they are
F^rareses all, and never knew my father, nor came never in Sicilia: this is my
house, will it please you to go in? I will follow.


They go in. Dulipo tarieth and espyeth the Doctor coming in with his man.
Scena. iij.
DVLIPPO alone. THis gear has had no evil beginning, if it continue so and
fall to happy end. But is not this the silly doctor with the side bonet, the
doting fool, that dare presume to become a suter to such a peerlesse Paragons?
O how covetousness does blind the common sort of men: Damon more desirous of
the dower, than mindful of his gentle and gallant daughter, has determined
to make him his son in law who for his age may he his father in law, and
has greater respect to the abundance of goods, than to his own natural
child. He bears well in mind to fill his own purse, but he little
remembers that his daughters purse shall be continually empty, unless Master
Doctor fill it with double ducke eggs. Alas, I jest and have no joy, I will
stand here aside and laughe a little at this lobcocke.

Dulippo espieth the Doctor and his man coming. Scena. iiij.
CARRION the doctors man. CLEANDER. DVLIPPO. Master, what the devil mean you
to go seek guestes at this time of the day? the Majors officers have dy^ed
ere this time, which are always the last in the market.

Cle. I come to seek Pasiphilo, to the end he may dyne with me.


Ca. As though six mouths and the cat for the seventh, be not sufficient to
eat an harlotrie shotterell, a pennieworthe of chese, and half a score
spurlinges, this is all the dainties you have dressed for you and your family.


Cle. Ah greedy gut, art thou afearde thou shall want?


Ca. I am afearde in deed, it is not the first time I have found it so.


Du. Shall I make some sport with this gallant? what shall I say to him?


Cle. Thou art afearde belike that he will eat thee and the rest.


Ca. Nay, rather that he will eat your mule, both hear and hyde.


Cle. Hear and hyde? and why not flesh and all?


Ca. Because she has none, if she had any flesh, I think you had eaten her
your self by this time.


Cle. She may thank you then, for your good attendance.


Ca. Nay she may thank you for your small allowance.


Du. In faith now let me alone.


Cle. Hold thy peace drunken knave, and espy me Pasiphilo.


Du. Since I can do no better, I will set such a staunce between him and
Pasiphilo, that all this town shall not make them friends.


Ca. Could you not have sent to seek him, but you must come your self?
surely you come for some other purpose, for if you would have had Pasiphilo to
dinner, I warant you he would have tarried here an hour since.


Cle. Hold thy peace, here is one of Damons servant, of him I shall
understand where he is: good fellow art not thou one of Damons servants?


Du. Yes sir, at your knamandement.


Cle. Gramercie, tell me then, has Pasiphilo been there this day or no?


Du. Yes sir, and I think he be there still, ah, ah, ah.


Cle. What laughest thou?


Du. At a thing, that every man may not laugh at.


Cle. What?


Du. Talk, that Pasiphilo had with my master this day.


Cle. What talk I pray thee?


Du. I may not tell it.


Cle. Does it concern me?


Du. Nay I will say nothing.


Cle. Tell me.


Du. I can say no more.


Cle. I would but know if it concern me, I pray thee tell me.


Du. I would tell you, if I were sure you would not tell it again.


Cle. Believe me I will keep it close: Carrion give us leave a little, go aside.


Du. If my master should know that it came by me, I were better die a
thousand deaths.


Cle. He shall never know it, say on.


Du. Yea, but what assurance shall I have?


Cle. I lay thee my faith and honesty in paune.


Du. A pretty paune, the fulkers will not lend you a farthing on it.


Cle. Yea, but amongst honest men it is more worth than gold.


Du. Yea marie sir, but where be they? but will you needs have me to tell it
unto you?


Cle. Yea I pray thee if it any thing appertain to me.


Du. Yes it is of you, and I would gladly tell it you, because I would not
have such a man of worship so scorned by a villain ribaulde.


Cle. I pray thee tell me then.


Du. I will tell you so that you will swear never to tell it to Pasiphilo, to
my master, nor to any other body.


Ca. Surely it is some toye devised to get some money of him.


Cle. I think I have a book here.


Ca. If he knew him as well as I, he would never go about it, for he may
as sone get one of his teeth from his jaws with a pair of pinchers, as a
penny out of his purs^ with such a conceit.


Cle. Here is a letter will serve the turn: I swear to thee by the contents
hereof never to disclose it to any man.


Du. I will tell you, I am sorry to see how Pasiphilo does abuse you,
persuading you that always he labors for you, where in de^de, he lies on
my master continually, as it were with tooth and nail for a stranger, a
scholar, borne in Sicilia they call him Roscus or arskisse, he has a mad
name I can never hit upon it.


Cle. And thou recknest it as madly: is it not Erostrato?


Du. That same, I should never have remembered it: and the villain speaks all
the evil of you that can ^e devised.


Cle. To whom?


Du. To my master, yea and to Polinesta herself sometimes.


Cle. Is it possible, Ah slave, and what says he?


Du. More evil than I can imagine: that you are the miserablest and most
nigardly man that ever was.


Cle. Says Pasiphilo so by me?


Du. And that as often as he comes to your house, he is like to die for
hunger, you fare so well.


Cle. That the devil take him else.


Du. And that you are the testiest man, and most diverse to please in the whole
world, so that he cannot please you unless he should even kill himself with
continual pain.


Cle. O deuilishe tongue.


Du. Furthermore, that you cough continually and spitte, so that a dog cannot
abide it.


Cle. I never spitte nor coughe more than thus, vho, vho, and that but since I
caughte this murre, but who is free from it?


Du. You say true sir, yet further he says, your arm holes stincke, your
feet worse than they, and your breathe worst of all.


Cle. If I quite him not for this gear.


Du. And that you are bursen in the cods.


Cle. O villain, he lies, and if I were not in the street thou should see
them.


Du. And he says, that you desire this young gentlewoman, as much for other
men's pleasure as for your own.


Cle. What means he by that?


Du. Peradventure that by her beauty, you would entice many young men to your
house.


Cle. Young men? to what purpose?


Du. Nay, guess you that.


Cle. Is it possible that Pasiphilo speaks thus of me?


Du. Yea, and much more.


Cle. And does Damon believe him?


Du. Yea, more than you would think, in such sort, that long ere this, he
would have given you a flat repulse, but Pasiphilo entreated him to continue
you a suter for his advantage.


Cle. How for his advantage?


Du. Marie, that during your suit he might still have some reward for his
great pains.


Cle. He shall have a rope, and yet that is more than he deserves: I had
thought to have given him these hose when I had worn them a little nearer, but
he shall have a. etc.


Du. In good faith sir, they were but lost on him. Will you any thing else
with me sir?


Cle. Nay, I have heard to much of thee already.


Du. Then I will take my leave of you.


Cle. Farewell, but tell me, may I not know thy name?


Du. Sir, they call me Foul fall you.


Cle. An ill favored name by my truth, art thou this country man?


Du. No sir, I was borne by a castle me^ call Scabbe catch you, fare you well
sir.


Cle. Farewell, oh God how have I been abused? what a spokesman? what a
messanger had I provided?


Car. Why sir, will you tarry for Pasiphilo till we die for hunger?


Cle. Trouble me not, that the devil take you both.


Car. These news what so ever they be, like him not.


Cle. Art thou so hungry yet? I pray to God thou he never satisfied.


Car. By the mass no more I shall as long as I am your servant.


Cle. Go with mischaunce.


Car. Yea, and a mischief to you, and to all such covetous wretches.


Finis. Actus. 2.
Actus iij.
Scena. 1.
DALIO the cook. CRAPINE the lackie* EROSTRATO. DVLIPPO. BY that time we come
to the house, I trust that of these xx. eggs in the basket we shall find but
very few whole, but it is a folly to talk to him: what the devil, will thou
never lay that stick out of thy hand? he fights with the dogs, beats
the bears, at every thing in the streate he finds occasion to tarry, if he
spy a slipstring by the way such another as himself, a Page, a Lackie or a
dwarf, the devil of hell cannot hold him in chains, but he will be doing
with him: I cannot go two steps, but I must look back for my yonker: go
to halter sack, if you break one egg I may chance break.

Cra. What will you break? your nose in mine ars^^


Da. Ah beast.


Cra. If I be a beast, yet I am no horned beast.


Da. Is it even so? is the wind in that door? If I were vnlode^ I would tell
you whether I be a horned beast or no.


Cra. You are always laden either with wine or with ale.


Dal. Ah spitef^ll boy, shall I suffer him?


Cra. Ah cowardelie beast, dare thou strike and say never a word?


Dal. Well, my master shall know of this geere, either he shall redress it,
or he shall lose one of us.


Cra. Tell him the worst thou can by me.


Erostra. and Du. ^x improuiso. Ero. What noise, what a rule is this?


Cra. Marye sir, he strikes me because I tell him of his swearing.


Dal The villain lies deadly, he reuiles me because I bid him make have.


Ero. Holla: no more of this. Dalio, do you make in a readiness those
Pigeons, stock Doves, and also the breast of Ueale: and let your vessel be as
clear as glass against I return, that I may tell you which I will have
roasted, and which boiled. Crapine, lay down that basket and follow me. Oh
that I could tell where to find Pasiphilo, but look where he comes that can
tell me of him.


Dull. What have you done with Philogano your father?


Dulipo is espied by Erostrato. Ero. I have left him within, I would feign
speak with Pasiphilo, can you tell me where he is?


Du. He dined this day with my master, but whether he went from thence I know
not, what would you with him?


Ero. I would have him go tell Damon that Philogano my father is come and
ready to make assurance of as much as he will require. Now shall I feach master
doc^or a schole point, he trauaileth to none other end but to catch Cornua,
and he shall have them, for as old as he is, and as many subtilties as he has
learned in the law, he can not go beyond me one ace.


Du. O dear friend, go thy ways seek Pasiphilo, find him out, and conclude
somewhat to our contentation.


Ero. But where shall I find him?


Du. At the feasts if there be any, or else in the market with the poulters
or the fishemongers.


Ero. What should he do with them?


Du. Mary he watches whose Caters bie the best meat, if any bie a fat Capon,
a good breast of Ueale, fresh Samon or any such good dishe, he follows to
the house, and either with some news, or some stale jest he will be sure to
make himself a geast.


Ero. In faith, and I will seek there for him.


Du. Then must you needs find him, and when you have done I will make you
laughe.


Ero. Whereat?


Du. At certain sport I made to day with master doctor.


Ero. And why not now?


Du. No it asks further leisure, I pray thee dispatche, and find out
Pasiphilo that honest man.


Dulippo taryeth. Scena. ij.
DVLIPPO alone. THis amorous cause that hangs in controversy between Domine
doctor and me, may be compared to the^ that play at primero, of who^ some one
peradventure shall leese a great sum of money before he win one stake, and at
last half in anger shall set up his rest, win it, and after that another,
another, and another, till at last he draw ye most part of the money to his
heap, ye other by little and little still deminishi^g his rest, till at last he
be come as near the brinke, as erst ye other was, yet again peradventure
fortune smiling on him, he shall as it were by piece meal, pull out ye guts of
his fellows bags, and bring him barer than he himself was tofore, and so in
play continue still, (fortune favoring now this way now y^ way) till at last
ye one of the^ is left with as many crosses as God has brethren: O how often
have I thought my self sure of the upper hand herein? but I triumphed before
the victory: and then how often again have I thought the field^ lost? Thus
have I been tossed now over, now under, even as fortune list to wherle the
wheel, neither sure to win nor certain to loose the wager: and this
practice that now my servant has devised, although hitherto it has not
succeeded amiss, yet can I not count my self assured of it, for I fear still
that one mischance or other will come and turn it topsie tur^ie. But look
where my master comes.

Damon coming in, espieth Dulippo and calls him. Scena. iij.
DAMON. DVLIPPO. NEVOLA, and two mo servants. DVlipo.

Du. Here sir.


Da. Go in and bid Neuola and his fellows come hither that I may tell them
what they shall go about, and go you into my study, there upon the shelfe you
shall find a roll of writings which John of the Deane made to my father, when
he sold him the Grange ferme, endorced with both their names: bring it hither
to me.


Du. It shall be done sir.


Da. Go, I will prepare other manner of writings for you tha^ you are aware of.
O fools that trust any man but themselves now adays, oh spiteful fortune,
thou do me wrong I think, that from the depth of Hell pit thou have sent
me this servant to be the subversion of me and all mine, come hither sirs and
hear what I shall say unto you: go in to my study, where you shall find
Dulippo, step to him all at once, take him and with a cord that I have laid
on the table for the nonce, bind him hand and foot, carry him into the
dungeo^ under the steares, make fast the door and bring me the kay, it hangs
by upon a pin ou the wall, dispatche and do this gear as privily as you can,
and thou Neuola come hither to me again with speed.


Ne. Well sir I shall.


Da. Alas how shall I be revenged of this extreme despite? if I punish my
servant according to his diuelishe deserts, I shall heap further cares upon
mine own head, for to such detestable offenses no punishment can seem
sufficient, but only death: and in such cases it is not lawful for a man to
be his own caruer, the laws are ord^yned, and officers appointed to minister
justice for the redress of wrongs: and if to the potestates I complain me, I
shall publishe mine own reproach to the world: yea, what should it prevail me
to use all the punishments that can be devised? the thing once done can not be
undone. My daughter is defloured, and utterly dishonested, how can I then wype
that blot off my browe? and on whom shall I seek revenge? Alas, alas, I my
self have been the cause of all these cares, and have deserved to bear the
punishment of all these mishappes. Alas, I should not have committed my dearest
darling in custody to so careless a creature as this old Nourse: for we see
by common proof, that these old women be either peeuishe, or to pitiful:
either easily inclined to evil, or quickly corrupted with bribes and rewards.
O wife, my good wife (that now lie cold in the grave) now may I well
bewail the want of thee, and mourning now may I bemone that I miss thee: if
thou had lived, such was thy government of the least things, that thou
would prudently have provided for the preservation of this pearl: a costly
jewel may I well account her, that has been my chief comfort in youth, and
is now become the coro^^ue of mine age. O Polynesta, full evil have thou
requ^^ed the clemency of thy careful father, and yet to excuse thee giltlesse
before God, and to condemn thee guilty before the world, I can count none
other but my wretched self the caytife and causer of all my cares: for of all
the duties that are requisite in humane life, only obedience is by the
parents to be required of the child, where on ye other side the parents are
bound, first to beget them, then to bring the^ forth, after to nourish them,
to preserve them from bodily perils in the cradle, from danger of soul by
godly education, to match them in comfort inclined to virtue, to banish them
all idle and wanton company, to allow them sufficient for their sustentation,
to cut of excess the open gate of sin, seldom or never to smile on them
unless it be to their encouragement in virtue, and finally, to provide them
marriages in time convenient, lest neglected of us, they learn to set either
to much or to little by themselves: five years are past since I might have
married her, when by continual excuses I have prolonged it to my own
perdition: Alas, I should have considered, she is a collop of my own flesh,
what should I think to make her a princess? Alas alas, a poor kingdom have
I now caught to endue her with: it is too true, that of all sorrows this is the
head source and chief fountain of all furies: the goods of the world are
incertaine, the gains to be rejoiced at, and the loss not greatly to be
lamented, only the children cast away, cutteth the parents throat with the
knife of inward care, which knife will kill me surely, I make none other
accoumpte.


Damons servants come to him again. Scena. iiij.
NEVOLA. DAMON. PASIPHILO. SIr, we have done as you badde us, and here is the
key.

Da. Well, go then Neuola and seek master Casteling the iayler, he dwells by
S. Antonies gate, desire him to lend me a pair of the fetters he uses for his
prisoners, and come again quickly.


Ne Well sir.


Da. Hear you, if he ask what I would do with them, say you ca^ not tell, and
tell neither him nor any other, what is become of Dulippo.


I warante you sir. Fie upon the Devil, it is a thing almost impossible for a
man now a days to handle money but the metal will stick on his fingers: I
marvelled always at this fellow of mine Dulippo, that of the wages he received,
he could maintain himself so bravely apparelled, but now I perceive the
cause, he had the disbursing and receite of al my masters affairs, the keys of
the granair, Dulippo here, Dulippo there, in favor with my master, in favor
with his daughter, what would you more, he was Magister fac totum, he was as
fine as the Crusadoe, and we silly wretches as course as canuas: well, behold
what it is come to in the end, Pasi. subito and improuiso venit.
he had bin better to have done less.

Pa. Thou say true Neuola, he has done to much in deed.


Ne. From whence come thou in the devils name?


Pa. Out of the same house thou came from, but not out of the same door.


Ne. We had thought thou had been gone long since.


Pa. When I arose from the table, I felt a rumbling in my belly, which made
me run to the stable, and there I fell on sleep upon the straw, and have
line there ever since: And thou, whether go thou?


Ne. My Master has sent me on an errand in great have.


Pa. Whether I pray thee?


Ne. Nay I may not tell, Farewell.


Pa. As though I need any further instructions: O God what news I hard even
now, as I lay in the stable: O good Erostrato and pore Cleander, that have so
earnestly strouen for this damsel, happy is he that can get her I promise
you, he shall be sure of mo than one at a clap that catches her, either Adam or
Eve within her belly: oh God how men may be deceived in a woman: who would have
believed the contrary but that she had bin a virgin? ask the neighbors and
you shall hear very good report of her, mark her behauiors and you would have
judged her very maydenly, seldom seen abroad but in place of prayer, and
there very devout, and no gaser at outward sightes, no blaser of her beauty
above in the windows, no stal at the door for the bypassers: you would have
thought her a holy young woman. But much good do it you Domine Doctor, he
shall be sure to lack no corn in a dear year, whatsoever he have with her
else: I beshrewe me if I let the marriage any way. But is not this the old
scabbed queen that I heard disclosing all this geere to her master, as I stood
in the stable ere now? it is she. Whither goes Psiteria?


Pasiphilo espieth Psiteria coming. Scena. v.
PSITERIA, PASIPHILO. TO a Gossip of mine hereby.

Pa. What? to tattle of the goodly stir that thou keptst concerning Polynesta.


Ps. No, no: but how knew you of that geere?


Pa. You told me.


Ps. I? when did I tell you?


Pa. Even now when you told it to Damon, I both saw you and heard you, though
you saw not me: a good part I promise you, to accuse the poor wenche, kill
the old man with care, over and besides the danger you have brought Dulipo
and the Nursse unto, and many more, fie, fie.


Ps. In deed I was to blame, but not so much as you think.


Pa. And how not so much did I not hear you tell?


Ps. Yes, But I will tell you how it came to pass: I have known for a great
while, that this Dulipo and Polynesta have been together, and all by the
means of the nurse, yet I held my peace, and never told it. Now this other
day the Nursse fell on scolding with me, and twyce or thryce called me drunken
old whore, and such names that it was t^o badde: and I called her ^aude, and
told her that I knew well enoughe how often she had brought Dulipo to
Polynestas bed: yet all this while I thought not that any body had heard me,
but it befell clean contrary, for my master was on the other side of the
wall, and heard all our talk, whereupon he sent for me, and forced me to
confess all that you heard.


Pas. And why would thou tell him? I would not for. etc.


Ps. Well, if I had thought my master would have taken it so, he should rather
have killed me?


Pas. Why? how could he take it?


Ps. Alas, it pitieth me to see the poor young woman how she weeps, wailes,
and tears her hear, not esteming her own life half so dear as she does
poor Dulipoes: and her father, he weeps on the other side, that it would
pearce an heart of stone with pity: but I must be gone.


Pas. Go that the gonne powder consume the old trotte.


Finis. Actus. 3.
Actus. iiij.
Scena. j.
EROSTRA TO fained. WHat shall I do? Alas what remedy shall I find for my
ruefull estate? what escape, or what excuse may I now devise to shifte over
our subtle supposes? for though to this day I have usurped the name of my
master, and that without chec^e or control of any man, now shall I be openly
deciphered, and that in the sight of every man: now shall it openly be known,
whether I be Erostrato the gentleman, or Dulipo the servant: we have hitherto
played our parts in abusing others, but now comes the man that will not be
abused, the right Philogono the right father of the right Erostrato, going to
seek Pasiphilo, and hearing that he was at the water gate, behold I espied my
servant Litio, and by and by my old master Philogano setting forth his first
step on land, I to fuge and away hither as fast as I could to bring word to the
right Erostrato, of his right father Philogano, that to so sudden a mishap
some subtle shift might be upon the sudden devised. But what can be imagined
to serve the turn, although we had a months respite to beat our brains
about it, since we are commonly known, at the least supposed in this town, he
for Dulipo, a slave and servant to Damon, and I for Erostrato a gentleman and a
student? But behold, run Crapine to yonder old woman before she get within
the doors, and desire her to call out Dulipo: but hear you? if she ask who
would speak with him, say thy self and none other.

Erostrato espieth Psiteria coming, and sends his lackey to her. Scena. ij.
CRAPINE. PSITERIA. EROSTRATO fained. HOnest woman, you gossip, thou rotten
whore, hear thou not old witch?

Ps. A rope stretche your young bones, either you must live to be as old as I,
or be hanged while you are young.


Cra. I pray thee look if Dulipo be within.


Ps. Yes that he is I warant him.


Cra. Desire him then to come hither and speak a word with me, he shall not
tarry.


Ps. Content your self, he is otherwise occupied.


Cra. Yet tell him so gentle girl.


Ps. I tell you he is busy.


Cra. Why is it such a matter to tell him so, thou crooked Crone?


Ps. A rope stretche you marie.


Cra. A pockes eat you marie.


Ps. Thou will be hanged I warant thee, if thou live to it.


Cra. And thou will be burnt I warant thee, if the canker consume thee not.


Ps. If I come near you hempstring, I will teach now to sing sol fa.


Cra. Come on, and if I get a stone I will scare crows with you.


Ps. Go with a mischief, I think thou be some devil that would tempte me.


Ero. Crapine: hear you? come away, let her go with a vengeance, why come you
not? Alas look where my master Philogano comes: what shall I do? where
shall I hide me? he shall not see me in these clothes, nor before I have spoken
with the right Erostrato.


Erostrato espyeth Phylogano coming, and runs about to hide him. Scena. iij.
PHILOGANO. FERRARESE the Inn keeper. LITIO a servant. HOnest man it is even
so: be you sure there is no love to be compared like the love of the parents
toward their children, it is not long since I thought that a very weighty
matter should not have made me come out of Sicilia, and yet now I have taken
this tedious toil and travail upon me, only to see my son, and to have him
home with me.

Fer. By my faith sir it has been a great travail in de^e and to much for one
of your age?


Phi. Yea be you sure: I came in company with certain gentlemen of my
country, who had affairs to dispatche as far as to Ancona, from thence by
water to Rauenna, and from Rauenna hither, continually against the tide.


Fer. Yea, and I think y^ you had but homly lodging by ye way.


Phi. The worst ye ever man had, but that was nothing to the stir that ye
serchers kept with me when I came aborde y^ ship, Jesus how often they
untrussed my male and ransacked a little capcase that I had, tossed and turned
all that was within it, serched my bosom, yea my breeches, that I assure you I
thought they would have flayed me to search between the fell and the fl^she
for fardings.


Fer. Sure I have heard no less, and that the marchantes bobbe them some
times, but they play the knaves still.


Phi. Yea be you well assured, for such an office is the inheritance of a
knave, and an honest man will not meddle with it.


Fer. Well, this passage shall seem pleasant unto you when you shall find your
child in health and well: but I pray you sir why did you not rather send for
him into Sicilia, tha^ to come your self, specially since you had none other
business? peradventure you had rather endanger your self by this noisome
journey, than hazard to draw him from his study.


Phi. Nay, that was not y^ matter, for I had rather have him give over his
study altogether and come home.


Fer. Why? if you minded not to make him learned, to what end did you send him
hither at the first?


Phi. I will tell you: when he was at home he did as most young men do, he
played many mad prankes and did many things that liked me not very well, and I
thinking, that by that time he had seen the world, he would learn to know
himself better, exhorted him to study, and put in his election what place he
would go to. At the last he came hither, and I think he was scarce here so
sone as I felt the want of him, in such sort, as from that day to this I
have passed few nights without tears: I have written to him very often that
he should come home, but continually he refused still, beseching me to
continue his study, wherein he doubted not (as he said) but to profit greatly.


Fer. In deed he is very much commended of all men, and specially of the best
reputed students.


Phi. I am glad he has not lost his time, but I care not greatly for so much
knowledge, I would not be without the sight of him again so long, for all
the learning in the world. I am old now, and if God should call me in his
absence, I promise you I think it would drive me into desperation.


Fer. It is commendable in a man to love his children, but to be so tender over
them is more womanlike?


Phi. Well, I confess it is my fault: and yet I will tell you another cause
of my coming hither, more weighty than this. Diverse of my country have been
here since he came hither, by whom I have sent unto him, and some of the^ have
been thrice, some four or five times at his house, and yet could never speak
with him: I fear he applies his study so, that he will not leese the minute
of an hour from his book. What, alas, he might yet talk with his countrymen
for a while, he is a young man, tenderly brought up, and if he fare thus
continually night and day at his book, it may be enough to drive him into a
frenzy.


Fer. In deed, enoughe were as good as a feast: lo^ you sir, here is your son
Erostratoes house, I will knock.


Phi. Yea, I pray you knock.


Fer. They hear not.


Phi. Knock again.


Fer. I think they be on sleep.


Ly. If this gate were your Grandefathers soul, you could not knock more
softly, let me come: ho, ho, is there any body within?


Dalio comes to the vvyndovve, and there makes them answer. Scena. iiij.
DALIO the cook. FERARESE thinholder. PHILOGANO. LITIO his man. WHat devil of
hell is there? I think he will break the gates in pieces.

Li. Marie fir, we had thought you had been on sleep within, and therefore
we thought best to make you: what does Erostrato?


Da. He is not within.


Phi. Open the door good fellow I pray thee.


Da. If you think to lodge here, you are deceived I tell you, for here are
guestes enowe already.


Phi. A good fellow, and much for thy masters honesty by our Lady: and what
guestes I pray thee?


Da. Here is Philogano my masters father, lately come out of Sicilia.


Phi. Thou speak truer than thou art aware of, he will be, by that time thou
have opened the door: open I pray thee heartily.


Da. It is a small matter for me to open the door, but here is no lodging for
you, I tell you plain, the house is full.


Phi. Of whom?


Da. I told you: here is Philogano my masters father come from Cathanea.


Phi. And when came he?


Da. He came three hours since, or more, he alighted at the Angel, and left
his horses there: afterward my master brought him hither.


Phi. Good fellow, I think thou haste good sport to mock me.


Da. Nay, I think you have good sport to make me tarry here, as though I have
nothing else to do: I am matched with an unruly mate in the kitchen, I will
go look to him another while.


Phi. I think he be drunken.


Fer. Sure he seems so: see you not how read he is about the gilles?


Phi. Abide fellow, what Philogano is it whom thou talkest of?


Da. An honest gentleman, father t^ Erostrato my master.


Phi. And where is he?


Da. Here within.


Phi. May we see him?


Da. I think you may if you be not blind.


Phi. Go to, go tell him here is one would speak with him.


Da. Mary that I will willingly do.


Phi. I can not tell what I should say to this geere, Litio what think thou
of it?


Li. I cannot tell you what I should say sir, the world is large and long,
there may be more Philoganos and more Erostratos than one, yea and more Ferraras,
more Sicilias, and more Cathaneas: peradventure this is not that Ferrara which
you sent your son unto.


Phi. Peradventure thou art a f^^le, and he was another that answered us even
now. But be you sure honest man, that you mistake not the house?


Fer. Nay, then god help, think you I know not Erostratos house? yes, and
himself also: I saw him here no longer since tha^ yesterday: but here co^mes
one that will tell us tidyngs of him. I like his countenance better than the
others that answered at the window erewhile.


Dalio draws his head in at the vvyndovve, the Scenese comes out. Scena. v.
SCENESE. PHILOGANO. DALIO. WOuld you speak with me sir?

Phi. Yea sir, I would feign know whence you are.


Sce. Sir I am a Sicilian, at your commandment.


Phi. What part of Sicilia?


Sce. Of Cathanea.


Phi. What shall I call your name?


Sce. My name is Philogano.


Phi. What trade do you occupy?


Sce. Merchandise.


Phi. What merchandise brought you hither?


Sce. None, I came only to see a son that I have here, whom I saw not these
two years.


Phi. What call they your son?


Sce. Erostrato.


Phi. Is Erostrato your son?


Sce. Yea verily.


Phi. And are you Philogano.


Sce. The same.


Phi. And a merchant of Cathanea?


Sce. What need I tell you so often? I will not tell you a lie.


Phi. Yes, you have told me a false lie, and thou art a villain and no
better.


Sce. Sir, you offer me great wrong with these injurious words.


Phi. Nay, I will do more than I have yet proffered to do, for I will prove
thee a liar, and a knave to take upon thee that thou art not.


Sce. Sir I am Philogano of Cathenea, out of all doubt, if I were not I would
be loathe to tell you so.


Phi. Oh, see the boldness of this brute beast, what a brazen face he sets
on it?


Sce. Well, you may believe me of you list: what wonder you?


Phi. I wonder at thy impudency, for thou, nor nature that framed thee, can
ever counterfaite thee to be me, ribauld villain, and lying wretch that thou
art.


Da. Shall I suffer a knave to abuse my masters father thus? hence villain,
hence, or I will sheath this good fawchio^ in your pau^ch: if my master
Erostrato find you prating here on this fashion to his father, I would not be in
your coat for mo cunnie skins than I gat these twelve months: come you in
again sir, and let this Curre bark here till he burst.


Dalio pulls the Scenese in at the doors. Scena. vj.
PHILOGANO. LITIO. FERARESE. LItio, how likest thou this geere?

Li. Sir, I like it as evil as may be, but have you not often heard tell of
the falsehood of Ferrara, and now may you see, it falls out accordingly.


Fer. Friend, you do not well to slander the City, these men are no
Ferrareses you may know by their tongue.


Li. Well, there is never a barrel better herring, between you both: but in
deed your officers are most to blame, that suffer such faults to escape
unpunished.


Fer. What know the officers of this? think you they know of every fault?


Li. Nay, I think they will know as little as may be, specially when they have
no gains by it, but they ought to have their ears as open to hear of such
offenses, as the Ingates be to receive guests.


Phi. Hold thy peace fool.


Li. By the mass I am afearde that we shall be proved fools both two.


Phi. Well, what shall we do?


Li. I would think best we should go seek Erostrato him self.


Fer. I will wait upon you willingly, and either at the schools, or at the
conuocations, we shall find him.


Phi. By our Lady I am weary, I will run no longer about to seek him, I am sure
hither he will come at the last.


Li. Sure, my mind gives me that we shall find a new Erostrato ere it be long.


Fe. Look where he is, whether runs he? stay you awhile, I will go tell him
that you are here: Erostrato, Erostrato, ho Erostrato, I would speak with you.


Erostrato is espied upon the stage running about. Scena. vij.
Fained EROSTRATO. FERRARESE. PHILOGANO. LITIO. DALIO. Ero. Now can I hide me
no longer, Alas what shall I do? I will set a good face on, to bear out the
matter.


Fera. O Erostrato, Philogano your father is come, of Sicilia.


Ero. Tell me that I know not, I have been with him and seen him already.


Fera. Is it possible? and it seems by him that you know not of his coming.


Ero. Why, have you spoken with him? when saw you him I pray you?


Fera. Look you where he stands, why go you not to him? Look you Philogano,
behold your dear son Erostrato.


Phi. Erostrato? this is not Erostrato, this seems rather to be Dulippo, and
it is Dulippo in deed.


Li. Why, doubt you of that?


Ero. What says this honest man?


Phi. Mary sir, in deed you are so honorably cladde, it is no marvel if you
look big.


Ero. To whom speaks he?


Phi. What, God help, do you not know me?


Ero. As far as I remember Sir, I never saw you before.


Phi. Hark Litio, here is good geere, this honest man will not know me.


Ero. Gentleman, you take your marks amiss.


Li. Did I not tell you of the falsehood of Ferrara master? Dulippo has learned
to play the knave indifferently well since he came hither.


Phi. Peace I say.


Ero. Friend, my name is not Dulippo, ask you thorough out this town of great
and small, they know me: ask this honest man that is with you, if you will not
believe me.


Ferra. In deed, I never knew him otherwise called than Erostrato, and so
they call him, as many as know him.


LI. Master, now you may see the falsehood of these fellows, this honest man
your host, is of counsel with him, and would face us down that it is
Erostrato: beware of these mates.


Fera. Friend, thou do me wrong to suspecte me, for sure I never heard him
otherwise called than Erostrato.


Ero. What name could you hear me called by, but by my right name? But I am
wise enough to stand prating here with this old man, I think he be mad.


Phi. Ah runnagate, ah villain traitor, do thou use thy master thus? what
have thou done with my son villain?


Da. Does this dog bark here still? and will you suffer him master thus to
revile you?


Ero. Come in, come in, what will thou do with this pestil?


Da. I will rap the old cackabed on the costerd.


Ero. Away with it, and you sir, lay down these stones, come in at door
every one of you, bear with him for his age, I pass not of his evil words.


Erostrato takes all his servants in at the doors. Scena. viij.
PHILOGANO. FERRARESE. LITIO. ALas, who shall reli^ue my miserable estate? to
whom shall I complain, since he whom I brought up of a child, yea and
cherished him as if he had been mine own, does now utterly deny to know me?
and you whom I took for an honest man, and he that should have brought me to
the sight of my son, are compacte with this false wretch, and would face me
down that he is Erostrato. Alas, you might have some compassion of mine age,
to the misery I am now in, and that I am a stranger desolate of all comfort
in this country, or at the least, you should have feared the vengeance of
God the supreme judge (which knows the secrets of all hearts) in bearing this
false witness with him, whom heaven and ^arth do know to be Dulippo and not
Erostrato.

Li. If there be many such witness in this country, me^ may go about to
prove what they will in controversies here.


Fer. Well sir, you may judge of me as it pleases you, and how the matter
comes to pass I know not, but truly, ever since he came first hither, I
have known him by the name of Erostrato y^ son of Philogano a Cathanese, now
whether he be so in deed, or whether he be Dulipo, (as you aleadge) let that be
proved by them that knew him before he came hither. But I protest before god,
that which I have said, is neither a matter compact with him, nor any other,
but eue^ as I have hard him called and reputed of al me^.


Phi. Out and alas, he whom I sent hither with my son to be his servant, and
to give attendance on him, has either cut his thr^ate, or by some evil means
made him away, and has not only taken his garments, his books, his money,
and that which he brought out of Sicilia with him, but usurps his name
also, and turns to his own commodity the bills of exchange that I have
always allowed for my sons expenses, Oh miserable Philogano, oh unhappy
old man: oh eternal god, is there no judge? no officer? no higher powers whom
I may complain unto for redress of these wrongs?


Fer. Yes sir, we have potestates, we have Judges, and above al, we have a most
just prince, doubt you not, but you shall have justice if your cause be just.


Phi. Bring me then to the Judges, to the potestates, or to whom you think
best: for I will disclose a part of the greatest knauerie, a fardell of the
fowlest falsehode that ever was heard of.


Li. Sir, he that will go to the civil law, must be sure of four things:
first, a right and a just cause: then a righteous doctor to plead: next,
favor Coram Iudice: and above all, a good purse to procure it.


Fer. I have not heard, that the law has any respect to favor, what you mean
by it I cannot tell.


Phi. Have you no regard to his words, he is but a (...).


Fer. I pray you sir, let him tell me what is favor?


Li. Favor call I, to have a friend near about the Judge, who may so solicit
thy cause, as if it be right, speedy sentence may ensue without any delays:
if it be not good, then to prolong it, till at the last, thine adversary being
weary, shall be glad be compound with thee.


Fer. Of thus much (although I never heard thus much in this country before)
doubt you not Philogano, I will bring you to an advocate that shall speed you
accordingly.


Phi. Then shall I give my self, as it were a pray to the doctors, whose
insatiable jaws I am not able to feed, although I had here all the goods and
lands which I possess in mine own country, much less being a stranger in
this misery. I know their cautels of old: at the first time I come they will
so extol my cause, as though it were already won: but within in seue^night or
ten days, if I do not continually feed them as the crow does her brattes,
twenty times in an hour, they will begin to wax cold, and to find canels
in my cause, saying, that at the first I did not well instruct them: till at
the last, they will not only draw the stuffing out of my purse, but the
marrow out of my bones.


Fer. Yea sir, but this man that I tell you of, is half a Saint.


Li. And the other half a Devil, I hold a penny.


Phi. Well said Litio, in deed I have but small confidence in their smothe
looks.


Fer. Well sir, I think this whom I mean, is no such manner of man: but if
he were, there is such hatred and evil will between him and this gentleman
(whether he be Erostrato or Dulippo, what so ever he be) that I warrant you, he
will do what so ever he can do for you, were it but to spite him.


Phi. Why? what hatred is betwixt them?


Fer. They are both in love and suitors to one gentlewoman, the daughter of a
welthie man in this city.


Phi. Why? is the villeine become of such estimati^n that he dare presume to be
a suter to any gentlewoma^ of a good family?


Fer. Yea sir out of all doubt.


Phi. How call you his adversary?


Fer. Cleander, one of the excellentest doctors in our city.


Phi. For gods love let us go to him.


Fer. Go we then.


Finis Actus. 4.
Actus quinti.
Scena. I.
Fained EROSTRATO. WHat a mishappe was this? that before I could meet with
Erostrato, I have light even full in the lap of Philogano, where I was
constrained to deny my name, to deny my master, and to feign that I knew him
not, to contend with him, and to revile him, in such sort, that hap what hap
can, I can never hap well in favor with him again: therefore if I could come
to speak with the right Erostrato. I will renounce unto him both habit and
credit, and away as fast as I can trudge into some strange country, where I
may never see Philogano again. Alas, he that of a little child has brought
me up unto this day, and nourished me as if I had been his own: and in deed
(to confess ye troth) I have no father to trust unto but him. But look where
Pasiphilo comes, the fittest man in the world to go on my message to
Erostrato.

Erostrato espieth Pasiphilo coming toward him. Scena. ij.
PASIPHILO. EROSTRATO. TWo good news have I heard to day already, one that
Erostrato prepared a great feast this night: y^ other, that he seeks for me,
and I to ease him of his travail, least he should run up and down seeking
me, and because no man loves better tha^ I to have an errand where good cheer
is, come in post have even home to his own house: and look where he is.

Ero. Pasiphilo, thou must do one thing for me if thou love me.


Pas. If I love you not, who loves you, command me?


Ero. Go then a little there, to Damons house, ask for Dulipo, and tell him.


Pas. Wot you what? I cannot speak with him, he is in prison.


Ero. In prison? how comes that to pass? where is he in prison?


Pas. In a vile dungeon there within his masters house.


Ero. Can thou tell wherefore?


Pas. Be you content to know he is in prison, I have told you to much.


Ero. If ever you will do any thing for me, tell me.


Pas. I pray you desire me not, what were you the better if you knew?


Ero. More than thou think Pasiphilo by god.


Pas. Well, and yet it stands me upon more than you think, to keep it secret


Ero. Why Pasiphilo, is this the trust I have had in you? are these the fair
promyses you have always made me?


Pas. By the mass I would I had fasted this night with master doctor, rather
than have come hither.


Ero Well Pasiphilo, either tell me, or at few words never think to be
welcome to this house from hence forth.


Pas Nay, yet I had rather leese all the gentlemen in this town, but if I tell
you any thing that displease you, blame no body but your self now.


Ero. There is nothing can grieve me more tha^ Dulipos mishappe, no not mine
own, and therefore I am sure thou can tell me no worsse tidings.


Pa. Well, since you would needs have it, I will tell you: he was taken a bed
with your beloved Polynesta.


Ero. Alas, and does Damon know it?


Pa. An old trot in the house disclosed it to him, whereupon he took both
Dulipo and the Nurse which has been the broker of all this bargayne, and
clapte them both in a cage, where I think they shall have sour soppes to
their sweet meats.


Ero. Pasiphilo, go thy ways into the kitchen, command the cook to boil and
roast what likes thee best, I make thee supra visour of this supper.


Pa. By the mass if you should have studied this seuenight, you could not have
appointed me an office to please me better, you shall see what dishes I will
devise.


Pasiphilo goes in, Erostrato tarieth. Scena. iij.
Feigned EROSTRATO alone. I Was glad to rid him out of the way, least he should
see me burst out these swelling tears, which hitherto with great pain I have
prisoned in my breast, and least he should hear the Echo of my doubled sighs,
which bounce from the botome of my heavy heart. O cursed I, O cruel fortune,
that so many dispersed griefs as were sufficient to sub^ert a legion of
Lovers, have suddenly assembled within my careful carcass to freat this
fearful heart in sunder with desperation: thou that have kept my master all
his youth within the realm of Sicilia* reserving the wind and waves in a
temperate calm (as it were at his command) now to convey his aged limbs
hither, neither sooner nor later, but even in the worst time that may be: if at
any time before thou had conducted him, this enterprise had been cut off
without care in the beginning: and if never so little longer thou had lingered
his journey, this happy day might then have fully finished our driftes and
devises. But alas, thou have brought him eue^ in the very worst time, to plunge
us all in the pit of perdition. Neither art thou content to entangle me alone
in thy ruinous ropes, but thou must also catch the right Erostrato in thy
crooked claws, to reward us both with open shame and rebuke. Two years have
thou kept secret our subtle Supposes, even this day to discipher them with a
sorrowful success. What shall I do? Alas what shifte shall I make? it is too
late now to imagine any further deceit, for every minute seems an hour
till I find some succor for the miserable captive Erostrato. Well, since there
is no other remedy, I will go to my master Philogano, and to him will I tell
the whole truth of the matter, that at the least he may provide in time,
before his son feel the smart of some sharp revenge and punishment: this is
the best, and thus will I do: yet I know, that for mine own part I shall do
bitter penance for my faults forepassed: but such is the good will and duty
that I bear to Erostrato, as even with the loss of my life I must not stick
to adventure any thing which may turn to his commodity. But what shall I do?
shall I go seek my master about the town, or shall I tarry his return
hither? If I meet him in the streets, he will cry out upon me, neither will
he harken to any thing that I shall say, till he have gathered all the people
woondring about me, as it were at an Owl. Therefore I were better to abide
here, and yet if he tarry long, I will go seek him, rather than prolong the
time to Erostratos peril.

Pasiphilo returns to Erostrato. Scena. iiij.
PASIPHILO. Feigned EROSTRATO. YEa dress them, but lay them not to the fire,
till they will be ready to sit down: this geere goes in order: but if I had
not gone in, there had fallen a foul fault.

Ero. And what fault I pray thee?


Pa. Marie, Dalio would have laid the shoulder of mutton and the Capon both to
the fire at once, like a fool, he did not consider, that the one would have
more roasting than the other.


Ero. Alas, I would this were the greatest fault.


Pa. Why? and either the one should have been burned before the other had ^ene
roasted, or else he must have drawn them off the spitte: and they would have
been served to the boorde either cold or raw.


Ero. Thou have reason Pasiphilo.


Pa. Now sir, if it please you I will go into the town and buy oranges,
^lyues, and caphers, for without such sauce the supper were more than half
lost.


Ero. There are within already, doubt you not, there shall lack nothing that is
necessary.

Erostrato exit.
Pa. Since I told him these news of Dulipo, he is clean beside him self: he
has so many hammers in his head, that his brains are ready to burst: and let
them break, so I may suppe with him to night, what care I? But is not this
Dominus noster Cleandrus that comes before? well said, by my truth we will
teach master Doctor to wear a cornerd cappe of a new fashion: by God
Polynesta shall be his, he shall have her out of doubt, for I have told
Erostrato such news of her, that he will none of her.


Cleander and Philogano come in, talking of the matter in controversy. Scena.
v.
CLEANDER. PHILOGANO. LITIO. PASIPHILO. YEa, but how wilt* ye prove that he is
not Erostrato, having such presumptio^s to the contrary? or how shall it be
thought that you are Philogano, when an other takes upon him this same name,
and for proof brings him for a witness, which has been ever reputed here
for Erostrato?

Phi. I will tell you sir, let me ^e kept here fast in prison, and at my
charges let there be some man sent into Sicilia* that may bring hither with
him two or three of the honestest men in Cath^nea and by them let it be proved
if I or this other be Philogano, and whether he be Erostrato or Dulipo my
servant: and if you find me contrary, let me suffer death for it.


Pa. I will go salute master Doctor.


Cle. It will ask great labor and great expenses to prove it this way, but it
is the best remedy that I can see.


Pa. God save you sir.


Cle. And reward you as you have deserved.


Pa. Then shall be give me your favor continually.


Cle. He shall give you a halter, knave and villein that thou art.


Pa. I know I am a knave, but no villein, I am your servant.


Cle. I neither take thee for my servant, nor for my friend.


Pa. Why? wherein have I offended you sir?


Cle. Hence to the gallows knave.


Pa. What soft and fair sir, I pray you, I prae se^^^^, you are mine elder.


Cle. I will be even with you, be you sure, honest man.


Pa. Why sir? I never offended you.


Cle. Well, I will teach you: out of my sight knave.


Pa. What? I am no dog, I would you wist.


Cle. Pratest thou yet villein? I will make thee.


Pa. What will you make me? I see well the more a man d^the suffer you, the
worsse you are.


Cle. A villein, if it were not for this gentleman, I would tell you what I.


Pa. Uillein? nay I am as honest a man as you.


Cle. Thou lie in thy throat knave.


Phi. O sir, stay your wisdom.


Pas. What will you fight? marie come on.


Cle. Well knave, I will meet with you another time, go your way.


Pas. Even when you list sir, I will be your man.


Cle. And if I be not even with thee, call me cut.


Pas. Nay by the mass, all is one, I care not, for I have nothing: if I had
either lands or goods, peradventure you would pull me into the law.


Phi. Sir, I perceive your patience is moved.


Cle. This villeine: but let him go, I will see him punished as he has
deserved. Now to the matter, how said you?


Phi. This fellow has disquieted you sir, peradventure you would be loathe to
be troubled any further.


Cle. Not a whit, say on, and let him go with a vengeance.


Phi. I say, let them send at my charge to Cathanea.


Cle. Yea I remember that well, and it is the surest way as this case
requires: but tell me, how is he your servant? and how come you by him?
inform me fully in the matter.


Phi. I will tell you sir: when the Turks won Otranto.


Cle. Oh, you put me in remembrance of my mishappes.


Phi. How sir?


Cle. For I was driven among the rest out of the town (it is my native
country) and there I lost more than ever I shall recover again while I live.


Phi. Alas, a pitiful case by saint Anne.


Cle. Well, proceed.


Phi. At that time (as I said) there were certain of our country that
scoured those costs upon the seas, with a good bark well appointed for the
purpose, and had espiall of a Turkey vessel that came laden from thence with
great abundance of riches.


Cle. And peradventure most of mine.


Phi. So they boarded them, and in the end overcame them, and brought the goods
to Palermo, from whence they came, and amongst other things that they had, was
this villeine my servant, a boy at that time, I think not paste five years
old.


Cle. Alas I lost one of that same age there.


Phi. And I being there, and lyking the Childs favor well, proffered them
four and twenty ducattes for him, and had him.


Cle. What? was the child a Turk? or had the Turks brought him from Otranto?


Phi They said he was a Child of Otranto, but what is that to the matter?
once.xxiiij Ducattes he cost me, that I wot well.


Cle. Alas, I speak it not for that sir, I would it were he whom I mean.


Phi. Why, whom mean you sir?


Liti. Beware sir, be not to lauishe.


Cle. Was his name Dulippo then? or had he not another name?


Liti. Beware what you say sir.


Phi. What the devil have thou to do? Dulipo? no sir, his name was Carino.


Liti. Yea, well said, tell all and more to, do?


Cle. O Lord, if it be as I think, how happy were I? and why did you change
his name then?


Phi. We called him Dulippo, because when he cried as Children do sometimes,
he would always cry on that name Dulippo.


Cle. Well, then I see well it is my own only Child, whom I lost, when I
lost my country: he was named Carino after his grandfather, and this Dulippo
whom he always remembered in his lamenting, was his foster father that
nourished him and brought him up.


Liti. Sir, have I not told you enough of ye falsehood of Ferrara? this
gentleman will not only pick your purse, but beguile you of your servant
also, and make you believe he is his son.


Cle. Well goodfellow, I have not used to lie.


Liti. Sir no, but every thing has a beginning.


Cle. Fie, Philogano have you not the least suspect^ that may be of me.


Liti. No marie, but it were good he had the most suspecte that may be.


Cle. Well, hold thou thy peace a little good fellow. I pray you tell me
Philogano had y^ child any remembrance of his fathers name, his mothers name or
ye name of his family?


Phi. He did remember them, and could name his mother also, but sure I have
forgotten the name.


Liti. I remember it well enough.


Phi. Tell it then.


Liti. Nay, that I will not marie, you have told him to^ much already.


Phi. Tell it I say, if thou can.


Liti. Ca^? yes by y^ mass I ca^ well enough: but I will have my tongue pulled
out, rather tha^ tell it, unless he tell it first: do you not perceive sir,
what he goes about?


Cle. Well, I will tell you then, my name you know already* my wife his mothers
name was Sophronia, the house that I came of, they call Spiagia.


Liti. I never heard him speak of Spiagia but in deed I have heard him say,
his mothers name was Sophronia: but what of y^? a great matter I promise you,
it is like enoughe that you two have compact together to deceive my master.


Cle. What needs me more evident tokens? this is my son out of doubt whom I
lost eighteen years since, and a thousand thousand times have I lamented for
him: he should have also a mould on his left shoulder.


Li. He has a moulde there in deed: and an hole in an other place too, I
would your nose were in it.


Cle. Fair words fellow Litio: oh I pray you let us go talk with him, O
fortune, how much am I bound to thee if I find my son?


Phi. Yea how small am I beholde^ to fortune, that know not where my son is
become, and you whom I chose to be mine advocate, will now by the means of
this Dulipo become mine adversary?


Cle. Sir, let us first go find mine: and I warrant you yours will be found
also ere it be long.


Phi. God grant, go we then.


Cle. Since the door is open, I will neither knock nor call, but we will be
bold to go in.


Li. Sir, take you heed, least he lead you to some mischief.


Phi. Alas Litio, if my son be lost what care I what become of me?


Li. Well, I have told you my mind Sir, do you as you please.


Exeunt: Damon and Psiteria come in. Scena sexta.
DAMON. PSITERIA. COme hither you old kallat, you tatling huswife, tha^ the
devil cut out your tongue: tell me, how could Pasiphilo know of this geere but
by you?

Psi. Sir, he never knew it of me, he was the first that told me of it.


Da. Thou lie old drabbe, but I would advise you tell me the truth, or I
will make those old bones rattle in your skin.


Psi. Sir, if you find me contrary, kill me.


Da. Why? where should he talk with thee?


Psi. He talked with me of it here in the street.


Da. What did you here?


Psi. I was going to the weauers for a web of clothe you have there.


Da. And what cause could Pasiphilo have to talk of it, unless thou began
the matter first?


Psi. Nay, he began with me sir, reuiling me, because I had told you of it: I
asked him how he knew of it, and he said he was in the stable when you
examined me erewhile.


Da. Alas, alas, what shall I do then? in at doors old whore, I will pluck
that tongue of thine out by the roots one day. Alas it greeueth me more that
Pasiphilo knows it, than all the rest: he that will have a thing kept
secret, let him tell it to Pasiphilo, the people shall know it, and as many
as have ears and no mo: by this time he has told it in a hundredth places.
Cleander was the first, Erostrato the second, and so from one to another
throughout the city. Alas, what dower, what marriage shall I now prepare for
my daughter? O poor dolorous Damon, more miserable than misery it self,
would god it were true that Polinesta, told me ere while: that he who has
deflowred her, is of no servile estate, as hitherto he has been supposed in my
service: but that he is a gentleman borne of a good parentage in Sicilia. Alas,
small riches should content me, if he be but of an honest family, but I fear
that he has devised these toys to allure my daughters love. Well I will go
examine her again, my mind gives me that I shall perceive by her tale whether
it be true or not. But is not this Pasiphilo that comes out of my neighbors
house? what the devil ayleth him to leap and laughe so like a fool in the
high way?


Pasiphilo comes out of the town laughing. Scena septima.
PASIPHILO. DAMON. O God, that I might find Damon at home.

Da. What the devil would he with me?


Pas. That I may be the first that shall bring him these news.


Da. What will he tell me, in the name of God?


Pas. O Lord, how happy am I? look where he is.


Da. What news Pasiphilo, that thou art so merry?


Pas. Sir, I am merry to make you gla^d: I bring you joyful news.


Da. And that I have need of Pasiphilo.


Pas. I know sir, that you are a sorrowful man for this mishap that has
chanced in your house, peradventure you thought I had not known of it: but
let it pass, pluck up you sprites, and rejoice, for he that has done you
this injury is so well borne, and has so rich parents, that you may be glad
to make him your son in law.


Da. How know thou?


Pas. His father Philogano one of the worthiest men in all Cathanea, is now
come to the city, and is here in your neighbors house.


Da. What, in Erostratos house?


Pas. Nay in Dulipos house, for where you have always supposed this gentleman
to be Erostrato, it is not so, but your servant whom you have emprisoned
hitherto, supposed to be Dulipo, he is in deed Erostrato, and that other is
Dulipo: and thus they have always, even since their first ariual in this
city, exchaunged names, to the end that Erostrato the master, under the name
of Dulipo a servant, might be entertained in your house, and so win the
love of your daughter.


Da. Well, then I perceive it is eue^ as Polinesta told me.


Pas. Why, did she tell you so?


Da. Yea: But I thought it but a tale.


Pas. Well, it is a true tale: and here they will be with you by and by, both
Philogano this worthy man, and master doctor Cleander.


Da. Cleander? what to do?


Pas. Cleander? Why thereby lies another tale, the most fortunate adventure
that ever you heard: wot you what? this other Dulipo, whom all this while we
supposed to be Erostrato, is found to be the son of Cleander, whom he lost
at the loss of Otranto, and was after sold in Sicilia to this Philogano, the
strangest case that ever you heard: a man might make a Comedy of it, they will
come even straight, and tell you the whole circumstance of it themselves.


Da. Nay I will first go hear the story of this Dulipo, be it Dulipo or
Erostrato that I hear within, before I speak with Philogano.


Pas. So shall you do well sir, I will go tell them that they may stay a
while, but look where they come.


Damo^ goes in, Scenese, Cleander and Philogano come upon the stage. Scena.
viij.
SCENESE. CLEANDER. PHILOGANO. SIr, you shall not need to excuse the matter any
further, since I have received no greater injury than by words: let them pass
like wind, I take them well in worth, and am rather well pleased than
offended, for it shall both be a good warning to me another time how to trust
every man at the first sight* yea, and I shall have good game hereafter to
tell this pleasant storye another day in mine own country.

Cle. Gentleman, you have reason, and be you sure, that as many as hear it,
will take great pleasure in it, and you Philogano may think, that god in
heaven above, has ordained your coming hither at this present, to the end I
might rcouer my lost son, whom by no other means I could ever have found
out.


Phi. Surely sir I think no less, for I think that not so much as a leaf
falls from the tree, without the ordynance of god. But let us go seek
Damon, for me thinks every day a year, every hour a day, and every minute
to much till I see my Erostrato.


Cle. I cannot blame you, go we then, Carino take you that gentleman home in
the mean time, the fewer the better to be present at such affairs.


Pasiphilo stays their going in. Scena. ix.
PASIPHILO. CLEANDER. Master doctor, will you not shewme this favor, to tell
me the cause of your displeasure?

Cle. Gentle Pasiphilo, I must needs confess I have done thee wrong, and
that I believed tales of thee, which in deed I find now contrary.


Pas. I am glad then that it proceeded rather of ignorance than of malice.


Cle. Yea believe me Pasiphilo.


Pas. O sir, but yet you should not have given me such foul words.


Cle. Well, content thy self Pasiphilo, I am thy friend as I have always
been: for proof whereof, come suppe with me to night, and from day to day
this seven night be thou my guest: but behold, her^commeth Damon out of his
house.


Here they come all together. Scena decima.
CLEANDER. PHILOGANO. DAMON. EROSTRATO. PASIPHILO. POLINESTA. NEVOLA* and other
servants. WE are come unto you sir, to turn your sorrow into joy and
gladness: the sorrow, we mean, that of force you have sustained since this
mishappe of late fallen in your house. But be you of good comfort sir, and
assure your self, that this young man which youthfully and not maliciously
has committed this amorous offense, is very well hable with consent of this
worthy man his father, to make you s^fficient amends, being borne in Cathanea
of Sicilia, of a noble house, noway inferior unto you, and of wealth (by the
report of such as know it) far exceeding that of yours.

Phe. And I here in proper person, do present unto you sir, not only my
assured friendship and brotherhoode, but do earnestly desire you to accept my
poor child (though unworthy) as your son in law: and for recompense of
the injury he has done you, I profer my whole lands in dower to your
daughter, yea and more would, if more I might.


Cle. And I sir, who have hitherto so earnestly desired your daughter in
marriage, do now willingly yield up and quite claim to this young man, who both
for his years, and for the love he bears her, is most meetest to be her
husband: for where I was desirous of a wife by whom I might have issue, to
leave that little which god has sent me, now have I little need, that (thanks
be to god) have found my dearly beloved son, whom I lost of a child at
the siege of Otranto.


Da. Worthy gentleman, you friendship, your alliance, and the nobility of your
birthe are such, as I have much more cause to desire them of you, than you to
request of me that which is already granted: therefore I gladly, and willingly
receive the same, and think my self most happy now of all my life past,
that I have gotten so toward a son in law to my self, and so worthy a
father in law to my daughter, yea and much the greater is my contentation,
since this worthy gentleman master Cleander, does hold himself satisfied.
And now behold your son.


Ero. O father.


Pas. Behold the natural love of the child to the the father, for inward
joy he cannot pronounce one word, in steed whereof he sends sobbes and
tears to tell the effect of his inward intention. But why do you abide here
abroad? will it please you to go into the house sir?


Da. Pasiphilo has said well, will it please you to go in sir?


Ne. Here I have brought you sir, both fetters and boltes.


Da. Away with them now.


Ne. Yea, but what shall I do with them?


Da. Marie I will tell thee Neuola, to make a right end of our supposes, lay
one of those boltes in the fire, and make thee a suppositorie as long as mine
arm, God save the sample. Nobles and gentlemen, if you suppose that our
supposes have given you sufficient cause of delighte, show some token, whereby
we may suppose you are content.


FINIS.
IOCASTA: A Tragedy written in Greek by Euripides, translated and digested
into Act by George Gascoygne, and Francis Kinvvelmershe of Grayes Inn, and
there by them presented. 1566.
The argument of the Tragedy
To scourge the crime of wicked Laius,
And vvrecke the foul Incest of Oedipus,
The angry Gods styrred up their sons, by strife
With blades embrevved to reaue each others life:
The wife, the mother, and the concubyne,
Whose fearful heart foredrad their fatal fine,
Her sons thus dead, disdayneth longer life,
And slayes hirself with selfsame bloody knyfe:
The daughter she, surprisde with childish dread
(That durst not dye) a loathsome life does lead,
Yet rather chose to guide her banysht sire,
Than cruel Creon should have his desire.
Creon is King, the type of Tyranny,
And Oedipus, myrrour of misery.
Fortunatus Infoelix.
The names of the Interloquutors.
Iocasta, the Queen. Seruus, a noble man of the Queens train. Bailo,
governor to the Queens sons. Antygone, daughter to the Queen. Chorus,
four Thebane dames. Pollynices and Eteocles sons to Oedipus and the Queen.
Creon, the Queens brother. Meneceus, son to Creon. Tyresias, the divine
priest. Manto, the daughter of Tyresias. Sacerdos, the sacrifycing priest.
Nuntij, three messangers from the camp. Oedipus, the old King father to
Eteocles, and Pollynices, son and husband to Iocasta the Queen. The
Tragedy represented in Thebes.
The order of the dumme shows and Musickes before every Act.
FIrst, before the beginning of the first Act, did sound a doleful and
strange noise of violles, Cythren, Bandurion, and such like, during the
which, there came in upon the Stage a King with an Imperial Crown upon his
head, very richely apparelled, a Scepter in his right hand, a Mounde with a
Cross in his left hand, sitting in a Chariote very richely furnished, drawn
in by four kings in their Dublettes and Hosen, with Crowns also upon their
heads: Representing unto us Ambition, by the history of Sesostres king of
Egypt, who being in his time and reign a mighty Conqueror, yet not content
to have subdued many Princes, and taken from them their kingdoms and
dominions, did in like manner cause those Kings whom he had so overcome, to
draw in his Chariote like Beasts and Oxen, thereby to content his unbridled
ambitious desire. After he had been drawn twyce about the Stage, and retired,
the Music ceased, and Iocasta the Queen issued out of her house, beginning
the first Act, as follows.

Iocasta the Queen issues out of her Palace, before her twelve Gentlemen
very bravely apparelled, following after her eight Gentlewomen, whereof four
be the Chorus that remain on the Stage after her departure. At her entrance
the Trumpettes sounded, and after she had gone once about the Stage, she
turns to one of her most trusty and esteemed servant, and unto him she
discloseth her grief, as follows.

The first Act.
The first Scene*
IOCASTA. SERVVS. O Faithful servant of mine ancient sire,
Though unto thee, sufficiently be known
The whole discourse of my recurelesse grief
By seeing me from Princes royal state
Thus basely brought into so great contempt,
As mine own sons repine to hear my plaint,
Now of a Queen but barely bearing name,
Seeing this town, seeing my flesh and blood,
Against it self to levy threatening arms,
(Whereof to talk my heart it rendes in twain)
Yet once again, I must to thee recompte
The wailefull thing that is already spread,
Because I know, that pity will compel
Thy tender heart, more than my natural child,
With ruthful tears to moan my mourning case.
Ser. My gracious Queen, as no man might surmount
The constant faith I bear my souraine lord,
So do I think, for love and trusty zeal,
No son you have, does owe you more than I:
For hereunto I am by duty bound,
With service meet no less to honor you,
Than that renoumed prince your dear father.
And as my duties be most infinite,
So infinite, must also be my love:
Then if my life or spending of my blood
May be employed to do your highness good,
Command (O queen) command this carcass here.
In spite of death to satissie thy will,
So, though I die, yet shall my willing ghost
Contentedly forsake this withered corpse,
For joy to think I never shewde my self
Ungrateful once to such a worthy Queen.

Ioca. Thou know what care my careful father took,
In wedlockes sacred state to settle me
With Laius, king of this unhappy Thebs,
That most unhappy now our City is:
Thou know, how he, desirous still to search
The hidden secrets of supernall powers,
Unto Divines did make his often recourse,
Of them to learn when he should have a son,
That in his Realm might after him succeed:
Of whom receiving answer sharp and sour,
That his own son should work his wailful end,
The wretched king (though all in vain) did seek
For to eschew that could not be eschewed:
And so, forgetting laws of natures love,
No sooner had this paynfull womb brought forth
His eldest son to this desired light,
But straight he chargde a trusty man of his
To bear the child into a desert wood,
And leave it there, for Tigers to deuo^re.

Ser. O lucklesse babe, begot in woeful hour.

Ioc. His servant thus obedient to his hest,
Up by the heels did hang this faultlesse Impe,
And percing with a knife his tender feet,
Through both the wounds did draw the slender twigs,
Which being bound about his feeble limbs,
Were strong enough to hold the little soul.
Thus did he leave this infant scarcely borne,
That in short time must needs have lost his life,
If destenie (that for our greater greefes
Decreede before to keep it still alive)
Had not unto this child sent present help:
For so it chaunst, a shepherd passing by,
With pity moude, did stay his giltlesse death:
He took him home, and gave him to his wife,
With homely fare to feed and foster up:
Now harken how the heavens have wroughte the way
To Laius death, and to mine own decay.

Ser. "Experience proves, and daily is it seen,
"In vain, too vain man strives against the heavens.

Ioca. Not far fro thence, the mighty Polibus,
Of Corinth King, did keep his princely court,
Unto whose woeful wife (lamenting much
She had no offspring by her noble pheere)
The courteous shepherd gave my little son:
Which grateful gift, the Queen did so accept,
As nothing seemde more precious in her sight:
Partly, for that, his faitures were so fine,
Partly, for that, he was so beautiful,
And partly, for because his comely grace
Gave great suspicion of his royal blood.
The infant grew, and many years was demd^
Polibus son, till time, that Oedipus
(For so he named was) did understand
That Polibus was not his sire in deed,
Whereby forsaking friends and country there,
He did return to seek his native stock:
And being come into Phocides land,
Took notice of the cursed oracle,
How first he should his father do to death,
And then become his mothers wedded mate.

Ser. O fierce aspecte of cruel planets all,
That can decree such seas of heinous faults.

Ioca. Then Oedipus, freight full of chilling fear,
By all means sought t'auoyde this furious fate,
But whiles he weende to shun the shameful deed,
Unluckly guyded by his own mishappe,
He fell into the snare that most he feared:
For lo, in Phocides did Laius lie,
To end the broils that civil discord then
Had raised up in that unquiet land,
By means whereof my woeful Oedipus,
Affording aid unto the other side,
With murdring blade unawares his father slew.
Thus heavenly doom, thus fate, thus powers divine,
Thus wicked read of Prophets took effect:
Now only restes to end the bitter hap
Of me, of me his miserable mother.
Alas, how cold I feel the quaking blood
Pass too and fro within my trembling breast?
Oedipus, when this bloody deed was done,
Forced forth by fatal doom, to Thebes came,
Where as full soon with glory he atchieude
The crown and scepter of this noble land,
By conquering Sphinx that cruel monster lo,
That erst destroyde this goodly flouring soil:
And thus did I (O hateful thing to hear)
To my own son become a wretched wife.

Ser. No marvel, though the golden Sun withdrew
His glittering beams from such a sinful fact.

Ioca. And so by him that from this belly sprang,
I brought to light (O cursed that I am)
As well two sons, as daughters also twain:
But when this monstrous marriage was disclosde,
So sore began the rage of boiling wrath
To swell within the furious breast of him,
As he him self by stresse of his own nails,
Out of his head did tear his griefull eyne,
Unworthy more to see the shining light.

Ser. How could it be, that knowing he had done
So foul a blot, he would remain alive?

Ioca. "So deeply faulteth none, the which unawares
"Does fall into the crime he can not shun:
And he (alas) unto his greater grief,
Prolongs the date of his accursed days,
Knowing that life does more and more increase
The cruel plagues of his detested gilte,
"Where stroke of griesly death does set an end
"Unto the pangs of man's increasing pain.

Ser. Of others all, most cause have we to moan
Thy woeful smarte (O miserable Queen)
Such and so many are thy grievous harms.

Ioca. Now to the end this blind outrageous sire.
Should reap no joy of his unnatural fruit,
His wretched sons, pricked forth by furious spite,
Adiudge their father to perpetual prison:
There buried in the depthe of dungeon dark,
(Alas) he leads his discontented life,
Accursing still his stony hearted sons,
And wishing all the infernal sprites of hell,
To breathe such poysned hate into their breasts,
As each with other fall to bloody wars,
And so with pricking point of piercing blade,
To rippe their bowels out, that each of them
With others blood might stayne his guilty hands,
And both at once by stroke of speedy death
Be forthwith thrown into the Stigia^ lake.

Ser. The mighty Gods prevent so foul a deed.

Ioca. They to avoid the wicked blasphemies,
And sinful prayer of their angry sire,
Agreed thus, that of this noble realm,
Until the course of one full year was run,
Eteocles should sway the kingly mace,
And Polynice as exul should depart,
Till time expyrde: and then to Polynice
Eteocles should yield the scepter up:
Thus year by year the one succeeding other,
This royal crown should unto both remain.

Ser. Oh thunbridled minds of ambicious men.

Ioca. Eteocles, thus plast in princely seat,
Drunk with the sugared taste of kingly reign,
Not only shut his brother from the crown,
But also from his native country soil.
Alas poor Polynice, what might he do,
Uniustly by his brother thus betrayed?
To Argos he, with sad and heavy cheer
Forthwith conuayde him self, on whom at length
With fauning face good fortune smyled so,
As with Adrastus king of Argiues there,
He found such favor and affinity,
As to restore my son unto his reign,
He has besedge this noble city Thebes.
And hence proceeds, my most extreme annoye:
For, of my sons, who ever do prevail,
The victory will turn unto my grief:
Alas, I fear (such is the chance of war)
That one, or both shall purchase death thereby.
Wherefore, to shun the worst that may befall,
Though comfortless, yet as a pitiful mother
Whom nature binds to love her loving sons,
And to provide the best for their avail,
I have thought good by prayers to entreat
The two brethren (nay rather cruel foes)
A while to stay their fierce and furious fight,
Till I have tried by means for to appease,
The swelling wrath of their outraging wills.
And so with much to do, at my request
They have forborne unto this only hour.

Ser. Small space god wot, to stint so great a strife.

Ioca. And even right now, a trusty man of mine,
Returned from the camp, enforming me
That Polynice will straight to Thebes come,
Thus of my woe, this is the wailefull so^me.
And for because, in vain and bootelesse plainte
I have small need to spend this title time,
Here will I cease, in words more to bewray
The restless state of my afflicted mind,
Desiring thee, thou go to Eteocles,
Hartly on my behalf beseching him,
That out of hand according to his promise,
He will vouchsafe to come unto my court,
I know he loves thee well, and to thy words
I think thou know he will give willing ear.

Ser. (O noble Queen) since unto such affairs
My spedie diligence is requisite,
I will apply effectually to do
What so your highness has commanded me.

Ioca. I will go in, and pray the Gods therwhile,
With tender pity to appease my grief.

Iocasta goes off the stage into her palace, her four handmaides follovv
her, the four Chorus also follow her to the gates of her palace, after
coming on the stage, take their place, where they continue to the end of the
Tragedy. SERVVS SOLVS. "THe simple man, whose marvel is so great
"At stately courts, and princes regal seats,
"With gasing eye but only does regard
"The golden gloss that outwardly appears,
"The crowns bedeckt with pearl and precious stones,
"The rich attire imbost with beaten gold,
"The glittering mace, the pomp of swarming train,
"The mighty halles heapt full of flattering friends,
"The huge chambers, the goodly gorgeous beds,
"The gilted roofes, embowde with curious work,
"The sweet faces of fine disdayning dames,
"The vain suppose of wanton reign at lust:
"But never viewes with eye of inward thought,
"The painful toil, the great and grievous cares,
"The troubles still, the new increasing fears,
"That princes nourish in their jealous breasts:
"He wayeth not the charge that Jove has laid
"On princes, how for themselves they reign not:
"He weenes, the law must stoop to princely will,
"But princes frame there noble wills to law:
"He knows not, that as the boystrous wind
"Does shake the tops of highest reared towers,
"So does the force of froward fortune strike
"The wighte that highest sits in haughty state.
Lo Oedipus, that sometime reigned king
Of The^ane soil, that wonted to suppress
The mightiest Prince, and keep him under check,
That fearful was unto his foreign foes,
Now like a poor afflicted prisoner,
In dungeon dark, shut up from cheerful light,
In every part so plagued with annoy,
As he abhorres to lead a longer life,
By means whereof, the one against the other
His wrathful sons have planted all their force,
And Thebes here, this ancient worthy town,
With threatening siege girt in on every ^ide,
In danger lies to be subverted quite,
If help of heavenly Jove uphold it not,
But as dark night succedes the shining day,
So lowering grief comes after pleasant joy.
Well now the charge her highness did command
I must fulfill, though happily all in vain.

Seruus goes off the stage by the gates called Electrae, Antygone attended
with.iij. gentlevvomen and her governor comes our of the Queen her mothers
Palace. BAILO. ANTIGONE. O Gentle daughter of King Oedipus,
O sister dear to that unhappy wight
Whom brothers rage has reaued of his right,
To whom, thou know, in young and tender years
I was a friend and faithful governor,
Come forth, since that her grace has granted leave,
And let me know what cause has moved now
So chaste a maid to set her dainty foot
Over the thresholde of her secret lodge?
Since that the town is furnishte euerywhere
With men of arms and warlike instruments,
Unto our ears there co^mes no other noise,
But sound of trumpe, and neigh of trampling stedes,
Which running up and down from place to place,
With hideous cries betoken blood and death:
The blasing sun ne shines half so brighte,
As it was wont to do al dawne of day:
The wretched dames throughout the woeful town,
Together clustring to the temples go,
Beseching Jove by way of humble plainte,
With tender ruthe to pity their distress.
An. The love I hear to my sweet Polynice,
My dear brother, is only cause hereof.

Bai. Why daughter, know thou any remedy
How to defend thy fathers city here
From that outrage and fierce repyning wrath,
Which he against it, justly has conceived?

An. Oh governor might this my faultlesse blood
Suffice to stay my brethrens dyre debate,
With glad consent I could afford my life
Betwixt them both to plant a perfect peace:
But since (alas) I cannot as I would,
A hot desire ins^ames my ^eruent mind
To have a sight of my sweet Pollynice.
Wherefore (good guide) vouchsafe to guide (...)
Into some tower about this hugie court,
From whence I may behold our enemies camp,
Thereby at least to feed my hungry eyes
But with the sight of my beloved brother:
Then if I die, contented shall I die.

Bai. O princely dame, the tender care thou takste
Of thy dear brother, deserves double praise:
Yet crau'st thou that, which cannot be obtainde,
By reason of the distance from the town
Unto the plain, where tharmie lies incampt:
And furthermore, besemeth not a maid
To show her self in such unseemly place,
Whereas among such young and lusty troops
Of harebrainde soldiers marching to and fro,
Both honest name and honor is empairde:
But yet rejoice, since this thy great desire,
Without long let, or yet without thy pain,
At wish and will shall shortly be fulfillde.
For Palynice forthwith will hither come,
Even I my self was lately at the camp,
Commanded by the Queen to bid him come,
Who labors still to link in friendly league,
Her iarring sons (which hap so hoped for,
Eftsoon I pray the gracious gods to grant)
And sure I am, that ere this hour pass,
Thou shall him here in person safely see.

Auti. O loving friend, do thou then warrant me,
That Polynice will come unto this court?

Bai. Ere thou be ware thou shall him here behold.

Anti. And who (alas) does warrant his adventure,
That of Eteocles he take no harm?

Bai. For constant pledge, he has his brothers faith,
He has also the truce that yet endures.

An. I fear alas, alas I greatly fear,
Some trustlesse snare his cruel brother lays
To trappe him in.

Bai. Daughter, god knows how willing I would be
With sweet relief to comfort thy distress,
But I cannot impart to thee, the good
Which I my self do not as yet enjoy.
The wailefull cause that moves Eteocles
With Pollinyce to enter civil wars
Is over great, and for this only cause
Full many men have broke the laws of truth,
And topsieturuie turned many towns.
"To gredie (daughter) too too gredie is
"Desire to rule and reign in kingly state.
Ne can he bide, that swaise a realm alone
To have another ioynde with him therein:
Yet must we hope for help of heavenly powers,
Since they be just, their mercy is at hand,
To help the weak when worldly force does fail.

An. As both my brethren ^e, so b^th I bear
As much goodwill as any sister may,
But yet the wrong that unto Pollinyce
This trothlesse tyrant has unjustly showed,
Does lead me more, to wish the prosperous life,
Of Pollinyce, than of that cruel wretch.
Besides that, Pollinyce whiles he remainde
In Thebes here, did ever love me more,
Than did Eteocles, whose swelling hate
Is toward me increased more and more:
Whereof I partly may assure my self,
Considering he disdaynes to visit me,
Yea, happly he intends to reaue my life,
And having power he will not stick to do it.
This therefore makes me earnestly desire
Oftymes to see him: yet ever as I think
For to discharge the duty of a sister,
The fear I have of hurt, does change as fast
My doubtful love into disdaynefull spite.

Bai. Yet daughter, must ye trust in mighty Jove,
His will is not, that for thoffence of one
So many suffer undeserved smarte:
I mean of thee, I mean of Polinyce,
Of Iocasta thy woeful aged mother,
And of Ismena thy beloved sister.
Who though for this she does not outwardly
From drearie eyes distill lamenting tears,
Yet do I think, no less afflicting grief
Does inwardly torment her tender breast.

An. Besides all this, a certain jealousy,
Lately conceyude (I know not whence it springes)
Of Creon, my mothers brother, appaules me much,
Him doubt I more than any danger else.

Bai. Dear daughter, leave this foolish ielous^e,
And seeing that thou shall here shortly find
Thy brother Polinyce, go in again.

An. O joyful would it be to me therwhile,
To understand the order of the host,
Whether it be such as have sufficient power
To overthrow this mighty town of Thebs.
What place suppl^es my brother Polynice?
Where found ye him? what answer did he give?
And though so great a care pertains not
Unto a maid of my unskillful years,
Yet, forbicause my self partaker am
Of good and evil with this my country soil,
I long to hear thee tell those fearful news,
Which otherwise I can not understand.

Bai. So noble a desire (O worthy dame)
I much commend: and briefly as I can,
Will satisfy thy hungry mind herein.
The power of men that Polinyce has brought,
(Whereof he, (being Adrastus son in law)
Takes chiefest charge) is even the flower of Greece,
Whose hugie train so mighty seems to be,
As I see not, how this our drouping town
Is able to withstand so strong a siege.
Entering the field their army did I find
So orderly in form of battle set,
As though they would forthwith have guien the charge:
In battles seven the host divided is,
To each of which, by order of the king,
A valiant knight for captain is assignde:
And as you know this city has seven gates,
So every captain has his gate prescribde,
With fierce assault to make his entry at.
And further, passing through our frouning foes
(That gave me countenance of a messanger)
Hard by the King I spied Pollinyce,
In golden glistring arms most richely cladde,
Whose person many a stately prince enpalde,
And many a comely crowned head enclosde:
At sight of me his color straight he chaungde
And like a loving child in clasped arms
He caught me up, and friendly kissed my cheke,
Then hearing what his mother did demaund^
With glad consent according to her hest
Gave me his hand, to come unto the court,
Of mutual truce desirous so he seemde,
He asked me of Antygone, and Ismena,
But chiefelie unto thee above the rest
He gave me charge most heartily to commend him.

An. The gods give grace he may at length possess
His kingly right and I his wished sight.

Bai. Daughter no more, it is time ye now return
It stands not with the honor of your state
Thus to be seen suspiciouslie abroad:
"For vulgar tongues are armed evermore
"With slanderous brute to bleamishe the renoum^
"Of virtues dames, which though at first it spring
"Of slender cause, yet does it swell to fast,
"As in short space it fills every ear
"With swifte report of undeserved blame:
"You cannot be too curious of your name,
"Fond show of evil (though still the mind be chaste)
"Decays the credit often, that Ladies had,
"Sometimes the place presumes a wanton mind:
"Repair sometimes of some, does hurt their honor:
"Sometimes the light and garishe proud attire
"Persuades a yelding bent of pleasing youths.
The voice that goes of your unspotted fame,
Is like a tender flower, that with the blast
Of every little wind does fade away.
Go in dear child, this way will I go see
If I can meet thy brother Pollinyce.

Antigone with her maids returns into her mothers palace, her governor
goes our by the gates Homoloydes. CHORUS. IF greedy lust of man's ambitious
eye
(That thristeth so for swaye of earthly things)
Would eke foresee, what mischiefs grow thereby,
What careful toil to quiet state it brings,
What endless grief from such a fountain springs:
Then should he swim in seas of sweet delight,
That now complains of fortunes cruel spite.
For then he would so safely shield himself
With sacred rules of wisdoms sage advise,
As no alluring train of trustles pelf,
To fond affectes his fancy should entise,
Then wary heed would quickly make him wise:
Where contrary (such is our skillesse kind)
We most do seek, that most may hurt the mind.
Amid the troop of these unstable toys,
Some fancies lo to beauty most be bent,
Some hunt for wealth, and some set all their joys,
In regal power of princely government,
Yet none of these from care are clean exempt*
For either they be got with grievous toil,
Or in the end forgone with shameful fail.
This flitting world does firmly naught retain,
Wherein a man may boldly rest his trust,
Such fickle chance in fortune does remain,
As when she lust, she threatens whom she lust,
From high renoume to throw him in the dust:
Thus may we see that each triumphing joy
By fortunes froune is turned to annoye.
Those elder heads may well be thought to err,
The which for easy life and quiet days,
The vulgar sort would seem for to prefer.
If glorious Phoebe, with-holde his glistring rays,
From such a peer as crown and scepter swayes,
No me^uaile though he hide his heavenly face,
From us that come of less renounied race.
Selde shall you see the ruin of a Prince,
But that the people eke like brunt do bear,
And old records of ancient time long since,
From age to age, yea almost every where,
With proof hereof has glutted every ear:
Thus by the follies of the princes heart,
The bounden subject still receives smart.
Lo, how unbridled lust of private reign,
Has pricked both the brethren unto war:
Yet Pollinyce, with sign of less disdain,
Against this land has brought from countries far,
A foreign power, to end this cruel jar,
Forgetting quite the duty, love, and zeal,
He ought to bear unto this common weal.
But whosoever gets ^he victory,
We wretched dames, and thou O noble town,
Shall feel thereof the woeful misery*
Thy gorgeous pomp, thy glorious high renoume,
Thy stately towers, and all shall fall a down,
Since raging Ma^s will each of them assist
In others breast to bathe his bloody fist.
But (...) son of (...), and of Jove,
(That tamde the proud attempt of giaunts strong)
Do thou defend, even of thy tender love,
Thy humble thralls from this afflicting wrong,
Whom wast of war has now tormented long:
So shall we never fail ne day ne night
With reverence due thy praises to resight.

Done by F. Kinvvelmarshe.
Finis Actus primi*
Thorder of the second dumb shevve.
BEfore the beginning of this second Act did sound a very doleful noise of
flutes, during the which there came (...) upon the stage two ^offines covered
with hearce clothes* and brought in by.viij. in mourning weed, and accompanied
with.viij. other mourners, and after they had carried the coffins about the
stage, there opened and appeared a Grave, wherein they buried the coffins and
put fire ^o them, but the flames did sever and part in twain, signifying
discord by the history of two brethren, whose discord in their life was not
only to be wondered at, but being buried both in one Tomb (as some writers
affirm) the flames of their funerals did yet part the one from the other in
like manner, and would in no wise join into one flame. After the Funerals were
ended and the fire consumed, the grave was closed up again, the mourners
withdrew the^ off the stage, and immediately by y^ gates Homoloydes entered
Pollinyces accompanied with vj. gentlemen and a page that carried his helmet
and Target, he and his men unarmed saving their gorgets, for that they were
permitted to come into the town in time of truce, to the end Iocasta might
bring the two brethren to a parle, and Pollinyces after good regard taken round
about him, spoke as follows.

Actus. 2.
Scena. 1.
POLLINYCES. CHORUS. IOCASTA. ETEOCLES. Lo here mine own city and native
soil,
Lo here the (...) I ought to nestle in,
Yet being thus entrencht with mine own towers,
And that, from him the safe conduct is given
Which does enjoy as much as mine should be,
My feet can tread no step without suspect:
For where my brother bides, even there behoues
More wary scout than in an enemies camp.
Yet while I may within this right hand hold
This brond, this blade, (vnyelden ever yet)
My life shall not be left without revenge*
But here behold the holy sancturie,
Of Bacchus eke the worthy Image lo,
The aultars where the sacred flames have sho^^e*
And where of yore these giltlesse hands of mine
Full often have offered to our mighty gods.
I see also a worthy compani^
Of* Thibane dames, resembling unto me
The trai^d of Iocasta my dear mother:
Behold them clad in clothes of grie^ly black,
That hellishe hew that nay for other harms
So well besemed wretched wightes to wear:
For why, ere long their selves themselves shall see
(Gramer^y to there princes tyranny)
Some spoiled of their sweet and sucking babes,
Some lose their husband, other some their sire,
(...) some their friends that were to the^ full dear.
But now it is time to lay this sword aside,
And eke of them to know where is the Queen:
O worthy dames, hea^ie, unhappy ye,
Where rests now the restless queen of Thebes?
Chor. O worthy impe sprung out of worthy race,
Renoumed Prince, whom we have looked for long,
And now in happy hour art come to us,
Some quiet bring to this unquiet realm.
O queen, O queen, come forth and see thy son,
The gentle fruit of all thy joyful seed.

Iocast. My faithful friends, my dear beloved maids,
I come at call, and at your words I move
My feebled feet with age and agony:
Where is my son? O tell me where is he,
For whom I sighed have so often sith,
For whom I spend both nights and days in tears?

Poli. Here noble mother, here, not as the king,
Nor as a Citizen of stately Thebes,
But as a stranger now, I thank my brother.

Iocast. O son, O sweet and my desired son,
These eyes they see, these hands of mine thee touch,
Yet scarsly can this mind believe the same,
And scarsly can this bruised breast sustain
The sodeyne joy that is inclosde therein:
O gladsome glass, wherein I see my self.

Chor. So grant the Gods, that for our common good*
You freendly may your sons both friends behold.

Iocast. At thy depart, O lovely child, thou left
My house in tears, and me thy wretched dame,
Myrrour of martyrdom, waymenting still
Th unworthy exile thy brother thee gave:
Ne was there ever son or friend far off,
Of his dear friends or mother so desired,
As thy return, in all the town of Thebes.
And of my self more than the rest to speak,
I have as thou may see, clean cast aside
My princely roabes, and thus in worfull weed,
Bewrapped have these lustlesse limbs of mine:
Naught else but tears have trickled from mine eyes,
And eke thy wretched blind and aged sire,
Since first he heard what war tweene you there was,
As one that did his bitter curse repent,
Or that he prayed to Jove for your decay,
With stretching string, or else with blouddie knyfe
Has sought full often to end his loathed life.
Thou this mean while my son, have lingered long
In far and forreyn coasts, and wedded eke,
By whom thou may, (when heavens appoyntes it so)
Strange issue have by one a stranger borne,
Which greeues me sore, and much the more dear child,
Because I was not present at the same,
There to perform thy loving mothers due.
But for I find thy noble match so meet,
And worthy both for thy degree and birth,
I seek to comfort thee by mine advise,
That thou return this city to inhabit,
Which best of all may seem to be the bower,
Both for thy self and for thy noble spouse.
Forget thou then thy brothers injuries,
And know dear child, the harm of all missehap,
That happes twixt you, must hap likewise to me:
Ne can the cruel swoorde so slightly touch
Your tender flesh, but that the self same wound
Shall deeply bruise this aged breast of mine.

Cho. "There is no love may be comparde to that*
"The tender mother bears unto her child:
"For even so much the more it does increase,
"As their grief grows, or contentations cease.

Poli. I know not mother, if I praise deserve,
(That you to please, whom I ought not displease)
Have trained my self among my trustlesse foes:
But Nature draws (whether he will or ^ill)
Each man to love his natue country soil:
And who should say, that otherwise it were,
His tongue should never with his heart agree.
This has me drawn beside my bounden due,
To set full light this lucklesse life of mine:
For of my brother, what may I else hope,
But traynes of treason, force and falshoode both?
Yet neither peril present, nor to come,
Can hold me from my due obedience:
I grant I can not grieflesse, well behold
My fathers palace, the holy aultars,
Ne lovely lodge wherein I fostred was:
From whence driven out, and chaste unworthily,
I have too long aboade in forreyn coasts:
And as the growing green and pleasant plant,
Does bear fresh branches one above an other,
Even so am^dde the huge heap of my woes,
Does grows one grudge more grievous than the rest,
To see my dear and doleful mother, cladde
In mournyng tire, to tire her mourning mind,
Wretched alonely for my wretchedness,
So lykes that enemy my brother best:
Soon shall you see that in this wandering world,
No enmity is equal unto that
That dark disdain (the cause of every evil)
Does breed full often in consangiunitie.
But Jove, he knows what dole I do endure,
For you and for my fathers wretched woe,
And eke how deeply I desire to know
What wearre life my loving sisters lead,
And what anoye mine absence them has given.

Iocast. Alas, alas, how wrekefull wrath of Gods
Does still afflicte Oedipus progeny:
The first cause was thy fathers wicked bed,
And then (Oh why do I my plagues recompte?)
My burdein borne, and your unhappy birth:
"But needs we must with pacient hearts abide,
"What so from high the heavens do provide.
With thee my child, feign would I question yet
Of certain things: ne would I that my words
Might thee anoye, ne yet renew thy grief.

Poli. Say on, dear mother, say what so you please,
What pleases you, shall never me disease.

Iocast. And seems it not a heavy hap my son,
To be deprived of thy country coasts?

Poli. So heavy hap as tongue can not express.

Iocast. And what may most molest the mind of man
That is exiled from his native soil?

Poli. The liberty he with his country lost,
"And that he lacks freedom for to speak,
"What seems best, without control or check.

Iocast. Why so? each servant lacks liberty
To speak his mind, without his masters leave.

Poli. "In exile, every man, or bond or free,
"Of noble race, or meaner parentage,
"Is not in this unlike unto the slave,
"That must of force obey to each man's will,
"And praise the peevishness of each man's pride.

Iocast. And seemed this so grievous unto thee?

Poli. What grief can greater he, that so constraynde,
Slauelyke to serve gaynst right and reason both,
Yea much the more, to him that noble is,
By stately line, or yet by virtuous life,
And has a heart like to his noble mind.

Iocast. What helps most in such adversity?

Poli. Hope helps most to comfort misery.

Ioca. Hope to return from whence he first was driven?

Poli. Yea, hope that happens oftentimes to late,
And many die before such hap may fall.

Iocast. And how did thou before thy marriage son,
Mainteyne thy life, a stranger so bestad?

Poli. Sometime I found (though seldom so it were)
Some gentle heart, that could for curtesye,
Content himself to succor mine estate.

Iocast. Thy fathers friends and thine, did they not help
For to relieve that neked need of thine?

Poli. Mother, he has a foolish fantasy,
"That thinks to find a friend in misery.

Iocast. Thou myghtst have help by thy nobility.

Poli. "Couerd alas, in cloak of pouerti^?

Iocast. "Well ought we then that are but mortal here,
"Above all treasure count our country dear:
Yet let me know my son, what cause thee moved
To go to Greece?

Poli. The flying fame that thundered in mine ears,
How king Adrastus, governor of Greece,
Was ^^swered by Oracle, that he
Should knitte in linkes of lawful marriage,
His two fair daughters, and his only heirs,
One to a Lion, the other to a Boar:
An answer such as each man wondered at.

Iocast. And how belongs this answer now to thee.

Poli. I took my guess even by this ensign here,
A Lion lo, which I did always bear:
Yet think I not, but Jove alonely brought
These hands of mine to such an high exploite.

Iocast. And how yet came it to this strange effect?

Poli. The shining day had run his hasted course,
And deawie night bespread her mantell dark,
When I that wandered after weary toil,
To seek some harbrough for mine irked limbs,
Began find at last a little cabin, close
Adjoined fast unto the stately walls,
Where king Adrastus held his royal towers.
Scarce was I there in quiet well ycoucht,
But thither came an other exile eke,
Named Tydeus, who straue perforce to drive
Me from this sorry seat, and so at last,
We settled us to fell and blouddie fight,
Whereof the rumor grew so great forth with,
That straight the king informed was thereof,
Who seeing then the ensigns that we bare,
To be even such as were to him foresaid,
Chose each of us to be his son by law,
And since did solemnize eke the ^ame.

Ioc^st. Yet would I know, if that thy wife be such
As thou can joy in her? or what she is?

Poli. O mother dear, fayrer ne wyser dame
Is none in Greece, Argia is her name.

Iocast. How could thou to this doubtefull enterprise,
So many bring, thus armed all at once?

Poli. Adrastus swear, that he would sone (...)
Unto our right both Tydeus, and me:
And first for me, that had the greater need,
Whereby the best and bol^est bloods in Greece,
Have fellowed me unto this enterprise.
A thing both just and grievous unto me,
Grievous I say, for that I do lamente
To be constrained by such open wrong,
To war against mine own dear country feeres.
But unto you (O mother) does pertain
To stiute this strife, and both duliuer me*
From exile now, and eke the town from siege:
For otherwise, I swear you here by heavens,
Eteocles, who now does me disdain
For brother, shortly shall see me his lord.
I ask the seat, whereof I ought of right
Possess the half, I am Oedipus son,
And yours, so am I true son to you both.
Wherefore I hope that as in my defense
The world will weygh, so Jove will me assiste.

Eteocles comes in here by the gates Electrae, himself armed, and before
him.xx. gentlemen in armor, his two pages, vvherof the one bearet^ his
Target, the other his helm. Chor. Behold O queen, behold O worthy queen,
Unwoorthie he, Eteocles here co^mes,
So, would the Gods, that in this noble realm
Should never long unnoble tyrant reign,
Or that with wrong the right and doubtless heir,
Should banished be out of his princely seat.
Yet thou O queen, so fyle thy sugared tongue,
And with such counsel deck thy mothers tale,
That peace may both the brothers hearts inflame*
And rancour yield, that erst possessed the same.

Eteocl. Mother, behold, your hestes for to obey,
In person now am I resorted hither:
In haste therefore, feign would I know what cause
With hasty speed, so moved has your mind
To call me now so causeless out of time,
When common wealth most craves my only aid:
Feign would I know, what queynt commodity
Persuades you thus to take a truce for time,
And yield the gates wide open to my foe,
The gates that might our stately state defend,
And now are made the path of our decay.

Ioca. "Repress dear son, those reging storms of wrath,
"That so bedimme the eyes of thine intent,
"But when disdaynes shrunk, or set aside,
"And mind of man with l^ysure can discourse
"What seemly words his tale may best (...),
"And that the (...) vnfoldes without affectes
"Then may proceed^ an answer sage and grave,
"And every sentenc^ (...) with soberness:
Wherefore vnbende thine (...) brows de are ^hylde,
And cast thy rolling eyes none other way,
That here do not Medusaes face behold,
But him, even him, thy blood and brother dear.
And thou behold, my Polinices eke,
Thy brothers face, wherein when thou may see
Thine own image, remember therwithall,
That what offense thou woldst to him were done,
The blows thereof rebounde unto thy self.
And hereof eke, I would you both fore warn,
When friends or brethren, kinsfolk or allies,
(Whose hasty hearts some angry mood had moved)
Be face to face by some of pity brought,
Who seeks to end their discord and debate:
They only ought consider well the cause
For which they come, and cast out of their mind
For evermore the old offenses past:
So shall sweet peace drive pleading out of place
Wherefore the first shall Polinices be,
To tell what reason first his mind did rule,
That thus our walls with foreign foes enclosde
In sharp revenge of causeless wrongs received,
As he alleges by his brothers doom:
And of this wicked woe and dire debate,
Some god of pity be the equal judge,
Whom I beseech, to breath in both your breasts
A yelding heart to deep desire of peace.

Poli. "My worthy dame, I find that tried truth
"Does best beseem a simple naked tale,
"Ne needs to be with painted process pricked,
"That in her self has no diversity*
"But always shows one vndisguysed face,
"Where deep deceit and lies must seek the shade,
"And wrap their words in guilefull eloquence,
"As ever fraught with contrariety:
So have I often said, and say again,
That to avoid our fathers foul reproach
And bitter curse, I parted from this land
With right good will, yet thus with him agreed,
That while the whirling wyngs of flying time
Might roll one year about the heavenly sphere,
So long alone he might with peace possess
Our fathers seat in princely diadem,
And when the year should eke his course renew,
Might I succeed to rule again as long.
And that this law might still be kept for aye,
He bound him self by vow of solemn oath
By Gods, by men, by heaven, and eke by earth:
Yet that forgot, without all reverence
Unto the Gods, without respect to right,
Without respect that reason ought to rule,
His faith and troth both trodden under foot,
He still vsurps most tyrantlike with wrong
The right that does of right to me belong.
But if he can with equal doom consent,
That I return into my native soil
To sway with him alyke the kingly seat
And euenly bear the bridle both in hand,
Dear mother mine I swear by all the Gods
To raise with speed the siege from these our walls,
And send the soldiers home from whence they came:
Which if he grant me not, then must I do
(Though loath) as much as right and reason would,
To venge my cause that is both good and just.
Yet this in heaven the Gods my records be,
And here in earth each mortal man may know,
That never yet my giltlesse heart did fail
Brotherly duty to Eteocles,
And that causlesse he holds me from mine own,
Thus have I said O mother, even as much
As needful is, wherein I me assure,
That in the judgment both of good and badde,
My words may seem of reason to proceed,
Constrained thus in my defense to speak.

Chor. None may deny, O pere of princely race,
But that thy words are honest, good and just,
And such as well be seem that ^ong of thine.

Eteo. "If what to some seems honest, good and just,
"Could seem even so in every doubtful mind,
"No dark debate nor quarrel could arise:
"But look, how many men so many minds,
"And that, that one man judges good and just,
"Some other deemes as deeply to be wrong.
To say the truth (mother) this mind of mine
Does fleet full far from that farfetch of his,
Ne will I longer cover my conceit:
If I could rule or reign in heaven above,
And eke command in depth of derksome hell,
No toil ne travel should my sprites abashe,
To make the way unto my restless will,
To climb aloft, nor down for to descend.
Then think you not, that I can yield consent
To yield a part of my possession,
Wherein I live and lead the monarchy.
"A witless fool may every man him guess,
"That leaves the more and takes him to the less.
With this, reproach might to my name redound,
If he, that has with foreign power spoilde
Our pleasant fields, might reaue from me perforce,
What so he list by force of arms demand.
No less reproof the citizens ensewes,
If I, for dread of Greekish hosts, should grant
That he might climb to height of his desire.
In fine, he ought not thus of me to crave
Accord or peace, with bloody sword in hand,
But with humility and prayer both.
For often is it seen^, and proof does teach,
"Sweet words prevail, where sword and fire fail.
Yet this, if here within these stately walls
He list to live, the son of Oedipus,
And not as king of Thebes, I stand content.
But let him think, since now I can command,
This neck of mine shall never yield to yoke
Of servitude: let bring his banners splaide,
Let spear and shield, sharp sword, and cyndring flame^
Procure the part that he so vainly claims:
As long as life within this breast does last,
I nill consent that he should reign with me.
If law of right may any way be broke,
"Desire of rule within a climbing breast
"To break a vow may bear the buckler best.

Cho. "Who once has past the bounds of honstie
"In ernest deeds, may pass it well in words.

Ioca. O son, amongst so many miseries
This benefit has crooked age, I find,
That as the tracke of trustlesse time has taught,
"It sees much, and many things discernes,
"Which recklesse youth can never rightly judge.
Oh, cast aside that vain ambition,
That corosiue, that cruel pestilence,
That most infects the minds of mortal men:
"In princely palace and in stately towns
"It crepeth often, and close with it conuayes,
"To leave behind it damage and decays:
"By it be love and amity destroyde,
"It breaks the laws and common concord beats,
"Kingdoms and realms it topsie turuie turns,
And now, even thee, her gall so poisoned has,
That the weak eyes of thine affection
Are blinded quite, and see not to them self
But worthy child, drive from thy doubtful breast
This monstrous mate, in stead whereof embrace
"Equality, which stately states defends
"And binds the mind with true and trusty knots
"Of friendly faith which never can be broke,
"This, man of right should properly possess,
And who that other does the more embrace,
Shall purchase pain to be his just reward
By wrathful woe or else by cruel death.
"This, first divided all by equal bonds
"What so the earth did yield for our avail:
"This, did divide the nights and days alike,
"And that the veil of dark and dreadful night,
"Which shrowds in misty clouds the pleasant light,
"Ne yet the golden beams of Phoebus rays
"Which cleares the dimmed air with gladsome gleame^
"Can yet heap has in either of them both.
If then the days and nights to serve our turn
Content them selves to yield each other place,
Well ought thou with weighty doom to grant
Thy brothers right to rule the reign with thee
Which heavens ordained common to you both:
If so thou nill O son O cruel son,
"In whose high breast may justice build her boure
"When princes hearts wide open lie to wrong?
Why likes thee so the tipe of tyranny
With others loss to gather greedy gain?
"Alas how far he wanders from the truth
"That compts a pomp, all other to command,
"Yet can not rule his own unbridled will,
"A vain desire much riches to possess
"Whereby the breast is brusde and bettered still,
"With dread, with danger, care and cold suspecte,
"Who seeks to have the thing we call enough,
"Acquainte him first with contentation,
"For plenteousnesse is but a naked name.
"And what suffiseth use of mortal men,
"Shall best apaye the mean and modest hearts.
"These hoorded heaps of gold and worldly wealth
"Are not the proper goods of any one,
"But pawnes which Jove powers out abundantly
"That we likewise might use them equally,
"And as he seems to lend them for a time,
"Even so in time he takes them home again,
"And would that we acknowledge every hour,
"That from his hands we did the same receive:
"There nothing is so firm and stayde to man,
"But whyrles about with wheels of restless time.
Now if I should this one thing thee demand,
Which of these two thou would choose to keep,
The town quiet or unquiet tyranny?
And would thou say I choose my kingly cheer?
O witless answer sent from wicked heart,
For if so fall (which mighty Gods defend)
Thine enemies hand should overcome thy might,
And thou should see them sack the town of Thebes,
The chastest virgins ravished for wrecke,
The worthy children in captivity,
"Then should thou feel that scepter, crown, and wealth
"Yield deeper care to see them taken away,
"Than to possess them yeldeth deep content.
Now to conclude, my son, Ambition
Is it that most offendes thy thought,
Blame not thy brother, blame ambition
From whom if so thou not redeem thy self,
I fear to see thee buy repentance dear.

Chapter Yea dear, too dear when it shall come too late,

Ioc. And now to thee my Polinices dear,
I say that silly was Adrastus read,
And thou God knows a simple silly soul,
He to be ruled by thy heady will,
And thou, to war against the Thebane walls,
These walls I say whose gates thy self should guard:
Tell me I pray thee, if the City yield,
Or thou it take by force in bloody fight,
(Which never grant the Gods I them beseeke)
What spoils? what Palms? what sign of victori^
Can thou set up to have thy country woonne?
What title worthy of immortal fam^,
Shall blased be in honor of thy name?
O son, dear son, believe thy trusty dame,
The name of glory shall thy name refuse,
And fly full far from all thy fond attemptes.
But if so fall thou should be overcome,
Then with what face can thou return to Greece,
That here have left so many Greeks on ground?
Each one shall curse and blame thee to thy face,
As him that only caused their decay,
And eke condemn Adrastus simple head,
That such a pheere had chosen for his child.
So may it fall, in one accursed hour,
That thou may loose thy wife and country both,
Both which thou may with little toil attain,
If thou can leave high mind and dark disdain.

Cho. O mighty Gods of goodness, never grant
Unto these evils, but set desired peace
Between the hearts of these two friendly foes.

Ete. The question that betwixt us two is grown,
Believe me mother, can not end with words:
You waste your breath, and I but loose my time,
And all your travel lost and spent in vain:
For this I swear, that peace you never get
Between us two, but with condition,
That whilst I live, I will be Lord of Thebes.
Then set aside these vain forewasted words,
And yield me leave to go where need does press:
And now good sir, get you out of these walls,
Unless you mean to buy abode with blood.

Po. And who is he that seeks to have my blood,
And shall not shed his own as fast as mine?

Ete. By thee he stands, and thou standst him before,
Lo here the sword that shall perform his word.

Po. And this shall eke maintain my rightful cause.

Ioc. O sons, dear sons, away with glittring arms,
And first, before you touch each others flesh,
With doubled blows come pierce this breast of mi^e.

Po. Ah wretch, thou art both vile and cowardlike,
Thy high estate esteems thy life too dear.

Ete. If with a wretch or cowarde should thou fight,
Oh dastarde villain, what first moved thee
With swarms of Greeks to take this enterprise?

Po. For well I wist, that cancred heart of thine
Could sefely keep thy head within these walls,
And flee the field when combat should be callde.

Ete. This truce assured thee Polinices,
And makes thee bold to give such bosting words:
So be thou sure, that had this truce not been,
Then long ere this, these hands had been embrude,
And eke this soil besprinkled with thy blood.

Po. Not one small drop of my blood shall thou spill,
But buy it dear against thy cancred will.

Ioc. O sons, my sons, for pity yet refrain.

Chapter Good Gods, who ever saw so strange a sight?
True love and friendship both be put to flight.

Po. Yield villein, yield my right which thou withholds*

Ete. Cut of thy hope to reign in Thebane walls,
Naught have thou here, nor naught shall ever have,
Away.

Po. O aultars of my country soil.

Ete. Whom thou art come to spoil and to deface.

Po. O Gods, give ear unto my honest cause.

Ete. With foreign power his country to invade.

Po. O holy temples of the heavenly Gods.

Ete. That for thy wicked deeds do hate thy name.

Po. Out of my kingdom am I driven by force.

Ete. Out of the which thou came me to drive.

Po. Punish O Gods this wicked tyrant here.

Ete. Pray to the Gods in Greece and not in Thebes.

Po. No savage beast so cruel nor unjust.

Ete. Not cruel to my country like to thee.

Po. Since from my right I am with wrong deprived.

Ete. Eke from thy life if long thou tarry here.

Po. O father hear what injuries I take.

Ete. As though thy diuelishe deeds were hid from him.

Po. And you mother.

Eteo. Have done thou not deseruest
With that false tongue thy mother once to name.

Po. O dear City.

Eteo. When thou ariuest in Greece,
Choose out thy dwelling in some mustie Moors.

Po. I must depart, and parting must I prays^
Oh dear mother the depth of your good will.

Ioc. O Son.

Eteo. Away I say out of these walls.

Po. I can not choose but must thy will obey,
Yet grant me once my father for to see.

Ete. I hear no prayers of my enemy.

Po. Where be my sweet sisters.

Eteo. And can thou yet
With shameless tongue once name thy noble race
That art become a common foe to Thebes?
Be sure thou shall them never see again,
Nor other friend that in these walls remain.

Po. Rest you in peace, O worthy mother mine.

Ioc. How can that be and thou my joy in war?

Po. Hence forth n'am I your joy ne yet your son.

Ioc. Alas the Heavens me whelme with all mishap.

Po. Lo here the cause that stirs me by wrong.

Ete. Much more is that he profereth unto me.

Po. Well, speak, dare thou come armed to the field?

Ete. So dare I come, wherefore do thou bemaunde?

Po. For needs or thou must end this life of mind
Or quench my thirst with pouring out thy blood.

Eteo. Ah wretch, my thirstis all as dry as thine.

Io. Alas and welaway, what hear I sons?
How can it be? dear children can it be
That brethrens hearts such rancour should enrage?

Eteo. And that right soon the proof shall plainly show.

Io. Oh say not so, yet say not so dear sons.

Po. O royal race of Thebes now take thine end.

Cho. God shield.

Eteo. O slow and sluggish heart of mine,
Why do I stay to embrew these slothful hands?
But for his greater grief I will depart,
And at return if here I find my foe,
This hasty hand shall end our hot debate.

Eteocles here goes out by the gates Electrae. Po. Dear Citizens, and you
eternal Gods,
Bear witness with me here before the world,
How this my fierce and cruel enemy,
Whom causeless now my brother I do call,
With threats of death my lingering steps does drive
Both from my right and from my country soil,
Not as beseemes the son of Oedipus,
But as a slave, an abject, or a wretch:
And since you be both pitiful and just,
Uouchsafe O Gods, that as I part with grief,
So may I yet return with joyful spoil
Of this accursed tyrant, and he slain
I may recover quietly mine own.

Polinyces goes out by the gates Homoloides. Io. O wretched wretch Iocasta,
where is found
The misery that may compare to thine?
O would I had nor gasing eyes to see,
Nor listening ears to hear that now I dread:
But what remaynes, save only to entreat
That cruel dole would yet so courteous be
To reaue the breath out of this woeful breast,
Before I hearken to some woeful ^ewes.
Rest you here dames, and pray unto the Gods
For our redress, and I in that mean while
Will shut my self from sight of loathsome light.
Iocasta goes into her Palace.
Cho. O mighty God, the governor of Thebes,
Pity with speed the pain Iocasta bydes,
And eke our needs, O mighty Bacchus help,
Bend willing care unto our just complaynt:
Leave them not comfortless that trust in thee,
We have nor gold nor silver thee to give,
Ne sacrifice to those thine aulters due,
In steed whereof we confecrate our hearts
To serve thy will, and hestes for to obey.

VVhyles the Chorus if thus praying to Bacchus, Eteocles returns by the gates
called Electrae. Actus. ij.
Scena. ij.
ETEOCLES. CREON. SInce I have rid mine enmie out of sight,
The best shall be, for Creon now to send,
My mothers brother, that with him I may
Reason, consulte, confer, and counsel both,
What shall be best to use in our defense,
Before we venture forth into the field.
But of this travail, lo, he me acquites
That comes in haste toward these royal towers.
Here Creon attended by four gentlemen, comes in by the gates Homoloydes.
Cre. O mighty king, not causeless now I come,
To find, that long have sought your majesty.
So to discharge the duty that I owe
To you, by comfort and by counsel both.

Ete. No less desire this heart of mine did press,
To send for thee Creon, since that in vain
My mother has her words and travail spent,
To reconcile Pollinices and me:
For he (so dull was his capacity)
Did think, he could by dread of danger, win
My princely heart to yield to him this realm.

Cre. I understand, the army that he brings
Against these walls, is such, that I me doubt
Our cities force may scarce the same resist.
Yet true it is, that right and reason both
Are on our side, which bring the victory
Oftetimes: for we our country to defend,
They to subdue the same in arms are come.
But what I would unto your highness show,
Is of more weight, and more behoues to know.

Ete. And what is that? oh quickly tell it me.

Cre. A Greek prisner is come unto my hands.

Ete. And what says he that does so much importe?

Cre. That even already be their ranks in raye,
And straight will give assault to these our walls.

Ete. Then must I straight prepare our Citizens
In glittring arms to march into the field.

Cre. O Prince (and pardon me) thy youthful years
Nor see them self, ne let thee once discern,
What best behooves in this doubtful case.
"For Prudence, she that is the mighty queen
"Of all good works, grows by experience,
"Which is not found with few days seeking for.

Ete. And were not this both sound and wise advise,
Boldly to look our foemen in the face,
Before they spread our fields with hugie host,
And all the town beset bysiege at once?

Cre. We be but few; and they in number great.

Ete. Our men have yet more courage far than they.

Cre. That know I not, nor am I sure to say.

Ete. Those eyes of thine in little space shall see
How many I my self can bring to ground.

Cre. That would I like, but hard it is to do.

Ete. I nill pan up our men within the walls.

Cre. In counsel yet the victory consistes.

Ete. And will thou then I use some other read?

Cre. What else? be still awhile, fir haste makes wast.

Ete. By night I will the Camuassado give.

Cre. So may you do and take the overthrow.

Ete. The vauntage is to him that does assault.

Cre. Yet skirmishe given by night is perilous.

Ete. Let set upon them as they sit at meat.

Cre. Sudden assaults affray the mind no doubt,
But we had need to overcome.

Ete. So shall we do.

Cre. No sure, unless some other counsel help.

Ete. Amid their trenches shall we them invade?

Cre. As who should say, were none to make defense.

Ete. Should I then yield the City to my foes?

Cre. No, but advise you well if you be wise.

Ete. That were thy part, that know more than I.

Cre. Then shall I say that best does seem to me?

Ete. Yea Creon yea, thy counsel hold I dear.

Cre. Seven men of courage have they chosen out.

Ete. A slender number for so great emprise.

Cre. But they them chose for guides and capitaynes.

Ete. To such an host? why they may not suffice.

Cre. Nay, to assault the seven gates of the city.

Ete. What then behooves so bestad to done?

Cre. With equal number see you do them match.

Ete. And then commit our men in charge to them?

Cre. Choosing the best and boldest bloods in Thebes.

Ete. And how shall I the City then defend?

Cre. Well with the rest, for one man sees not all.

Ete. And shall I choose the boldest or the wisest?

Cre. Nay both, for one without that other fayles.

Ete. "Force without wisdom then is little worth.

Cre. That one must be fast to that other ioynde

Ete. Creon I will thy counsel follow still,
For why, I hold it wise and trusty both,
And out of hand for now I will depart
That I in time the better may provide
Before occasion slip out of my hands,
And that I may this Pollinices quell:
For well may I with bloody knife him ^le^
That commes in arms my country for to spoil,
But if so please to fortune and to fate
That other end than I do think may fall,
To thee my friend it rests to procure
The marriage twixt my sister Antygone
And thy dear son Haemone, to whom for dowre
At parting thus I promise to perform
As much as late I did beheste to thee:
My mothers blood and brother dear thou art,
Ne need I crave of thee to guard her well,
As for my father care I not, for if
So chance I dye, it may full well be said
His bitter curses brought me to my bane,

Cre. The Lord defend, for that unworthy were.

Ete. Of Thebes town the rule and scepter lo
I need nor ought it other wise dispose
Than unto thee, if I dye without heir.
Yet longs my lingering mind to understand
The doubtful end of this unhappy war:
Wherefore I will thou send thy son to seek
Tyresias the divine, and learn of him,
For at my call I know he will not come
That often have his arts and him reproude.

Cre. As you command, so ought I to perform.

Ete. And last, I thee and city both command,
If fortune friendly favor our attemptes,
And make our men triumphant victors al,
That none there be so hardy ne so bold
For Pollinices bones to give a grave:
And who presumes to break my heste berein,
Shall dye the death in penance of his pain,
For though I were by blood to him conioynde
I part it now, and justice goes with me
To guide my steps victoriously before.
Pray you to Jove he deigne for to defend,
Our City safe both now and evermore.

Cre. Gramercie worthy prince, for all thy love
And faithful trust thou do in me repose,
And if should hap, that I hope never shall,
I promise yet to do what best behoues,
But chiefly this I swear and make a vow,
For Pollinices now our cruel foe,
To hold the hest that thou do me command.

Creon attends Eteocles to the gates Electrae, he returns and goes out by
the gates called Homoloydes. CHORUS. O Fierce and furious God, whose harmefull
heart,
Rejoices most to shed the giltlesse blood,
Whose headie will does all the world subvert,
And does envy the pleasant merry mood,
Of our estate that erst in quiet stood,
Why do thou thus our harmless town annoye,
Which mighty Bacchus governed in joy?
Father of war and death, that do remove
With wrathful wrecke from woeful mothers breast,
The trusty pledges of their tender love,
So grant the Gods, that for our final rest,
Dame Uenus pleasant looks may please thee best,
Whereby when thou shall all amazed stand,
The sword may fall out of thy trembling hand.
And thou may prove some other way full well
The bloody prowess of thy mighty spear,
Wherewith thou raisest from the depth of hell,
The wrathful sprites of all the furies there,
Who when they wake, do wander every where,
And never rest to rang^ about the coasts,
T'enriche that pit with spoil of damned ghostes.
And when thou have our fields forsaken thus,
Let cruel discord bear thee company,
Engirt with snakes and serpents venomous,
Even she that can with red vermilion dye
The gladsome green that flourished pleasantly,
And make the greedy ground a drinking cup,
To suy the blood of murdered bodies up.
Yet thou return O joy and pleasant peace,
From whence thou did against our will depart,
Ne let thy worthy mind from travel cease,
To chase disdain out of the poisoned heart,
That raised war to all our pains and smarte,
Even from the breast of Oedipus his son,
Whose swelling pride has all this jar begone.
And thou great God, that does all things decree*
And sitst on high above the starrie skies,
Thou chiefest cause of causes all that be,
Regard not his offense but hear our cries,
And spedily redress our miseries,
For what can we poor woeful wretches do
But crave thy aid, and only cleave thereto?

Done by G. Gascoyg^e.
Finis Actus secundi.
The order of the third dumb shevve.
BEfore the beginning of this.iij. Act did sound a very doleful noise of
cornettes, during the which there opened and appeared in the stage a great
Gulf, immediately came in.vj. gentlemen in their dublets and hose bringing
upon their shulders baskets full of earth and threw them into the Gulf to
fill it up, but it would not so close up nor be filled. Then came the ladies
and dames that stood by, throwing in their chey^es and Jewels, so to cause it
stop up and close it self, but when it would not so be filled, came in a
kinghte with his sword drawn, armed at all points, who walking twice or
thrice about it, and perusing if, seeing that it would neither be filled with
earth nor with their Jewels and ornaments, after solemn reverence done to
the gods, and courteous leave taken of the Ladies and standers by, sodeinly
lepte into the Gulf the which did close up immediately, bet^kening unto us the
love that every worthy person owes unto his native country, by the historye
of Curtius, who for the like cause adventured the like in Rome. This done,
blind Tyresias the divine prophet led in by his daughter, and conducted by
Meneceus the son of Creon, enters by the gates Electrae, and says as
follows.

Actus. iij.
Scena 1.
TYRESIAS. CREON. MANTO. MENEC^VS. SACERDOS. THou trusty guide of my so
trustlesse steps
Deer daughter mine go we, lead thou y^ way,
That since the day I first did leese this light
Thou only art the light of thsee mine eyes:
And for thou know I am both old and weak
And ever longing after lovely rest,
Derect my steps amyd the playnest paths,
That so my febled feet may feel lest pain.
Meneceus thou gentle child, tell me,
It is far hence, the place where we must go,
Where as thy father for my coming stays?
For like unto the slothful snayle I draw,
Dear s^nne, with pain these aged legs of mine,
Creon returns be the ga^es Homoloydes. And though my mind be quick, scarce
can I move.
Cre. Comfort thy self divine, Creon thy friend
Lo stands here, and came to meet with thee
To ease the pain that thou might else sustain.
"For unto elde each travel yeldes annoy:
And thou his daughter and his faithful guide*
Lo rest him here, and rest thou there withal
Thy virgins hands, that in sustayning him
Do well acquit the duty of a child.
"For crooked age and hory silver hears
"Still craves help of lusty youthful years.

Tyr. Gramercie Lord, what is your noble will?

Cre. What I would have of thee Tyresias
Is not a thing so soon for to be said,
But rest a while thy weak and weary limbs
And take some breath now after weary walk,
And tell I pray thee, what this crown does mean,
That sits so kingly on thy skillful head?

Tyr. Know this, that for I did with grave advise,
Foretell the Citizens of Athens town,
How they might best with loss of little blood,
Have victories against their enemies,
Has been the cause why I do wear this Crown,
As right reward and not unmeet for me.

Cre. So take I then this thy victorious crown,
For our avail in token of good luck,
That know, how the discord and debat^
Which late is fallen between these brethren twain,
Has brought all Thebes in danger and in dread.
Eteocles our king, with threatening arms,
Is gone against his greekish enemies,
Commanding me to learn of thee (who art
A true divine of things that be to come)
What were for us the safest to be done,
From peril now our country to preserve.

Tyr. Long have I been within the town of Thebes,
Since that I tied this trusty tongue of mine
From telling truth, fearing Eteocles:
Yet, since thou do in so great need desire
I should reveal things hidden unto thee,
For common cause of this our common weal,
I stand content to pleasure thee herein.
But first, that to this mighty God of yours
There might some worthy sacrifice be made,
Let kill the fairest goat that is in Thebes,
Within whose bowels when the Priest shall look,
And tell to me what he has there espied,
I trust t'aduyse thee what is best to done.

Cre. Lo here the temple, and ere long I look
To see the holy priest that hither co^mes,
Bringing with him the pure and fair offerings,
Which thou requirest, for not long since, I sent
For him, as one that am not ignorant
Of all your rytes and sacred ceremonies:
He went to choose amid our herd of goats,
The fattest there: and look where now he commes.

Sacerdos accompanied with.xvth.xvj. becchanales and all his rytes and
ceremonies enters by the gates Homoloydes. Sacer. O famous Citizens, that
hold full dear
Your quiet country: Lo where I do come
Most joyfully, with wonted sacrifice,
So to beseech the supreme Citizens,
To stay our state that staggringly do stand,
And plant us peace where war and discord grows:
Wherefore, with heart devout and humble cheer,
Whiles I break up the bowels of this beast,
That often thy vyneyarde Bacchus has destroyed,
Let every wight crave pardon for his faults,
With bending knee about his aultars here.

Tyr. Take here the salt, and sprinckle therwithall
About the neck, that done, cast all the rest
Into the sacred fire, and then annoynte
The knife prepared for the sacrifice.
O mighty Jove, preserve the precious gift
That thou me gave, when first thine angry Queen,
For deep disdain did both mine eyes do out,
Grant me, I may foretell the truth in this,
For, but by thee, I know that I ne may,
Ne will ne can, out trusty sentence say,

Sa. This due is done.

Tyr. With knife then stick y^ kid.

Sac. Thou daughter of divine Tyresias,
With those unspotted virgins hands of thine
Receive the blood within this vessel here,
And then devoutly it to Bacchus yield.

Man. O holy God of Thebes, that do both praise
Sweet peace* and do in heart also disdain
The noisome noise, the furies and the fight
Of bloody Mars and of Bellona both:
O thou the giver both of joy and health,
Receive in gree and with well willing hand
These holy whole brunt offerings unto thee,
And as this town does wholly thee adore,
So by thy help do grant that it may stand
Safe from the enmyes outrage evermore.

Sac. Now in thy sacred name I bowell here
This sacrifice.

Tire. And what entralls has it?

Sac. Fair and welformed all in every point,
The liver clean, the heart is not inf^^t,
Save lo, I find but only one heart string
By which I find somewhat I woten^re what,
That seems corrupt, and were not only that,
In all the rest, they are both sound and hole.

Tyr. Now cast at once into the holy flame
The sweet incense, and then advertise me
What hew it bears, and every other ryte
That ought may help the truth for to coniecte.

Sac. I see the flames do sundry colors cast,
Now bloody sanguine, straight way purple, blew,
Some parts seem black, some gray, and some be green.

Tyr. Stay there, suffy^eth this for to have seen,
Know Creon, that these outward seemly signs
By that the Gods have let me understand
Who understands al and sees secret things,
Betokens that the City great of Thebes
Shall Uictor be against the Greekish host,
If so consent be given, but more than this
I list not say:

Cre. Alas for courtesy
Say on Tyresias, never have respect
To any living man, but tell the truth.

Sacerdos returns with the Bacchan by the gates homoloides. Sac. In this
mean while I will return with speed
From whence I came, for lawful is it not,
That such as I should hear your secretnesse.

Tyr* Contrary then to that which I have said,
The incest foul, and childbirth monstrous
Of Iocasta, so stirs the wrath of Jove,
This city shall with bloody channels swim,
And angry Mars shall overcome it all.
With famine, flame, rape, murder, dole and death:
These lusty towers shall have a headlong fall,
These houses burnde, and all the rest be rasde,
And soon be said, here whilome Thebes stood.
One only way I find for to escape,
Which both would thee displease to hear it told,
And me to tell percase were perilous.
Thee therefore with my travel I commend
To Jove, and with the rest I will endure,
What so shall chance for our adversity.

Cre. Yet stay a while.

Tyr. Creon make me not stay
By force.

Cre. Why fleest thou?

Tyr. Sir it is not from thee
I flee, but from this fortune foul and fell.

Cre. Yet tell me what behoues the city do?

Tyr. Thou Creon seem now desirous still
It to preserve: but if as well as I
Thou knew that which is to thee unknown,
Then wouldste thou not so soon consent thereto.

Cre. And would not I with eagre mind desire
The thing that may for Thebes ought avail?

Tyr. And do thou then so instantly request
To know which way thou may the same preserve?

Cre. For nothing else I sent my son of late
To seek for thee.

Tyr. Then will I satisfy
Thy greedy mind in this: but first tell me,
Menetius where is he?

Cre. Not far from me.

Tyr. I pray thee send him out some other where.

Cre. Why would thou that he should not be here?

Tyr. I would not have him hear what I should say.

Cre. He is my son, ne will he it reveal.

Tyr. And shall I then while he is present speak?

Cre. Yea, be thou sure that he no less than I,
Does wish full well unto this common weal.

Tyr. Then Creon shall thou know: the mean to save
This City, is, that thou shall ^lea thy son,
And of his body make a sacrifice
For his Country: lo here is all you seek
So much to know, and since you have me forced
To tell the thing that I would not have told,
If I have you offended with my words,
Blame then your self, and eke your froward fate.

Cre. cruel words, oh, oh, what have thou said,
Thou cruel southsayer?

Tyr. Even that, that heaven
Has ordained once, and needs it must ensue.

Cre. How many evils have thou knit up in one?

Tyr. Though evil for thee, yet for thy country good.

Cre. And let my country perish, what care I?

Tyr. "Above all things we ought to hold it dear.

Cre. Cruel were he, that would not love his child.

Tyr. "For commonweal, were well, that one man wail.

Cre. To loose mine own, I list none other save.

Tyr. "Best Citizens care least for private gain.

Cre. Depart, for now, with all thy prophecies.

Tyr. "Lo, thus the truth does always hatred get.

Cre. Yet pray I thee by these thy silver hears,

Tyr. "The harm that co^mes from heaven can not be escaped.

Cre. And by thy holy spirit of prophecy,

Tyr. "What heaven has done, that can not I undo.

Cre. "That to no more this secret thou reueals.

Tyr. And would thou have me learn to make a lie?

Cre. I pray thee hold thy peace.

Tyr. That will I not:
But in thy woe to yield thee some relief,
I tell thee once, thou shall be Lord of Thebes.
Which hap of thine this string did well declare,
Which from the heart does out alonely grow.
So did the piece corrupted plainly show,
An argument most evident to prove
Thy son his death.

Cre. Well, yet be thou content
To keep full close this secret hidden grief.

Tyr. I neither ought, ne will keep it so close.

Cre. Shall I be then the murderer of mine own?

Tyr. Ne blame not me, but blame the stars for this.

Cre. Can heavens condemn but him alone to dye?

Tyr. We ought believe the cause is good and just.

Cre. "Unjust is he condemns the innocent.

Tyr. "A fool is he accuses heavens of wrongs.

Cre. "There can no ill thing come from heavens above.

Tyr. Then this that heaven commands can not be ill.

Cre. I not believe that thou have talked with God.

Tyr. Because I tell thee that does thee displease.

Cre. Out of my sight accursed lying wretch.

Tyr. Go daughter go, oh what a fool is he
That puts in ure to publishe prophecies?
"For if he do foretell a froward fate,
"Though it be true, yet shall he purchase hate:
"And if he silence keep, or hide the truth,
"The heavy wrath of mighty Gods ensuth.
Apollo he might well tell things to come,
That had no dread the angry to offend:
But hye we daughter hence some other way.

Tyresias with Manto his daughter, returns by the gates called Electrae.
Scena. ij.
CREON. MENECEVS. OH my dear child, well have thou heard with ear
These weery news, or rather wicked tales
That this divine of thee deuined has:
Yet will thy father never be thy foe,
With cruel doom thy death for to consent.
Me. You rather ought, O father, to consent
Unto my death, since that my death may bring
Unto this town both peace and victory.
"Ne can I purchase more prayseworthy death
"Than for my countries wealth to lose my breath.

Cre. I can not praise this witless will of thine.

Me. "You know dear father, that this life of ours
"Is brittle, short, and nothing else in deed
"But tedious toil and pangs of endless pain:
"And death, whose darte to some men seems so fell,
"Brings quiet end to this unquiet life.
"Unto which end who soonest does arrive,
"Finds soonest rest of all his restless grief.
"And were it so, that here on earth we felt
"No prick of pain, nor that our flattring days
"Were never dashed by froward fortunes frown,
"Yet being borne (as all men are) to dye,
"Were not this worthy glory and renown,
"To yield the country soil where I was borne,
"For so long time, so short a time as mine?
I can not think that this can be denied.
Then if to shun this haughty high beh^st,
Mine only cause, O father, does you move,
Be sure, you seek to take from me your son,
The greatest honor that I can attain:
But if your own commodity you move,
So much the less you ought the same allow:
For look, how much the more you have in Thebes,
So much the more you ought to love the same:
Here have you Hemone, he that in my stead
(O my dear father) may with you remain,
So that, although you be deprived of me,
Yet shall you not be quite deprived of heirs.

Cre. I can not choose, dear son, but disalow^
This thy too hasty, hot desire of death:
For if thy life thou set all so light,
Yet ought thou thy father me respect,
Who as I draw the more to lumpishe age,
So much more need have I to crave thine aid:
Ne will I yet, with stubborn tongue deny,
"That for his common weal to spend his life,
"Does win the subject high renoumed name.
"But how? in armoure to defend the state,
"Not like a beast to bleed in sacrifice:
And therewithal, if any should consent
To such a death, then should the same be I,
That have prolonged life even long enough,
Ne many days have I now to draw on.
And more avail might to the country come,
Dear son, to hold that lusty life of thine
That art both young and eke of courage stout,
Than may by me that feeble am and old.
Then live dear son in high prosperity,
And give me leave that worthy am to dye.

Mean. Yet worthy were not that unworthy change.

Cre. If such a death bring glory, give it me,

Mean. Not you, but me, the heavens call to die.

Cre. We be but one in flesh and body both.

Mean. I father ought; so ought not you, to die.

Cre. If thou son die, think not that I can line:
Then let me die, and so shall he first die,
That ought to die, and yet but one shall die.

Me. Although I, father, ought to obey your hestes,
Yet evil were not to this yield your will.

Cre. Thy wit is wily for to work this woe.

Me. Oh, tender pity moves me thereto.

Cre. "A beast is he, that kills himself with knife,
"Of pity to preserve an others life.

Me. "Yet wise is he, that does obey the Gods.

Cre. The Gods will not the death of any wight.

Me. "Whose life they take, they give him life also.

Cre. But thou do strive to take thy life thy self.

Me. Nay them to obey, that will I shall not live.

Cre. What fault, O son, condemns thee to death?

Me. "Who lives (father) here without a fault?

Cre. I see no gylte in thee that death deserves.

Me. But God it sees that every secret sees.

Cre. How should we know what is the will of God?

Me. We know it then, when he reueales the same.

Cre. As though he would come down to tell it us.

Me. By diverse means his secrets he discloseth.

Cre. Oh, fond is he, who thinks to understand
The mysteries of ^oue his secret mind:
And for to end this controversy here,
Lo thus I say, I will we both live yet:
Prepare thee then, my hestes to hold and keep,
And pull a down that stubborn heart of thine.

Me. You may of me, as of your self dispose,
And since my life does seem so dear to you,
I will preserve the same to your avail,
That I may spend it always to your will.

Cre. Then* thee behoues out of this town to (...):
Before the bold and bl^ide Tyresias
Do publish this that is as yet unknown*

Me. And where, or in what place shall I become?

Cre. Where thou may be hence furthest out of sight.

Me. You may command, and I ought to obey.

Cre. Go to the land of Th^s^eotia.

Me. Where Dodona does fit in sacred chair?

Cre. Even there my child.

Me. And who shall guide my wandering steps?

Cre. high Jove.

Me. Who shall give sustenance for my relief?

Cre. There will I send thee heaps of glistring gold.

Me. But when shall I eft^soones my father see?

Cre. Cre long I hope: but now, for now depart,
For every lingering let or little stay,
May purchase pain and torment both to me.

Me. First would I take my conge of the Queen,
That since the day my mother lost her life,
Has nourisht me as if I were her own.

Creon goes out by the gates Homoloydes. Cre. Oh, tarry not my dear son,
tarry not.

Me. Behold father, I go. You dames o^ Thebes.
Pray to almighty Jove for my return,
You see how mine unhappy starr^s me drive
To go my country fro, and if so chance,
I end in woe my pryme and lusty years
Before the course of Nature do them call,
Honor my death yet with your drery plaints,
And I shall eke, where so this carkas come,
Pray to the Gods that they preserve this town.

Meneceus departs by the gates Electrae. CHORUS. WHen she that rules the
rolling wheel of chance,
Does turn aside her angry frowning face,
On him, whom erst she deigned to advance,
She never leaves to galde him with disgrace,
T^ toss and turn his state in every place,
Till at the last she hurl him from on high
And yield him subject unto misery:
And as the branch that from the root is reft,
He never winnes like life to that he left:
Yea though he do, yet can no taste of joy
Compare with pangs that past in his annoy.
Well did the heavens ordeine for our behoof
Necessity, and fa^es by them allowde,
That when we see our high mishappes aloof
(As though our eyes were mufled with a cloud)
Our froward will does shrink it self and shrowde
From our avail, wherewith we run so far
As none a^ends can make that we do mar:
Then draws evil hap and strives to show his strength,
And such as yield unto his might, at length
He leads them by necessity the way
That destiny preparde for our decay.
The Mariner amidde the swelling seas
Who sees his bark with many a billowe beaten,
Now here, now there, as wind and waves best please,
When thundering Jove with tempest list to threaten,
And dreades in d^pest gulf for to be eaten,
Yet learnes a mean by mere necessity
To save him self in such extremity:
For when he sees no man has wit nor power
To fly from fate when fortune list to lowre,
His only hope on mighty Jove does cast,
Whereby he winnes the wished haven at last.
How fond is that man in his fantasy,
Who thinks that Jove the maker of us al,
And he that tempers all in heaven on high,
The sun, the moon, the stars celestial,
So that no leaf without his leave can fall,
Has not in him omnipotence also
To guide and govern all things here below?
O blinded eyes, O wretched mortal wights,
O subject sl^ues to every evil that lights,
To escape such woe, such pain, such shame and scorn,
Happy were he that never had bin borne.
Well might duke Creon driven by destiny,
If tr^^ it be that old Tyresias says,
Redeem our city from this misery,
By his consent unto Meneceus death,
Who of him self would feign have lost his breath,
"But every man is loath for to fulfill
"The heavenly hest that pleases not his will:
"That public weal must needs to ruin go
"Where private profit is preferred so.
Yet mighty God, thy only aid we crave,
This town from siege, and us from sorrow save.

Finis Actus tertij.
The order of the fourth dumb shevve.
BEfore the beginning of this fourth Act, the Trumpets sounded, the drums
and fifes, and a great peale of ordinance was shot of, in the which there
entered upon the stage.vj. knights armed at al points, whereof three came in by
the Gates Electrae, and the other four by the Gates Homoloides, either part
being accompanied with vij, other armed men: and after they had marched twice
or thrice about the Stage, the one party menacing the other by their furious
looks and gestures, the.vj. knights caused their other attendants to stand by,
and drawing their Swords, fell to cruel and courageous combat, continuing
therein, till two on the one side were slain: the third perceiving, that he
only remained to withstand the force of.iij. enemies, did politiquely run
aside, wherewith immediately one of the.iij. followed after him, and when he
had drawn his enemy thus from his company, he turned again and slew
him: Then the second also ran after him, whom he slew in like manner, and
consequently the third, and then triumphantly marched about the Stage with
his sword in his hand. Hereby was noted the incomparable force of concord
between brethren, who as long as they hold together may not easily by any
means be overcome, and being once disseuered by any means, are easily
overthrown. The history of the brethren Horatij and Curiatij, who agreed to
like combat and came to like end. After that the dead carcasses were carried
from the Stage by the armed men on both parties, and that the victor was
triumphantly accompanied out, also came in a messanger armed from the camp,
seeking the Queen, and to her spoke as follows.

Actus. iiij.
Scena. j.
NVNCIVS IOCASTA. Nuncius comes in by the gates Homoloides O Sage and sober
dames, O shamefast maids,
O faithful servants of our aged Queen,
Come lead her forth, since unto her I bring
Such secret news as are of great importe.
Come forth, O Queen, furceasse thy woeful plainte,
And to my words vouchsafe a willing ear.
The Queen with her train comes out of her Palace. Ioca. My servant
dear, do thou yet bring me news
Of more mishappe? ah werie wretch, alas,
How does Eteocles? whom heretofore
In his increasing years, I wonted ay
From dangerous hap with favor to defend,
Does he yet live? or has untimely death
In cruel fight berefte his flowring life?

Nun. He lives (O Queen) hereof have ye no doubt,
From such suspecte my self will quite you soon.

Ioca. The ve^trous Greeks have happily ta^^ the town*

Nun. The Gods forbid.

Ioca. Our soldiers then, perchance,
Dispersed be^e and yelden to the sword.

Nun. Not so, they were at first in danger sure,
But in the end obtained victory.

Ioca. Alas, what then beco^mes of Polinice?
Oh can thou tell? is he dead or alive?

Nun. You have (O Queen) yet both your sons alive.

Ioca. Oh, how my heart is eased of this pain.
Well, then proceed, and briefly let me hear,
How ye rep^lst your proud presuming foes,
That thereby yet at least I may assuage
The swelling sorrows in my doleful breast,
In that the town is hitherto preserude:
And for the rest, I trust that mighty Jove
Will yield us aid.

Nun. No sooner had your worthy valiant son,
Seuerde the Dukes into seven several parts,
And set them to defense of several gates,
And brought in brave arraye his horssemen out,
First to encounter with their mighty foen,
And likewise pitched, the footmen face to face
Against the footmen of their enemies,
But fiercely straight, the armies did approach,
Swarming so thick, as couerde clean the field,
When dreadful blast of braying trumpets sound,
Of doleful drums, and thundering cannon shot,
Gave hideous sign of horror of the fight,
Then began the Greeks to give their sharp assault,
Then from the walls our stout courageous men,
With rolling stones, with paisse of hugie beame^,
With flying darts, with flakes of burning fire,
And deadly blows, did beat them back again:
Thus striving long, with stout and bloody fight,
Whereby full many thousand slaughtered were,
The hardy Greeks came underneath the walls,
Of whom, first Capaney (a lusty Knight)
Did scale the walls, and on the top thereof
Did vaunt himself, when many hundred more,
With fierce assaults did follow him as fast.
Then lo, the Captains seven bestirrde themselves,
(Whose names ye have already understood)
Some here, some there, naught dreading loss of life,
With new relief to feed thee fainting breach:
And Polinice, he ^ended all the force*
Of his whole charge, against the greatest (...),
When suddenly a flashe of lightning flame
From angry skies struck captain Capaney,
That there down dead he fell, at sight whereof
The gazers one were fraught with soden fear.
The rest, that strove to mount the walls so fast,
From ladders top did headlong tumble down.
Herewith our men encouragde by good hap,
Took hardy hearts, and so repulst the Greeks.
There was Eteocles and I with him,
Who setting first those soldiers to their charge,
Ran straight to the other gates, unto the weak
He manly comfort gave, unto the bold
His lusty words increased courage still,
In so much as th'amased Grecian king
When he did hear of Capaney his death,
Fearing thereby the Gods became his foen
Out from the trench withdrewe his weary host.
But rash Eteocles (presuming too too much
Upon their flight) did issue out of Thebes,
And forward straighte with strength of chivalry,
His flying foes courageously pursude.
To long it were to make recompt of all
That wounded been, or slain, or captive now,
The cloudy air was filled round about
With houling cries and woeful wayling plaints:
So great a slaughter (O renowned Queen)
Before this day I think was never seen.
Thus have we now cut of the fruitless hope
The Grecians had, to sack this noble town.
What joyful end will happen hereunto
Yet know I not: the gods turn all to good.
"To conquer, lo, is doubtless worthy praise,
"But wisely for to use the conquest got,
"Has ever won immortal sound of fame
Well, yet therewhile in this we may rejoice,
Since heaven and heavenly powers are pleased therewith.

Ioca. This good success was luckie sure, and such,
As for my part I little looked for:
To save the town and eke to have my sons
(As you report) preserved yet alive.
But yet proceed, and further let me know
The final end that they agreed upon.

Nun. No more (O Queen) let this for now suffice,
Since hitherto your state is safe enough.

Ioca. Those words of thine, do whelme my jealous mind
With great suspecte of other mischiefs hid.

Nun. What would ye more, already being sure
That both your sons in safety do remain?

Ioca. I long to know the rest, or good or bad.

Nun. O let me now return to Eteocles,
That of my service greatly stands in need.

Ioca. Right well* I see, thou do conceal the woorst.

Nun. Oh force me not, the good now being past,
To tell the ill.

Ioca. Tell it I say, on pain of our displeasure.

Nun. Since thus ye seek to hear a doleful tale,
I will no longer stay: wit ye therefore,
Your desperate sons together be agreed
For to attempt a wicked enterprise,
To private ^^ght they have betroutht themselves,
Of which conflicte, the end mus^ needs be this,
That one do (...), that other die the death.

Ioca. Alas, alas, this did I ever fear.

Nun. Now, since in sum I have revealed that,
Which you have heard with great remorse of mind,
I will proceed, at large to tell the wh^le.
When your victorious son, with valiant force
Had chaste his foes into their joining tents,
Even there he staide, and straight at sound of trumpe
With stretched voice the herault thus proclaimde:
You princely Greeks, that hither be arrived
To spoil the fruit of these our fertile fields,
And us to drive from this our Native soil,
O suffer not so many giltlesse souls
By this debate descend in Stigian lake,
For private cause of wicked Pollinice,
But rather let the brethren, hand to hand,
By mutual blows appease their furious rage,
And so to cease from sheding further blood:
And, to the end you all might understand
The profit that to every side may fall,
Thus much my Lord thought good to profer you,
This is his will, if he be overcome,
Then Polinice to rule this kingly realm:
If so it hap (as reason would it should)
Our rightful prince to conquer Polinice,
That then no one of you make more adoo,
But straight to Argos. I Will have home again.
This, thus pronounst unto the noble Greeks,
No sooner did the sound of trumpet cease,
But Polinice stepped forth before the host,
And to these words this answer did he make:
O thou, (not brother) but my mortal foe,
Thy profer here has pleased me so well,
As presently, without more long delay,
I yield my self prepared to the field.
Our noble King no sooner heard this vaunt,
But forth as fast he pressed his princely steps,
With eger mind, as hoouering falcon wonts
To make her stoop, when pray appears in fight:
At all assayes they both were bra^ely armed,
To eithers side his sword fast being girt,
In ^ithers hand was put a sturdy lance:
About Eteocles our soldiers cloong,
To comfort him, and put him then in mind,
He fought for safety of his country soil,
And that in him consisted all their hope.
To Polinice the king Adrastus swore,
If he escaped victor from the field,
As his retourn he would in Greece erecte
A golden Image unto mighty Jove
In sign of his triumphing victory:
But all this while seek you (O noble queen)
To hinder this your furious sons attempt.
Entreat that Gods it may not take effect,
Else must you needs ere long deprived be
Of both your sons, or of the one at least.

Nuntius returns to the camp by the gates Homoloides. IOCASTA. ANTIGONE.
ANtigone my sweet daughter, come forth
Out of this house, that naught but woe retains,
Come forth I say, not for to sing or dance,
But to prevent (if in our powers it lie)
That thy malicious brethren (swollen with ire)
And I alas, their miserable mother,
Be not destroide by stroke of dreadful death.
Antigone comes out of her mothers Palace. Anti. Ah sweet mother, ah my
beloved mother,
Alas alas what cause does move ye now
From trembling voice to send such careful cries?
What painful pang? what grief does gripe you now?

Ioca. O dear daughter, thy most unhappy brethren
That sometimes lodgde within these wretched loins
Shall die this day, if Jove prevent it not.

Anti. Alas what say you? alas what do you say?
Can I (alas) endure to see him dead,
Whom I thus long have sought to see alive?

Ioca. They both have vowde (I quake alas to tell)
With trenchant blade to spill each others blood.
O cruel Eteocles, ah ruthlesse wretch,
Of this outrage thou only art the cause,
Not Pollinice, whom thou with hateful spite
Have reaued first of crown and country soil,
And now do seek to reaue him of his life.

Ioca. Daughter no more delay, lets go, lets go.

Anti. Ah my sweet mother, whither shall I go?

Ioca. With me, dear daughter, to the greekish host,

Anti. Alas how can I go? unless I go
In danger of my life, or of good name?

Ioca. Time serves not now (my well-beloved child)
To way the loss of life or honest name,
But rather to prevent (if so we may)
That wicked deed, which only but to think,
Does hale my heart out of my heavy breast.

Anti. Come then, lets go, good mother let us go,
But what shall we be able for to do,
You a weak old woman for worn with years,
And I God knows a silly simple maid?

Ioca. Our woeful words, our prayers and our plaintes,
Pourde out with streams of ouerflowing tears,
(Where Nature rules) may happen to prevail,
When reason, power, and force of arms do fail,
But if the glowing heat of boiling wrath
So furious be, as it may not relent,
Then I atwixt them both will throw my self,
And this my breast shall bear the deadly blows
That otherwise should light upon my sons:
So shall they shead my blood and not their own.
Well now dear daughter, let us hasten hence,
For if in time we stay this raging strife,
Then happily may my life prolonged be:
If ere we come the bloody deed be done,
Then must my ghost forsake this feeble corpse:
And thou, dear child, with dolor shall bewail,
Thy brothers death and mothers all at once.

locasta with Antigone, and all her train (except the Chorus) goes toward
the camp, by the gates Homoloydes. CHORUS. WHo so has ^elt, what fervent love
A mother bears unto her tender sons,
She and none other sure, can comprehend
The doleful grief, the pangs and secret pain,
That presently does pierce the princely breast
Of our afflicted Queen: alas, I think
No martyrdom might well compare with hirs.
So often as I record her restless state,
Alas me thinks I feel a shiuering fear
Flit to and fro along my flushing veins.
Alas for ruth, that thus two brethren should,
Enforce themselves to shed each others blood.
Where is the laws of nature now become?
Can flesh of flesh, alas, can blood of blood,
So far forget it self, as slaye it self?
O lowering stars, O dim and angry skies,
O guilty fate, such mischief set aside.
But if supernall powers decreed have,
That death must be the end of this debate,
Alas what floudes of tears shall then suffice,
To weep and wail the near approaching death:
I mean the death of sons and mother both,
And with their death the ruin and decay,
Of Oedipus and all his princely race?
But lo, here Creon co^mes with careful cheer.
It Is time that now I end my just complaint.

Creon comes in by the gates Homoloydes. CREON NVNCIVS. ALthough I straightly
chargde my tender child
To fly from Thebes for safegarde of himself,
And that long since he parted from my (...),
Yet do I greatly hand in lingering doubt,
Least passing through the gates, the privy watch
Has stayed him by some suspect of treason.
And so therewhile, the prophets having skride
His hidden fate, he purchased have the death
Which I by all means sought he might eschew:
And this mischaunce so much I fear the more,
How much the wished conquest at the first,
Fell happily unto the town of Thebes.
"But wise men ought with patience to sustain
"The sundry haps that slipperie fortune frames.
Nuncius comes in by the gates Electrae. Nun. Alas, who can direct my hasty
steps
Unto the brother of our woeful Queen?
But lo where carefully he stands here.

Cre. If so the mind may dread his own mishap,
Then dread I much, this man that seeks me thus,
Has brought the death of my beloved son.

Nun. My Lord, the thing you fear is very true,
Your son Meneceus no longer lives.

Cre. Alas who can withstand the heavenly powers?
Well, it beseems not me, ne yet my years,
In bootelesse plaint to wast my wailefull tear^s:
Do thou recount to me his lucklesse death,
The order, form, and manner of the same.

Nun. Your son (my Lord) came to Eteocles,
And told him this in presence of the rest,
Renou^ed King, neither your victory,
Ne yet the safety of this princely Realm
In armor does consist, but in the death
Of me, of me, (O most victorious King)
So heavenly dome of mighty Jove commands,
I (knowing what avail my death should yield
Unto your grace, and unto native land)
Might well be ^^inde a most ungrateful son
Unto this worthy town, if I would shun
The sharpest death to do my country good,
In mourning weed now let the vestall Nymphs,
With fauning tunes commend my faultl^sse ghost
To highest heavens, while I despoyle my self,
That afterward (since ^oue will have it so)
To save your lives, I may receive my death.
Of you I crave, O courteous Citizens,
To shrine my corpse in tomb of marble stone,
Whereon grave this: Meneceus here does lie,
For countries cause that was content to die.
This said, alas, he made no more a do,
But drew his sword and sheathde it in his breast.

Cre. No more, I have enough, return ye now
From whence ye came.

Nuncius retourneth by the gates Electrae. Well, since the blood of my beloved
son,
Must serve to s^ake the wrath of angry Jove,
And since his only death must bring to Thebes
A quiet end of her unquiet state,
Me thinks good reason would, that I henceforth,
Of Thebane soil should bear the kingly swaye,
Yea sure, and so I will ere it be long,
Either by right, or else by force of arms.
Of al mishap lo here the wicked brood,
My sister first espoused has her son
That slew his sire, of whose accursed seed
Two brethren sprang, whose raging hateful hearts,
By force of boiling ire are bolne so sore
As each do thyrst to suck the others blood:
But why do I sustain the smart hereof?
Why should my blood he spilte for others gilte?
Oh welcome were that messanger to me
That brought me word of both my nephews deaths,
Then should it soon be seen in every eye,
Twixt prince and prince what difference would appear*
Then should experience show what grief it is
To serve the humors of unbridled youth.
Now will I go for to prepare with speed
The funerals of my young giltlesse son,
The which perhaps may be accompanied
With thobsequies of proud Eteocles.
Creon goes out by the gates Homoloydes. Finis Actus. 4.

CHORUS. O Blissfull concord, bredde in sacred breast
Of him that guides the restless rolling sky,
That to the earth for man's assured rest
From height of heavens vouchsafest down to fly,
In thee alone the mighty power does lie,
With sweet accord to keep the frouning stars
And every planet else from hurtful wars.
In thee, in thee such noble virtue bydes,
As may command the mightiest Gods to bend,
From thee alone such sugared friendship flydes
As mortal wightes can scarcely comprehend,
To greatest strife thou setst delightful end*
O holy peace, by thee are only found
The passing joys that every where abound.
Thou only thou, through thy celestial might,
Did first of all the heavenly pole divide,
From the old confused heap that Chao hight:
Thou ^adest the Sun, the Moon, and stars to glide,
With ordered course about this world so wide:
Thou have ordainde Dan Tytans shining ^ight,
By dawne of day to chase the darkesome night.
When tract of time returns the lusty Uer,
By thee alone, the buddes and blossoms spring,
The fields with flowers be garnisht every where,
The blooming trees, abundant fruit do bring,
The cherefull birds melodiously do sing,
Thou do appoint, the crop of summers seed
For man's relief, to serve the winters need.
Thou do inspire the hearts of princely peers
By providence, proceeding from above,
In flowring youth to choose their worthy feeres,
With whom they live in league of lasting love,
Till fearful death does flitting life remove:
And look how fast, to death man pays his due,
So fast again, do thou his stock renew.
By thee, the basest thing advanced is,
Thou every where, do graffe such golden peace,
As fills man, with more than earthly bliss,
The earth by thee, does yield her sweet increase
At beck of thee, all bloody discords cease,
And mightiest Realms in quiet do remain,
Whereas thy hand, does hold the royal reign.
But if thou fail, then all things gone to wrack,
The mother the^, does dread her natural child,
Then every town is subject to the sack,
Then spotless maids, then virgins be defilde,
Then rigor rules, then reason is exilde:
And this, thou woeful Thebes, to our great pain,
With present spoil, art likely to sustain.
Me think I hear the wailfull weeping cries
Of wretched dames, in every coast resound,
Me thinks I see, how up to heavenly skies
From battered walls, the thundering clappes rebound
Me think I hear, how all things go to ground,
Me think I see, how soldiers wounded lie
With gasping breath, and yet they can not dye.
By means whereof, oh sweet Meneceus he,
That gives for countries cause his guiltless life,
Of others all, most happy shall he be:
His ghost shall flit, from broiles of bloody strife,
To heavenly bliss, where pleasing joys be rife:
And would to God, that this his fatal end
From further plagues, our city might defend.
O sacred God, give ear unto thy thrall,
That humbly here upon thy name does call,
O let not now, our faultlesse blood be spilt,
For hot revenge of any others gilt.

Done by F. Kinvvelmarshe.
Finis Actus quarti.
The order of the last dumb shevve.
FIrst the Stillpipes sounded a very mournful melodye, in which time came upon
the Stage a woman clothed in a white garment, on her head a pillar, double
faced, the foremost face fair and smiling, the other behind black and
louring, muffled with a white laune about her eyes, her lap full of Iewelles,
sitting in a charyot, her legs naked, her fete set upon a great round ball,
and being drawn in by.iiij. noble personages, she led in a string on her
right hand.ij. kings crowned, and in her left hand.ij. poor slaves very
meanly attyred. After she was drawn about the stage, she stayed a little,
changing the kings unto the left hand and the slaves unto the right hand,
taking the crowns from the kings heads she crowned therewith the ij. slaves,
and casting the vile clothes of the slaves upon the kings, she despoyled the
kings of their robes, and therewith aparelled the slaves. This done, she was
drawn eftsoon about the stage in this order, and then departed, leaving unto
us a plain Type or figure of unstable fortune, who does oftentimes raise to
heigthe of dignity the vile and unnoble, and in like manner throws down
from the place of promotio^, even those who^ before she her self had thither
advanced: after her departure came in Duke Creon with four gentlemen waiting
upon him, and lamented the death of Menec^us his son in this manner.

Actus. v.
Scena. j.
CREON. CHORUS. ALas what shall I do? bemone my self?
Or rue the ruin of my Native land,
About the which such clouds I see enclosde
As darker cannot cover dreadful hell.
With mine own eyes I saw my own dear son
All gorde with blood of his too bloody breast,
Which he has shed full like a friend, too dear
To his country, and yet a cruel foe
To me that was his friend and father both.
Thus to him self he gaynde a famous name,
And glory great, to me redoubted pain,
Whose hapless death in my afflicted house,
Has put such playnt, as I ne can epsy
What comfort might acquiet their distr^sse.
I hither come my sister for to seek,
Iocasta, she that might in woeful wise
Amid her high and ouerpining cares
Prepare the baynes for his so wretched corpse,
And eke for him that now is not in life,
May pay the due that to the dead pertaynes,
And for the honor he did well deserve,
The give some gifts unto infernal Gods.
Cho. My Lord, your sister is gone forth long since,
Into the camp, and with her Antigone
Her daughter dear.

Cre. Into the camp? alas and what to do?

Cho. She understood, that for this realm forthwith
Her sons were greed in combat for to join.

Cre. Alas, the funerals of my dear son
Dismayed me so, that I ne did receive,
Ne seek to know these new unwelcome news.
But lo, behold a plain apparent sign
Of further fears, the furious troubled looks
Of him that comes here so hastily.

Scena. ij.
NVNTIVS. CREON. CHORUS. ALas, alas what shall I do? alas,
What shriching voice may serve my woeful words?
O wretched I, ten thousand times a wretch,
The messanger of dread and cruel death.
Cre. Yet more mishappe? and what unhappy news?

Nun. My Lord, your nephues both have lost their lives.

Cre. Out and alas, to me and to this town
Thou do account great ruin and decay:
You royal family of Oedipus,
And hear you this? your liege and sovereign Lords
The brethren both are slain and done to death.

Cho. O cruel news, most cruel that can come,
O news that might these stony walls provoke
For tender ruthe to burst in bitter tears,
And so they would, had they the sense of man.

Cre. O worthy young Lords, that unworthy were
Of such unworthy death, O me most wretch.

Nun. More wretched shall ye deem your self, my lord,
When you shall hear of further misery.

Cre. And can there be more misery than this?

Nun. With her dear sons the queen her self is slain,

Cho. Bewail ladies, alas good ladies wail
This hard mischaunce, this cruel common evil,
Ne henceforth hope for ever to rejoice.

Cre. O Iocasta, miserable mother,
What hapless end thy life alas has he^t?
Percase the heavens purueyed had the same,
Moved thereto by the wicked wedlock
Of Oedipus thy son, yet might thy scuse
Be justly made, that knew not of the crime.
But tell me messanger, oh tell me yet
The death of these two brethren, driven thereto,
Not thus all only by their drearie fate,
But by the banning and the bitter curse
Of their cruel sire, borne for our annoy,
And here on earth the only soursse of evil.

Nun. Then know my Lord, the battle that begone
Under the walls, was brought to luckie end,
Eteocles had made his foemen flee
Within their trenches, to their foul reproach:
But herewithall the brethren streightway
Each other challenge forth into the field,
By combat so to stinte their cruel strife,
Who armed thus amid the field appeard.
First Pollinices turning toward Greece
His lovely looks, began Juno thus beseech:
O heavenly queen, thou see, that since the day
I first did wedde Adrastus daughter dear,
And stayde in Greece, thy servant have I been:
Then (be it not for mine unworthiness)
Grant me this grace, the victory to win,
Grant me, that I with high triumphant hand,
May bathe this blade within my brothers breast:
I know I crave unworthy victory,
Unworthy triumphs, and unworthy spoils,
Lo he the cause, my cruel enemy.
The people wept to hear the woeful words
Of Pollinice, foreseeing eke the end
Of this outrage and cruel combat taken,
Each man began look upon his drouping mate,
With minds amazde, and trembling hearts for dread,
Whom pity perced for these youthful knights.
Eteocles with eyes up cast to heaven.
Thus said:
O mighty love his daughter grant to me,
That this right hand with this sharp armed lance
Passing amid my brothers cankred breast,
It may eke pierce that cowarde heart of his,
And so him slay that thus unworthily
Disturbes the quiet of our common weal.
So said Eteocles, and trumpets blown,
To send the summens of their bloody fight,
That one the other fiercely did encounter,
Like Lions two yfraught with boiling wrath,
Both coucht their lances full against the face,
But heaven it nolde that there they should them teinte:
Upon the battred shields the mighty spears
Are both ybroke, and in a thousand shiuers
Amid the air flowne up into the heavens:
Behold again, with naked sword in hand,
Each one the other furiously assaults.
Here they of Thebes, there stood the Greeks in doubt,
Of whom does each man feel more chilling dread,
Least any of the twain should lose his life,
Than any of the twain did feel in fight.
Their angry looks, their deadly daunting blows,
Might witness well, that in their hearts remaynde
As cankred hate, disdain, and furious mood,
As ever bred in bear or tigers breast.
The first that hapt to hurt was Polinice,
Who smote the right thighe of Eteocles:
But as we deem, the blow was nothing deep,
Then cried the Greeks, and lepte with lightened hearts,
But straight again they held their peace, for he
Eteocles began thrust his wicked sword
In the left arm of unarmed Pollinice,
And let the blood from thin vnfence^ flesh
With falling drops distill upon the ground,
Ne long he stays, but with an other thrust
His brothers belly boweld with his blade,
Then wretched he, with bridle left at large,
From of his horse fell pale upon the ground,
Ne long it was, but down our duke dismountes
From of his startling steed, and runs in have,
His brothers hapless helm for to unlace,
And with such hungry mind desired spoil,
As one that thought the field already woonne:
That at unawares, his brothers dagger drawn,
And griped fast within the dying hand,
Under his side he recklesse does receive,
That made the way to his wide open heart:
Thus falls E^eocles his brother by,
From both whose breasts the bloudfast bubling, gave
A sorry show to Greeks and (...) both.

Cho. Oh wretched end of our unhappy Lords.

Cre. Oh Oedipus, I must be wail the death
Of thy dear sons, that were my nephews both,
But of these blows thou ought feel the smarte,
That with thy wonted prayers, thus have brought
Such noble bloods to this unnoble end.
But now tell on, what followed of the Queen?

Nun. When thus with pierced hearts, by there own hands
The brothers fell had wallowed in their blood,
Th one tumbling on the others gore,
Came their afflicted mother, then to late,
And eke with her, her chaste child Antygone,
Who saw no sooner how their fates had fa^ne,
But with the doub^ed echo of alas,
Sore dym^de the air with loud complaints and cries:
Oh sons (quod she) too (...) came all my help,
And all to late have I my succor sent:
And with these words, upon their carcas cold.
She shriched so, as might have stayed the Sun
To mourn with her, the woeful sister eke,
That both her chekes did bathe in flowing tears,
Out from the depth of her tormente^ breast,
With scalding sighs began draw these weary words:
O my dear brethren, why abandon ye
Our mother dear, when these her aged years,
That of themselves are weak and grown with grief,
Stood most in need of your sustaining help?
Why do you leave her thus disconsolate?
At sound of such her weeping long lament,
Eteocles our king held up his hand,
And sent from bottom of his woeful breast.
A doubled sighe, divided with his grief,
In faithful token of his feeble will
To recomfort his mother and sister both:
And in the stead of sweet contenting words,
The trickling tears raynde down his paled chekes:
Then claspt his hands, and shut his dying eyes.
But Pollinice that turned his rolling eyes
Unto his mother and his sister dear,
With hollow voice and fumbling tongue, thus spoke:
Mother, y^u see how I am now arrived
Unto the haven of mine unhappy end,
Now nothing does remain to me, but this,
That I lament my sisters life and yours
Left thus in everlasting woe and gri^fe:
So am I sorry for Eteocles,
Who though he were my cruel enemy,
He was your son, and brother yet to me:
But since these ghosts of curs must needs go down^
With staggering steps into the Stigian reign,
I you beseech, mother and sister both,
Of pity yet, that you will me procure
A royal tomb within my native realm,
And now shut up with those your tender hands,
These grie^full eyes of mine, whose daseled ^ight
Shadows of dreadful death b^ come to close,
Now rest in pe^ce, thus said, he yielded up
His fainting ghost, that ready was to part.
The mother thus beholding both her sons
Y^one to death, and overcome with dol^,
Drew out the dagger of her Pol^mces,
From brothers breast, and gorde her mothers throat
Falling between her sons,
Then with her feebled arms, she does en^old^
Their bodies both, as if for company
Her discontented corpse were yet content
To pass with them in Cha^ons ferrie boat.
When cruel fate had th^s with force berest
The woeful mother and her two dear sons,
All suddenly alarm alarm they cry,
And hot conflict began for to arise
Between our army and our e^emyes:
For either part would have the victory.
A while they did with equal force maintain
The bloody fight, at last the Greeks do fly,
Of whom could hardly any one escape,
For in such hugie heaps our men them slew,
The ground was couerde all with carcases:
And of our soldiers, some began spoil the dead,
Some other were that parted out the pray,
And some pursuing Antigone took up
The Queen locasta and the brethren both,
Whom in a chariot hither they will bring
Ere long: and thus, although we gotten have
The victory over our enemies,
Yet have we lost much more than we have won.

Creon exit. Cho. O hard mishap we do not only hear
The weary news of their vn^imely death,
But eke we must with wayling eyes behold
Their bodies dead, for look where they be brought.

Scena. 3.
ANTIGONE. CHORUS. MOst bitter plaint, O ladies, us behoues,
Behooves eke not only bitter plainte,
But that our hears dysheuylde from our heads
About our shoulders hang, and that our breasts
With bouncing blows be all be battered,
Our ghastly faces with our nails defaced:
Behold, your Queen twixt both her sons lies slain,
The Queen whom you di^ love and honor both,
The Queen that did so tend^rly bring up
And nourishe you, each one like to her own,
Now has she left you all (O cruel hap)
With her too cruel death in dying dread,
Pyning with pensi^enesse without all help.
O weary life, why bydst thou in my breast,
And I contented be that th^se mine eyes
Should see her dye that gave to me this life,
And I not venge her death by loss of life?
Who can me give a fountain made of moan,
That I may weep as much as is my will,
To sowsse this sorrow up in swelling tears?
Cho. What stony heart could leave for to lament?

Anti. O Polinice, now have thou with thy blood
Bought all too dear the title to this realm,
That cruel he Eteocles thee rest,
And now also has reft thee of thy life,
Alas, what wicked deed can wrath not do?
And out alas for me*
While thou yet liuedst I had a lively hope
To have some noble wight to be my pheere,
By whom I might be crownde a royal Queen:
But now, thy hasty death has done to dye
This dying hope of mine, that hope henceforth
None other wedlock, but tormenting woe,
If so these trembling hands for cowarde dread
Dare not presume to end this wretched life.

Cho. Alas dear dame, let not thy raging grief
Heap one mishap upon another head.

Anti. O doleful day, wherein my sorry sire
Was borne, and yet O more unhappy hour
When he was crowned king of sta^ely Thebes,
The Hymene^ in unhappy bed,
And wicked wedlock, wittingly did join
The giltlesse mother with her gil^^e son,
Out of which root we be the braunthes borne,
To bear the scourge of their so foul offense:
And thou, O father, thou that for this fact,
Haste torn chine eyes from thy tormented head,
Give ear to this, come forth, and bend th^^e ear
To bloody news, that can not them behold:
Happy in this, for if thine eyes could see
Thy sons both slain, and even between them both
Thy wife and mother dead, bathed and imbrude
All in one blood, then would thou dye for dole,
And so might end all our unlucky stock.
But most unhappy now, that lack of sight
Shall linger, life within thy lucklesse breast,
And still tormented in such misery,
Shall always dye, because thou can not dye.

Oedipus enters. Scena. iiij.
OEDIPVS. ANTIGONE. CHORUS. WHy do thou call out of this darkesome den,
The lustleste lodge of my lamenting years,
O daughter dear, thy fathers blinded eyes,
Into the light I was not worthy of?
Or what such sight (O cruel destenie)
Without tormenting cares might I behold,
That image am of death and not of man?
Anti. O father mine, I bring unlucky news
Unto your ears, your sons are now both slain,
Ne does your wife, that wonted was to guide
So piteously your staylesse stumbling sleppes,
Now see this light, alas and welaway.

Oed. O heap of infinite calamities,
And can thou yet increase when I thought least
That any grief more great could grow in thee?
But tell me yet, what kind of cruel death
Had these three sorry souls?

Anti. Without offense to speak, dear father mine,
The lucklesse lotte, the froward frowning fate
That gave you life to end your fathers life,
Have led your sons to reaue each others life.

Oed. Of them I thought no less, but tell me yet
What causeless death has caught from me my dear,
(What shall I call her) mother or my wife?

Anti. When as my mother saw her dear sons dead,
As pensive pangs had pressed her tender heart,
With bloudlesse cheeks and ghastly looks she fell,
Drawing the dagger from Eteocles side,
She gorde hirselfe with wide recurelesse wound:
And thus, without mo words, gave up the ghost,
Embracing both her sons with both her arms.
In these affrightes this frosen heart of mine,
By fear of death maynteines my dying life.

Cho. This drearie day is cause of many evils,
Poor Oedipus, unto thy progeny.
The Gods yet grant it may become the cause
Of better hap to this afflicted realm.

Scena. v.
CREON. OEDIPVS. ANTIGONE. GOod Ladies leave your bootelesse vain complaynt
Leave to lament, c^t of your woeful cries,
High time it is as now for to provide
The funerals for the renowned king:
And thou Oedipus hearken to my words,
And know thus much, that for thy daughters dower,
Antigo^^ with Hemone shall wedde.
Thy son our king not long before his death
Assigned has the kingdom should descend
To me, that am his mothers brother borne,
And so the same might to my son succeed.
Now I that am the lord and king of Thebes,
Will not permit that thou abide therein:
Ne marvel yet of this my heady will,
Ne blame thou me, for why, the heavens above,
Which only rule the rolling life of man,
Have so ordeynde, and that my words be true,
Tyresias he that knows things to come,
By trusty tokens has foretold the town,
That while thou did within the wal^es remain,
It should be plagued still with penury:
Wherefore depart, and think not that I speak
These woeful words for hate I bear to thee,
But for the weal of this afflicted realm.
O foul accursed fate, that have me bredde
To bear the burden of the misery
Of this cold death, which we account for life:
Before my birth my father understood
I should him slay, and scarcely was I borne,
When he me made a pray for savage bea^tes.
But what? I slew him yet, then caught the crown,
And last of all defilde my mothers bed,
By whom I have this wicked offspring got:
And to this heinous crime and filthy fact
The heavens have from high enforced me,
Against whose doom no counsel can prevail.
Thus has I now my life, and last of all,
Lo by the news of this so cruel death
Of both my sons and dear beloved wife,
Mine angry constellacion me rommaundes
Withouten eyes so wander in mine age,
When these my weery, weak, and crooked (...)
Have greatest need to crave their quiet rest.
O cruel ^reon, will thou slay me so,
For cruelly thou doste but murder me,
Out of my kingdom now to chase me thus:
Yet can I not with humble mind beseech
Thy courtesy, ne fall before thy feet.
Let fortune take from me these worldly gifts,
She can not conquer this courageous heart,
That never yet could well be overcome,
To force me yield for fear to villainy:
Do what thou can I will be Oedipus.
Cre. So have thou reason Oedipus, to say,
And for my part I would thee counsel eke,
Still to maynteine the high and hawtie mind,
That has dene even in thy noble heart:
For this be sure, if thou would kis^e these knees,
And practice eke by prayer to pr^^ayle,
No pity could persuade me to consent
That thou remain one only hour in Th^bes.
And now, prepare you worthy Citizens,
The funerals that duly do pertayne
Unto the Queen, and to Eteocles,
And eke for them provide their stately tombs.
But Pollynice, as common enemy
Unto his country, carry forth his corpse
Out of the walls, ne none so hardy be
On pain of death his body to engraue,
But in the fields let him unburied lie,
Without his honor, and without complaynte,
An open pray for savage beasts to spoil.
And thou Antigone, dry up thy tears,
Pluck up thy sprites, and cheer thy harmless heart.
To marriage: for ere these two days pass,
Thou shall espouse Hemone mine only heir.

Antig. Father, I see us wrapped in endless woe,
And now much more do I your state lamente,
Than these that now be dead, not that I think
Their great missehappes too little to bewail,
But this, that you, you only do surpass
All wretched wightes that in this world remain.
But you my Lord, why banishe you with wrong
My father thus out of his own perforce?
And why will you deny these guiltless bo^es
Of Polinice, their grave in country soil?

Creon. So would not I, so would Eteocles.

Anti. He cruel was, you fond to hold his hestes.

Creon. Is then a fault to do a kings command?

Anti. When his command is cruel and unjust.

Creon. Is it unjust that he unburied be?

Anti. He not deserved so cruel punishment.

Creon. He was his countries cruel enemy.

Anti. Or else was he that held him from his right.

Cre. Bare he not arms against his native land?

Anti. Offends he that sekes to win his own?

Cre. Perforce to thee he shall unburied be.

Anti. Perforce to thee these hands shall bury him.

Cre. And with him eke then will I bury thee.

Anti. So grant the gods, I get none other grave,
Then with my Polinices dear to rest.

Cre. Go sirs, lay hold on her, and take her in.

Anti. I will not leave this corpse unburied.

Cre. Can thou undo the thing that is decreed?

Anti. A wicked foul decree to wrong the dead.

Cre. The ground ne shall ne ought to cover him.

Anti. Creon, yet I beseech thee for the love.

Cre. Away I say, thy prayers not prevail.

Anti. That thou did bear Iocasta in her life,

Cre. Thou do but waste thy words amid the wind.

Anti. Yet grant me leave to wash his wounded corpse*

Cre. It can not be that I should grant thee so.

Anti. O my dear Polinice, this tirant yet
With all his wrongful force can not fordoe,
But I will kiss these cold pale lips of thine,
And wash thy wounds with my waymenting tears.

Cre. O simple wench, O fond and foolish girl,
Beware, beware, thy tears do not foretell
Some sign of hard mishap unto thy marriage.

Anti. No, no for Hemone will I never wed.

Cre. Do thou refuse the marriage of my son?

Anti. I will nor him, nor any other wed.

Cre. Against thy will then must I thee constrain.

Anti. If thou me force, I swear thou shall repent.

Cre. What can thou casue that I should once repent*

Anti. With bloody knife I can this knot unknit.

Cre. And what a fool were thou to kill thy self?

Anti. I will ensue some worthy woman's steps.

Cre. Speak out Antigone, that I may hear.

Anti. This hardy hand shall soon dispatche his life.

Cre. O simple fool, and dare thou be so bold?

Anti. Why should I dread to do so doughtie deed?

Cre. And wherefore do thou wedlock so despise?

Anti. In cruel exile for to follow him.

pointing to Oedipus. Cre. What others might befeme, besemes not thee.

Anti. If need require, with him eke will I dye.

Cre. Depart, depart, and with thy father dye,
Rather than kill my child with bloody knife:
Go hellishe monster, go out of the town.
Creon exit.
Oedi. Daughter, I must commend thy noble heart.

Anti. Father, I will never come in company
And you alone wander in wilderness.

Oedi. O yes dear daughter, leave thou me alone
Amid my plagues: be merry while thou may.

Anti. And who shall guide these aged feet of yours,
That banished been, in blind necessity?

Oedi. I will endure, as fatal lot me drives,
Resting these crooked sorry sides of mine
Where so the heavens shall lend me harborough.
And in exchange of rich and stately toures,
The woods, the wilderness, the darkesome dens
Shall Be the bower of mine unhappy bones.

Anti. O father, now where is your glory gone?

Oedi. "One happy day did raise me to renoune,
"One hapless day has thrown mine honor down.

Anti. Yet will I bear a part of your mishappes.

Oedi. That sits not amid thy pleasant years.

Anti. "Dear father yes, let youth give place to age.

Oedi. Where is thy mother? let me touch her face,
That with these hands I may yet feel the harm
That these blind eyes forbid me to behold.

Anti. Here father, here her corpse, here put your hand.

Oedi. O wife, O mother, O both woeful names,
O woeful mother, and O woeful wife,
O would to God, alas, O would to God
Thou nere had been my mother, nor my wife.
But where lie now the paled bodies two,
Of mine unlucky sons, Oh where be they?

Anti. Lo here* they lie one by an other dead.

Oedip. Stretch out this hand, dear daughter, stretch this hand
Upon their faces.

Anti. Lo father, here, lo, now you touch them both.

Oedi. O bodies dear, O bodies dearly boughte
Unto your father, bought with high missehap.

Anti. O lovely name of my dear Pollinice,
Why can I not of cruel Creon crave,
Ne with my death now purchase thee a grave?

Oedi. Now commes Apollos oracle of pass,
That I in Athens town should end my days:
And since thou do, O daughter mine, desire
In this exile to be my woeful mate,
Lend me thy hand, and let us go together.

Anti. Lo, here all pressed my dear beloved father,
A feeble guide, and eke a simple skowte,
To pass the perils in a doubtful way.

Oedi. Unto the wretched, be a wretched guide.

Anti. In this all only equal to my father.

Oedi. And where shall I set forth my trembling feet?
O reach me yet some surer staff, to stay
My staggryng pace amidde these ways unknown.

Anti. Here father here, and here set forth your feet.

Oedi. Now can I blame none other for my harms
But secret spite of foredecreed fate,
Thou art the cause, the crooked, old and blind,
I am exilde far from my country soil,
And suffer dole that I might not endure.

Anti. "O father, father, Justice lies on sleep,
"Ne does regard the wrongs of wretchedness,
"Ne princes swelling pride it does redress.

Oedi. O careful caytife, how am I now changed
From that I was? I am that Oedipus,
That whylome had triumphant victory,
And was both dread and honored eke in Thebes:
But now (so pleases you my froward stars)
Down headlong hurlde in depth of myserie,
So that remaynes of Oedipus no more
As now in me, but even the naked name,
And lo, this image, that resembles more
Shadows of death, than shape of Oedipus.

Antig. O father, now forgette the pleasant days
And happy life that you did whylom lead,
The muse whereof redoubleth but your grief:
Sustain the smarte of these your present pains
With patience, that best may you preserve.
Lo where I come, to live and die with you,
Not (as sometimes) the daughter of a king,
But as an abject now in poverty,
That you, by presence of such faithful guide,
May better bear the wrack of misery.

Oedi. O only comfort of my cruel hap.

Anti. Your daughters pity is but due to you:
Would God I might as well ingraue the corpse
Of my dear Pollinice, but I ne may,
And that I can not, doubleth all my dole.

Oedi. This thy desire, that is both good and just,
Imparte to some that be thy trusty friends,
Who moude with pity, may procure the same.

Anti. "Believe me father, when dame fortune frowns,
"Be few that find trusty companions.

Oedi. And of those few, yet one of those am I:
Wherefore, go we now daughter, lead the way
Into the stony rocks and highest hills,
Where fewest trackes our steppings may be spyde.
"Who once has sit in chair of dignity,
"May shame to show him self in misery.

Anti. From thee, O country, am I forced to part,
Despoyled thus in flower of my youth,
And yet I leave within mine enemies rule
Ismene my unfortunate sister.

Oed. Dear Citizens, behold your lord and king
That Thebes set in quiet government,
Now as you see, neglected of you all,
And in these ragged ruthful weeds bewrapt,
Ychased from his native country soil,
Betakes him self (for so this Tyrant will)
To everlasting banishment: but why
Do I lament my lucklesse lotte in vain?
"Since every man must bear with quiet mind,
"The fate that heavens have erst to him assignde.

CHORUS. EXample here, lo take by Oedipus,
You kings and princes in prosperity,
And every one that is desirous
To sway the seat of worldly dignity,
How fickle is to trust in fortunes wheel:
For him, whom now she hoyseth up on hye,
If so be chance on any side to reele,
She hurles him down in twinkling of an eye:
And him again, that grouleth now on ground,
And lies low in dungeon of despair,
Her whirling wheel can heave up at a bound,
And place aloft in stay of stately chair.
As from the Sun the Moon withdrawes her face,
So might of man does yield dame fortune place,

Finis Actus quinti.
Epilogus.
LO here the fruit of high aspiring mind,
Who weeues to mount above the moving skies:
Lo here the trappe that titles proud do find,
See, ruin grows when most we reach to rise:
Sweet is the name, and stately is the reign
Of kingly rule, and sway of royal seat,
But bitter is the taste of Princes gain,
When climbing heads do hunte for to be great.
Who would forecast the bank of restless toil,
Ambitious wightes do freight their breasts withal,
The growing cares, the fears of dreadful foil,
The evil success that on such flightes do fall,
He would not stayne his practice to atchiue
The largest limits of the mightiest states.
But oh, what fancies sweet do still relieve
The hungry humor of these swelling hates?
What poison sweet inflameth high desire?
How soon the hawty heart is puffed with pride?
How soon is thirst of scepter set on fire?
How soon in rising minds does mischief slide?
What bloody sturres does glut of honor breed?
Thambitious son does often surpresse his sire:
Where natures power unfeigned love should spread,
There malice raynes and reaches to be higher.
O blind unbridled search of Soueraintie,
O tickle train of evil attained state,
O fond desire of princely dignity,
Who climbs too soon, he often repents too late.
The golden mean the happy does suffice,
They leave the posting day in rare delight,
They fill (not feed) their vncontended eyes,
They reap such rest as does begile the might,
They not envy the pomp of haughty reign,
Ne dread the dinte of proud usurping swoorde,
But plaste allow, more sugared joys attain,
Than swaye of lofty Scepter can afoorde.
Cease to aspire then, cease to soar so high,
And shun the plague that pierces noble breasts:
To glittring courts what fondness is to flee,
When better state in baser Towers rests?
Done by Chr. Yeluerton.
Finis Epilogi,
Printed by Henry Bynneman for Richard Smith.

A discourse of the adventures passed by Master F. I.
H. VV. to the Reader.
IN August last passed my familiar friend Master G. T. bestowed upon me y^
reading of a written Book, wherein he had collected diverse discourses and
verses, invented upon sundry occasions, by sundry gentlemen (in mine
opinion) right commendable for their capacity. And herewithal my said friend
charged me, that I should use them only for mine own particular commodity,
and eftsoon safely deliver the original copy to him again, wherein I must
confess my self but half a merchant, for the copy vnt^ him I have safely
redeliuered. But the work (for I thought it worthy to be publilished) I have
entreated my friend A. B. to emprint: as one that thought better to please a
number by common commodity then to feed the humor of any private parson by
nedelesse singularity. This I have adventured, for thy contentation (learned
Reader.) And further have presumed of my self to christen it by the name of A
hundredth sundry Flowers: In which poetical posie are setforth many trifling
fantasies, humorall passions, and strange affects of a Lover. And therein
(although the wiser sort would turn over the leaf as a thing altogether
fruitless) yet I my self have reaped this commodity, to sit and smile at the
fond devises of such as have enchayned them selves in the golden fetters of
fantasy, and having bewrayed them selves to the whole world, do yet conjecture
y^ they walk unseen in a net. Some other things you may also find in this
Book, which are as void of vanity, as the first are lame for government.
And I must confess that (what to laugh at the one, and what to learn by the
other) I have contrary to the chardge of my said friend G. T. procured for
these trifles this day of publication. Whereat if the aucthors only repyne, and
the number of other learned minds be thankful: I may then boast to have
gained a bushel of good will, in exchange for one pynt of peevish choler. But
if it fall out contrary to expectation that the readers judgments agree not
with mine opinion in their commendacions, I may then (unless their courtesies
supply my want of discretion) with loss of some labor, account also the
loss of my familier friends, in doubt whereof, I cover all our names, and
refer you to the well written letter of my friend G. T. next following,
whereby you may more at large consider of these occasions. And so I commend the
praise of other men's travails together with the pardon of mine own rashness,
unto the well willing minds of discrete readers. From my lodging nere the
Strande the xx. of January. 1572.

H. W.

The letter of G. T. to his very friend H. W. concerning this work.
Remembering the late conference passed between us in my lodging, and how you
seemed to esteem some Pamphlets, which I did there show unto you far above
their worth in skill, I do straightwaye conclude the same your judgment to
proceed of two especial causes, one (and principal) the steadfast good will,
which you have ever hitherto since our first familiarity borne toward me.
An other (of no less weight) the exceeding zeal and favor that you bear to
good letters. The which (I agree with you) do no less bloome and appear in
plea^aunt ditties or compendious Sonets, devised by green youthful capacities,
than they do fruitefully flourish unto perfection in the ryper works of grave
and grayheared writers. For as in the last, the younger sort may make a mirror
of perfect life: so in the first, the most frosty bearded Philosopher, may
take just occasion of honest recreation, not altogether without wholesome
lessons, tending to the reformation of manners. For who doubts but that Poets
in their most feyned fables and imaginations, have metaphorically set forth
unto us the right rewards of virtues, and the due punnishments for vices?
Marie in deed I may not compare Pamphlets unto Poems, neither yet may justly
aduant for our native countrymen, that they have in their verses hitherto
(translations excepted) delivered unto us any such notable volume, as have been
by Poets of antiquity, left unto the posterity. And the more pity, that
amongst so many toward wits no one has been hitherto encouraged to follow
the trace of that worthy and famous Knight Sir Geffrey Chaucer, and after many
pretty devises spent in youth, for the obtaining a worthles victory, might
consume and consummate his age in discribing the right pathway to perfect
felicity, with the due preservation of the same. The which although some may
judge over grave a subject to be handled in style metrical, yet for that I have
found in the verses of eloquent Latinists, learned Greeks, and pleasant
Italians* sundry directions, whereby a man may be guided toward thattayning of
that unspeakable treasure, I have thus far lamented, that our countrymen,
have chosen rather to win a passover praise by the wanton penning of a few
loving lays, than to gain immortal fame, by the Clarkely handlinge of so
profitable a Theme. For if quicknes of inuencion, proper vocables, apt
Epythetes, and store of monasillables may help a pleasant brain to be crowned
with Laurel. I doubt not but both our countrymen and coun^rie language might
be entronised among the old foreleaders unto the mount Helicon. But now let
me return to my first purpose, for I have wandered somewhat beside the path,
and yet not clean out of the way. I have thoug^t good (I say) to present you
with this written book, wherein you shall find a number of Sonets* lays,
letters, Ballades, Rondlets, verlayes and verses, the works of your friend and
mine Master F. I. and diverse others, the which when I had with long travail
confusedly gathered together, I thought it then Opere precium, to reduce them
into some good order. The which I have done according to my barreyne skill in
this written Book, commending it unto you to read and to peruse, and desiring
you as I only do adventure thus to participate the sight thereof unto your
former good will, even so that you will by no means make the same common: but
after your own recreation taken therein y^ you will safely redeliuer unto me the
original copy. For otherwise I shall not only provoke all the aucthors to be
offended with me, but further shall leese the opertunitie of a greater matter,
half and more granted unto me already, by the willing consent of one of
them. And to be plain (with you my friend) he has written (which as far as
I can learn) did never yet come to the reading or perusinge of any man but
himself: two notable works. The one called, the Sundry lots of love. The
other of his own inuencion entitled. The clyming of an Eagles neast. These
things (and especially the later) does seem by the name to be a work worthy
the reading. And the rather I judge so because his fantasy is so occupied in
the same, as that contrary to his wonted use, he has hitherto withhelde it
from sight of any his fa^iliers, until it be finished, you may guess him by
his Nature. And therefore I requier your secrecy herein, least if he hear the
contrary, we shall not be able by any means to procure these other at his
hands. So fare you well,

from my Chamber this tenth of August. 1572. Youres or not his own. G. T.


WHen I had with no small entreatie obtained of Master F. I. and sundry other
toward young gentlemen, the sundry copies of these sundry matters, then as well
for that the number of them was great, as also for that I found none of them,
so barreyne, but that (in my judgment) had in it Aliquid Salis, and especially
being considered by the very proper occasion whereupon it was written (as they
them selves did always with the verse rehearse unto me the cause y^ then moved
them to write) I did with more labor gather them into some order, and so
placed them in this register. Wherein as near as I could guess, I have set in
the first places those which Master. F. I. did compyle. And to begin with this
his history that ensues, it was (as he declared unto me) written upon this
occasion. The said F. I. chanced once in the north parts of this Realm to
fall in company of a very fair gentlewoman whose name was Mistress Elinor,
unto whom bearinge a hot affection, he first adventured to write this letter
following.

G. T.

Mistress I pray you understand that being altogether a stranger in these
parties, my good hap has been to behold you to my (no small) contentation, and
my evil happ accompanies the same, with such imperfection of my deserts, as
that I find always a ready repulse in mine own frowardnes. So that
consideringe the natural clymate of the country, I must say that I have found
fire in frost. And yet comparing the inequality of my deserts, with the least
part of your worthiness, I feel a continual frost, in my most fervent fire.
Such is then thextremitie of my passions, the which I could never have been
content to commit unto this telltale paper, wear it not that I am destitute
of all other help. Accept therefore I beseeke you, the earnest good will of a
more trusty (than worthy) servant, who being thereby encouraged, may supply
the defects of his ability with ready trial of duetifull loyalty. And let
this poor paper (besprent with salt tears, and blown over with skalding
sighs) be saved of you as a safe guard for your sampler, or a bottom to wind
your sowing silk, that when your last nedelfull is wrought, you may return
to readinge thereof and consider the care of him who is

More youres than his own. F. I.


THis letter by her received (as I have hard him say) her answer was this: She
took occasion one day, at his request to dance with him, the which doing,
she bashfully began to declare unto him, that she had read over the writing,
which he delivered unto her, with like protestation, that (as at delivery
thereof, she understood not for what cause he thrust the same into her bosom,)
so now she could not perceive thereby any part of his meaning, nevertheless at
last seemed to take upon hi the matte and though she disabled her self, yet
gave him thanks as etc. Wheruppon he brake the braule, and walkinge abroad
devised immediately these few verses followinge.

G. T.

FA^^e Bersabe the bright once bathing in a Well,
With d^awe bedimmd King David's eyes that ruled Israel.
And Solomon him self, the source of sapience,
Against the force of such assaults could make but small defense:
To it the stoutest yield, and strongest feel like woo,
Bold Hercules and Sampson both, did prove it to be so.
What wonder seems then? when stars stand thick in skies,
If such a blasing star have power to dim my dazzled eyes?
Lenuoie.
To you these few suffice, your wits be quick and good,
You can coniect by change of hew, what humors feed my blood.
F. I.


I Have heard the Aucthor say, that these were the first verses that ever he
wrote upon like occasion. The which considering ye matter precedent, may in my
judgment be well allowed, and to judge his doings by the effects he declared
unto me, that before he could put the same in legible writing, it pleased the
said Mystresse Elinor of her courtesy thus to deal with him. Walking in a
garden among diverse other gentlemen and gentlewomen, with a little frowning
smyle in passing by him, she delivered unto him a paper, with these words. For
that I understand not (quoth she) the intent of your letters, I pray you take
them here again, and bestow them at your pleasure. The which done and said,
she passed by without change either of pace or countenance. F. I. somewhat
troubled with her angry look, did suddenly leave the company, and walking
into a park near adjoining, in great rage began to wreake his malice on this
poor paper, and he same did rend and tear in pieces. When suddenly at a
glaunce he perceived it was not of his own hand writing, and therewithal
abashed, upon better regard he perceived in one piece thereof written (in
Roman) these letters S H E: wherefore placing all the pieces thereof, as
orderly as he could, he found therein written, these few lines hereafter
followinge.

G. T.

YOur sodeyn departure, from our pastime yesterday, did enforce me for lack of
chosen company to return unto my work, wherein I did so long continue, till at
the last the bare bottom did draw unto my remembrance your strange request.
And although I found therein no just cause to credit your coulored words,
yet have I thought good hereby to requite you with like courtesy, so that at
least you shall not condemn me for ungrateful. But as to the matter therein
contained, if I could persuade my self, that there were in me any coals to
kyndle such sparks of fire, I might yet peradventure be drawn to believe that
your mind were frosen with like fear. But as no smoke arises, where no cole
is kindled, so without cause of affection the passion is easy to be cured.
This is all that I understand of your dark letters. And as much as I mean to
aunsweare.

S H E.


MY friend F. I. has told me diverse times, that imediatly upon receipt
hereof, he grew in ielosy, that the same was not her own devise. And there in I
have no less allowed his judgment, then commended his invention of the verses,
and letters before rehearsed. For as by the style this letter of hirs bewrays
that it was not penned by a woman's capacity, so the sequel of her doings may
discipher, that she had me ready clearkes then trusty servants in store. Well
yet as the perfect hound, when he has chased the hurt dear, amidde the whole
heard, will never give over till he have singled it again. Even so F. I. though
somewhat abashed with this doubtful show, yet still constant in his former
intention, ceased not by all possible means, to bring this Dear yet once
again to the Bows, whereby she might be the more surely stryken: and so in the
end enforced to yield. Wherefore he thought not best to commit the said verses
willingly into her custody, but privily lost them in her chamber, written in
counterfeit. And after on the next day thought better to reply, either upon
her, or upon her Secretary in this wise as here follows.

G. T.

THE much that you have answered is very much, and much more than I am able to
replye unto: nevertheless in mine own defense, thus I allege: that if my
sodein departure pleased not you, I cannot my self therewith be pleased, as one
that seeks not to please many, and more disirous to please you then any. The
cause of mine affection, I suppose you behold daily. For (self love avoided)
every wight may judge of themselves as much as reason persuades: the which if
it be in your good nature suppressed with bashfulnes, then mighty love grant,
you may once behold my wan cheeks washed in woe, that therein my salt tears
may be a myrrour to represent your own shadow, and that like unto Narcissus
you may be constrained to kiss the cold waves, wherein your cou^terfait is so
lively portrayed. For if abundance of other matters failed to draw my gazing
eyes in contemplacion of so rare excellency, yet might these your letters both
frame in me an admiration of such divine esprit, and a confusion to my dull
understanding, which so rashly presumed to wander in this endless Laberinthe.
Such I esteem you, and thereby am become such, and Even.

HE. F.I.


THis letter finished and fair written over, his chance was to meet her
alone in a Gallery of the same house: where (as I have heard him declare) his
manhood in this kind of combat was first tried, and therein I can compare him
to a valiant Prince, who distressed with power of enemies had committed the
safeguard of his person to treaty of Ambassade, and suddenly (surprised with a
Camnassado in his own trenches) was enforced toyeeld as prisoner. Even so my
friend F.I. lately overcome by y^ beautiful beams of this Dame Elynor, and
having now committed his most secret intent to these late rehearsed letters,
was at unawares encountered with his friendly foe, and constrained either to
prepare some new defense, or else like a recreant to yield himself as already
vanquished. Wherefore (as in a trance) he lifted up his dazzled eyes, and so
continued in a certain kind of admiration, not unlike the Astronomer, who
(having after a whole nights travail, in gray morning found his desired
star) has fixed his hungry eyes to behold the Comete long looked for: whereat
this gracious Dame (as one that could discern ye sun before her chamber
windows were wide open) did deign to embolden the feinting Knight with these or
like words.

I perceive now (quod she) how mishap does follow me, that having chosen this
walk for a simple solace, I am here disquieted by the man that means my
distructio^* and therwithal, as half angry, began to turn her back, when as my
friend F.I. now awaked, began thus salute her.

Mystres (quod he) and I perceive now, y^ good hap hau^ts me, for being by lack
of opportunity constreined to commit my welfare unto these blabbing leaves of
bewraying pape (showing y^ in his hand) I am here reco^forted with happy view of
my desired joy, and therewithal reuere^tly kissing his hand, did softly
distreine her slende arm and so stayed her departure. The first blow thus
proffered and defended, they walked and talked traversing diverse ways, wherein
I doubt not but y^ my friend. F.I. could quit himself resonably well. And
though it stood not with duty of a friend that I should therein require to know
her secrets, yet of him self he declared thus much, that after long talk she
was contented to accept his proferd service, but yet still disabling her self,
and seeming to marvel what cause had moved him to subject his liberty so
wilfully, or at least in a prison (as she termed it) so unworthy. Whereunto I
need not rehearse his answer, but suppose now, y^ thus they departed: saving
I had forgotten this, she required of him the last rehearsed letter, saying
that his frist was lost, and now she lacked a new bottom for her silk, the
which I warrant you, he granted: and so profering to take an humble conge by
Bezo las manos, she graciously gave him the zuccado dez labros: and so for
then departed. And thereupon reco^pting her words, he co^pyled these following,
which he termed Terza sequenza, to sweet Mystres SHE.

G. T.

OF thee dear Dame, three lessons would I learn,
What reason first persuades the foolish Fly
(As soon as she a candle can discern)
To play with flame, till she be burnt thereby?
Or what may move the Mouse to byte the bayte
Which strykes the trappe, that stops her hungry breath?
What calls the Byrd, where snares of deep deceit
Are closely caught to draw her to her death?
Consider well, what is the cause of this.
And though percase thou will not so confess,
Yet deep desire, to gain a heavenly bliss,
May drown the mind in dole and dark distress:
Often is it seen (whereat my heart may bleed)
Fools play so long till they be caught in deed.
And then
It is a heaven to see them hop and skip,
And seek all shifts to shake their shackles of:
It is a world, to see them hang the lip.
Who (erst) at love, were w^nt to skorne and skof.
But as the Mouse, once caught in crafty trap,
May bounce and beat, against the boorden wall,
Till she have brought her head in such mishape,
That down to death her fainting lymbes must fall:
And as the Fly once singed in the flame,
Cannot command her wings to wave away:
But by the heel, she hangs in the same
Till cruel death her hasty journey stay.
So they that seek to break the linkes of love
Strive with the stream, and this by pain I prou^.
For when
I first beheld that heavenly hew of thine,
Thy stately stature, and thy comely grace,
I must confess these dazzled eyes of mine
Did wincke for fear, when I first viewd thy face
But bold desire, did open them again,
And bad me look till I had looked to long,
I pitied them that did procure my pain,
And loved the looks that wrought me all the wrong:
And as the Byrd once caught (but woorks her woe)
That stryues to leave the lymed wings behind:
Even so the more I straue to part thee fro,
The greater grief did grow within my mind:
Remediles then must I yield to thee,
And crave no more, thy servant but to be
Till then and ever. HE. F. I.


WHen he had well sorted this sequence, he sought opportunity to leave it where
she might find it before it were lost. And now the coals began to kindle,
whereof (but ere while) she feig^ed her self altogether ignorant. The flames
began to break out on every side: and she to quench them, shut up her self in
her chamber solitarely. But as the smithie gathers greater heat by casting on
of water, even so the more she absented her self from company, the fresher was
the grief which galded her remembrance: so that at last the report was spread
thorough the house, that Mystres Elinor was sick. At which news F. I. took
small comfort: nevertheless Dame Venus with good aspect did yet thus much
further his enterprise. The Dame (whether it were by sudden change, or of
wonted custom) fell one day into a great bleeding at the nose. For which
accident the said F. I. amongst other pretty co^ceits, has a present remedy,
whereby he took occasion (when they of the house had all in vain sought many
ways to stop her bleeding) to work his feate in this wise: First he pleaded
ignorance, as though he knew not her name, and therefore demanded the same of
one other Gentlewoma^ in the house, whose name was Mistres Frances, who when
she had to him declared that her name was Elinor, he said these words or
very like in effect: If I thought I should not offend Mystres Elynor, I would
not doubt to stop her bleeding, without either pain or difficulty. This
gentlewoman somewhat tyckled with his words, did incontinent make relacion
thereof to the said Mystres Elynor, who immediately (declaring that F. I. was
her late received servant) returned the said messanger unto him with especial
charge, that he should employ his de^oyre toward the recovery of her health,
with whom the same F. I. repaired to the chamber of his desired: and finding
her set in a chair, leaning on the one side over a silver basin: After his
due reuereuce, he laid his hand on her temples, and privily rounding her in
her ear, desired her to command a Hazell stick and a knyfe: the which being
brought, he delivered unto her, saying on this wise. Mystres I will speak
certain words in secret to my self, and do require no more: but when you hear
me say openly this word Amen, that you with this knyfe will make a nycke upon
this hasell stycke: and when you have made five nickes, command me also to
cease. The Dame partly of good will to the knight, and partly to be stenched of
her bleeding, commanded her maid, and required the other gentiles, somewhat to
stand aside, which done, he began his oraisons, wherein he had not long
muttered before he pronounced Amen, wherewith the Lady made a nyck on the stick
with her knyfe. The said F. I. continued to an other Amen, when the Lady having
made an other nyck felt her bleeding, began to steynch: and so by the third
Amen thoroughly steinched. F. I. then changing his prayers into private talk,
said softly unto her. Mystres, I am glad that I am hereby enabled to do you
some service, and as the staunching of your own blood may some way reco^fort
you, so if y^ shedding of my blood may any way content you, I beseech you
command it, for it shall be evermore readily employed in your service, and
therwithal with a loud voice pronounced Amen: wherewith the good Lady making a
nyck did secretly answer thus. Good servant (quod she) I must needs think my
self right happy to have gained your service and good will, and be you sure,
that although there be in me no such desert as may draw you into this depth of
affection, yet such as I am, I shall be always glad to show my self thankful
unto you, and now, if you think your self assured, that I shall bleed no more,
do the^ prononce your fifth Amen, the which pronounced, she made also her
fifth nicke, and held up her head, calling the company unto her, and declaring
unto them, that her bleeding was thoroughly steinched. Well, it were long to
tell, what sundry opinions were pronounced upon this act, and I do dwell
ouerlong in the discourses of this F. I. especially having taken in hand only
to copy out his verses, but for the circumsta^ce does better declare the
effect, I will return to my former tale. F. I. tarying a while in the chamber
found opportunity to loose his sequence near to his desired Mistres: And after
conge taken departed. After whose departuer the Lady arose out of her chair,
and her maid going about to remove the same, espied, and took up the writing:
the which her mistres perceiving, began suddenly conjecture that y^ same had in it
some like matter to the verses once before left in like manner, and made
sembla^t to mistrust that the same should be some words of co^iuration: and
taking it from her maid, did peruse it, and immediately said to the company,
that she would not forgo the same for a great treasure. But to be plain, I
think that ( F. I. excepted) she was glad to be rid of all company, until she
had with sufficient leisure turned over and retossed every card in this
seque^ce. And not long after being now tickled thorough all the veins with an
unknown humor, adventured of her self to commit unto a like Ambassador the
discyphring of that which hitherto she had kept more secret, and thereupon wrote
with her own hand and head in this wise.

G. T.

GOod servant, I am out of al doubt much beholding unto you, and I have great
comfort by your means in the steinching of my blood, and I take great comfort
to read your letters, and I have found in my chamber diverse songs which I
think to be of your making, and I promise you, they are excellently made, I
assure you that I will be ready to do for you any pleasure that I can, during my
life: wherefore I pray you come to my chamber once in a day, till I come abroad
again, and I will be glad of your company, and for because that you have promised
to be my HE: I will take upon me this name, your SHE.


THis letter I have seen, of her own hand writing: and as therein the Reader
may find great difference of Style, from her former letter, so may you now
understand the casue. She had in the same house a friend, a servant, a
Secretary: what should I name him? such one as she esteemed in time past more
than was cause in time present, and to make my tale good, I will (by report of
my very good friend F. I.) discribe him unto you. He was in height, the
proportion of two Pigmeys, in breadth the thickness of two bacon hogs, of
presumption a Giant, of power a Gnat, Apishly wytted, Knauishly mannerd, and
crabbedly fauord, what was there in him then to draw a fair Ladies liking?
Marry sir even all in all, a well lyned pursse, wherewith he could at every
call, provide such pretty conceytes as pleased her peevish fantasy, and by
that means he had thoroughly (long before) insinuated him self with this
amorous dame. This manling, this minion, this slave, this secretary, was now
by occasion rydden to London forsothe: and though his absence were unto her a
disfurnishing of eloquence: it was yet unto F. I. an opertunitie of good
aduau^tage, for when he perceived the change of her style, and thereby grew in
some suspicion that the same proceeded by absence of her chief Chauncellor, he
thought good now to smite while the iron was hot, and to lend his Mistress
such a pen in her Secretaries absence, as he should never be able at his
return to amend the well writing thereof, wherefore according to her command
he repaired once every day to her chamber, at the least, whereas he guided him
self so well, and could devise such store of sundry pleasure and pastymes, that
he grew in favor not only with his desired, but also with the rest of the
gentlewomen. And one day passing the time amongst them, their play grew to
this end, that his Mistress, being Queen, demanded of him these three
questions. Servant (quod she) I charge you, as well upon your allegiance being
now my subject, as also upon your fidelity, having vowed your service unto
me that you answer me these three questions, by the very truth of your
secret thought. First, what thing in this universal world does most rejoice
and comfort you? F. I. abasing his eyes toward the ground, took good
aduisement in his answer, when a fair gentlewoman of the company clapped him
on the shoulder, saying, how now sir, is your hand on your halfpeny? To whom he
answered, no fair Lady, my hand is on my heart, and yet my heart is not in
mine own hands: wherewithal abashed turning toward dame Elinor he said.
My sovereign and Mistress, according to the charge of your command, and the
duty that I owe you, my tongue shall bewraye unto you the truth of mine intent.
At this present a reward given me without desert* does so rejoice me with
continual remembrance thereof, that though my mind be so occupied to think
thereon, as that day nor night I can be quiet from that thought, yet the joy
and pleasure which I conceive in the same is such, that I can neither be cloyed
with continuance thereof, nor yet afraid, that any mishap can counteruayle so
great a treasure. This is to me such a heaven to dwell in, as that I feed by
day, and repose by night, upon the fresh record of this reward, this (as he
says) he meant by the kiss that she lent him in the Gallery, and by the
profession of her last letters and words. Well, though this answer be
somewhat mistie, yet let my friends excuse be: that taken upon the sodeyne he
thought better to answer darkely, then to be mistrusted openly. Her second
question was, what thing in this life did most grieve his heart, and disquiet
his mind, whereunto he answered. That although his late rehearsed joy were
incomparable, yet the greatest enemy that disturbed the same, was the privy
worm of his own guilty conscience, which accused him evermore with great
unworthiness: and that this was his greatest grief. The Lady biting upon the
bit at his cunning answers made unto these two questions, began thus reply,
Servant, I had thought to have touched you yet nearer with my third question,
but I will refrain to attempt your patience: and now for my third demand,
answer me directly in what manner this passion does handle you? and how
these contraries may hang together by any possibility of concord? for your
words are strauunge. F. I. now rowsing him self boldly took occasion thus to
handle his answer. Mistress (quod he) my words in deed are strange, but
yet my possion is is much stranger, and theruppon this other day to content
mine own fa^tasie I devised a Sonet, which although it be a piece of
Cocklorells music, and such as I might be ashamed to publish in this company,
yet because my truth in this answer may the better appear unto you, I pray
you vouchsafe to receive the same in writing: and drawing a paper out of his
packet presented it unto her, wherein was written this Sonet.

G. T.

Love, hope, and death, do stir in me such strife,
As never man but I led such a life.
First burning love does wound my heart to death,
And when death comes at call of inward grief
Cold lingering hope, does feed my fainting breath
Against my will, and yeeldes my wound relief:
So that I live, but yet my life is such,
As death would never grieve me half so much.
No comfort then but only this I taste,
To salve such sore, such hope will never want,
And with such hope, such life will ever last,
And with such life, such sorrows are not skant.
Oh strange desire, O life with torments tossed
Through too much hope, mine only hope is lost.
Even HE F. I.


THis Sonet was highly commended, and in my judgment it deserves no less, I
have heard F. I. say, that he borrowed th'inuentiun of an Italian: but were it
a translation or invention (if I be Judge) it is both pretty and pithy. His
duty thus performed, their pastimes ended, and at their departure for a watch
word he counseled his Mistress by little and little to walk abrodesayinge
that the Gallery near adjoining was so pleasant, as if he were half dead he
thought that by walking therein he might be half and more revived. Think^ you
so servant (quod she?) and the last time that I walked there I suppose I took
the cause of my mallady, but by your advise (and for you have ^o clerkly
steynched my bleeding) I will assaye to walk there to morrow. Mistres quod he,
and in more full accomplishment of my duty toward you, and in sure hope that
you will use y^ same one lie to your own private commodity, will there awaite
upon you, and between you and me will teach you the full order how to steynch
the bleeding of any creature, whereby you shall be as cuning as my self.
Gramercy good servant, quoth she, I think you lost the same in writing here
yesterday, but I cannot understand it, and therefore to morrow (if I feel my
self any thing amended) I will send for you thither to enstruct me thoroughly:
thus they departed. And at supper time, the Knight of the Castle finding fault
that his gestes stomach served him no better, began to accuse the gro^enes of
his vyands, to whom one of the gentlewomen which had passed the afternoon in
his company, answered. Nay sir quoth she, this gentleman has a passion, the
which once once in a day at the least does kill his appetite. Are you so well
acquainted with the disposition of his body quoth the Lord of the house? by his
own saying, quoth she, and not otherwise. Fair Lady quoth F. I. you either mistoke
me or ouerheard me then, for I told of a comfortable humor which so ^ed me with
continual remembrance of joy, as y^ my stomach being full thereof does desire in
manner none other vittayles. Why sir, quoth y^ host, do you then live by love? God
forbid Sir quod F. I. for then my cheeks would be much thinner then they be,
but there are diverse other greater causes of joy, then y^ doubtful lottes of
love, and for mine own part, to be plain, I cannot love, and I dare not hate.
I would I thought so, quod the gentlewoman. And thus with pretty nyppes, they
passed over their supper: which ended, the Lord of the house require^ F. I. to
dance and pass the time with the gentlewoman, which he refused not to do.
But suddenly, before the music was well tuned, came out Dame Elynor in her
night attire, and said to the Lord, that (supposing the solitariness of her
chamber had increased her malady) she came out for her better recreacio^ to
see them dau^ce, Well done daughter (quod the Lord.) And I Mistres (quod F. I.)
would gladly bestow the leading of you about this great chamber, to drive away
the faintness of your fever. No good servant, quod the Lady, but in my
steed, I pray you dance with this fair Gentlewoman, pointing him to the Lady
that had so taken him up at supper. F. I. to avoid mistrust, did agree to her
request without further entreaty. The dance begone, this Knight marched on with
the Image of S. Fraunces in his hand, and S. Elynor in his heart. The violands
at end of the pauion stayed a while: in which time this Dame said to F. I. on
this wise. I am right sorry for you in two respects, although the familiarity
have hitherto had no great continuance between us: and as I do lament your
case, so do I rejoice (for mine own contentation) that I shall now see a due
trial of the experiment which I have long desired. This said, she kept
silence. When F. I. (somewhat astonished with her strange speech) thus
answered: Mystres although I cannot conceive the meaning of your words, yet
by curtesy I am constrained to yield you thanks for your good will, the which
appears no less in lamenting of mishaps, than in rejoicing at good fortune.
What experiment you mean to try by me, I know not, but I dare assure you,
that my skill in experiments is very simple. Herewith the Instruments sounded a
new Measure, and they passed forthwardes leaving to talk, until the noise
ceased: which done, the gentlewoman replied. I am sorry sir, that you did
erewhile, deny love and all his laws, and that in so open audience. Not so
quod F. I. but as the word was roundly taken, so can I readely answer it by
good reason. Well quod she, how if the hearers will admit no reasonable
answer? My reason shall yet be nevertheless (quod he) in reasonable
judgment. Herewith she smyled, and he cast a glance toward dame Elinor
askances art thou pleased? Again the vyols called them forthwardes, and again
at the end of the braule said F. I. to this gentlewoman: I pray you Mistres,
and what may be the second cause of your sorrow sustained in my behalf? Nay
soft quod she, percase I have not yet told you the first, but content your
self, for the second cause you shall never know at my hands, until I see due
trial of the experiment which I have long desired. Why then (quod she) I can
but wish a present occasion to bring y^ same to effect, to ye end that I might
also understand ye mystery of your meaning. And so might you fail of your
purpose (quod she) for I mean to be better assured of him that shall know the
depth of mine intent in such a secret, than I do suppose that any creature
(one except) may be of you. Gentlewoma^ (quod he) you speak Greek, the which I
have now forgotten, and mine instructers are to far from me at this present
to expound your words. Or else to near (quod she) and so smiling stayed her
talk, when the music called them to another dau^ce. Which ended, F. I. half
afraid of false suspect, and more amazed at this strange talk, gave over, and
bringing Mistress Fraunces to her place was thus saluted by his Mistress.
Servant (quod she) I had done you great wrong to have daunced with you,
con^^dering that this gentlewoman and you had former occasion of so weighty
conference. Mistress said F. I. you had done me great pleasure, for by our
conference I have but brought my brains in a busy conjecture. I doubt not
(said his Mistress) but you will end that business easily. It is hard said F. I.
to end the thing, whereof yet I have found no beginning. His Mistress with
change of countenance kept silence, whereat dame Fraunces rejoicing, cast out
this bone to gnawe on. I perceive (quod she) it is evil to halt before a
Creple. F. I. perceiving now that his Mistress waxed angry thought good on her
behalf thus to answer: and it is evil to hop before them that run for the
Bell: his Mistress replied, and it is evil to hang the Bell at their heels
which are always running. The L. of he Castle ouerhearing these proper
quippes, rose out of his chair, and coming toward F. I. required him to
dance a Gallyard. Sir said F. I. I have hitherto at your apoyntment but walked
about the house, now if you be desirous to see one tomble a turn or twain, it
is like enough tyat I might provoke you to laugh at me, but in good faith my
dancing days are almost done, and therefore sir (quod he) I pray you speak to
them that are more nymble at tripping on the toe. Whilst he was thus saying
dame Elynor had made her Congey, and was now entering the door of her chamber:
when F. I. all amazed at her sodeyne departure followed to take leave of his
Mistress: but she more then angry, refused to hear his good night, and
entering her chamber caused her maid to clappe the door. F. I. with heavy
cheer returned to his company, and Mistress Fraunces to toutch his sore with
a corosiue said to him softly in this wise. Sir you may now perceive that this
our country cannot allow the French manner of dancing, for they (as I have
heard tell) do more commonly dance to talk, then entreat to dance. F. I.
hoping to drive out one nail with another, and thinking this a mean most
convenient to suppress all ielous supposes, took Mistress Fraunces by the
hand^ and with a heavy smyle answered. Mistress and I (because I have seen
the french manner of dancing) will eftsoon entreat you to dance a Bargynet:
what mean you by this quod Mistress Fraunces. If it please you to follow
(quod he) you shall see that I can jest without joy, and laugh without lust,
and calling the musitions, caused them softly to sound the Tyntarnell, when he
clearing his voice did Alla Napolitana apply these verses following, unto the
measure.

G. T.

IN prime of lusty years, when Cupid caught me in
And nature taught the way to love, how I might best begin:
To please my wandering eye, in beauties tickle trade,
To gaze on each that passed by, a careless sport I made.
With sweet entising bayte, I fisht for many a dame,
And warmed me by many a fire, yet felt I not the flame:
But when at last I spied, the face that please me most,
The coals were quick, the wood was dry, and I began to tost^.
And smyling yet full often, I have beheld that face,
When in my heart I might bewail mine own unlucky case:
And often again with lokes that might bewray my grief,
I pleaded hard for just reward, and sought to find relief.
What will you more? so often, my gazing eyes did seek
To see the Rose and Lilly strive upon that lively cheek:
Till at the last I spied, and by good proof I found,
That in that face was painted plain, the pearcer of my wou^d.
Then (all to late) aghast, I did my foot reitre,
And sought with secret sighs to quench my greedy skalding fire:
But lo, I did prevail as much to guide my will,
As he that seeks with halting heel, to hop against the hill.
Or as the feeble sight, would search the sunny beam,
Even so I found but labor lost, to strive against the stream.
Then began I thus resolve, since liking forced love,
Should I mislike my happy choice, before I did it prove?
And since none other joy I had but her to see,
Should I retire my deep desire? no no it would not be:
Though great the duty were, that she did well deserve,
And I poor man, unworthy am so worthy a wight to serve,
Yet hope my comfort stayed, that she would have regard
To my good will, that nothing craved, but like for just reward:
I see the Faucon gent sometimes will take delight,
To seek the sollace of her wing, and dally with a kite.
The fairest Woulf will choose the foulest for her make,
And why? because he does endure most sorrow for her sake*
Even so had I like hope, when doleful days were spent,
When weary words were wasted well, to open true intent.
When fluddes of flowing tears, had washed my weeping eyes,
When trembling tongue had troubled her, with loud lamenting cries:
At last her worthy will would pity this my playnt,
And comfort me her own poor slave, whom fear had made so faint.
Wherefore I made a vow, the stony rock should start,
Ere I presume, to let her slip out of my faithful heart.
Lenuoie.
And when she saw by proof, the pith of my good will,
She took in worth this simple song, for want of better skill.
And as my just deserts, her gentle heart did move,
She was content to answer thus: I am content to love.
F. I.

THese verses are more in number than do stand with contentation of some
judgments, and yet the occasion thoroughly considered, I can commend them with
the rest, for it is (as may be well fermed) continua or at ^o* declaring a full
discourse of his first love: wherein (over and besides that the Epythetes are
aptly applied, and the verse of it self pleasant enough) I note that by it he
meant in clouds to discipher unto Mistres Fraunces such matter as she would
snatch at, and yet could take no good hold of the same. Furthermore, it
answered very aptly to the note which the music sounded, as the skillful
reader by due trial may approve. This singing dance, or daunsing song ended,
Mistres Fraunces giving due thanks, seemed weary also of the company, and
profering to depart, gave yet this farewell to F. I. not vexed by choler, but
pleased with contentation, and called away by heavy sleep: I am constreyned
(quod she) to bid you good night, and so turning to the rest of the company,
took her leave. Then the Master of the house commanded a torch to light F.
I. to his lodging, where (as I have heard him say) the sodeyn change of his
Mistres countenance, together with the straungenes of Mistress Fraunces talk,
made such an encounter in his mind, that he could take no rest that night:
wherefore in the morning rising very early (although it were far before his
mistres hour) he rooled his choler by walking in the Gallery near to her
lodging, and there in this passion compyled these vers^s following.

G. T.

A cloud of care has coured all my cost,
And storms of strife do threaten to appear:
The waves of woo, which I mistrusted most,
Have broke the banks wherein my life lay clear:
Chippes of ill chance, are fallen amyd my choice,
To mar the mind, that meant for to rejoice.
Before I sought, I found the haven of hap*
Wherein (once found) I sought to shroud my ship,
But lowering love has lift me from her lap,
And crabbed lot begins to hang the lip:
The drops of dark, mistrust do fall so thick,
They pearce my coat, and touch my skin at quick*
What may be said, where truth cannot preu^yl^?
What plea may serve, where will it self is Judge?
What reason rules, where right and reason fail?
^emediles then must the giltlesse trudge:
And s^eke out care, to be the caruing knyfe
To cut the thread, that lingreth such a life,
F. I.

THis is but a rough (...), and reason, for it was devised in great disquiet of
mind, and written (...) rage, yet have I seen much worse pass the mustors,
yea and where both the Lieutenant and Provost Marshall were (...) of ripe
judgment: and as it is, I pray you (...) here, for the truth is that F. I.
himself had so (...) therein, that he never presented it, but to y^ matter.
When he had long (and all in vayn) looked for the coming of his Mistres into
her appointed walk: he wandered into y^ park near adjoining to the Castle wall;
where his chance was to meet Mistress Fraunces, accompanied with one other
Gentlewoman, by whom he passed with a reverence of courtesy: and so walking on,
came into the side of a thicket* where he sat down under a tree to allay his
sadness with solitarines. Mistres Fraunces, partly of courtesy and affection,
and partly to content her mind by continuance of such talk as they had
commenced over night, entreated her companion to go with her unto this tree of
reformacion, whereas they found the Knight with his arms unfolded in a heavy
kind of contemplation, unto whom Mistres Fraunces stepped apace, (right softly)
and at unawares gave this salutation. I little thought Sir Knight (quod she) by
your euensong yesternight, to have found you presently at such a morrow mass,
but I perceive you serve your Saint with double devotion: and I pray God grant
you treble meede for your true intent. F. I. taken thus upon the sodeine, could
none otherwise answer but thus: I told you Mistress (quod he) that I could
laughe without lu^^, and jest without joy: and there withal starting up, with
a more bold countenance came toward the Dames, profering unto them his
service, to wait upon the^ home wards. I have heard say often times ( quoth Mistres
Fraunces) that it is hard to serve two Masters at one time, but we will be right
glad of your company. I thank you (quod F. I.) and so walking on with them,
fell into sundry discourses, still refusing to touch any part of their former
communicacion, until Mistress Frauuces said unto him: by my troth (quod thee)
I would be your debtour these two days, to answer me truly but unto one
question that I will propound: fair Gentlewoman (quod he) you shall not need
to becomme my bebtour, but if it please you to quit question by question, I will
be more ready to gratify you in this request, than either reason requires, or
than you would be willing to work my co^tentatio^. Master F. I. ( quoth she, and
y^ sadly) peradue^tur you know but a little how willing I would be to procure
your contentation, but you know that hitherto familiarity has taken no deep
root betwixt us twain. And though I find in you no manner of cause whereby I
might doubt to commit this or greater matter unto you, yet have I stayed
hitherto so to do, in doubt least you might thereby justly condemn me both
of arrogance and lack of discretion, wherewith I must yet foolishly affirm, that
I have with great pain brydeled my tongue from disclosing the same unto you.
Such is then the good will that I bear toward you, the which if you rather
judge to be impudency, than a friendly meaning, I may then curse the hour
that I first concluded thue to deal with you: herewithall being now red for
chaste bashefulnesse, she abased her eyes, and stayed her talk, to whom F. I.
thus answered. Mistress Fraunces, if I should with so exceeding villainy
requite such and so exceeding courtesy, I might not only seem to digenerate
from all gentry, but also to differ in behavior from all the rest of my life
spent: wherefore to be plain with you in few words, I think my self so much
bound unto you for diverse respects, as if ability do not fail me, you shall
find me myndfull in requital of the same: and for disclosing your mind to
me, you may if so please you adventure it without adventure, for by this
Sun, quod he, I will not deceive such trust as you shall lay upon me, and
furthermore, so far forth as I may, I will be yours in any respect: wherefore I
beseech you accept me for your faithful friend, and so shall you surely find
me. Not so, quod she, but you shall be my Trust, if you vouchsafe the name, and
I will be to you as you shall please to term me: my H^pe (quod he) if you so
be pleasedand: thus agreed, they two walked a part from the other Gentlewoman,
and fell into sad talk, wherein Mistress Fraunces did very curteousely
declare unto him, that in deed, one cause of her sorrow sustained in his
behalf, was that he had said so openly over night, that he could not love,
for she perceived very well the affection between him and Madame Elynor, and
she was also advertised that Dame Elynor stood in the portall of her chamber,
harkening to the talk that they had at supper that night, wherefore she seemed
to be sorry that such a word (rashely escaped) might become great hinderaunce
unto his desire: but a greater cause of her grief was (as she declared) that
his hap was to bestow his lyking so unworthily, for she seemed to accuse Dame
Elynor, for the most unconstant woman living: In full proof whereof, she
bewrayed unto F. I. how she the same Dame Elynor, had of long time ben yielded
to the Mynion Secretary, whom I have before described: in whom though there be
(quod she) no one point of worthynesse, yet shameth she not to use him as h^^
^ea^est friend, or rather her holiest Idol, and that this not withstanding
Dame Elynor had been also sundry times woone to choice of change, as she named
unto F. I. two Gentlemen whereof the one was named H. D. and that other H. K.
by whom she was during sundry times of their feuerall abode in those parties,
entreated to like ^urteousie, for these causes the Dame Fraunces seemed to
mislike F. I. choice, and to lament that she doubted in process of time to see
him abused. The experiment she meant was this, for that she thought F. I. (I use
her words) a man in every respect very worthy to have the several use of a
more commodious common, she hoped now to see if his enclosure thereof might be
defensible against her said Secretary, and such like. These things and diverse
other of great importance, this courteouse Lady Fraunces did friendly disclose
unto F. I. and furthermore, did both instruct and advise him how to proceed in
his enterprise. Now to make my talk good, and least the Reader might be
drawn in a jealous suppose of this Lady Fraunces; I must let you understand
that she was unto F. I. a kinswoman, a virgin of rare chastity, singular
capacity, notable modesty, and excellent beauty: and though F. I. had cast
his affection on the other (being a married woman) yet was there in their
beauties no great difference: but in all other good gifts a wonderful
diversity, as much as might be between constancy and ^litting fantasy,
between woma^ly countenance and girlish garishnes, between hot dissimulacion
and temperate fidelity. Now if any man will curiously ask the question why F.
I. should choose the one and leave the other, over and besides the common
proverb? ( So many men so many minds) thus may be answered: we see by common
experience, y^ the highest flying fa^con, does more commonly pray upon the corn
fed crow, and the simple shiftles dove, then on the mounting kyte: and why?
because the one is overcome with less difficulty then that other. Thus much
in defense of this Lady Fraunces, and to excuse the choice of my friend F. I.
who thought himself now no less beholding to good fortune, to have found such
a trusty friend, then bounden to Dame Venus, to have won such a Mistres. And
to return unto my pretense, understand you, y^ F. I. (being now with these two
fair Ladies come very near the castle) grew in some jealous doubt (as on his
own behalf) whether he were best to break company or not. When his assured
Hope, perceiving the same, began thus recomfort him: Good sir ( quoth she) if you
trusted your trusty friends, you should not need thus cowardly to stand in
dread of your friendly enemies. Well said in faith (quod F. I. and I must
confess, you were in my bosom before I wist, but yet I have heard said often,
that in Trust is treason. Well spoken for your self quod his Hope. F. I. now
remembering that he had but erewhile taken upon him y^ name of her Trust, came
home per misericordiam, when his Hope entering the Castle gate, caught hold of
his lay, and half by force led him by the gallery unto his Mistre^ chamber:
whereas after a little dissembling disdain, he was at last by the good help of
his Hope, right thankfully received: and for his Mistres was now ready to dyne,
he was therefore for that time arested there, and a supersedias sent into the
great chamber unto the Lord of the house, who expected his coming out of the
park. The dinner ended, and he thoroughly contented both with welfare and
welcome, they fell into sundry devices of pastime: at last F. I. taking into
his hand a Lute that lay on his Mistres bed, did unto the note of y^ Venetian
galliard apply the Italian ^ittie written by the worthy Bradamant unto the
noble Rugier, as Ari^sto has it. Rugier qual semper fui, etc. but his Mistres
could not be quiet until she heard him repeat the Tyntarnell which he used
over night, the which F. I. (...) nights roste, with the bruise thereof. Well,
servant (quod she) content your self, and for your sake, I will speak to her
to provide him a plaster, the which I my self will apply to his hurt: And to
the end it may work the better with him, I will puruey a lodging for him,
where hereafter he may sleep at more quiet. This laid the rosy hew,
distained her sickly cheeks, and she returned to the company, leaving F. I.
ravished between hope and dread, as one that could neither co^^ecture the
meaning of her mystical words, nor assuredly ^rust unto the knot of her
slyding affections. When the Lady Fraunces coming to him, demanded, what?
dream you sir? Yea mary do I fair Lady (quod he). And what was your dream,
sir (quod she?) I drempt (quod F. I.) that wa^^ing in a pleasant garden
garnished with sundry (...), my hap was to epsy hanging in the air, a hope
where in I might well behold the aspectes and face of the heavens, and calling
to remembrance the day and hour of my nativity, I did thereby (according to my
small skill in Astronomy) try the conclusions of mine adventures. And what
found you therein (quod dame Fraunces?) you awaked me out of my dream (quod he)
or else paraduenture you should not have known. I believe you well (quod the
Ladi Fraunces) and laughing at his quick answer brought him by the hand unto
the rest of his company: where he ^aried not long before his gracious
Mistress had him to farewell, and to keep his hour there again, when he
should by her be sommoned. Hereby F. I. passed the rest of that day in hope
awayting the happy time when his Mistress should send for him. Supper time
came and passed over, and not long after came the handmayd of the Lady Elynor
into the great chamber, desiring F. I. to repair unto their Mistress, the
which he willingly accomplished: and being now entered into her chamber, he
might perceive his Mistress in her nights attire, preparinge her self
toward bed, to whom F. I. said: Why how now Mistress? I had thought this
night to have seen you dance (at least or at last) amongst us? By my troth
good servant ( quoth she) adventured so soon unto the great chamber yesternight,
that I find my self somewhat sickly disposed, and therefore do streyne courtesy
(as you see) to go the sooner to my bed this night: but before I sleep (quod
she) I am to charge you with a matter of weight, and taking him apart from the
rest, declared that (as that present night) she would talk with him more at
large in the gallery near aioyning to her chamber. Here upon F. I. discretely
dissimuling his joy, took his leave and returned into the great chamber, where
he had not long continued before the Lord of the Castle commanded a torch to
light him unto his lodging, whereas he prepared himself and went to bed,
commanding his servant also to go to his rest. And when he thought as well his
servant, as the rest of the household to be safe, he arose again, and taking
his night gown, did under the same convey his naked sword, and so walked to
the gallerie, where he found his good Mistress walking in her night gown and
attending his coming. The Moon was now at the full, the skies clear, and the
weather temperate, by reason whereof he might the more plainly and with the
greater contentation behold his long desired joys, and spreding his arms
abroad to embrace his loving Mistress, he said: oh my dear Lady when shall I
be able with any desert to counteruayle the least part of this your bountiful
goodness? The dame (whether it were of fear in deed, or that the wylynes of
womanhode had taught her to cover her conceits with some five dissimulation)
stert back from the Kning^, and shriching (but softly) said unto him. Alas
servant what have I deserved, that you come against me with naked sword as
against an open enemy. F. I. perceiving her intent excused himself, declaring
that he brought the same for their defense, and not to offend her in any wise.
The Lady being therewith somewhat apeased, they began with more comfortable
gesture to expel the dread of the said late affright, and since to become
bolder of behavior, more familier in speech, and most kind in accomplishing of
common comfort. But why hold I so long discourse in discribing the joys which
(for lack of like experience) I cannot set out to y^ full? Were it not that I
know to whom I write, I would the more beware what I write. F. I. was a man,
and neither of us are senseless, and therefore I should slander him, (over and
besides a greater obloquie to the whole genealogy of Enaeas) if I should
imagine that of tender heart he would forbear to express her more tender
limbs against the hard floor. Suffised that of her curteouse nature she was
content to accept bords for a bead of down, mattes for Camerike sheets, and
the night gown of F. I. for a counterpoynt to cover them, and thus with calm
content, in steed of quiet sleep, they be^uiled the night, until the
proudest sterre began to abandon the fyrmament, when F. I. and his Mistress,
were constrained also to abandon their delights, and with ten thousand sweet
kisses and straight embracings, did frame themselves to play loath to depart.
Well, remedy was there none, but dame Elynor must return unto her chamber, and
F. I. must also convey himself (as closely as might be) into his chamber, the
which was hard to do, the day being so far sprung, and he having a large
base court to pass over before he could recover his staire foot door. And
though he were not much perceived, yet the Lady Fraunces being no less
desirous to see an issue of these enterprises, then F. I. was willing to cover
them in secresy, did watch, and even at the entering of his chamber door,
perceived the point of his naked sword glistring under the skyrt of his night
gown: whereat she smyled and said to her self, this gear goes well about.
Well, F. I. having now recovered his chamber, he went to bed, and there let
him sleep, as his Mistress did on that otherside. Although the Lady Fraunces
being thoroughly tickled now in all the veins, could not enjoy such quiet
rest, but arising, took another gentlewoman of the house with her, and walked
into the park to take the fresh air of the morning. They had not long walked
there, but they returned, and though F. I. had not yet slept sufficiently, for
one which had so far trauayled in the night past, yet they went into his
chamber to raise him, and coming to his beds side, found him fast on sleep.
Alas ^uod that other gentlewoman, it were pity to awake him: even so it were
quod dame Fraunces, but we will take away somewhat of his, whereby he may
perceive that we were here, and loking about the chamber, his naked sword
presented it self to the hands of dame Fraunces, who took it with her, and
softly shutting his chamber door again, went down the stayres and recovered
her own lodging, in good order and vnperceyued of any body, saving only that
other gentlewoman which accompanied her. At the last F. I. awaked, and
apparreling himself, walked out also to take the air, and being thoroughly
recomforted as well with remembrance of his joys forepassed, as also with the
pleasant hermony which the Byr^es made on every side, and the fragrant smell of
the redolent flowers and blossoms which budded on every branch: he did in
these delights compyle these verses following.

The occasion (as I have heard him rehearse) was by encounter that he had with
his Lady by light of the moon: and forasmuch, as the moon in mids of their
delights did vanish away, or was ouerspred with a cloud, thereuppon he took the
subject of his theme. And thus it ensues, called a imooneshine Banquet.

G. T.

DAme Cinthia her self (that shines so bright,
And deyneth not to leave her lofty place:
But only then, when Phoebus shows his face
Which is her brother borne and lends her light,)
Disdaynd not yet to do my Lady right:
To prove that in such heavenly wightes as she,
It sits best that right and reason be.
For when she spied my Ladies golden rays,
Into the clouds,
Her head she shrouds,
And shamed to shine where she her beams displayes.
Good reason yet, that to my simple skill,
I should the name of Cynthia adore:
By whose high help, I might behold the more
My Ladies lovely looks at mine own will,
With deep content, to gare, and gaze my fill:
Of curteousie and not of dark disdain,
Dame Cinthia dis^losd my Lady plain,
She did but lend her light (as for a lyte)
With friendly grace,
To show her face,
That else would show and shine in her dispight.
Dan Phoebus he with many a lowering look,
Had her heheld of yore in angry wise:
And when he could none other mean devise
To stayne her name, this deep deceit he took
To be the bayt^ that best might hide his hoke:
Into her eyes his parching beams he cast,
To skorche their skins, that gazed on her full fast:
Whereby when many a man was son burnt so
They thought my Queen,
The son had been
With skalding flames, which wrought them all that woe*
And thus when many a look had looked so long,
As that their eyes were dim and dazzled both:
Some fainting hearts that were both leude and loath
To look again from whence the error sprung,
Began close their eye for fear of further wrong:
And some again once drawn into the maze,
Began leudly blame the beams of beauties blaze:
But I with deep foresight did sone epsy,
How Phoebus meant,
By false intent,
To slander so her name with cruelty.
Wherefore at better leisure thought I best,
To try the treason of his treachery:
And to exalt my Ladies dignity
When Phoebus fled and drew him down to rest
Amid the waves that walter in the west.
I began behold this lovely Ladies face,
Whereon dame nature spent her gifts of grace:
And found therein no parching heat at all,
But such bright hew,
As might renew,
An Angels joys in reign celestial.
The curteouse Moon that wished to do me good,
Did shine to show my dame more perfectly,
But when she saw her passing iollitie,
The Moon for shame, did blush as red as blood,
And sh^onke a side and kept her horns in hood:
So that now when Dame Cynthia was gone,
I might enjoy my Ladies lokes alone,
Yet honored still the Moon with true intent:
Who taught us skill,
To work our will,
And gave us place, till all the night was spent.
F. I.

THis Ballade, or howsoever I shall term it, percase you will not like, and
yet in my judgment it has great good store of deep invention, and for the
order of the verse, it is not common, I have not heard many of like proporcion,
some will account it but a dyddeldome: but who so had heard F. I. sing it to
the lute, by a note of his own devise, I suppose he would esteem it to be a
pleasant diddeldome, and for my part, if I were not parciall, I would say
more in commendacion of it than now I mean to do, leaving it to your and like
judgments. And now to returns to my tale, by that time, that F. I. returned
out of the park, it was dynner time, and at dynner they all met, I mean both
dame Elynor, dame Fraunces, and F. I. I leave to discribe that the Lady
Fraunces was gorgeously attired, and set forth with very brave apparel, and
Madame Elynor only in her night gown gyrt to her, with a coyfe trymmed Alla
Piedmonteze, on the which she ware a little cap crossed over the crown with
two bends of yellowe Sarcenet or Cipresse, in the midst whereof she had
placed (of her own had writing) in paper this word, Contented. This attire
pleased her then to use, and could not have displeased Mistress Fraunces, had
she not been more privy to the cause, than to the thing it self: at least the
Lord of the Castle of ignorance, and dame Fraunces of great temp^rance, let it
pass without offense. At dynner, because the one was pleased with all former
reconninges, and the other made privy to the account, there passed no word of
taunt or grudge, but omnia been. After dynner dame Elinor being no less
desirouse to have F. I. company, then dame Fraunces was to take him in some
pretty trippe, they began to question how they might best pass the day: the
Lady Elynor seemed desirous to keep her chamber, but Mistress Fraunces for
another purpose seemed desirous to ride abroad thereby to take the open air:
they agreed to ride a mile or twain for sollace, and requested F. I. to
accompany them, the which willingly granted. Each one parted from other, to
prepare themselves, and now began the sport, for when F. I. was booted, his
horses sadled, and he ready to ride, he began mysse his Rapier, whereat al
astonished he began to blame his man, but blame whom he would, found it could not
be. At last the Ladies going toward horseback called for him in the base
Court, and demanded if he were ready: to whom F. I. answered. Madames I am
more than ready, and yet not so ready as I would be, and immediately taking him
self in trip, he thought best to utter no more of his conceit, but in have
more than good speed mounted his horse, and coming toward y^ dames presented
him self, turning, bounding, and taking up his courser to the uttermost of his
power in bravery: after suffering his horse to breath him self, he began also
allay his own choler, and to the dames he said. Fair Ladies I am ready when
it pleases you to ride where so you command. How ready soever you be
servant, quod dame Elinor, it seems your horse is readier at your command
then at ours. If he be at my command Mistress (quod he,) he shall be at
yours. Gramercy good servant (quod she) but my meaning is, that I fear he be
to stirring for our company. If he prove so Mistres quoth F. I. I have here a
soberer palfrey to serve you on. The Dames being mounted they rode forthwardes
by the space of a mile or very near, and F. I. (whether it were of his horses
courage or his own choler) came not so near them as they wished, at last the
Lady Fraunces said unto him: Master I. you said that you had a soberer horse,
which if it be so, we would be glad of your company, but I believe by your
cou^tinance, your horse and you are agreed. F. I. alighting called his
servant, changed horses with him, and ouertaking the Dames, said to Mistres
Fraunces: And why do you think fair Lady that my horse and I are agreed?
Because by your countenance (quod she) it seems your patience is stirred. In
good faith, quod F. I. you have gessed a right, but not with any of you. Then
we care the less servant, quod Dame Elinor* By my troth Mistres. quoth F. I.
(looking well about him that none might hear but they two) it is with my
servant, who has lost my sword out of my chamber. Dame Elinor little
remembering the occasion, replied it is no matter servant, quod she, you shall
hear of it again, I warrant you, and presently we ride in Gods peace, and I
turst shall have no need of it: yet Mistress quod he, a weapon serves both
uses, as well to defend, as to offend. Now by my troth, quod Dame Fraunces, I
have now my dream, for I dreamt this night that I was in a pleasant meadow
alone, where I met with a tall Gentleman, apparelled in a night gown of silk
all embroadered about with a guard of naked swords, and when he came toward me
I seemed to be afraid of him, but he recomforted me saying, be not afraid
fair Lady, for I use this garment only for mine own defense: and in this sort
went that warlicke God Mars what time he taught dame Venus to make Vulcan a
hamer of the new fashion. Notwithstanding these comfortable words the fright
of the dream awaked me, and since unto this hour I have not slept at al.
And what time of the night dreamt you this quod F. I? In the gray morning about
daw^ing of y^ day, but why ask you quod dame Fran^ces? F. I. with a great sigh
answered, because that dreams are to be marched more at some hour of the
night, then at some other, why are you so cunning at the interpretation of
dreams servant (quod the Lady Elynor?) not very cunning Mistress quod F.I.
but guess, like a young scholar. The dames continued in these and like
pleasant talks: but F. I. could not be merry, as one that esteemed the
preservation of his Mistress honor no less then the obtaining of his own
delights: and yet to avoid further suspicion, he repressed his passions,
as much as he could. The Lady Elynor more careless then consideratiue of her
own case, pricking forwards said softly to F. I. I had thought you had
received small cause servant to be thus dumpish, when I would be merry. Alas
dear Mistress quod F. I. it is altogether for your sake, that I am pensife:
dame Fraunces with courtesy withdrewe her self and gave them leave when as F.
I. declared unto his Mistress, that his sword was taken out of his chamber,
and that he dreaded much by the words of the Lady Fraunces, that she had some
understanding of the matter. Dame Elynor now calling to remembrance what had
passed the same night, at the first was abashed, but immediately (for these
women be redely wyt^ed) chered her servant, and willed him to commit unto her
the saluing of that s^re. Thus they passed the rest of the way in pleasant
talk with dame Fraunces, and so returned toward the Castle where F. I.
suffered the two dames to go together, and he alone unto his chamber to bewail
his own misgouernement. But dame Elynor (whether it were according to old
custom, or by wily policy) found mean that night, y^ the sword was
conveyed out of Mistres Fraunces chamber and brought unto hirs and after
redeliuerie of it unto F. I. she warned him to be more wary from that time
forthwards: well I dwell too long upon these particular points in discoursing
this trif^ing history, but that the same is the more apt mean of introduction
to y^ verses, which I mean to rehearse unto you, and I think you will not
disdain to read my conceit with his invention about declaration of his
commedie. The next that ever F. I. wrote the^, upon any adventure happened
between him and this fair Lady, was this as I have heard him say, and upon
this occasion. After he grew more bold and better acquaynted with his Mistress
disposition, he adventured one Friday in the morning to go unto her chamber,
and theruppon wrote as follows: which he termed a Frydayes Breakefast.

G. T.

TThat self same day, and of that day that hour,
When she does reign, that mocked Vulcane the Smith:
And thought it meet to harbor in her bower,
Some gallant gest for her to dally with.
That blessed hour, that blist and happy day,
I thought it meet, with hasty steps to go:
Unto the lodge, wherein my Lady lay,
To laugh for joy, or else to weep for woe.
And lo, my Lady of her wonted grace,
First lent her lips to me (as for a kiss:)
And after that her body to embrace,
Wherein dame nature wrought nothing amiss.
What followed next, guess you that know the trade,
For in this sort, my Frydayes feast I made.
F. I.


THis Sonet is short and sweet, reasonably well, according to the occasion
etc. Many days passed these two lovers with great delight, their affairs
being no less politikely governed, than happily atchiued. And surely I have
heard F. I. affirm in sad earnest, that he did not only love her, but was
furthermore so ravished in Ecstasies with continual remembrance of his delights,
that he made an Idol of her in his inward conceypte. So seems it by this
challenge to beauty, which he wrote in her praise and upon her name.

G. T.

Beauty shut up thy shop, and trusse up all thy trash,
My Nell has stolen thy fynest stuff, and le^t thee in the lash:
Thy market now is marred, thy gaynes are gone god wot,
Thou have no ware, that may compare, with this that I have got*
As for thy painted pale, and wrinckles surfled up:
Are dear enough, for such as lust to drink of every cup:
Thy bodies bolstred out, with bumbast and with bags,
Thy rowles, thy Ruffes, thy caules, thy coyfes, thy Ierkins and thy iagges.
Thy curling and thy cost, thy frisling and thy fare,
To Court to court with all those toys, and there setforth such ware
Before their hungry eyes, that gaze on every gest:
And choose the cheapest chaffayre still, to please their fancy best.
But I whose steadfast eyes, could never cast a glance,
With wa^dring look, amid the prease, to take my choice by chance
Have won by due desert, a piece that has no peer,
And left the rest as refuse all, to serve the market there:
There let him choose that list, there catch the best who can:
A painted blazing bayte may serve, to choke a gazing man.
But I have slipped thy flower, that freshest is of hew,
I have thy corn, go sell thy chaff, I list to seek no new:
The wyndowes of mine eyes, are glazed with such delight,
As each new face seems full of faults, that blaseth in my sight:
And not without just cause* I can compare her so,
Lo here my glove I challenge him, that can, or dare say no.
Let Theseus come with clubbe, or Paris brag with brand,
To prove how fair their Hellen was, that skourg'd the Grecian land:
Let mighty Mars him self, come armed to the field:
And vaunt dame Venus to defend, with helmet spear and shield
This hand that had good hap, my Hellen to embrace,
Shall have like luck to foyl her foes, and dau^t them with disgrace.
And cause them to confess by verdict and by oath*
How far her lovely looks do steyne the beauties of them both.
And that my Hellen is more fair then Paris wife,
And does deserve more famous praise, then Venus for her life.
Which if I not perform, my l^fe then let me leese,
Or else be bound in chains of change to beg for beauties fies.
F. I.


BY this challenge I guess, that either he was than in an (...) else sure I am
now in a lunacie, for it is* a prou^ challenge made to Beauty her self, and
all her companyons and ymag^^ing that Beauty having a shop where she vtt^^ her
wares of all sundry sorts, his Lady had stolen the fine ^away, leaving none
behind her, but paynting, bolstring, forcing and such like the which in his
rage he judges good enough to serve the Court: and theruppon grew a great
quarrel. When these verses were by the negligence of his Mistress dispersed
into sundry hands, and so at last to the reading of a Courtier. Well F. I. had
his desire if his Mistress lyked them, but as I have heard him declare, she
grew in ieolosie, that the same were not written by her, because her name was
Elynor and not Hellen. And about this point have been diverse and sundry
opinions, for this and diverse other of his most notable Poems, have come to
view of y^ world, although altogether without his consent. And some have
attributed this praise unto a Hellen, who deserved not so well as this dame
Elynor should seem to deserve by the relation of F. I. and yet never a ba^ell
of good herring between them both* But that other Hellen, because she was and
is of so base condition, as may deserve no manner commendacion in any honest
judgment, therefore I will excuse my friend F. I. and adventure my pen in his
behalf, that he would never bestow verse of so mean a subject. An^ yet some
of his acquayntance, being also acquainted (better then I,) that F. I. was
sometimes acquaynted with Hellene, have stood* in argument with me, that it
was written by Hellene and not by Elynor. Well F. I. told me himself that it
was written by this dame Elyno^, and that unto her he thus alleged, that he
took it all for one (...), or at least he never red of any Elinor such matter
as might sound worthy like commendation for beauty. And in deed, considering
that it was in the first beginning of his writings, as then he was no writer of
any long continuance comparing also the time that such reports do spread of
his acquayntaunce with Hellene* it cannot be written less then six or seven
years before he knew Hell^ne: mary paraduenture if there were any acquayntance
between F. I. and that Hellene afterward, (the which I dare no^ confess) he
might adapt it to her name, and so make it serve both their turns, as elder
lou^rs have done before and still do and will do world without end A^en* Well
by whom he wrote it I know not, but once I am sure that he wrote it, for he is
no borrower of inue^tio^s* and this is all that I mean to prove, as one that
send you his verses by stealth, and do him double wrong, to disclose unto any
man the secret causes why they were devised, but this for your delight I do
adventure and to return to the purpose, he sought more certaynely to please
his Mistress Elynor with this Sonet written in her praise as follows.

G. T.

THE stately Dames of Rome, their Pearls did wear,
About their necks to beautify their name:
But she (whom I do serve) her peers does bear,
Close in her mouth, and smiling shows the same.
No wonder then, though every word she speaks,
A Jewel seem^ in judgment of the wise*
Sin^e that her ^ugred tongue the passage breaks,
Between two rocks, bedeckt with pearls of price.
Her hair of gold, her front of Iuory,
(A bloody heart within so white a breast)
Her teeth of Pearl, lips Rubie, crystal eye,
Needs must I honor her above the rest:
Since she is fourmed of none other moulde,
But Rubie, Crystal, Iuory, Pearl, and Gold.
F. I.


OF this Sonet I am assured that it is but a t^anslation, for I my self have
seen the invention of an Italian, and Master I. has a little dylated the
same, but not much besides the sense of the first, and the addicion very aptly
applied: wherefore I cannot condemn his doing therein, and for the Sonet, were
it not a little to much praise (as the Italians do most commonly offend in the
superlatiue) I could the more commend it: but I hope the party to whom it was
dedicated, had rather it were much more, than any thing less. Well, thus these
two Lovers passed many days in exceeding contentation* ^ more than speakeable
pleasures, in which time F. I. did compyle very many verses according to
sundry occasions proffred, whereof I have not obtained the most at his hands*
and the reason that he denied me the same, was that (as he alleged) they were
for the most part sauced with a taste of glory, as you know that in such cases
a lover being charged with ine^priuable joys, and therewith enjoined both by
duty and discretion to keep the same covert, can by no means devise a greater
consolation, than to commit it into some cyphred words and figured speeches in
verse, whereby he feels his heart half (or more than half) eased of
swelling. For as sighs are some present ease to the pensife mind, even so we
find by experience, that such secret enter comoning of joys does increase
delight. I would not have you conster my words to this ^ffecte, that I think
a man cannot sufficiently rejoice in the luckie lottes of love, unless he
empart the same to others: God forbid that ever I should enter into such a^
heresy, for I have always been of this opinion, that as to be fortunate in
love, is one of the most inward contentatious to man's mind of all earthly
joys: even so if he do but once bewray y^ same to any living creature,
imemdiatlye either dread of discovering does bruise his breast with an
intolerable burden, or else he leeseth the principal virtue which gave effect
to his gladness, not unlike to a Potycaries pot which being filled with sweet
oyntmentes or parfumes, does reteyne in it self some sent of the same, and
being powered out does return to the former state, hard, harshe, and of small
savor: So the mind being fraught with delights, as long as it can keep them
secretly enclosed, may continually feed upon the pleasant record thereof as
the well willing and ready horse byteth on the bridle, but having once
disclosed them to any other, strayghtway we loose the hidden treasure of the
same, and are oppressed with sundry doubtful opinions and dreadful conceits.
And yet for a man to record unto him self in the inward contemplation of his
mind the often remembrance of his late received joys, does as it were ease
the heart of burden, and ad unto the mind a fresh supply of delight, yea and in
verse principally (as I conceive) a man may best contriue this way of comfort
in him self. Therefore as I have said F. I. swymming now in delights did
nothing but write such verse as might accumilate his joys, to the extremity
of pleasure, the which for that purpose he kept from me, as one more desirous
to seem obscure and defective, than overmuch to glory in his adventures,
especially for that in the end his hap was as heavy, has hitherto he had been
fortunate, amongst other I remembered one happened upon this occasion. The
husband of the Lady Elynor bebeing all this while absent from her, began now
return, and kept Cut at home, with whom F.I. found means so to ensignuate
himself, that familiarity took deep ^oot^ between them, and seldom but by
^^elth you could ^^nde the one out of the others company. On a time the knight
ryding on hunting desired F. I. to accompany him, the which he could not refuse
to do, but like a lusty younker, ready at all assayes, apparrelled him self
in green, and about his neck a Bugle, pricking and gallowping amongst the
foremost, according to the manor of that country. And it chanced that the
married Knight thus gallowping lost his horn, which some deuines might have
interpreted to be but moulting, and that by Gods grace, he might have a new
come up again shortly in steed of that. Well, he came to F. I. requiring him
to lend him his* Beugle, for (said the Knight) I hard you not blow this day,
and I would feign encourage the hounds, if I had a horn. Quod F. I. although
I have not ben over lauishe of my coming hitherto, I would you should not
doubt but that I can tell how to use a horn well enough, and yet I may little
do if I may not lend you a horn, and therewithal took his Beugle from his
neck, and lent it to the Knight, who making in unto the hounds, began assaye to
rechate: but the horn was to hard for him to wind, whereat F. I. took
pleasure, and said to him self, blow till thou break that: I made thee one
with in these few days, that thou will never crack whiles thou live. And
hereupon (before the fall of the Buck) devised this Sonet following, which at
his home coming he presented unto his mistress.

G. T.

As some men say there is a kind of seed
Will grow to horns if it be sowed thick:
Wherewith I thought to try if I could breed
A brood of buddes, well sharped on the prick:
And by good proof of learned skill I found,
(As on some special soil all seeds best frame)
So jealous brains do breed the battle ground,
That best of all might serve to bear the same.
Then sought I forth to find such supple soil,
And called to mind thy husband had a brain,
So that percase, by trauayll and by toil,
His fruitful front might turn my seed to gain:
And as I groped In that ground to sow it,
Start up a horn, thy husband could not blow it.
F.I.


THis Sonet treats of a straung seed, but it tastes most of Rye, which is
more common amongst me^ nowadays: well let it pass amongst y^ rest, and he that
likes it not, turn over y^ leaf to another, I dout not but in this register he
may find some to content him, unless he be to curious: and here I will
surcease to rehearse any more of his verses, until I have expressed how that
his joys being now exalted to the highest degree, began to bend toward
declination. For now the unhappy Secretary whom I have before remembered, was
returned from London, on who^ F.I. had no sooner cast his eyes, but immediately
he fell into a great passion of mind, which might be compared unto a fever.
This fruit grew of the good instructions that his Hope had planted in his mind,
whereby I might take just occasion to forwarn every lover, how they suffer this
venomous serpent jealousy to creep into their conceits: for surely, of all
other diseases in love, I suppose that to be incurable, and would hold longer
discourse therein, were it not that both this tale and the verses of F. I.
himself hereafter to be recited, shall be sufficient to speak for me in this
behalf. The lover (as I say upon the sodein) was drouen into such a malladie,
as no meat might nourish his body, no delights please his mind, no
remembrance of joys forepassed content him, nor any hope of the like to come
might recomfort him: hereat (some unto whom I have imparted this tale) have
taken occasion to disco^mend his faynting heart, yet surely the cause inwardly,
and depely considered, I cannot so lightly condemn him, for an old saying is,
that every man can give council better than follow it: and needs must the
conflicts of his thoughts be strange, between the remembrance of his
forepassed pleasure, and the present sight of this monster whom before (for
lack of like instruction) he had not so thoroughly marked and beh^l^. Well, such
was the grief unto him, that he became sickly and kept his chamber. The Ladies
having received the news thereof, began al at once lament his misfortun, and of
common consent agreed to visit him: they marched thither in good equipage, I
warrant you, and found F. I. lying upon his bed languishing, who^ they all
saluted generally, and sought to recomforte, but especially his Mistress,
having in her hand a branch of willow, wherewith thee defended her from the
whot air, ga^ thus say unto him: Servant (quod she) for that I suppose your
mallady to proceed of none other cause but only slothfulness, I have brought
this preaty rod to beat you a little: nothing doubting, but when you feel the
smart of a twig or twain, you will like a tractable young scholar, pluck up
your quickened spirits, and cast this drowsines apart. F. I. with a great sighe
answered: Alas good Mistres (quod he) if any like chastisement might quicken
me, how much more might the presence of all you lovely Dames? recomfort my
dulled mind who^ to behold* were sufficien^ to revive an eye now dazzled with
the dread of death, and that not only for the heavenly aspectes which you
represent, but also much the more for your exceeding courtesy, in that you have
deigned to visit me so unworthy a servant: But good Mistres (quod he) as it
were shame for me to confess that ever my heart could yield for fear, so I
assure you that my mind cannot be content to induce infirmity by sluggish
conceyt: But in truth Mistress I am sick (quod he), and there withal the
trembling of his heart had sent up such throbbing into his throat, as that his
voice (now deprived of breath) commanded the tongue to be still. When Dame
Elynor for compassion distilled into tears, and drew toward the window,
leaving the other Gentlewome^ about his bed, who being no less sorry for his
grief, yet for that they were none of them so touched in their secret
thoughts, they had bolder sprits and freeer speech to recomfort him: amongst
the rest the Lady Fraunces, (who in deed loved him deeply, and could best
conjecture the cause of his co^ceipts) said unto him: Good Trust (quod she) if
any help of Physic may cure your malady, I would not have you hurt your
self with these doubts which you seem to retain: If choice of Diet may
help, behold us here (your cooks) ready to minister all things needful: if
company may drive away your anoye, we mean not to leave you solitary: if
grief of mind be cause of your infirmity, we all here will offer our deuoyre
to turn it into joy: if mishap have given you cause to fear or dread any
thing, remember Hope, which never fails to recomfort an afflicted mind. And
good Trust (quod she) (dis^ reining his hand right heartily) let this simple
proof of our poor good wills be so accepted of you, as that ^t may work
thereby the effect of our desires. F. I. (as one in a trance) had marked very
little of her curteouse talk, and yet gave her thanks, and so held his peace:
whereat the Ladies (being all amazed) there became a silence in the chamber on
all sides. Dame Elynor fearing thereby that she might the more easily be
espied, and having now dried up her tears, returned to F. I. recomforting him
by all possible means of common courtesy, promising that since in her sickness
he had not only stau^ched her bleeding, but also by his gentle company and
sundry devices of honest pastime had dryue^ away the pensiuenes of her mind,
she thought her self bound with like willingness to do her best in any thing
that might restore his health? and taking him by the hand said further: Good
servant, if thou bear in deed any true affection to thy poor Mistres, start
upon thy feet again, and let her enjoy thine accustomed service to her
comfort, for sure (quod she) I will never leave to visit this chamber once in
a day, until I may have thee down with me. F. I. hearing the hearty words of
his Mistres, and perceiving the earnest manner of her pronunciation, began to
receive unspeakable comfort in the same, and said. Mistres, your exceeding
courtesy were able to revive a man half dead, and to me it is both great
comfort, and it does also gald my remembrance with a continual smart of mine
own unworthiness: but as I would desire no longer life, than til I might be
able to deserve some part of your bounty, so I will ende^our my self to live,
were it but only unto that end, that I might merit some part of your favor
with acceptable service, and requite some deal the courtesy of all these
other fair Ladies, who have so far (above my deserts) deigned to do me
good. Thus said, the Ladies tarried not long before they were called to
Euensong, when his Mistres taking his hand, kissed it saying: Farewell good
servant, and I pray thee suffer not the malice of thy sickness to overcome
the gentleness of thy good heart. F.I. ravished with joy, suffered them all to
depart, and was not able to pronounce one word. After their departure, he began
cast in his mind the exceeding courtesy used toward him by them all: but above
all other the bounty of his Mistress, and therewithal took a sound and
firm opinion, that it was not possible for her to cou^terfeit so deeply (as in
deed I believe that she then did not) whereby he suddenly felt his heart greatly
eased, and began in himself thus to reason. Was ever man of so wretched a
heart? I am the most bounden to love (quod he) of all them that ever professed
his service, I enjoy one the fairest that ever was found, and I find her the
kindest that ever was heard of: yet in mine own wicked heart I could
villaynously conceive that of her, which being compared with the rest of her
virtues is not possible to harbor in so noble a mind. Hereby I have brought my
self without cause into this feeblenes, and good reason that for so high an
offense I should be punished with great infirmity: what shall I then do?
yield to the same? no, but according to my late protestation I will recomfort
this languishing mind of mine, to the end I may live but only to do penance
for this so notable a crime so rashly committed: and thus saying, he start from
his bed, and began to walk toward the window: but the venomous serpent which
(as before I rehearsed) had stong him, could not be content that these
medicines applied by the mouth of his gentle Mistress, should so soon restore
him to guerison. And although in deed they were such Mythrydate to F. I. as
that they had now expelled the rancour of the poison, yet that ougly hellish
monster had left behind her in the most secret of his bosom, (even between
the mind and the man) one of her familiars named Suspect, which began work in the
weak sprites of F. I. efects of no less peril than before he had conceived:
his head swelling with these troublesome toys, and his heart swimming in the
tempests of tossing fantasy: he felt his legs so feeble, that he was
constrained to lie down on his bed again, and repeating in his own remembrance
every word that his Mistres had spoken unto him, he began to dread, that she
had brought the willow braunce to beat him with, in token that he was of her
forsaken: for so lovers do most commonly expound the will^ we garland, and
this to think, did cut his heart in twain. A wonderful change: and here a
little to stay you, I will discribe (for I think you have not red it in
Ariosto) the beginning, the fall, the return, and the bying of this hellish
byrd, who in deed may well be counted a very limb of the Diuill. Many years
since, one of the most dreadful dastards in the world, and one of them that
first devised to wear his beard at length, least the barbor might do him a
good turn sooner than he looked for it, and yet not so soon as he deserved,
had builded for his security a pile on the highest and most inaccessible mount
of all his Territories: the which being fortified with strong walls, and
environed with deep ditches, had no place of entry, but one only door so
straight and narrow, as might by any possibility receive the body of one living
man, from which he ascended up a ladder, and so creeping thorough a marvelous
strayt hole, attained to his lodging, y^ which was so dark and obscure, as
scarcely either sun or air could enter into it: thus he devised to lodge in
safety, and for the more suertie began trust none other letting down this
ladder but only his wife, and at the foot thereof kept always by day light, a
firce masti^ close enkeneled which never saw nor heard the face or voice of
any other creature but only of them two, him by night he trusted with the
scout of this pretty passage, having nevertheless between him and this dog, a
double door with treble locks, quadriple bars: and before all a port coulez
of Iron: neither yet could he be so hardy as to sleep until he had caused a
guard of servants (whom he kept abroad for that purpose) to search all the
corners adjoining to his fortress, and then between fearful sweat and
chyuering cold, with one eye open and the other closed, he stole sometimes a
broken sleep, divided with many terrible dream^s. In this sort the wretch
lived all to long, until at last his wife being not able any longer to
supporte this hellish life, grew so hardy, as with his own knife to dispatch
his carkas out of this earthly purgatory: the which being done his soul (and
good reason) was quickly conveyed by Carone unto hell: there Radamanthus Judge
of that benche, commanded him quickly to be thrust into a boiling poole: and
being therein plonged very often, he never shriked or cried, I skalde, as his
other companions there cried, but seemed so lightly to esteem it, that the
Judge thought meet to condemn him unto the most terrible place, where are
such torments, as neither pen can write, tongue express, or thought
conceive: but the myser (even there) seemed to smyle and to make small account
of his punishment. Radamanthus hereof informed* sent for him, and demanded the
cause why he made so light of his durance? he answered that whiles he lived on
earth, he was so continually afflicted and oppressed with suspicion, as that
now (only to think that he was out of those meditacions) was sufficient armor
to defend him from all other torments. Radamanthus a^^onied hereat, began call
together the Senators of that kingdom, and propounded this question, how and
by what punishment they might devise to touch him according to his deserts?
and herupo^ fell great disputation, at last being considered that he had
already bin plonged in the most unspeakable torments, and thereat little or
nothing had changed cou^tena^ce, therwithall y^ no soul was sent unto the^ to
be relieved of his smart, but rather to be punished for his former delights: it
was concluded by y^ general ceu^cel, yt he should be eftsoon sent into y^ world
and restored to the same body wherein he first had his resiance, so to remain
for perpetuity, and never to depart nor to perish. Thus this body and soul
being once again united, and now eftsoon with the same pestilence infected,
he became of a suspicious man Suspicion it self: and now the wretch
remembering the treason of his wife, who had so willingly dispatched him once
before, began utterly abhor her and fled her company, searching in all countries
some place of better assurance: and when he had in vayn trod on the most part
of the earth, he embarked himself to find some unknown Island wherein he might
frame some new habitacion, and finding none so commodious as he desired, he
fortuned (sailing along by the shore) to epsy a rock, more than six hundredth
Cubits high, which hong so suspiciously over the seas, as though it would
threaten to fall at every little blast: this did Suspicion Imagine to be a fit
foundation whereon he might buyld his second Bower: he forsook his boat, and
trauayled by land to epsy what entry or access might be made unto y^ same,
and found from land no manner of entry or access, unless it were that some
curteouse Byrd of the air would be Ambassador, or convey some Engines, as
whilom the Eagle did carry Ganymedes into heaven. He then returned to Seas,
and approaching near to his rock, found a small stream of fresh water issuing
out of the same into the Seas: the which, although it were so little and so
straight, as might uneaths receive a boat of bigness to carry one living
creature at once, yet in his conceit he thought it more large and spacious
than that broad way called of our forefathers Via appia, or than that other
named Flaminia: he abandoned his bark, and putting of his clothes, adue^tured
(for he was now assured not to drown) to wade and swim against the stream of
this unknown brook, the which (a wondrous thing to tell, and skarcely to be
believed) came down from the very top and height of this rock: and by the way
he found six straight and dangerous places, where the water seemed to stay his
course, passing under six straight and low bridges, and hard by every of
those places, a pyle raised up in manner of a Bulworke, the which were hollow,
in such sort as lodginges and other places necessary might in them commodiously
be devised, by such one as could endure the hellishnes of the place. Passing
by these he attained with much pain unto the top of the Rock, the which
he found hollowed as the rest, and far more fit for his security, than
otherwise apt for any commodity. There began suspicion determyne to nestle him
self, and having now placed six chosen porters, to wit, (Dread, Mistrust,
Wrath, Desperation, Frenzy, and Fury:) at these six strange Bulworks, he
lodged him self in ye vij. al alone, for he trusted no company, but ever
mistrustinge that his wife should eftsoon find him out, therein he shrieketh
continually like to a shrich owl to keep the watch waking, never content to
sleep by day or by night. But to be sure that he should not over sleep him
self, began stuff his ^ouch with Porpentines quilles, to the end that when
heavy sleep overcame him, and he thereby should be constrained to charge his
pallad with more heavy burden, those plumes might then prick through and so
awake him. His garments were steel upon Iron, and that Iron upon Iron, and
Iron again, and the more he was armed, the less he trusted to be out of
danger. He chopped and changed continually now this, now that, new keys, new
locks, ditches new skowred, and walls newly fortified, and thus always
discontented lives this wretched helhound Suspicion in this hellish dungion of
habitation, from whence he never remoueth his foot, but only in the dead and
silent nights, when he may be assured that all creatures (but him self) are
whelmed in sound sleep. And then with stealing steps he stalketh about the
earth, enfecting, torme^ting, and ve^ing al kinds of people with some part of
his afflictions, but especially such as either do sit in chair of greatest
dignity and estimation, or else such as have atchiued some dear and rare
emprise: Those above al others he contynually galdeth with fresh wounds of
dread, least they might loose and forgo the rooms whereunto with such long
travail and good happes they had atteyned, and by this means percase he had
crept into the bosom of F.I. who (as is before declared) did erst swim in
the deepest seas of earthly delights. Now then I must think it high time to
return unto him, who being now through feeblenes eftsoon cast down upon his
be^, began cast in his inward meditations all things passed, and as one
thoroughly puffed up and filled with one peeuishe conceit, could think upon
nothing else, and yet accusing his own guilty conscience to be infected with
ielosie, did compyle this translation of Ariostoes xxxi. song as follows.

WHat state to man, so sweet and pleasant were,
As to be tied, in lincks of worthy love?
What life so blist and happy might appear,
As for to serve Cupid that God above?
If that our minds were not sometimes infect,
With dread, with fear, with care, with cold suspect*
With deep despair, with furious frenzy,
Handmaydes to her, whom we call iellosie.
For every other sop of sower chance,
Which lovers taste amid their sweet delight:
Increases joy, and does their love advance,
In pleasures place, to have more perfect plight.
The thirsty mouth thinks water has good taste,
The hungry jaws, are pleased, with each repaste:
Who has not proved what dearth by wars does grow,
Cannot of peace the pleasant plenties know.
And though with eye, we see not every joy*
Yet may the mind, full well support the same,
An absent life long led in great anoye,
When presence comes, does turn from grief to game,
To serve without reward is thought great pain,
But if despair do not therewith remain,
It may be borne, for right rewards at last,
Follow true service, though they come not fast.
Disdaynes, repulses, finally each ill,
Each smart, each pain, of love each bitter taste,
To think on them began frame the lovers will,
To like each joy, the more that comes at last:
But this infernal plague if once it toutche,
Or venom once the lovers mind with grutch,
All feasts and joys that afterward befall,
The lover compts them light or naught at all.
This is that sore, this is that poisoned wound,
The which to heal, nor salve, nor ointments serve,
Nor charm of words, nor Image can be found,
Nor observance of stars can it preserve,
Nor all the art of Magic can prevail,
Which Zoroastes found for our avail.
Oh cruel plague, above all sorrows smart,
With desperate death thou sleast the lovers heart.
And me even now, thy gall has so enfect,
As all the joys which ever lover found,
And all good haps, that ever Troylus sect,
Atchiued yet above the luckles ground:
Can never sweeten once my mouth with mell,
Nor bring my thoughts, again in rest to dwell.
Of thy mad moodes, and of naught else I think,
In such like seas, fair Bradamant did sincke.
F. I.


THis is the translation of Ariosto his xxxj. song, all but the last staff,
which seems as an allegory applied to the rest. It will please none but
learned ears, he was tied to the invention, troubled in mind etc. So I leave
it to your judgment, and return to F.I. who continued on his bed, until his
bountiful Mistress with the company of the other courteous dames returned
after supper to his chamber, at their first entry: Why how now servant (quod
dame Elynor) we hoped to have found you on foot? Mistress quod F.I. I have
assayed my feet since your departure, but I find them yet unable to suporte my
heavy body, and therefore am constrained as you see, to acquaint my self with
these pyllowes. Servant said she I am right sorry thereof, but since it is of
necessity to bear sickness, I will employ my deuoyre to allaye some part of
your pains, and to refreshe your weary limbs with some comfortable matter:
and therwithall calling her handmayde, delivered unto her a bounche of pretty
little keys, and whispering in her ear, dispatched her toward her chamber.
The maid tarried not long, but returned with a little Casket, the which her
Mistress took, opened and drew out of the same much fine lynnen, amongst the
which she took a pillowhere very fine and sweet, which although it were of it
self as sweet as might be, being of long time kept in that odoriferous chest,
yet did she with damask water (and that the best that might be I warrant
you) all to sprinckle it with her own hands, which in my conceit might much
amend the matter. Then calling for a fresh pyllowe, sent her maid to air the
same, and at her return put on this, thus perfumed pillowheare. In mean time
also she had with her own hands attyred her servants head in a fair wrought
kerchif taken out of the same Casket, then laid him down upon this fresh and
pleasant place, and pretely as it were in sport, bedewed his temples with
sweet water which she had ready in a casting bottle of Gold, kissing his
cheek and saying: Good servant be whole, for I might not long endure thus to
attend thee, and yet the love that I bear toward thee, cannot be content to
see thee languish: Mistres said F.I. (and that with a trembling voice) assure
your self, that if there remayn in me any spark of life or possibility of
recovery, then may this excellent bounty of yours be sufficient to revive me
without any further travail or pain unto your person, for whom I am highly to
blame, in that I do not spare to put you unto this trouble: and better if were
that such a wretch as I had dyed unknown, than they by your exceeding courtesy
you should fall into any mallady, either by resorting unto me, or by these your
pains taken about me. Servant (quod she) all pleasures seem paynefull to
them that take no delight therein, and likewise all toil seems pleasant to
such as set their felicity in the same, but for me be you sure, I do it with
so good a will that I can take no hurt thereby, unless I shall perceive that it
be rejected or neglected, as unprofitable or uncomfortable unto you. To me
Mistress quod F.I. it is such pleasure, as neither my feeble tongue can
express, nor my troubled mind conceive. Why? are you troubled in mind then
servant quod dame Elynor? F.I now blushing answered, but even as all sick men
be Mistress. Herewith they staid their talk a while, and the first that brake
silence was the Lady Fraunces, who said: and to drive away the troubles of
your mind good Trust, I would be glad if we could devise some pastime amongst us
to keep you company, for I remember that with such devises you did greatly
recomfort this fair Lady when she languished in like sort. She languished in
deed gentle Hope, quod F.I. but God forbid that she had languished in like
sort. Every body thinks their grief greatest quoth dame Elynor, but in deed
whether my grief were the more or the less, I am right sorry that youres is
such as it is: And to assay whither our passions proceeded of like cause or not,
I would we could (according to this Ladies saying) devise some like pastimes to
try if your malladie would be cured with like medicines. A gentle woman of the
company whom I have not hitherto named, and that for good respects, least her
name might altogether disclose the rest, began thus propound. We have accustomed
(quod she) heretofore in most of our games to choose a King or Queen, and he or
she during their government have charged every of us either with
commandments or questions as best seemed to their majesty: wherein to
speak mine opinion we have given over large a skope, neither seems it
reasonable that one should have the power to discover the thoughts* or at
least to bridle the affects of all the rest. And though in deed in questioning
(which does of the twain more nerely touch the mind) every one is at free
liberty to answer what they list: yet often have I heard a question demanded
in such sort, and upon such sudden, that it has been hardly answered
without moving matter of contention. And in commaundes also, sometimes it
happens one to be commanded unto such service, as either they are unfit to
accomplish (and then the parties weakness is thereby detected) or else to do
something that they would not, whereof ensues more grutch then game. Wherefore
in mine opinion, we shall do well to choose by lot amongst us a governor, who
for that it shall be sufficient pre-eminence to use the chair of majesty,
shall be bound to give sentence upon all such arguments and questions as we
shall orderly propound unto them, and from him or her (as from an oracle) we
will receive answer, and decyding of our lytigious causes. This dame had
stuff in her, an old courtier, and a wily wench, whom for this discourse I
will name Pergo, least her name natural were to broad before, and might not
drink of all waters. Well this proportion of Pergo pleased them well, and by lot
it happened that F.I. must be moderator of these matters, and collector of
these causes: the which being so constituted, the Lady Elynor said unto this
dame Pergo. You have devised this pastime ( quoth she) and because we think you
to be most expert in the handling thereof, do you propound the first question,
and we shall be both the more ready and able to follow your example: the Lady
Pergo refused not, but began on this wise. Noble governor ( quoth she) amongst the
adventures that have befallen me, I remember especially this one, that in youth
it was my chance to be beloved of a very courtlike young gentleman, who abode
near the place wherein my parents had their restaunce. This gentleman whether
it were for beauty* or for any other respect that he saw in me, I know not,
but he was enamored of me, and that with an exceeding vehement passion, and of
such force were his affects, that notwista^ding many repulses which he had
received at my hands, he seemed daily to grow in the renewing of his desires.
I on the otherside, although I could by no means mislike of him by any good
reason, considering that he was of birth no way inferior unto me, of
possessions not to be disdeyned, of parson right comely, of behauyour Courtly,
of manners modest, of mind lyberall, and of verteous disposition: yet such was
the gaitie of my mind, as that I could not be content to lend him over large
thongs of my love, but always daungerously behaved my self toward him, and
in such sort, as he could neither take comfort of mine aunsweres, nor yet
once find him self requited with one good look for all his travail. This
notwithstanding, the worthy Knigh^ continued his suit with no less vehement
affection than erst he had begone it, even by the space of seven years. At
the last, whether discomfited by my dealinges, or tired by long travail, or
that he had percase light upon the lake that is in the forest of Ardena, and
so in haste and all thristie, had drunk some drops of disdain, whereby his
hot flames were quenched, or that he had undertaken to serve no longer but his
just term of apprenticehode, or that the teeth of time had gnawen and tired
his dulled sprites in such sort, as that all beenommed he was constrained to
use some other artificial balm for the quickening of his senses, or by what
cause moved I know not, he did not only leave his long continued suit, but (as
I have since perceyed) grew to hate me more deadly than before I had disdayned
him. At the first beginning of his retire I perceived not his hatred, but
imagined that being over wearied he had withdrawn him self for a time. And
considring his worthynes, therwithall his constancy of long time proved, I
thought that I could not in the whole world find out a fitter match to bestow
my self, than on so worthy a person, wherefore I did by all possible means
procure that he might eftsoon use his accustomed repair unto my parents: And
further, in all places where I happened to meet him, I used all the curtes^es
toward him that might be contained within the bonds of modesty, but al was
in vain, for he was now become more dangerous to be won, than the haggard
Faulcon. Our lottes being thus vnluckely changed, I grew to burn in desire,
and the more dangerous that he showed him self unto me, the more earnest I
was by all means to procure his consent of love. At the last I might perceive
that not only he disdayned me, but as me thought boiled in hatred against me:
and the time that I thus continued tormented with these thoughts, was also just
the space of seven years. Finally when I perceived no remedy for my
parplexities, I assayed by absence to wear away this malladie, and therefore
utterly refused to come in his presence, yea or almost in any other company,
whereby I have consumed in lost time the flower of my youth, and am become as
you see (what with years, and what with the torme^ting passions of love) pale,
wan, and full of wrinkles, nevertheless, I have thereby gained thus much, that
at last I have wond my self clear out of Cupids cheines, and remain careless
at liberty.

Now mark to what end I tell you this: first vii. years passed in the which I
could never be content to yield unto his just desires: next other vii. years I
spent in seeking to recover his lost love: and since both those vii. years,
there are even now on saint Valentines day last, other vii. years passed, in
the which (neither I have desired to see him) nor he has coueted to hear of
me. My parents now perceiving how the crows foot is crept under mine eye, and
remembering the long suit that this gentleman had in youth spent on me,
considering therewithal that green youth is well mellowed in us both, have of
late sought to persuade a marriage between us, the which the Knight has not
refused to hear of, and I have not disdained to think on: by their mediation
we have bin eftsoons brought to Parlee, wherein over and besides the ripping
up of many old griefs, this has been chiefly rehearsed and objected between
us, what wrong and injury each of us has done to other, and hereabouts we
have fallen to sharp contention: he alleged, that much greater is the wrong
which I have done unto him, than that repulse which he has since used to
me: and I have affirmed the contrary, the matter yet hangs in variance. Now,
of you worthy Governor I would be most glad to hear this question decided,
remembering that there was no difference in the times between us: and surely,
unless your judgment help me, I am afraid my marriage will be marred, and I may
go lead Apes in hell. F. I. answered, good Pergo, I am sorry to hear so
lamentable a discourse of your luckles love, and much the sorier, in that I
must needs give sentence against you: for surely great was the wrong that
either of you have done to other, and greater was the needelesse grief which
causeless each of you has conceived in this long time, but greatest in my
judgment has been both the wrong and the grief of the Knight, in that
notwithstanding his deserts (which your self confess) he never enjoyed any
guerdone of love at your hands: And you (as you allege) did enjoy his love of
long time together, so that by the reckoning, it will fall out (although being
blinded in your own conceypt) you see it not, that of the one and twenty
years you enjoyed his love vii. at the least, but that ever he enjoyed yours
we cannot perceive. And much greater is the wrong that rewards evil for
good, than that which requires tip for tap: further, it seemed that where as
you went about in time to try him, you did altogether loose time which can
never be recovered: and not only lost your own time, whereof you would seem
now to lament, but also compelled him to leese his time, which he might (be it
spoken without offense to you) have bestowed in some other worthy place: and
therefore, as that grief is much greater which has no kind of comfort to allay
it, so much more is that wrong which al^^gither without cause is offered. And I
(said Pergo) must needs think, that much easier is it for them to endure grief
which never tasted of joy, and much less is that wrong which is so willingly
proffered to be by recompense restored: for if this Knight will confess that he
never had cause to rejoice in all the time of his s^ruice, then with better
co^tentation might he abide grief than I, who having tasted of the delight
which I did secretly conceive of his deserts, do think each grief a present
death by the remembrance of those forepassed thoughts: and less wrong seems
it to be destitut of y^ thing which was never obtained, than to be deprived of
a jewel whereof we have bin already possessed: so y^ under your correction I
might conclude, that greater has bin my grief and injury sustained, than that
of the Knight. To whom F.I. replied, as touching delight, it may not be denied
but that every lover does take delight in the inward co^templacion of his mind,
to think of the worthiness of his beloved, and therefore you may not allege that
the Knight had never cause to rejoice, unless you will altogether co^dempne
your self of unworthiness: Mary if you will say that he tasted not the delights
that lovers seek, then mark, who was the cause but your self? And if you would
accuse him of like ingratitude, for that he disdained you in the latter vii.
years, when as he might by accepting your love, have reco^penced him self of
all former wrongs you must remember there withal, that the cruelty by you
showed toward him was such, y^ could by no means perceive that your change
proceeded of good will, but rather eftsoon to hold him enchained in unknown
links of subtle dealings, and therefore not without cause he douted you: and yet
without cause you rejected him. He had often sought occasion, but by your
refusals he could never find him: you having occasion fast by the foretop did
dally with him so long, til at last he slipped his head from you, and then
catching at the bald nodd^e, you found your self y^ cause, and yet you would
accuse another. To conclude, greater is the grief that is sustained without
desert, and much more is the wrong that is offered without cause. Thus F. I.
decided the question propounded by Pergo, and expected that some other Dame
should propou^d another: but his mistres (having her hand on another halfpeny)
began thus say unto him. Servant this pastime is good, and such as I must needs
like of, to drive away your pensive thoughts: but sleeping time approaches, and
I fear we disquiet you, wherefore the rest of this time we will (if so like
you) bestow in trimming up your bed and to morrow we shall meet here and
nenew this new begone game with Madame Pergo. Mistres ( quoth F. I.) I must obey
your will, and most humbly thank you of your great goodness, and all these
Ladies for their courtesy: Even so, requiring you that you will no further
trouble your selves about me, but let my servant alone with conducting me to
bed. Yes servant (quod she) I will see if you can sleep any better in my
sheets: and therewith commanded her handmayd to fetch a pair of clean
sheets, the which being brought (maruailous fine and sweet) the Ladies
Fraunces and Elyn^r did courteously unfold them, and laid them on the bed, which
done, they also entreated F. I. to unclothe him and go to bed: being laid, his
Mistres dressed and couched the clothes about him, since moistened his
temples with rosewater, gave him handkerchewes and other fresh linen about
him, in doing whereof, she whispered in his ear, saying: Servant, this night
I will be with thee, and after with the rest of the Dames gave him good night
and departed, leaving F. I. in a trance between hope and despair, trust and
mistrust. Thus he lay ravished, commanding his servant to go to bed, and
fayning that himself would assay if he could sleep. About ten or eleaue^ of
the clock came his Mistress in her night gown, who knowing all privy ways in
that house very perfectly, had conveyed her self into F. I. chamber, unseen
and vnperceyued, and being now come unto his beds side kneeled down, and
laying her arm over him said these or like words: My good Servant, if thou
knew what perplexiteis I suffer in beholding of thine infirmities, it might
then suffice, either utterly to drive away thy mallady, or much more to augment
thy griefs: for I know thou love me, and I think also that thou have had
sufficient proof of mine unfeigned good will, in remembrance whereof, I fall
into sundry passions: First, I count the happy lots of our first acquaintance,
and therein I call to mind the equality of our affections, for I think that
there were never two lovers conjoined with freeer consent on both parties: and
if my ouerhasty delivery of yielding words be not wrested hereafter to my
condempnacion, I can then assure my self to escape for ever without desert of
any reprofe: herewithall I can not forget the sundry adventures happened since
we became one heart divided in two bodies, all which have been both happily
achieved, and delectably enjoyed: what rests then to consider but this thy
present state? The first corosiue that I have felt, and the last cordial that
I look for, the end of my joys, and the beginning of my torments, and hereat
her salt tears began bathe the dying lips of her servant: who hearing these
words, and well considering her demeanor, began now to accuse him self of
such and so heinous treason, as that his gilty heart was constreined to yield
unto a just scourge for the same. He swooned under her arm: the which when
she perceived, it were hard to tell what fears did most affright her. But I
have heard my friend F. I. confess, that he was in a happy trance, and
thought himself for diverse causes unhappily revived. For surely I have heard
him affirm, that to dye in such a passion* had been rather pleasant, than like
to panges of death. It were hard now to rehearse how he was revived, since
there were none present, but he dying, (who could not declare) and she living,
whowold not disclose so much as I mean to bewray. For my friend F.I. has to
me emported, that returning to life, the first thing which he felt, was that
his good mistres lay pressing his breast with the whole weight of her body, and
biting his lips with her friendly teeth: and peradventure she refrayned
(either of courtesy toward him, or for womanish fear, to hurt her tender
hand) to strik him on the cheeks in such sort, as they do that strive to
call again a dying creature: and therefore thought this the aptest mean to
reduce him unto remembrance. F.I. now awaked, could no less do, than of his
courteous nature receive his Mistress into his bed: Who, as one that knew that
way better, than how to help his swooning, began gently strip of her clothes,
and lovingly embracing him, began demand of him in this sort. Alas good
Servant (quod she) what kind of malady is this that so extreemely does
torment thee? F.I. with faynting speech answered: Mistress, as for my
malady, it has been easily cured by your bountiful medicines applied: But I
must confess, that in receiving that guerison at your hands, I have been
constreined to fall into an Ecstasy, through the galding remembrance of mine
own unworthiness: Nevertheless good Mistress, since I perceive such fidelity
remaining between us, as that few words will persuade such trust as lovers
ought to embrace, let these few words suffice to crave your pardon, and do
eftsoons power upon me (your unworthy servant) the haboundant waves of your
accustomed clemency: for I must confess, that I have so highly offended you,
as (but your goodness surpass the malice of my conceits) I must remain (and
that right woorthely) to the severe punishment of my deserts: and so should
you but loose him who has cast away him self, and neither can accuse you, nor
dare excuse him self of the crime. Dame Elynor, who had rather have found her
servant perfectly revived, than thus with strange conceits encombred: and
musing much at his dark speech, became importunat to know y^ certainty of his
thoughts. And F.I. as one not master of him self, began at the last plainly
confess how he had mistrusted the change of her vowed affections: Yea and
(that more was) he plainly expressed with whom, of whom, by whom, and too whom
she bent her better liking.

Now, here I would demand of you and such other as are expert: Is there any
geater impediment to the fruition of a Lovers delights, than to be mistrusted?
or rather, is it not the ready way to race all love and former good will out of
remembrance, to tell a gilty mind that you do mistrust it? It should seem
yes, by Dame Elynor, who began now to take the matter whottely, and of such
vehemence were her fancies, that she now fell into flat defiance with F. I.
who although he sought by many fair words to temper her chollerike passions,
and by yielding him self to ^et the conquest of an other, yet could he by no
means determine the quarrel. The soft pillowes being present at all these
whot words, put forth themselves as mediators for a truce between these
enemies, and desired that (if they would needs fight) it might be in their
presence but only one pusshe of the pike, and so from thenceforth to become
friends again for ever. But the Dame denied flatly, alleging that she found
no cause at all to use such courtesy unto such a re^reant, adding further many
words of great reproach: the which did so encourage F. I. as that having now
forgotten all former courtesies, he drew upon his new pr^fessed enemy, and
bare her up with such a violence against the bolster, that before she could
prepare the ward, he thrust her through both hands, and etc. whereby the Dame
swoning for fear, was constreyned (for a time) to abandon her body to the
enemies courtesy. At last when she came to her self, she rose sodeinly and
determined to save her self by flight, leaving F. I. with many dispytefull
words, and swearing that he should never (eftsoons) take her at the like
advantage, the which oath she kept better than her former professd good will:
and having now recovered her chamber (because she found her hurt to be
nothing dangerous) I doubt not, but she slept quietly the rest of the night:
As F. I. also persuading himself that he should with convenient leisure
recover her from this hagger conceit, took some better rest toward the
morning, than he had done in many nights forepast. So let them both sleep
whiles I turn my pen unto the before named Secretary, who being (as I said)
come lately from London, had made many proffers to renew his accustomed
consultations: but the sorrow which his Mistress had conceived in F.I. his
sickness, together with her continual repair to him during the same, had been
such lettes unto his attempts, at is was long time before he could obtain
audience.

At the last these new accidents fell so favorably for the furtherance of
his cause, that he came to his Mistress presence, and there pleaded for
himself. Now, if I should at large write his allegations, together with her
subtle aunsweres, I should but comber your ears with unpleasant rehearsal
of feminine frayeltie.

To be short, the late disdayneful mood which she had conceived against F.I.
together with a scrupule which lay in her conscience, touching the xi. article
of her believe, moved her presently with better will to co^sult with this
Secretary, as well upon a speedy reueng of her late received wro^gs as also upon
the reformation of her religion. And in very deed, it fell out that the
Secretary having bin of long time abse^t, and thereby his quils and pe^nes not
worn so near as they were wont to be, did now prick such fair large notes, y^
his Mistres liked better to sing faburden under him, tha^ to descant any longer
upon F. I. plain song: and thus they continued in good accord, until it
fortuned that Dame Fraunces came into her chamber upon such sodeyn as she had
like to have marred all the music. Well they co^ueied their clifs as closely as
they could, but yet not altogether without some suspicio^ given to y^ said dame
Frau^ces, who although she could baue bin content to take any pain in F.I.
behalf, yet otherwise she would never have bestowed the watching about so
wortheles a prise. After woma^ly salutacions they fell into sundry discourses,
y^ Secretaty still abiding in y^ chamber with them. At last two or three other
gentlewome^ of the Castle came into Madam Elynors chamber, who after their Bon
iour did all (vna voce) seem to lament the sickness of F.I. and called upon the
Dames Elinor and Fraunces, to go visit him again. The Lady Fraunces
courteously consented, but Madame Elinor first alleged that she her self was
also sickly, the which she attributed to her late pains taken about F. I. and
said that only for that cause she was constrained to keep her bed longer than
her accustomed hour. The Dames (but especially the Lady Fraunces) began straight
ways conjecture some great cause of sudden change, and so leaving dame
Elynor, walked altogether into the park to take the air of the morning: And
as they thus walked it chanced that Dame Pergo heard a Cuckoe chaunt, who
(because the pride of the spring was now past) cried Cuck cuck Cuckoe in her
stameringe voice. A ha (quod Pergo) this foul byrd begines to fly the
country, and yet before her departure, see how spitefully she can devise to
salute us. Not us (quod Dame Fraunces) but some other whom she has espied:
wherewith Dame Pergo looking round about her, and espying none other company
said. Why here is no body but we few women quoth she. Thanks be to God the house
is not far from us (quod Dame Fraunces.) Here at the wily Pergo partly
perceiving Dame Fraunces meaning replied on this sort: I understand you not
(quod she) but to leap out of this matter, shall we go visit Master F. I.
and see how he does this morning? Why quod dame Fraunces, do you suppose that
the Cuckoe called unto him? Nay marry quod Pergo, for (as far as I know) he
is not married. As who should say (quod Dame Fraunces,) that the Cuckoe enuieth
none but married folks. I take it so said Pergo: the Lady Fraunces answered.
Yes suer I have noted as evil luck in love (after the cuckoes call) to have
happened unto diverse unmarried folks, as ever I did unto the married: but I can
be well content that we go unto Master. I. for I promised on the behalf of us
al, that we would use our best deuoyre to recomfort him until he had recovered
health, and I do much marvel that y^ Lady Elinor is now become so unwilling
to take any travail in his behalf, especially remembering that but yesternigh
she was so diligent to bring him to bed, but I perceive that all earthly
things are subject unto change. Even so they be quod Pergo, for you may behold
the trees which but even this other day were clad in gladsome green, and now
their leaves begin to fa^e and change color. Thus they passed talking and
walking until they returned unto the Castle, whereas they went straight unto
F.I. chamber, and found him in bed: why how now Trust (quod Dame Fraunces,)
w^ll it be no better? Yes shortly I hope quod F.I. The Ladies all saluted him
and he gave them the gramercy: at the last Pergo popped this question unto him.
And how have you slept in your Mistres sheets Master F. I. quod she?
reasonable well quod F. I. but I pray you where is my Mistress this morning?
Mary said Pergo, we left her in bed scarce well at ease. I am the more sorye
quod F. I. Why Trust (said Mistress Fraunces) be of good comfort, and assure
your self that here are others who would be as glad of your well doing, as your
Mistress in any respect. I ought not to doubt thereof (quod F. I.) having the
proof that I have had of your great courtesies, but I thought it my duty to
ask for my Mistress being absent. Thus they passed some time with him until
they were called away unto prayers, and that being finished they went to
dinner, where they met Dame Elynor attired in a night kerchief after the
soolenest (the solempnest fashion I should have said,) who looked very drowsely
upon all folks unless it were her secretary, unto whom she deigned sometime
to lend a freendly glaunce. The Lord of the Castle demanded of her how F.I.
did this morning. She answered that she knew not, for she had not seen him
that day. You may do well then daughter ( quoth the Lord) to go now unto him, and
to assay if he will eat any thing, and if here be no meats that like him, I
pray you command (for him) any thing that is in my house. You must pardon me
sir (quod she,) I am sickly disposed, and would be loath to take the air: why
then go you Mistres France (quod he) and take some body with you: and I charge
you see that he lack nothing. Mistress Fraunces was glad of the ambassade,
and arysing from the table with one other gentlewoman, took with her a dishe of
chickins boiled in white broth, saying to her father: I think this meat
meetest for Master I. of any that is here. It is so (qoud he) daughter, and if
he like not that, cause somewhat else to be dressed for him according to his
apetite. Thus she departed and came to F. I. who being plonged in sundry woes
and thrilled with restless thoughts, was now beginning to arise: but seeing
the Dames, couched down again, and said unto them. Alas fair Ladies you put
your selves to more pains than either I do desire, or can deserve. Good Trust
quod Dame Fraunces, our pains are no greater than duty requires, nor yet so
great as we could vouchsafe in your behalf, and presently my father has sent
us unto you (quod she) with this pittaunce, and if your apetite desire any one
thing more than other, we are to desire likewise that you will not refrain to
call for it. Oh my good Hope (quod he) I perceive that I shall not dye as
long as you may make me live. And being now somedeale recomforted with the
remembrance of his Mistres words which she had used over night at her first
coming, and also thinkinge that although she parted in choler, it was but
justly provoked by him self, and that at leisure he should fyn^e some salve
for that soore also: he determined to take the comfort of his assured Hope,
and so to expel all venomnes of mistrust before received: wherefore raising him
self in his bed, he cast a night gown about his shoulders saying: It shall
never be said that my faynting heart can reject the comfortable Cordialles of so
freendly physicians. Now by my troth well said gentle Trust quod Dame
Fraunces, and in so doing assure your self of guerison with speed. This thus
said, the courteous Dame became his keruer, and he with a bold spirit began
taste of her cookery, but the late conflicts of his conceits had so
disaquainted his stomach from repastes, that he could not well away with meat:
and yet nevertheless by little and little received some nouryture. When his
Hope had crammed him as long as she could make him feed, they delivered the
rest to the other gentlewoman, who having not dyned, fell to her prouander. In
which mean while the Lady Fraunces had much comfortable speech with F.I. and
declared that she perceived very well the cause of his malladie, but my Trust
(quod she) be all whole, and remember what I foretold you in the beginning:
nevertheless you must think that there are remedies for all mischiefs, and
if you will be ruled by mine advise, we will soon find the mean to ease you of
this mishap. F. I. took comfort in her discretion, and freendly kissing her
hand, gave her a cartlode of thanks for her great good will, promising to put
to his uttermost force, and evermore to be ruled by her advise. Thus they
passed the dynner while, the Lady Fraunces always refusing to declare her
conceit of the late change which she perceived in his Mistress, for she
thought best first to win his will unto conformity by little and little, and
then in the end to persuade him with necessity. When the other gentlewoman had
vytayled her, they departed, requiring F.I. to arise and boldly to resist the
faintness of his fever, the which he promised and so bad them a Di^. The
Ladies at their return found the court in Dame Elynors chamber, who had there
assembled her secretary, Dam Pergo, and the rest: there they passed an hour or
twain in sundry discourses, wherein Dame Pergo did always cast out some bone
for Mistress Fraunces to gnaw upon, for that in deed she perceived her hearty
affection toward F.I: whereat Mistress Fraunces changed no countenance, but
reserved her revenge until a better opportunity. At last (quod Dame Fraunces
unto Mistress Elinor) and when will you go unto your servant fair Lady? When
he is sick and I am whole quod Dame Elynor. That is even now quod the other,
for how sick he is your self can witness: and how well you are we must bear
record. You may as well be deceived in my disposition (quod Dame Elynor) as I was
ouerseene in his sudden alteration, and if he be sick you are meetest to be
his physician: for you saw yesterday that my pains did little profit
toward his reco^fort. Yes surely said the other, not only I but all the rest
had occasion to judge that your courtesy was his chief comfort. Well quod Dame
Elinor you know not what I know. Nor you what I think quod Dame Fraunces.
Think what you list quod Elynor. In deed quod Fraunces I may not think that
you care, neither will I die for your pleasure: and so half angry she
departed. At supper they met again, and the Master of the house demanded of
his daughter Fraunces how F.I. did? Sir (quod she) he did eat somewhat at
dinner, and since I saw him not. The more to blame quod he, and now I would
have al you gentlewomen take of the best meats and go suppe with him: for
company drives away carfulness, and leave you me here with your leauinges
alone. Nay sir quod Mistress Elynor, I pray you give me leave to bear you
company, for I dare not adventure thither. The Lord of the Castle was contented
and dispatched away the rest: who taking with them such vyandes as they thought
meetest, went unto F.I. chamber, fynding him up, and walking about to recover
strength, whereat Dame Fraunces reioysed, and declared how her father had sent
that company to attend him at supper. F. I. gave great thanks, and missing now
nothing but his Mistress, thought not good yet to ask for her, but because he
partly gessed the cause of her absence, he contented him self, hoping that
when his lure was new garnished, he should easily reclayme her from those
coye conceiptes. They passed over their supper all in quiet, and sone after
Mistress Fraunces, being desirous to requite Dame Pergoes quippes, requested
that they might continue the pastime which Dame Pergo had begone over night:
whereunto they all consented, and the lot fell unto Dame Fraunces to propounde
the second question, who adressing her speech unto F. I. said in this wise.
Noble governor, I will rehearse unto you a strange history, not feigned,
neither borrowed out of any old authority, but a thing done in deed of late
days, and not far distant from this place where we now remain. It
chanced that a gentleman our neighbor being married to a very fair
gentlewoman, lived with her by the space of four or five years in great
contentation, trusting her no less than he loved her, and yet loving her as
much as any man could love a woman. On that otherside the gentlewoman had
won (unto her beauty) a singular commendation for her chaste and modest
behavior. Yet it happened in time that a lusty young gentleman (who very
often resorted to them) obtained that at her hands* which never any man could
before him attain: and to be plain, he won so much in her affections, that
forgetting both her own duty and her husbands kindness, she yielded her body
at the commandment of this lover, in which pastime they passed long time by
their polliticks government. At last the friends of this Lady (and especially
three sisters which she had) espied overmuch familiarity between the two
lovers, and dreading least it might break out to their common reproach took
their sister apart, and declared that the world did judge scarce well of the
repair of that gentleman unto her house: and that if she did not foresee it in
time, she should not only leese the good credit which she her self had
hitherto possessed, but furthermore should distayne their whole race with
common obloquy and reproach. These and sundry other godly admonitions of these
sisters could not sink in the mind of this gentlewoman, for she did not only
stand in defiaunce what any man could think of her, but also seemed to accuse
them, that because they saw her estimation (being their younger) to grow above
their own, they had therefore devised this mean to set variance between her
husband and her. The sisters seeing their wholesome counsel so rejected, and
her continue still in her obstinate opinion, adressed their speech unto her
husband, declaring that the world judged not the best, neither they
themselves did very well like of the familiarity between their sister and that
gentleman, and therefore advised him to forecast all perils, and in time to
forbid him his house. The husband (on that otherside) had also conceived such a
goo^ opinion of his gest, and had grown into such a stricte famyliaritie with
him, y^ you might with more ease have removed a stone wall, than once to make
him think amiss, either of his wife, or of her lover: Yea and immediately
after this conference he would not stick thus to say unto his wife. Besse:
(for so in dee^e was her name) thou have three such busy bray^ed si^ters, as I
think shortly their heads will break: they would have me to be tellous of
thee, no no Besse etc. so that he was not only far from any such belief,
but furthermore did every day increase his courtesies toward the lover. The
sisters being thus on all sides rejected, and yet perceiving more and more an
unseemly behavior between their sister and her minio^, began to melt in their
own grease: and such was their enraged pretense of revenge, that they suborned
diverse servants in the house to watch so dilligently, as that this treason
might be discovered. Amongst the rest, one maid of subtle spirit had so long
watched them, that at last she espied them go into a chamber together, and
lock the door to them: whereupon she ran with all have possible to her
Master, and told him that if he would come with her, she would show him a
very strange sight. The gentleman (suspectinge nothing) went with her until
he came into a chamber near unto that wherein they had shut themselves, and
she poynting her Master to the keyhole, bad him look through, where he saw
the thing which most might mislike him to behold. Where at he sodaynely drew
his Dagger, and turned toward the maid, who fled from him for fear of
mischief: but when he could not over take her in the heat of his choler, he
commanded that she should forthwith trusse up that little which she had and to
depart his service: and before her departure he found means to talk with her,
threatening that if ever she spoke any word of this mystery in any place where
she should come, it should cost her life. The maid for fear departed in
silence, and the Master never changed countenance either to his wife or to her
peramour, but feyned unto his wife that he had turned away the maid upon that
sudden, for that she had thrown a Kitchen knife at him, whiles he went about
to correct a fault in her etc. Thus the good gentleman drank up his own
swette unseen every day, increasing courtesy to the lover, and never changing
countenance to his wife in any thing, but only that he refrayned to have such
knowledge of her carnally as he in times past had, and other men have of their
wives. In this sort he continued by the space all most of half a year,
nevertheless lamenting his mishap in sollitary places. At last (what moved him
I know not) he fell again to company with his wife as other men do, and as I
have heard it said he used this policy: every time that he had knowledge of
her, he would leave either in the bed, or in her cusshencloth, or by her
looking glass, or in some place where she must needs find it, a piece of money
which then was fallen to three halfpence: and I remember they called the^
Slippes. Thus he dealt with her continually by the space of four or five
months, using her nevertheless very kindly in all other respects, and
providing for her al things necessary at the first call: But unto his geast he
still augmented his courtesy, in such sort, that you would have thought them
to be sworn brothers. All this notwithstanding his wife much musing at these
three half penny pieces which she found in this sort, and furthermore, having
sundry times found her husband in solitary places making great lamentation,
she grew enquisitiue, what should be the secret cause of these alteracions:
unto who^ he would none otherwise answer, but that any man should find
occasion to be more pensive at one time than at another. The wife
notwithstanding increasing her suspect, emported the same unto her lover,
alleging therwithall that she doubted very much least her husband had some
vehement suspicio^ of their affairs. The lover encoraged her, and likewise
declared, y^ if she would be importunate to enquire the cause, her husband
would not be able to keep it from her: and having now thoroughly enstructed
her, she dealt with her husband in this sort. One day when she knew him to be
in his study alone, she came in to him, and having fast locked the door after
her, and conveyed the key into her pocked, she began first with earnest
entreaty, and then with tears to crave that he would no longer keep from her
the cause of his sodein alteration. The husband dissimuled the matter still: at
last she was so earnest to know for what cause he left money in such sort at
sundry times, that he answered on this wise: Wife (quod he) thou know how
long we have been married together, and how long I made so dear account of thee
as ever man made of his wife: since which days, thou know also how long I
refreyned thy company, and how long again I have used thy company leaving the
money in this sort, and the cause is this. So long as thou did behave thy
self faithfully toward me, I never lothed thy company, but since I have
perceived thee to be a harlot, therefore did I for a time refreine and forbear
to lie with thee: and now I can no longer forbear it, I do give thee every
time that I lie with thee a slip, which is to make thee understand thine own
whordome: and this reward is sufficient for a whore. The wife began stoutly to
stand at defiance, but the husband cut off her speech and declared when,
where, and how he had seen it: hereat the woman being abashed, and finding her
conscience gilty of as much as he had alleged, fell down on her knees, and with
most bitter tears craved pardon, confessing her offense: whereat her husband
(moved with pity) and melting likewise in fluds of lamentation, reco^forted
her promising that if from that day forwards she would be true unto him, he
would not only forgive all that was past, but become more tender and loving unto
her than ever he was. What do I tarry so long? they became of accord: and in
full acco^plishment thereof, the gentlewoman did altogether eschew the company,
the speech, and (as much as in her lay) the sight of her lover, although her
husband did continue his courtesy to wars him, and often charged his wife to
make him fair semblant. The Lover was now only left in perpleritie, who knew
nothing what might be the cause of all these chaunges, and that most grieved
him, he could by no means obtain again the speech of his desired: he watched
all opportunities, he suborned messangers, he wrote letters, but all in vain.
In the end she caused to be declared unto him a time and place where she would
meet him and speak with him. Being met, she put him in remembrance of all
that had passed between them: shhe laid also before him how trusty she had
bin unto him in all professions: she confessed also how faithfully he had
discharged the duty of a friend in all respects, and therewithal she declared
that her late alteration and pensiuenes of mind was not with out great cause,
for that she had of late such a mishap, as might change the disposition of any
living creature: Yea and that the case was such, as unless she found present
remedy, her death must needs ensue and that speedely: for the preventing
whereof, she alleged that she had beaten her brains with all devises
possible, and that in the end she could think of no redress but one, the which
lay only in him to accomplish. Wherefore she besought him for all the love and
good will which passed between them, now to show the fruits of true
friendship, and to gratify her with a free grant to this request. The lover
who had always ben desirous to pleasure her in any thing, but now especially to
recover her woonted kindness, began frankly promise to accomplish any thing that
might be to him possible, yea though it were to his great detriment: and
therewithal did deeply blame her in that she would so long torment her self
with any grief, considering that it lay in him to help it. The Lady answered,
that she had so long kept it from his knowledge, because she doubted whether he
would be contented to perform it or not, although it was such a thing as he
might easily grant without any manner of hurt to himself: and yet that now in
ye end she was forced to adventure upon his courtesy, being no longer able to
bear ye burden of her grief the lover solicited her most earnestly to disclose
it: and she (as fast) seemed to mistrust y^ he would not acco^pl^sh it. In the
end she took out a book (which she had brought for the no^ce) and bound him
by oath to accomplish it. The lover mistrusting nothing less than that ensued,
took the oath willingly: which don she declared all that had passed between her
and her husband: his grief, her repentance, his pardon, her vow, and in ye end
of her tale enioined the lover, that from thenceforthwards, he should never
attempt to break her constant determination: the lover replied that this was
impossible: but she plainly assured him, y^ if he granted her that request,
she would be his friend in all honest and godly wise: if not, she put him out
of doubt that she would eschew his company and fly from his sight as from a
scorpion. The lover considering that her request was but just, accusing his own
gilty conscience, remembering the great courtesies always used by her husband,
and therwithal seeing the case now brought to such an issue, as y^ by none
other means than by this it could be co^ceiled from knowledge of the world:
but most of all, being urged by his oath, did at last give an unwilling consent,
and yet a faithful promise to yield unto her will in all things: and thus being
become of one asse^t, he remains the dearest friend and most welcome gest
that may be, both to the Lady and her husband, and the man and wife so kind
(each to other) as if there never had bin such a breach between them. Now, of
you noble Governor I would fayn learn, whether the perplexity of the husband
when he looked in at the key hole, or of the wife when she knew the cause why
the slippes were so scattered, or of the lover when he knew what was his
Mistres charge, was greater of the three? I might have put in also the troubled
thoughts of the sisters and the maid, when they saw their good will rejected,
but let these three suffice. Gentle Hope (quod F. I.) you have rehearsed (and
that right eloque^tly) a notable tale, or rather a notable history, because you
seem to affirm, that it was don in deed of late, and not far hence. Wherein I
note five especial points: that is a marvelous patience in the husband, no
less repentance in the wife, no small boldness of the maid, but much more
rashness in the sisters, and last of all, a rare tractabilitie in the lover.
Nevertheless to return unto your question, I think the husbands perplexity
greatest, because his losses abounded above the rest, and his injuries were
vnco^parable. The Lady Fraunces did not seem to contrary him, but rather
smyled in her sleeue at Dame Pergo, who had no less patience to hear the tale
recited, than the Lady Frau^ces had pleasure in telling of it, but I may not
rehearse the cause why, unless I should tell all. By this time the sleeping
hour aproched, and the Ladies prepared their departure, when as mistres
Frau^ces said unto F.I. Although percase I shall not do it so handsomely as your
mistres, yet good Trust (quod she) if you vouchsafe it, I can be content to
trim up your bed in ye best manner that I may, as one who would be as glad as
she to procure your quiet rest. I.F. gave her great thanks desiring her not to
trouble hirself, but to let his man alone with that charge: thus they departed,
and how all parties took rest that night I know not: but in the morning F.I.
began to consider with himself that he might lie long enough in his bed before
his mistres would be apeased in her peewish co^ceipts: wherefore he arose, and
being aparelled in his night gown, took occasion to walk in the gallery near
adjoining unto his Mistres chamber: but there might he walk long enough ere his
mistres would come to walk with him. When dinner time came he went into the great
chamber whereas the Lord of the castle saluted him being joyful of his recovery.
F.I. giving dew thanks, declared that his friendly entretaineme^t together with
the great courtesy of the gentlewome^ was such, as might revive a man although
he were half dead. I would be loath ( quoth the host) that any gentleman coming
to me for good will should want any courtesy of entertainme^t y^ lies in my
power. When y^ meat was served to the table, the gentlewome^ came in all but
Dame Elynor and mistres Pergo, the which F.I. marked very well, and it did
somewhat abate his apetit. After dinner, his Hope came unto him and demanded
of him how he would pass the day for his recreation? to whom he answered
even as it best pleased her. She devised to walk into the park, and so by
little and little to acquaint himself with the air: he agreed, and they walked
together being accompanied with one or two other gentlewome^. Here (least you
should grow in some wrong conceit of F.I.) I must put you out of dout, that
although there were now more cause that he should mistrust his mistres than ever
he had before received, yet the vehement passions which he saw in her when the
first came to visit him, and moreover, the earnest words which she pronounced
in his extremity, were such a refreshing to his mind, as that he determined no
more to trouble himself with like co^ceitps: co^cluding further, y^ if his
mistres were not faulty, the^ had he co^mittted a foul offense in needless
jealousy, and that if she were faulty (especially with the Secretary) the^ no
persuasion could amend her, nor any passion help him: and this was the cause y^
enabled him after such passing pangs to abide the doubtful conclusion, thus
manfully and valia^tly to repress feintnesse of his mind: nothing doubting but
that he should have won his Mistres to pardon his presumption, and lovingly
to embrace his service in wonted manner, but he was far deceived, for she was
now in another tewne, the which Mistres Frau^ces began partly to discover unto
him as they walked together: for she burdened him that his mallady proceeded
only of a disquiet mind. And if it did so my gentle Hope (quod he) what remedy?
My good Trust (quod she) none other but to plant quiet where disquiet began to
grow. I have determined so ( quoth he) but I must crave the help of your assured
frie^ship. Thereof you may make accou^pt ( quoth she) but wherein? F.I. walking
apart with her, began to declare that there was some conte^tion hapened between
his mistres and him: the Lady told him that she was not ignorant thereof. The^
he desired her to treat so much in y^ cause, as they might eftsoon come to
Parlee: thereof I dare assure you ( quoth Mistress Fraunces, and at their return
she led F.I. into his Mistres chamber, whom they found lying on her bed,
whether galded with any grief, or weary of the thing (which you wrote of) I know
not, but there she lay: unto who^ F.I. gave two or three salutatio^s before she
seemed to mark him. At last said the Lady Fraunces unto her, your servant
hearing of your sickness, has adue^tured thus far into the air to see you. I
thank him ( quoth Dame Elynor) and so lay still, refusing to give him any
cou^tena^ce. Whereat F. I. perceiving all the other gentlewomen fall to
whispering, thought good, boldly to plead his own case: and aproching the bed
began to enforce his unwilling mistres unto courtesy, wherein he used such
veheme^ce as she could not well by any means refuse to talk with him: but
what their talk was I may not take upon me to tell you, unless you would have
me fill up a whole volume only with his matters, and I have dilated the^ over
largely already. Suffyseth this to be known, that in the end she pretended
to pass over all old grudges, and thenceforth to pleasure him as accasion
might serve: the which occasion was so long in hapening, that in the end F.I.
being now eftsoon troubled with unquiet fantasies, and forced to use his pen
again as an Ambassador between the^: one day amongst the rest found
opportunity to thrust a letter into her bosom, wherein he had earnestly
requested another mooneshyne banquet or frydayes breakfast to recomfort his
dulled spirits, whereunto the Dame yielded this answer in writing, but of whose
endyting judge you.

G.T.

I can but smyle at your simplicity, who burden your friends with an
impossibility. The case so stood as I could not though I would. Wherefore from
henceforth either learn to frame your request more reasonably, or else stand
content with a flat repulse.

SHE.


F.I. liked this letter but a little: and being thereby drouen into his
accustomed vain, he compiled in verse this answer following, upon these
words contained in her letter, I could not though I would.

G.T.

I could not though I would: good Lady say not so,
Since one good word of your good will might soon redesse my w^
Where would is free before, there could can never fail:
For proof, you see how galleys pass where ships ca^ bear no sail.
The weary mariner when skies are ouercast,
By ready will does guide his skill and wins the haven at last.
The pretty byrd that sings with prick against her breast,
Does make a virtue of her need to watch when others rest.
And true the proverb is, which you have laid apart,
There is no hap can seem to hard unto a willing heart.
Then lovely Lady mine, you say not as you should,
In doubtful terms to answer thus: I could not though I would.
Yes, yes* full well you know, your can is quick and good:
And wilful will is eke too swift toshed my giltlesse blood.
But if good will were bent as pressed as power is,
Such will would quickly find the skill to mend that is amiss.
Wherefore if you desire to see my true love spilt,
Command and I will slay my self, that yours may be the gilt.
But if you have no power to say your servant nay,
Write thus: I may not as I would, yet must I as I may.
F.I.


THus F.I. replied upon his Mistres answer, hoping thereby to recover some
favor at her hands, but it would not be: so that now he had been as likely (as
at the first) to have fretted in fantasies, had not the Lady Fraunces
continually comforted him: and by little and little she drove such reason into
his mind, that now he began to subdue his humors with discretion, and to
determine that if he might epsy evident proof of his Mistress frayeltie, he
would then stand content with patience perforce, and give his Mistres the Bezo
las manos. And it happened one day amongst others, that he resorted to his
Mistress chamber and found her ( allo solito) lying upon her bed, and the
secretary with Dame Pergo and her handmayd keeping of her company. Whereat F.I.
somewhat repyning, came to her and fell to dallia^ce, as one y^ had now rather
adventure to be thought presumptious than yield to be accounted bashful, he
cast his arm over his Mistress and began t^ accuse her of slogishnes, using
some other bold parts, as well to provoke her, as also to grieve the other.
The Lady seemed little to delight in his dallying, but cast a glance at her
secretary and therewith smyled, when as the Secretary and dame Pergo burst out
into open laughter. The which F.I. perceiving, and disdayning her ingratitude,
was forced to depart, and in that fantasy compyled this Sonet.

G.T.

WIth her in arms that had my heart in hold,
I stood of late to plead for pity so:
And as I did her lovely looks behold,
She cast a glance upon my ryuall foe.
His fleering face provoked her to smyle,
When my salt tears were drowned in disdain:
He glad, I sad, he laughed, (alas the while)
I wept for woe: I pyn'd for deadly pain.
And when I saw none other boot prevail,
But reasons rule must guide my skillful mind:
Why then (quod I) old proverbs never fail,
For yet was never good Cat out of kind:
Nor woman true but even as stories tell,
Won with an egg, and lost again with shall.
F. I.


THis Sonet declares that he began now to account of her as she deserved, for
it has a sharp conclusion, and it is somewhat too general. Well, as it is he
lost it where his Mistress found it, and she immediately emparted the same unto
Dame Pergo, and Dame Pergo unto others: so that it quickly became common in
the house. Amongst others Mistress Fraunces having recovered a copy of it,
did seem to pardon the generallitie, and to be well pleased with the
perticularitie thereof, the which she bewrayed one day unto F.I. in this wise.
Of all the joys that ever I had (my good Trust quod she) there is none wherein
I take more comfort than in your comformitie, and although your present rage
is such that you can be content to condemn a number unknown, for the
transgression of one too well known: yet I do rather rejoice that you should
judge your pleasure over many, than to be abused by any. My good Hope (quod he)
it were not reason that after such manifold proofs of your exceeding courtesies,
I should use strange or contentious speech with so dear a friend, and in
deed I must confess that the opinion which I have conceived of my Mistress,
has stirred my pen to write very hardly against all the feminine gender, but
I pray you pardon me (quod he) and if it please y^u I will recant ^^tas also
(percase) I was but ^loyed with Surquedry, and presumed to think more than may
be proved. Yea but how if it were proved quod Dame Fraunces? If it were so
(which God forbid quod he) then could you not blame me to conceive that
opinion. Howsoever I might blame you (quod she) I mean not to blame you, but I
demand further, if it be as I think and you suspect, what will you then do?
Surely (quod F. I.) I have deter^ed to drink up mine own sorrow secretly,
and to bid them both a Dieu. I like your farewell better than your fantasy
(quod she) and whenever you can be content to take so much pains, as the
Knight (which had a night gown guarded with naked swords) did take, I think
you may put your self out of doubt of all these things. By these words and
other speech which she uttered unto him, F.I. smelt how the world went about,
and therefore did one day in y^ gray morning adventure to pass through the
gallery toward his Mistres chamber, hoping to have found the door open, but
he found the contrary, and there attending in good devotion, heard the parting
of his Mistress and her Secretary, with many kind words: whereby it appeared
that the one was very loath to depart from the other. F.I. was enforced to
bear this burden, and after he had attended there as long as the light would
give him leave, he departed also to his chamber, and aparaling himself, could
not be quiet until he had spoken with his Mistress, whom he burdened flatly
with this despitefull treachery: and she as fast denied it, until at last being
still urged with such evident tokens as he alleged, she gave him this bone to
g^awe upon. And if I did so (quod she) what than? Whereunto F.I. made none
answer, but departed with this farewell. My loss is mine own, and your gain
is none of yours, and sooner can I recover my loss than you enjoy the gain
which you gape after. And when he was in place sollitary, he compyled these
following for a fynall end of the matter.

G. T.

And if I did what then?
Are you agreeu'd therefore?
The Sea has fish for every man,
And what would you have more?
Thus did my Mistress once,
Amaze my mind with doubt:
And (...) a question for the nonce,
To beat my brains about*
Whereto I thus replied,
Each fisherman can wish,
That all the Sea at every tide,
Were his alone to fish.
And so did I (in vain,)
But since it may not be:
Let such fish there as find the gain,
And lea^e the loss for me.
And with such luck and loss,
I will content my self:
Till tides of turning time may toss,
Such fishers on the shelfe.
And when they stick on sands,
That every man may see:
Then will I laugh and clappe my hands,
As they do now at meo.
F.I.


IT is time now to make an end of this thriftlesse History, wherein although I
could wade much f^rther, as to declare his departure, what thanks he gave to
his Hope etc. Yet I will cease, as one that had rather leave it imperfect than
make it to plain. I have past it over with quod he, and quod she, after my
homely manner of writing, using sundry names for one person, as the Dame, the
Lady, Mistress, etc. The Lord of the Castle, the Master of the house, and the
host: nevertheless for that I have seen good aucthors term every gentle
woman a Lady, and every gentleman domine, I have thought it no greater fault
then petty treason thus to enter myngle them, nothing doubting but you will
easily, understand my meaning, and that is as much as I desire. Now
henceforwardes I will trouble you no more with such a barbarous style in prose,
but will only recite unto you sundry verses written by sundry gentlemen,
adding nothing of mine own, but only a title to every Poem, whereby the cause
of writing the same may the more evidently appear: Neither can I declare
unto you who wrote the greatest part of them, for they are unto me but a pos^e
presented out of sundry gardens, neither have I any other names of the flowers,
but such short notes as the aucthors themselves have delivered thereby if you
can guess them, it shall no way offend me. I will begin with this
translation as follows.

G. T.

A translation of Ariosto allegorized.
WHen worthy Bradamant, had looked long in vain.
To see her absent love and Lord, Ruggier: return again:
Upon her lothed bed her lustlesse limbs did cast,
And in deceitful dreams she thought, she saw him come at last.
But when with open arm^s, she ran him to embrace,
With open eyes she found it false, and thus co^plain'd her case.
That which me pleased ( quoth she) was dreams which fancy drew,
But that which me torments (alas) by sight I find it true.
My joy was but a dream, and soon did fade away,
But my tormenting c^uell cares, cannot so soon decay*
Why hear I not and see, since now I have my senses?
That which in fained fading dreams appeared by ^^te^ces*
Or whereto serve mine eyes, if sights they so mistake,
As seem to see each joy in s^eepe, and woo when they awake.
The sweet and slumbring sleep, did promise joy and peace,
But these unpleasant sights to raise, such wars as never cease.
The sleep I felt was false, and seemed to ease my grief,
But that I see is all to true, and yeeldes me no relief.
If truth anoy me then, and feigned fancyes please me,
God grant I never hear nor see, true thing for to disease me.
If sleaping yield me joy, and waking work me woe,
God grant I sleep, and never wake, to ^ase my torment so.
O happy ^lumbring souls, whom one dead drowsy sleep
Six months (of yore) in silence shut, with closed eyes did keep.
Yet can I not compare, such sleep to be like death,
Nor yet such waking, as I wake, to be like vital breath.
For why my let does fall, contrary to the rest,
I deem it death when I awake, and life while I do rest.
Yet if such sleep be like to death in any wise,
O gentle death come quick at call, and close my drery eyes.
Thus said the worthy dame, whereby I gather this,
No care can be co^pard to that, where true love parted is.
Lenuoi^.
Lo Lady if you had but half like care for me,
That worthy Bradamant had then her own Ruggier to see:
My ready will should be so pressed to come at call,
You should have no such sight or dream to trouble you withal.
Then when you list command, and I will come in have,
There is no hap shall hold me back, good will shall roon so fast.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Written upon a reconciliation between two friends
THe hateful man that heapeth in his mind,
Cruel revenge of wrongs forepast and done,
May not (with ease^) the pleasant pathway find,
Of friendly verses which I have now begone,
Unless at first his angry breast vntwinde,
The crooked knot which canckred choler knit,
And then recule with reconciled grace.
Likewise I find it said in holy write,
If thou entend to turn thy fearful face,
To God above: make thine agreement yet,
First with thy Brother whom thou did abuse,
Confess thy faults thy frowardnes and all,
So that the Lord thy prayer not refuse.
When I consider this, and then the brall,
Which raging youth (I will not me excuse)
Did whilome breed in mine vn^ellowed brain,
I thought it meet before I did assay,
To write in ryme the double golden gain,
Of amity: first yet to take away
The grutch of grief, as thou do me constrayne.
By due desert whereto I now must yield,
And drown for aye in depth of Lethes lake,
Disdaynefull moodes whom friendship cannot weeld:
Pleading for peace which for my part I make
Of former strife, and henceforth let us write
The pleasant fruits of faithful friends delight.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Two gentlemen did roon three courses at the ring for one kiss, to be taken
of a fair gentlewoman being then present, with this condition* that the winner
should have the kiss, and the loser be bound to write some verses upon the
gain or loss thereof. Now it fortuned so that the wynner triumphed saying, he
much lamented that in his youth he had not seen the wars. Whereupon the
looser compiled these following in discharge of the condition above rehea^sed.
THis vain avayle which thou by Mars have won,
Should not allure thy flittering mind to feeld:
Where sturdie Steedes in depth of dangers roon,
With guts well gnawen by clappes that Cannons yield.
Where faythlesse friends by warfare waxen ware,
And roon to him that gives best reward:
No fear of laws can cause them for to care,
But rob and reaue, and steal without regard
The fathers cote, the brothers steed from stall:
The dear friends purse shall picked be for pence,
The native soil, the parents left and all,
With Tant tra Tant, the camp is marching hence.
But when bare beggrie hids them to beware,
And late repentance rules them to retire.
Like hy^elesse Bees they wander here and there,
And hang on them (who erst) might dread their ire.
This cutthro^e life (me seems) thou should not like,
And shoon the happy haven of mean estate:
High Jove (perdie) may send what thou do seek,
And heap up pounds within thy quiet gate.
Nor yet I would that thou should spend thy days,
In idleness to tear a golden time:
Like country loutes which count none other praise,
But grease a sheep and learn to serve the swine.
In vain were then the gifts which nature lent,
If Pan so preasse to pass Dame Pallas lore:
But my good friend let thus thy youth be spent,
Serve God thy Lord, and praise him evermore.
Search out the skill which learned books do teach,
And serve in feeld when shadows make thee sure:
Hold with the head, and row not past thy reach.
But plead for peace which plenty may procure.
And (for my life) if thou can roon this race,
Thy bags of coin will multiply apace.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Not long after the writing hereof: he departed from the company of his said
friend (whom he entirely loved) into the west of England, and feeling himself
so consumed by women's craft that he doubted of a safe return: wrote before his
departure as follows.
THe feeble thread which Lachesis has spoon,
To draw my days in short abode with thee,
Has wrought a webb which now (welneare) is done,
The wale is worn: and (all to late) I see
That lingering life does da^ly but in vain,
For Atrop^s will cut the twist in twain.
I not discer^e what life but loathsome were,
When faithful friends are kept in twain by want:
Nor yet perceive what pleasure does appear,
To deep desires where good success is skant.
Such spite yet shows dame fortune (if she frown,)
The haughty hearts in high mishaps to drown.
Hot be the flames which boil in friendly minds,
Cruel the care and dreadful is the doom:
Slipper the knot which tract of time vntwynds,
Hateful the life and welcome were the toome.
Blessed were the day which migh deuower such youth,
And cursed the want that seeks to choke such truth.
This wayling verse I bathe in flowing tears,
And would my life might end with these my lines:
Yet strive I not to force into thine ears,
Such feigned plaintes as fickell faith resignes.
But high forsight in dreams has stopped my breath,
And causd the Swanne to sing before his death.
For lo these naked walls do well declare,
My latest leave of thee I taken have:
And unknown coasts which I must seek with care
Do well divine that there shall be my grave.
There shall my death make many for to moan,
Skarce known to them, well known to thee alone.
This bowne of thee (as last request) I crave,
When true report shall sound my death with fame:
Uouchsafe yet then to go unto my grave,
And there first write my birth and then my name*
And how my life was shortened many years,
By women's wyles as to the world appears.
And in reward of grant to this request,
Permit O God my tongue these words to tell*
(When (...) his pen shall write upon my chest)
With shriking voice mine own dear friend farewell.
No care on earth did seem so much to me,
As when my corpse was forced to part from thee.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He wrote to the same friend from Excester, this Sonet following.
A Hundredth sons (in course but not in kind)
Can witness well that I possess no joy:
The fear of death which fretteth in my mind
Consumes my heart with dread of dark anoye.
And for each son a thousand broken sleeps,
Divide my dreams with fresh recourse of cares:
The youngest s^^ter sharp her sheare she kepes,
To cut my thread and thus my life it wears.
Yet let such days, such thousand restless nights,
Spit forth their spite, let fates eke show their force:
Deaths daunting dart where so his buffets lights,
Shall shape no change within my friendly corse:
But dead or live, in heaven, in earth, in hell
I will be thine where so my carkase dwell.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He wrote to the same friend from Founteine belle eau in France* this Sonet in
commendation of the said house of Fountain bel' eau.
NOt stately Troy though Priam yet did live*
Could now compare Founteine bell eau to pass*
Nor Syrriane towers, whose lofty steps did strive,
To clymbe the throne where angry Saturn was.
For outward show the ports are of such price,
(...)
Such works within as stayne the rare devise*
Which whillome he Apelles wrought on toome.
Swift Tiber flood which fed the Romayne pooles,
Puddle to this where Crystal melts in streams,
The pleasant place where Muses kept their schools*
(Not parcht with Phaebe, nor banished from his beams)
Yield to those Dames, nor sight, nor fruit, nor smell,
Which may be thought these gardens to excel.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He wrote unto a Skotish Dame whom he chose for his Mistress in the french
Court, as follows.
LAdy receive, receive in gracious wise,
This ragged verse, these rude ill skribled lines:
Too base an object for your heavenly eyes,
For he that writes his freedom (lo) resignes
Into your hands: and freely yields as thrall
His sturdy neck (erst subject to no yoke)
But bending now, and headlong pressed to fall*
Before your feet, such force has beauties stroke.
Since then mine eyes (which skornd our English) dames
In forrayne courts have chosen you for fair,
Let be this verse true token of my flames,
And do not drench your own in deep despair.
Only I crave (as I nill change for new)
That you vouchsafe to think your servant true.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Written to a gentlewoman who had refused him and chosen a husband (as he
thought) much inferior to himself, both in knowledge birth and parsonage.
VVherin he bewrays both their names in clouds, and how she was won from him
with sweet gloves and broken ringes.
I Cannot wish thy grief, although thou work my woe
Since I professed to be thy friend, I cannot be thy foe:
But if things done and past, might well be called again,
Then would I wish the wasted words, which I have spent in vain:
Were it untold to thee, in earnest or in game,
And that my doubtful musing mind, had never thought the same.
For whiles I thee beheld, in careful thoughts I spent
My liking lust, my lucklesse love which ever truly meant*
And whiles I sought a mean, by pity to procure,
Too late I found that gorged hawks, do not esteem y^ lure.
This vau^tage have thou then, thou may well brag and b^st
Thou might have had a lusty lad, of stature with the most,
And eke of noble mind: his virtues nothing base,
Do well declare that descends, of ancient worthy race.
Save that I not his name, and though I could it tell,
My friendly pen shall let it pass, because I love him well.
And thou have chosen one of meaner parentage,
Of stature small and therwithall, unequal for thine age.
His thewes unlike the first, yet have thou hot desire,
To play thee in his flitting flames, God grant they prove not fire.
Him hold thou as dear, and he thy Lord shall be,
(Too late alas) thou love him, that never loved thee.
And for just proof hereof, mark what I tell is true,
Some dismold day shall change his mind, and make him seek a new.
Then will thou much repent thy bargain made in have,
And much lament those parfumd gloves, which yield such sower taste.
And eke the falsed faith, which lurkes in broken ringes,
Though hand in hand say otherwise, yet do I know such things.
Then shall thou sing and say, farewell my trusty Squier*
Would god my mind had yielded once, unto thy just desire*
Thus shall thou wail my want, and I thy great unrest,
Which cruel Cupid kindled has, within thy broken breast.
Thus shall thou find it grief, which erst thou thoughtest game,
And I shall hear y^ weary news, by true reporting fame*
Lamenting thy mishap, in source of swelling tears,
Harding my heart with cruel care, which frosen fa^cy bears.
And though my just deserte, thy pity could not move,
yet will I wash in wayli^g words, thy careless childish love
And say as Troyl^s said, since that I can no more,
Thy wanton will did waver once, and woe is me therefore.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
In praise of a gentlewoman who though she were not very fair, yet was she as
hard favored as might be.
IF men may credit give, to true reported fames,
Who douts but stately Room had store of lusty loving Dames?
Whose ears have been so deaf, as never yet heard tell
How far the fresh Pompeia, for beauty did excel.
And golden Marcus he, that swayde the Roman sword,
Bare witness of Boemia, by credit of his word.
What need I mo rehearse? since all the world did know
How high y^ floods of beauties blase, within those walls did flow.
And yet in all that choice a worthy Roman Knight,
Antonius who conquered proud Egypt by his might.
Not all to please his eye, but most to ease his mind,
Chose Cleopatra for his love, and left the rest behind.
A wondrous thing to read, in all his victory.
He snapt but her for his own share, to please his fa^tasie.
She was not fair God wot, y^ country breeds none bright,
Well may we judge her skin the foil, because her teeth were white.
Percase her lovely looks, some praises did deserve,
But brown I dare be bold she was* for so y^ solle did serve.
And could Antonius forsake the fair in Room?
To love this nutbrowne Lady best, was this an equal doom?
I dare well say dames there, did bear him deadly grudge,
His sentence had been shortly said, if Faustine had been judge.
For this I dare auow, (without vaunt be it spoke)
So brave a knight as Anthony, held al their necks in yoke
I leave not Lucrece out, believe in her who list,
I think she would have liked his lure, and stooped to his fist.
What moved the chieftain then, to lincke his liking thus?
I would some Roman dame were here, the question to discuss.
But I that read her life, do find therein by fame,
How clear her curtisie did shine, in honor of her name.
Her bounty did excel, her truth had never peer,
Her lovely looks her pleasant speech, her lusty loving ^here.
And all the worthy gifts, that ever yet were found,
Within this good Egiptia^ Queen, did seem for to abou^d*
Wherefore he worthy was, to win the golden fleece,
Which scornd the blasing sterres in Room, to conquer such a piece.
And she to quite his love, in spite of dreadful death,
Enshrinde with Snakes within his tomb, did yield her parting breath.
Allegoria.
IF fortune fauord him, then may that man rejoice,
And think himself a happy man by hap of happy choice.
Who loves and is beloved of one as good, as true,
As kind as Cleopatra was, and yet more of bright hew.
Her eyes as gray as glass, her teeth as white as milk,
A ruddy lip, a dimpled chyn, a skin as smoth as silk.
A wight what could you more y^ may content ma^s mind,
And has supplies for every want that any man can find.
And may himself assure, when hence his life shall pass,
She will be stong to death with snakes, as Cleopatra was.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He began to write by a gentlewoman who passed by him with her arms set
bragging by her sides, and left it unfinished as follows.
WEre my heart set on hoygh as thine is bent,
Or in my breast so brave and stout a will:
Then (long ere this) I could have been content,
With sharp revenge thy careless corpse to kill.
For why thou know (although thou know not all)
What rule, what reign, what power, what segnory,
Thy melting mind did yield to me (as thrall)
When first I pleased thy wandering fantasy.
What lingering looks bewrayed thine inward thought,
What pangs were published by perplexity,
Such reakes the rage of love in thee had wrought
And no gramercy for thy courtesy.
I list not vaunt, but yet I dare auowe
(Had been my harmless heart as hard as thine)
I could have bound thee then for sterting now,
In bonds of bale, in pangs of deadly pyne.
For why by proof the field is eath to win,
Where as the chiefteynes yield themselves in chains:
The port or passage plain to enter in
Where porters list to leave the key for gains.
But did I then devise with cruelty,
(As tyrants do) to kill thy yielding pray?
Or did I brag and boast triumphantly,
As who should say, the field were mine that day?
Did I retire my self out of thy sight
To beat (a fresh) the bulwarks of thy breast?
Or did my mind in choice of change delight,
And render thee as refusd with the rest?
No Tygre no* the Lion is not lewd,
He shows no force on seely wounded sheep, etc.
VVhiles he sat at the door of his lodging* deuysing these verses above
rehearsed, the same Gentlewoman passed by again, and cast a long look
toward him, whereby he left his former invention and wrote thus.
HOw long she looked that looked at me of late,
As who would say, her looks were all for love:
When God he knows they came from deadly hate,
To pinch me yet with pangs which I must prove.
But since my looks her liking may not move,
Look where she likes: for lo this look was cast,
Not for my love, but even to see my last.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
An other Sonet written by the same Gentlewoman upon the same occasion.
I Looked of late and saw thee look askance,
Upon my door to see if I satt there,
As who should say* If he be there by chance,
Yet may he think I look him every where.
No cruel no, thou know and I can tell,
How for thy love I laid my looks a side:
Though thou (percase) have looked and liked well
Some new found looks amid this world so wide.
But since thy looks my love have so enchaynd
That in my looks thy liking now is past:
Look where thou likest, and let thy hands be staynd,
In true loves blood which thou shall lack at last.
So look so lack, for in these toys thus tossed,
My looks thy love, thy looks my life have lost.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Enough of this Dame. And let us peruse his other doings which have come to my
hands, in such disordred order, as I can best set them down. I will now then
present you with a Sonet written in praise of the brown beauty, which he
compyled for the love of Mistress E. P. as follows.
THe thriftles thread which pampred beauty spinnes,
In thraldom binds the foolish gazing eyes:
As cruel Spyders with their crafty ginnes,
In worthless webbes do snare the simple Flies.
The garments gay, the glittring golden gite,
The tysing talk which flows from Pallas pooles:
The painted pale, the (too much) red made white,
Are smyling baytes to fish for loving fools.
But lo, when eld in toothlesse mouth appears,
And whoary bears in steed of bauties blaze:
Than Had I wist, does teach repenting years,
The tickle track of crafty Cupides maze.
Twixt fair and foul therefore, twixt great and small,
A lovely nutbrowne ^ace is best of all.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Written by a Gentlewoman in court, who (when she was there placed) seemed to
disdain him, contrary to a former profession.
WHen danger kepes the dor^, of lady beauties bower,
When jealous toys have chased Trust out of her stro^gest tower:
Then faith and troth may fly, then falshod wins the field
The^ feeble naked faultlesse hearts, for lack of sense must yield.
And the^ preuailes as much to hop against the hill,
As seek by suite for to apease a froward Ladies will.
For oaths and solemn vows, are wasted then in vain,
And truth is co^pted but a toy, when such fond fa^cies reign.
The sentence sone is said, when will it self is Judge,
And quickly is the quarrel picked when ladies list to grudge.
This sing I for my self, (which wrote this weary song)
Who justly may co^plain my case, if ever man had wrong
A Lady have I served, a Lady have I loved,
A Ladies good will once I had, her ill will lay I pr^u'd.
In country first I knew her, in country first I caught her,
And out of country now in court, to my cost have I sought her.
In court where Princes reign, her place is now assingd,
And well were worthy for the room, if she were not unkind.
There I (in wonted wise) did show my self of late,
And found y^ as the soil was changed, so love was turned to hate.
But why? God knows, not I: save as I said before,
Pity is put from porters place, and danger keeps the door.
If courting then have skill, to change good Ladies so,
god se^d each wilful dame in court, some wo^d of my like woe
That with a troubled head, she may both turn and toss,
In restless bed when she should sleep and feel of love y^ loss.
And I (since porters put me from my wonted place)*
And deep deceit has wrought a wyle to wrest me out of grace:
will home agein to cart* as fitter were for me,
Then thus in court to serve and starve, where such proud porters be.
Si fort^natus infoelix.
From this I will skip to certain verses written to a Gentlewoma^ whom he
liked very well, and yet had never any opportunity to discover his affection,
being always brydled by jealous looks, which attended them both, and therefore
gessing by her looks, that she partly also liked him: he wrote in a book of
hirs as follows.
THou with thy looks on whom I look full often,
And find therein great cause of deep delight:
Thy face is fair, thy skin is smooth and soft,
Thy lips are sweet, thine eyes are clear and bright,
And every part seems pleasant in my sight.
Yet wot thou well, those looks have wrought my woe*
Because I love to look upon them so.
For first those looks allured mine eye to look,
And straight mine eye stird up my heart to love:
And cruel love with deep deceitful hook,
Chokt up my mind whom fancy cannot move,
Nor hope relieve, nor other help behoue:
But still to look, and though I look too much,
Needs must I look, because I see none such.
Thus in thy looks my love and life have hold,
And with such life my death draws on apace:
And for such death no medcine can be told,
But looking still upon thy lovely face,
Wherein are painted pity, peace, and grace.
Then though thy looks should cause me for to dye,
Needs must I look, because I live thereby.
Since then thy looks my life have so in thrall,
As I can like none other looks but thine:
Lo here I yield my life, my love, and all
Into thy hands, and all things else resign,
But liberty to gaze upon thine eyes.
Which when I do, then think it were thy part,
To look again, and link with me in heart.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
With these verses you shall judge the quick capacity of the Lady: for she
wrote therunder this short answer.
Look as long as you list, but surely if I take you looking, I will look with
you.

And for a further proof of this Dames quick understanding, you shall now
understand, that soon after this answer of hirs, the same Author chanced to
be at a supper in her company, where were also her brother, her husband, and an
old lover of hirs by whom she had bin long suspected. Now, although there
wanted no delicate viands to content them, yet their chief repast was by
entreglancing of looks. For G. G. being stoong with hot affection, could none
otherwise relie^e his passion but by gazing. And the Dame of a courteous
enclinatio^ deigned (now and then) to requite the same with glancing at him.
Her old lover occupied his eyes with watching: and her brother perceiving all
this could not absteyne from winking, whereby he might put his Sister in
remembrance, least she should too much forget hirself. But most of all her
husband beholding the first, and being evil pleased with the second, scarce
contented with the third, and misconstruing the fourth, was constreyned to play
the fifth part in froward frowninge. This royal banquet thus passed over, G.G.
knowing that after supper they should pass the time in propounding of Riddles,
and making of purposes: contryued all this conceit in a Riddle as follows.
The which was no sooner pronounced, but she could perfectly perceive his
intent, and drove out one nail with another, as also enseweth.
His Riddle.
I Cast mine eye and saw ten eyes at once,
All seemly set upon one lovely face:
Two gazed, two glanced, two watched for the nonce,
Two winked wyles, two fround with froward grace*
Thus every eye was pitched in his place.
And every eye which wrought each others woe,
Said to itself, alas why looked I so?
And every eye for jealous love did pine,
And sighed and said, I would that eye were mine.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
In all this lovely company was none that could and would expound the meaning
hereof. At last the Dame hirself answered on this wise. Sir, quod she, because
your dark speech is much too curious for this simple company, I will be so bold
as to quit one question with an other. And when you have answered mine, it may
fall out peradventure, that I shall somewhat the better judge of yours.
Her Question.
What thing is that which swims in bliss,
And yet consumes in burning grief:
Which being plast where pleasure is,
Can yet recover no relief.
Which sees to sighe, and sighs to see,
All this is one, what may it be?
He held himself herwith contented: and afterward when they were better
acquainted, he chanced once (groping in her pocket) to find a letter of her
old lovers: and thinking it were better to wincke than utterly to put out his
eyes, seemed not too understand this first offense: but soon after finding a
le^man (the which he thought he saw her old lemman put there) he devised thereof
thus, and delivered it unto her in writing.
I Groped in thy pocket pretty peat,
And found a Lemman which I looked not:
So found I once (which now I must repeat)
Both leaves and letters which I liked not.
Such hap have I to find and seek it not,
But since I see no faster means to bind, then
I will (henceforth) take lemmans as I find them.
The Dame within very short space did answer it thus.
A Lymone (but no Lemmane) Sir you found,
For Lemmans bear their name to broad before:
The which since it has given you such a wound,
That you seem now offended very sore:
Content your self you shall find (there) no more.
B^t take your Lemmans henceforth were you lust,
For I will show my letters where I trust.
This Sonet of his shall pass (for me) without any preface.
WHen steadfast friendship (bound by holy oath)
Did part perforce my presence from thy sight.
In dreams I might behold how thou were loath
With troubled thoughts to part from thy delight.
When Popler walls enclosed thy pensi^e mind,
My painted sh^dow did thy woes revive:
Thine evening walks by Thames in open wind,
Did long to see my sailing boat ariue.
But when the dismold day did seek to part
From London walls thy longing mind for me.
The sugared kisses (sent to thy dear heart)
With secret smart in broken sleeps I see.
W^erfore in tears I drenche a thousand fold,
Till these moist eyes thy beauty may behold.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
He wrote (at his friends request) in praise of a Gentlewoman, whose name was
Phillip, as follows.
OF all the byrds that I do know,
Phillip my sparow has no pear:
For sit she high or lie she low,
Be she far off, or be she near,
There is no bird so fair, so fine,
Nor yet so fresh as this of mine.
Come in a morning merely
When Phillip has been lately fed,
Or in an evening soberly,
When Phillip list to go to bed:
It is a heaven to hear my phippe,
How she can chirpe with chery lip.
She never wanders far abroad,
But is at hand when I do call:
If I command she lays on lode,
With lips, with teeth, with tongue and all.
She chants, she chirpes, she maks such cheer,
That I believe she has no peer.
And yet besides all this good sport,
My Phillip can both sing and dance:
With newfond toys of sundry sort,
My Phillip can both prycke and prance:
As if you say but fend cut phippe,
Lord how the peat will turn and skippe
Her feathers are so fresh of hew,
And so well proyned every day:
She lacks none oil, I warrant you:
To trim her tail both tryck and gay.
And though her mouth be somewhat wide,
Her tongue is sweet and short beside.
And for the rest I dare compare,
She is both tender, sweet and soft:
She never lacks daynty fare,
But is well fed and feeds often:
For if my phip have lust to eat,
I warrant you Phip lacks no meat.
And then if that her meat be good,
And such as like do love always:
She will lay lips thereon by the^rood,
And see that none be cast away:
For when she once has felt a fit,
Phillip will cry still, yet, yet, yet.
And to tell truth he were to blame,
Which had so fine a Bird as she,
To make him all this goodly game,
Without suspect or iellousie:
He were a churl and knew no good,
Would see her faint for lack of food.
Wherefore I sing and ever shall,
To praise as I have often proved,
There is no byrd amongst them all,
So worthy for to be beloved.
Let others praise what byrd they will,
Sweet Phillip shall be my byrd still.
Si fortunatus infoelix.
Now to begin with another man, take these verses written to be sent with a
ryng, wherein were engraued a Patrich in a Merlines foot.
THe Partridge in the pretty Merlines foot,
Who feels her force suppressed with fearfulness,
And finds that strength nor strife can do her boot,
To escape the danger of her deep distress:
These woeful words may seem for to rehearse
Which I must write in this waymenting verse.
What helps now (says she) dame natures skill,
To die my feathers like the dustie ground?
Or what preuayles to lend me wings at will
Which in the air can make my body bound?
Since from the earth the dogs me drove perforce,
And now aloft the Hawk has caught my corse.
If change of coollors, could not me convey,
Yet might my wings have escaped the dogs despite:
And if my wings did fail to fly away,
Yet m^ught my strength resist the Merlynes might.
But nature made the Merlyne me to kill,
And me to yield unto the Merlines will.
My lot is like (dear Dame) believe me well,
The quiet life which I full closely kept:
Was not content in happy state to dwell,
But forth in have to gaze on thee it lept.
Desire the dog did spring me up in have,
Thou were the Hawk, whose tallents caught me fast.
What should I then, seek means to fly away?
Or strive by force, to break out of thy feet?
No, no, perdie, I may no strength assay,
To strive with thee ywis, it were not meet.
Thou art that Hawk, whom nature made to hent me,
And I the Byrd, that must therewith content me.
And since Dame nature has ordained so,
Her happy heast I gladly shall embrace:
I yield my will, although it were to woe,
I stand content to take, my grief for grace:
And seal it up within my secret heart,
Which seal receive, as token of my smart.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
To a Dame which challenged the aucthor because he held his head always down,
and looked not upon her in his wonted wise.
YOu must not wonder, though you think it strange,
To see me hold, my lowering head so low:
And that mine eyes, take no delight to raunge,
About the gleames, which on your face do grow.
The Mouse which once has broken out of trappe,
Is seldom tysed* with the trustlesse bayte:
But lies aloof, for fear of more mishappe,
And feeds still in doubt of deep disceipt.
The skorched fly, which once has escaped the flame,
Will hardly come, to play again with fire:
Whereby I learn, that grievous is the game,
Which follows fancy dazzled by desire.
So that I wincke, or else hold down my head,
Because your blazing eyes, my bale have bred.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
A loving Lady being wounded in the spring time, and now galded eftsoon with
the remembrance of the spring, does therefore thus bewail.
THis tenth of March when Aries receyu'd,
Dame Phoebus rays, into his horned head:
And I my self, by learned lore perceyu'd,
That Ver approcht, and frostie winter fled.
I crossed the Thames, to take the cherefull air,
In open feeldes, the weather was so fair.
And as I rowed, fast by the further shore,
I heard a voice, which seemed to lament:
Whereat I stayed, and by a stately door,
I left my Boat, and up on land I went.
Till at the last by lasting pain I found,
The woeful wight, which made this doleful sound.
In pleasant garden (placed all alone)
I saw a Dame, who sat in weary wise,
With scalding sighs, she vttred all her moan,
The ruefull tears, down rayned from her eyes:
Her lowering head, full low on hand she laid,
On knee her arm: and thus this Lady said.
Alas (quod she) behold each pleasant green,
Will now renew, his summers livery,
The fragrant flowers, which have not long been seen,
Will flourish now, (ere long) in bravery:
The tender buddes, whom cold has long kept in,
Will spring and sproute, as they do now begin.
But I (alas) within whose mourning mind,
The graffes of grief, are onley given to grow,
Cannot enjoy the spring which others find,
But still my will, must wyther all in woe:
The cold of care, so nippes my joys at root,
No sun does shine, that well can no them boot.
The lusty Ver, which whillome might exchange
My grief to joy, and then my joys increase,
Springs now elsewhere, and shows to me but strange,
My winters woe, therefore can never cease:
In other coasts, his sun full clear does shine,
And comfort lends to ey'ry mould but mine.
What plant can spring, that feels no force of Ver?
What flower can flourish, where no sun does shine?
These Bales (quod she (within my breast I bear,
To break my bark, and make my pyth to pyne:
Needs must I fall, I fade both root and rynde,
My branches bow, at blast of every wind.
This said: she cast a glance and spied my face,
By sight whereof, Lord how the changed hew?
So that for shame, I turned back a pace
And to my home, my self in have I drew:
And as I could her woofull words rehearse,
I set them down in this waymenting verse.
Now Ladies you, that know by whom I sing,
And feel the winter, of such frozen wylls:
Of courtesy, yet cause this noble spring,
To send his sun, above the highest hills:
And so to shine, upon her fading sprayes,
Which now in woe, do wyther thus always.
Spreta tamen viuunt.
The careful lover combred with pleasure, thus complayneth.
NOw have I found the way, to weep and wayle my ^^ll,
Now can I end my doleful days, and so content my will.
The way to weep enough, for such as list to wayle,
Is this: to go abord ye ship, where pleasure bears sail.
And there to mark the jests, of every joyful wight,
And with what wind and wave they fleet, to nourish their delight.
For as the stricken Dear, that sees his fellows feed,
Amid the lusty heard (unhurt,) and feels him self to bleed.
Or as the seely byrd, that with the Bolte is brusd,
And lies a loofe among the leaves, of al her peers refusd.
And hears them sing full shrill, yet cannot she rejoice,
Nor frame one warbling note to pass, out of her mournful voice.
Even so I find by proof, that pleasure dubleth pain,
Unto a wretched wounded heart, which does in woe remain.
I pass where pleasure is, I hear some for sing joy,
I see some laugh, some other dau^ce, in spite of dark anoy.
But out alas my mind, amends not by their mirth,
I deem al pleasures to be pain, that dwell above y^ earth.
Such heavy humors feed, y^ blood that lends me breath,
As merry medcines cannot serve, to keep my corpse from death.
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
The lover being disdaynfully abiected by a dame of high calling, who had
chosen (in his place) a play fellow of baser condition: does therefore
determine to step a side, and before his departure gives her this farewell in
verse.
THy birth, thy beauty, nor thy brave attire,
(Disdainefull Dame, which do me double wrong)
Thy high estate, which sets thy heart on fire,
Or new found choice, which cannot serve thee long,
Shall make me dread, with pen for to rehearse,
Thy skittish deeds, in this my parting verse.
For why thou know, and I my self can tell,
By many vows, how thou to me were ^ound:
And how for joy, thy heart did seem to swell,
And in delight* how thy desires were drowned.
When of thy will, the walls I did assail,
Wherein fond fancy, fought for mine avail.
And though my mind, have small delight to vaunt,
Yet must I vow, my heart to thee was true:
My hand was always able for to daunt,
Thy slaundrous fooes, and keep their tongues in mew.
My head (though dull) was yet of such devise,
As might have kept thy name always in price.
And for the rest my body was not brave,
But able yet, of substance to allay,
The raging lust, where in thy limbs did rave,
And quench the coals, which kindled thee to play.
Such one I was, and such always will be,
For worthy Dames, but then I mean not thee.
For thou have caught a proper paragon,
A thief, a coward, and a Peacocke fool:
An Ass, a mylksop, and a minion,
Which has none oil, thy furious flames to cool,
Such one he is, a pheare for thee most fit,
A wandering guest, to please thy wavering wit.
A thief I count him, for he robbes us both,
Thee of thy name, and me of my delight:
A cowerd is he noted where he goes,
Since every child, is matched to him in might.
And for his pride no more, but mark his plumes,
The which to princke, he days and nights consumes.
The rest thy self, in secret sort can judge,
He rydes not me, thou know his sadell best:
and though these tricks of thine, might make me grudge
And kyndle wrath, in my revenging breast:
Yet of my self, and not to please thy mind,
I stand content, my rage in rule to bind.
And far from thee now must I take my flight,
Where tongues may tell, (and I not see) thy fall:
Where I may drink these dragges of thy despite,
To purge my Melancholicke mind withal.
In secret so, my stomach will I sterue,
Wishing thee better than thou do deserve,
Spraeta tamen viuunt.
An absent Dame thus complayneth.
MUch like the seely Byrd, which close in Cage is pent,
So sing I now, not notes of joy, but lays of deep lament.
And as the hooded Hawk, which hears the Partrich spring,
Who though she feel her self fast tied, yet beats her bating wing:
So strive I now to show, my feeble froward will,
Although I know my labor lost, to hop against the Hill.
The drops of dark disdain, did never drench my heart,
For well I know I am beloved, if that might ease my smart.
Ne yet the privy coals, of glowing iellosie,
Could ever kindle needless fear, within my fantasy.
The rigor of repulse, does not renew my playnt,
Nor choice of change does move my moan, nor force me thus to faint.
Only that pang of pain, which passes all the rest,
And canker like does fret the heart, within the giltlesse breast.
Which is if any be, most like the panges of death,
That present grief now grypeth me, and strives to stop my breath.
When friends in mind may meet, and heart in heart embrace,
And absent yet are feign to plain, for lack of time and place:
Then may I count, their love like seed, that soon is so wen,
Yet lacking drops of heavenly dew, with weeds is ouergrowen.
The Greyhound is agree^'d, although he see his game,
If still in slip he must be stayde, when he would chase the same.
So fares it now by me* who know my self beloved
Of one the best, in each respect, that ever yet was proved.
But since my lucklesse lot, forbids me now to taste,
The dulcet fruits of my delight, therefore in woes I wast.
And Swallow like I sing, as one enforced so,
Since others reap the gaineful crop, which I with pain did sow.
Yet you that mark my song, excuse my Swallows voice,
And bear with her unpleasant tunes, which cannot well rejoice.
Had I or luck in love, or lease of liberty,
Then should you hear some sweeter notes, so clear my throat would be.
But take it thus in gree, and mark my playnsong well,
No heart feels, so much hurt as that: which does in absence dwell.
Spreta tamen viuunt.
This question being propounded by a Dame unto the writer thereof, to wit, why
he should write Spreta tamen viuunt* he answers thus.
Despised things may live, although they pyne in pain:
And things often trodden under foot, may once yet rise again.
The stone that lies full low, may clime at last full hye:
And stand aloft on stately towers, in sight of every eye.
The cruel axe which fe^les the tree that grew full straight:
Is worn with rust, when it renewes, and springs up on height.
The roots of rotten Reeds in swelling seas are seen:
And when each tide has toste his worst, they grow agein full green.
Thus much to please my self, unpleasantly I sing:
And shrich to ease my mourning mind, in spyte of enuies sting.
I am now set full light, who erst was dearly loved:
Some newfound choice is more esteemd, tha^ y^ which welwas proved
Some Diomede is crept into Dame Cressydes heart:
And trusty Troylus now is taught in vain to plain his part.
What rests then for me? but thus to wade in woe:
And hang in hope of better chance, when change appoints so.
I see no sight on earth, but it to Change enclines:
As little clouds often ouercast, the brightest sun that shines.
No Flower is so fresh, but frost can it deface:
No man so sure in any seat but he may leese his place.
So that I stand content (though much against my mind)
To take in worth this loathsome lot, which luck to me assynd,
And trust to see the time, when they that now are up:
May feel the whirle of fortunes wheel, and taste of sorrows cup.
God knows I wish it not, it had been bet for me:
Still to have kept my quiet chair in hap of high degree.
But since without recure, Dame Change in love must reign:
I now wish change that sought no change, but constant did remain.
And if such change do chance, I vow to clap my hands,
And laugh at them which laughed at me: lo thus my fancy stands.
Spreta tamen viuunt.
A strange passion of another Author.
AMid my Bale I bath in bliss,
I swim in heaven, I sink in hell:
I find amends for every miss,
And yet my moan no tongue can tell.
I live and love, what would you more?
As never lover lived before.
I laugh sometimes with little lust,
So jest I often and feel no joy:
Mine ease is builded all on trust,
And yet mistrust breeds mine anoye.
I live and lack, I lack and have:
I have and miss the thing I crave.
These things seem strange, yet ar they true
Believe me (sweet) my state is such:
One pleasure which I would eschew,
Both slakes my grief, and breeds my gruch.
So does one pain which I would shoon
Renew my joys where grief begoon.
Thon like the Lark that past the night
In heavy sleep with cares oppressed:
Yet when she spies the pleasant light,
She sends sweet notes from out her breast.
So sing I now because I think
How joys approach, when sorrows shrink.
And as fair Philomene ageine
Can watch and singe when other sleep:
And takes pleasure in her pain,
To wray the woo that makes her weep.
So sing I now for to bewray
The loathsome life I lead always.
The which to thee (dear wench) I write,
That know my mirth, but not my moan:
I pray God grant thee deep delight,
To live in joys when I am gone.
I cannot live, it will not be:
I dye to think to part from thee.
Ferenda Natura.
The Lover leaning only to his Ladies promises, and fi^ding them to fail,
does thus lament.
THe straightest tree that grows upon one only root:
If that root fail, will quickly fade, no props can do it boo^e*
I am that fading plant, which on thy grace did grow.
Thy grace is gone wherefore I moan, and wither all in woe.
The tallest ship that sails, if she to Ancors trust:
When ancors slip and cables break, her help lies in the dust.
I am the ship my self, mine An^or was thy faith:
Which now is fled, thy promise broke, and I am driven to death.
Who clymeth often on hie, and trusts the rotten bow:
If that bow break may catch a fall such state stand I in now.
Me thought I was aloft, and yet my seat full sure:
Thy heart did seem to me a rock which ever might endure.
And see, it was but sand, whom seas of subtlety:
Have soked so with wanton waves, that faith was forced to fly.
The Fluds of fickleness have undermined so,
The first foundation of my joy, that mirth is ebbed to woe.
Yet at low water ^arkes, I lie and wait my time:
To mend the breach, but all in vayn, it cannot pass the prime.
For when the primeflud comes which all this rage begone:
Then waves of will do work so fast, my piles are ouerron.
Duty and diligence which are my workmen there,
Are glad to take up tools in haste and run away for fear.
For fancy has such force, it ouerfloweth all:
And whispring ^ales do blow the blasts that make it rise and fall.
Thus in these tempests ^ost, my restles life does stand:
Because I builded on thy words, as I was borne in hand.
Thou weart that only stake, whereby I meant to stay:
Alas, alas, thou stoodst so weak, the hedge is borne away.
By thee I thought to live, by thee now must I dye:
I made thee my Physician, thou art my mallady.
For thee I longd to live, for thee now welcome death:
And welcome be that happy pang, that stops my gasping breath.
Twice happy were that are, would cut my roots down right:
And sacred were that swelling sea, which would consume me quight.
Blessed were that bow would break to bring down clyming youth,
Which craks aloft, and quakes full often, for fear of thine untruth.
Ferenda Natura.
The constancy of a lover has thus sometimes ben briefly declared.
THat self same tongue which first did thee entreat
To link thy liking with my lucky love:
That trusty tongue must now these words repeat,
I love the still, my fancy cannot move.
That dreadlesse heart which durst attempt the thought
To win thy will with mine for to consent,
Maintains that vow which love in me first wrought,
I love thee still and never shall repent.
That happy hand which hardely did touch
Thy tender body, to my deep delight:
Shall serve with sword to prove my passion such
As loves thee still* much more than it can write.
Thus love I still with tongue, hand, heart and all,
And when I change, let vengeance on me fall.
Ferenda Natura.
Now I must desire you with patience to hearken unto the works of another
writer* who though he may not compare with the rest passed, yet such things as
he wrote upon sundry occasions, I will rehearse, beginning with this praise of
a Countess.
DEsire of Fame would force my feeble skill,
To praise a Countess by her dew desert:
But dread of blame holds back my forward will,
And quenched the coals which kindled in my heart.
Thus am I plongd twene dread and deep desire,
To pay the dew which duty does require.
And when I call the mighty Gods in aid
To further forth some fine invention:
My bashefull spirits be full ill afraid
To purchase pain by my presumption.
Such malice reigns (sometimes) in heavenly mynds*
To punish him that prayseth as he fynds.
For Pallas first whose filed flowing skill,
Should guide my pen some pleasant words to write*
With angry mood has framed a froward will,
To dashe devise as often as I endite.
For why? if once my Ladies gifts were known,
Pallas should loose the praises of her own.
And bloody Mars by change of his delight
Has made Jove's daughter now mine enemy:
In whose conceit my Countess shines so bright,
That Venus pynes for burning jealousy.
She may go home to Vulcane now again:
For Mars is sworn to be my Ladies swayne.
Of her bright beams Dan Phoebus stands in dread,
And shames to shine within our Horizon:
Dame Cynthia holds in her horned head,
For fear to loose by like comparison.
Lo thus she lives, and laughes them all to skorne:
Countess on earth, in heaven a Goddess borne.
And I sometimes her servant, now her friend,
Whom heaven and earth for her (thus) hate and blame:
Have yet presumed in friendly wise to spend,
This ragged verse in honor of her name.
A simple gift, compared by the skill:
Yet what may seem so dear as such good will.
Meritum petere, grave.
The Lover declares his affection, together with the cause thereof.
WHen first I thee beheld in coulors black and whyt,
Thy face in form well framed with favor blooming still:
My burning breast in cares did choose his chief delight,
With pen to painte thy praise; contrary to my skill.
Whose worthiness compared with this my rude devise,
I blush and am abasht, this work to enterprise.
But when I call to mind thy sundry gifts of grace,
Full fraught with manners meek in happy quiet mind:
My hasty hand forthwith does scribble on apace,
Least willing heart might think, it meant to come behind.
Thus do both hand and heart these careful meetres use,
Twixt hope and trembling fear, my deutie to excuse.
Wherefore accept these lives, and banish dark disdayn,
Be sure they come from one that loves thee in chief:
And guerdon me thy friend in like with love again,
So shall thou well be sure to yield me such relief,
As only may redress my sorrows and my smart:
For proof whereof I pledge (dear Dame) to thee my heart.
Meritum petere, grave.
Another shorter discourse to the same effect.
IF ever man yet found the Bath of perfect bliss,
Then swim I now amid the Sea where naught but pleasure is.
I love and am beloved (without vaunt be it told)
Of one more fair than she of Greece for who^ proud Tr^y was sold*
As bountiful and good as Cleopatra Queen:
As constant as Penelope unto her make was seen.
What would you more? my pen unable is to write
The least desert that seems to shine within this worthy wight.
So that for now I cease, with hands held up on hye,
And crave of God that when I change, I may be forced to dye.
Meritum petere, grave.
The lover disdaynefully rejected contrary to former promise, thus complayneth.
THe deadly drops of dark disdain,
Which daily fall on my desarte.
The lingering suite long spent in vain,
Whereof I feel no fruit but smart:
Enforce me now these words to write:
Not all for love, but more for spyte.
The which to thee I m^st rehearce,
Whom I did honor, serve and trust.
And though the music of my verse
Be plainsong tune both true and just:
Content thee yet to hear my song,
For else thou do me doobble wrong.
I must allege, and thou can tell
How faithful I vowed to serve,
And how thou seemdst to like me well:
And how thou saydst I did deserve
To be thy Lord, thy Knight, thy King,
And how much more I list not sing.
And can thou now (thou cruel one)
Condemn desert to deep despair?
Is all thy promise past and gone?
Is faith so fled into the air?
If that be so, what rests for me?
But thus in song to say to thee.
If Cressides name were not so known,
And written wide on every wall:
If brute of pride were not so blown
Upon Angelica withal:
For hault disdain thou might be she,
Or Cressyde for inconstancy.
And in reward of thy desert,
I hope at last to see thee paid:
With deep repentance for thy part,
Which thou have now so lewdly played.
Medoro he must be thy make,
Since thou Orlando do forsake.
Such is the fruit that grows always
Upon the root of ripe disdayn:
Such kindly wages Cupide pays,
Where constant hearts cannot remain*
I hope to see thee in such bands,
When I may laugh and clappe my hands.
But yet for thee I must protest,
That sure the fault is none of thine,
Thou art as true as is the best,
That ever came of Cressedes line:
For constant yet was never none,
But in inconstancy alone.
Meritum petere, grave.
An absent lover (parted from his Lady by Sea) thus complayneth.
BOth deep and dreadful were the Seas,
Which held Leander from his love,
Yet could no doubts his mind appease,
Nor save his life for her behoue:
But giltlesse blood it self would spyll,
To please the waves and work his will.
O greedy gul^e, O wretched wau^s,
O cruel floods, O ^inke of shames,
You hold true lovers bound like s^aues,
And keep them from their worthy Dames:
Your open mouth gapes evermore,
Till one or both be drowned therefore.
For proof whereof my self may sing,
And shrich to pearce the lofty skies,
Whose Lady left me lang^ishing,
Upon the shore in woofull wise:
And crossed the Seas out of my sight,
Whereby I lost my chief delight.
She said that no such trustlesse flood,
Should keep our loves (long time) in twain:
She swear no bread should do her good,
Till she might see my self again.
She said and swore these words and mo,
But now I find them nothing so.
What rests then for me to do,
Thou salt sea foome come say thy mind?
Should I come drown within thee too,
That am of true Leanders kind?
And headlong cast this corpse of mine,
Into those greedy guts of thine?
No cruel, but in spite of thee,
I will make Seas where erst were none,
My tears shall flow in full degree,
Till all my mirth may ebb to moan.
Into such drops I mean to melt,
And in such Seas my self to swelt,
Lenuoie.
Yet you dear Dame for whom I fade,
Thus steruing still in wretched state:
Remember once your promise made,
Perform it now though all to late.
Come h^me to Mars who may you please*
Let Vulcane bide beyond the Seas.
Meritum petere, grave.
A Lady being both wronged by false suspect, and also wounded by the durance of
her husband, does thus bewray her grief.
Give me my Lute in bed now as I lie,
And lock the doors of mi^e unlucky bower:
So shall my voice in mournful verse des^rie*
The secret smart which causes me to lower.
Resound you walls an Echo to my m^ne,
And thou cold bed wherein I lie alone:
Bear witness yet what r^st thy Lady takes,
When other sleep which may enjoy their make^,
In prime of youth when Cupid kindled fire,
And warmd my will with flames of (...)
To further forth the fruit of my desire*
My friends deuisd this mean for my (...).
They made a match according to my mind*
And cast a snare my fancy for to bind:
Short tale to make the deed was almost done,
Before I knew which way the work begoon*
And with this lot I did my self content,
I lent a lyking to my parents choice:
With hand and heart I gave my free consent,
And hung in hope for ever to rejoice.
I lived and loved long time in greater joy,
The^ she which held king Pri^ms son of Troy:
But three lewd lots have cha^g^d my heaven to hell
And those be these, give ear and mark the^ well.
First slander he, which always bears hate,
To happy hearts in heavenly state that bide:
Began play his part to stir up some debate,
Whereby suspect into my choice might glyde.
And by his means the slime of false suspect,
Did (as I fear) my dearest friend infect.
Thus by these twayn long was I plungd in pain,
Yet in good hope my heart did still remain.
But now (aye me) the greatest grief of all,
(Sound loud my Lute, and tell it out my tongue)
The hardest hap that ever might befall,
The only cause wherefore this song is song,
Is this alas: my love, my Lord, my Roy,
My chosen pheare, my gemme, and all my joy,
Is kept perforce out of my daily sight,
Whereby I lack the stay of my delight.
In lofty walls, in strong and stately towers,
(With troubled mind in sollitary sort,
My lovely Lord does spend his days and hours,
A weary life deuoyde of all disport.
And I poor soul must lie here all alone,
To tire my truth, and wound my will with moan:
Such is my hap to shake my blooming time,
With wynters blastes before it pass the prime.
Now have you heard the sum of all my grief,
Whereof to tell my heart (oh) rends in twain:
Good Ladies yet lend you me some relief,
And bear a part to ease me of my pain.
My sorts are such, that waying well my truth,
They might provoke the craggy rocks to rueth,
And move these walls with tears for to lament,
The loathsome life wherein my youth is spent.
But thou my Lute, be still now take thy rest,
Repose thy bones upon this bed of down:
Thou have dischargd some burden from my breast,
Wherefore take thou my place, here lie thee down.
And let me w^lke to tire my restless mind,
Until I may entreat some courteous wynd:
To blow these words unto my noble make,
That he may see I sorrow for his sake.
Meritum petere, grave.
Either a needelesse or a bootelesse comparison between two letters.
OF all the letters in the christ's cross row,
I fear (my sweet) thou love B. the best,
And though there be good letters many mo,
As A.O.G.N.C.S. and the rest,
Yet such a liking bear thou to B.
That few or none thou thinckest like it to be.
And much I muse what madness should thee move,
To set the Carl before the comely horse:
Must A. give place, to B. for his behoue?
Are letters now so changed from their course?
Then must I learn (though much unto my pain,)
To read (a new) my christ cross row again.
When I first learnd, A. was in high degree,
A captain letter, and a vowell too:
Such one as was always a help to B,
And lent him sound and taught him what to do.
For take away the vowels from their place,
And how can then the consonants have grace*
Yet if thou like a consonant so well,
Why should not G. seem better far then B?
G. spelleth God, that high in heaven does dwell,
So spell we Gold and all good things with G.
B. serves to spell bold, baw^y, braynsicke, bold,
Black, brown, and bad, yea worse than may be told.
In song, the G. cliffe keeps the highest place,
Where B. sounds always (or too sharp or) flat:
In G. sol, re, vt: trebles have trim grace,
B. serves the base and is content with that.
Believe me (sweet) G. gives sound full sweet*
When B. cries buzze, as is for bases meet.
But now percase thou will one G. permit,
And with that G. thou meanest B. to join:
Alas, alas, me thinks it were not fit,
(To cloak thy fault) such fine excuse to coin.
Take dooble G. for thy most loving letter,
And cast of B. for it deserves no better.
Thus have I played a little with thy B.
Whereof the brand is thine, and mine the blame
The wight which wounds thy wandering will is he,
And I the man that seek to salu^ thy name:
The which to think, does make me sigh sometime,
Though thus I strive to jest it out in rym^.
Meritum petere, grave.
An absent lover does thus encourage his Lady to continue constant.
COntent thy self with patience perforce,
And que^th no love with drops of dark mistrust:
Let absence have no power to divorce,
Thy faithful friend which means to be just,
Bear but a while thy constance to declare,
For when I come one ynch shall break no square.
I must confess that promise did me bind,
For to have seen thy seemly self ere now:
And if thou knewst what greeues did galde my mind,
Because I could not keep that faithful vow:
My just ^xeuse* (...) self assure,
With little pain thy (...) might procure.
B^t call to mind how long Ulysses was,
In lingering absence, from his loving make:
And how she deigned then her days to pass,
In sollitary silence for his sake.
Be thou a true Penelope to me,
And thou shall soon thine own Ulysses see.
What said I? soon? yea soon I say again,
I will come soon and sooner if I may:
Believe me now it is a pinching pain,
To think of love when lovers are away.
Such thoughts I have, and when I think on thee,
My thoughts are there, whereas my bones would be.
The longing lust which Priames son of Troy,
Had for to see his Cressyde come again:
Could not exceed the depth of mine anoye,
Nor seem to pass the pattern of my pain.
I fryse in hope, I thaw in hot desire,
Far from the flame, and yet I burn like fire.
Wherefore dear friend, think on the pleasures past,
And let my tears* for both our pains suffice:
The lingering joys, when as they come at last,
Are bet then those, which pass in posting wise.
And I my self, to prove this tale is true,
In have, post have, thy comfort will renew.
Meritum petere, grave.
A letter devised for a young lover.
Receive you worthy Dame this rude and ragged verse,
Le^d willi^g ear unto y^ tale, which I shall now rehearse.
and though my witles words, might move you for to smile
Yet trust to that which I shall tell, and never mark my style.
Amongst five hundredth Dames, presented to my view,
I find most cause by due desert, to like the best of you.
I see your beauty such, as seems to suffice,
To bind my heart in lincks of love, by judgment of mine eyes.
And but your bounty quench, the coals of quick desire,
I fear y^ face of youres will set, ten thousand hearts on fire.
But bounty so aboundes, above all my desert,
As y^ I quake and shrink for fear, to show you of my smart.
Yet since mine eye made choice, my heart shall not repent,
But yield it self unto your will, and therewith stand content.
God knowth I am not great, my power it is not much,
The greater glory shall you gain, to show your favor such.
And what I am or have, all that I yield to you,
My hand and sword shall serve always, to prove my tongue is true.
Then take me for your own, and so I will be still,
Believe me now, I make this vow, in hope of your good will.
Which if I may obtein, God leave me when I change,
This is the tale I meant to tell, good Lady be not strange.

Meritum petere, grave.
Three Sonets in sequence, written upon this occasion. The deviser hereof
amongst other friends had named a gentlewoman his Berzabe: and she was content
to call him her David* The man presented his Lady with a Book of the Golden
Ass, written by Lucius Apuleius, and in the beginning of the Book wrote this
sequence. You must confer it with the History of Apuleius, for else it will
have small grace.
THis Apuleius was in Affricke borne,
And took delight to travail Thessaly,
As one that held his native soil in skorne,
In foraine coasts to feed his fantasy.
And such a gain as wandering wits find out,
This yonker won by will and weary toil,
A youth misspent, a doting age in douvt,
A body brusd with many a beastly broyle,
A present pleasure passing on a pace,
And paynting plain the path of penitence,
A frollicke favor foyld with foul disgrace,
When hoarie hears should claim their reverence.
Such is the fruit that grows on gadding ^rees,
Such kind of mell most moves busy Bees.
For Lucius he,
Esteeming more one ounce of present sport,
Than elders do a pound of perfect wit:
First to the bower of Beauty does resort,
And there in pleasure passed many a fit,
His worthy race he (recklesse) does forget,
With small regard in great affairs he reeles,
No counsel grave nor good advice can set,
His brains in brake that whirled still on wheels.
For if Birhena could have held him back,
From Venus Court where he now nousled was,
His lusty limbs had never found the lack
Of manly shape: the figure of an Ass,
Had not been blazed on his blood and bones,
To wound his will with torments all attonce.
But Fotys she*
Who saw this Lording whitled with the cup,
Of vain delight whereof he began to taste:
Pourde out apace and filled the Mazor up,
With dronken dole, yea after that in have.
She greasd this gest with sauce of Sorcery,
And fed his mind with knacks both queynt and strange:
Lo here the treason and the treachery,
Of gadding gyrles when they delight to raunge.
For Lucius thinking to become a foul,
Became a fool, yea more then that, an Ass,
A bodding block, a beating stock, an owl,
Well wondered at in place where he did pass:
And spent his time his travail and his cost,
To purchase pain and all his labor lost.
Yet I poor I.
Who make of thee my Fotys and my friend,
In like delights my youthful years to spend:
Do hope thou will from such sower sauce defend,
David thy King.
Meritum petere grave.
A Ryddle.
A Lady once did ask of me,
This pretty thing in priuetie:
Good sir (quod she) feign would I crave,
One thing which you your self not have:
Nor never had yet in times past,
Nor never shall while life does last.
And if you seek to find it out,
You loose your labor out of doubt:
Yet if you love me as you say,
Then give it me, for sure you may.
Meritum petere, grave.
To a gentlewoman who blamed him for writing his friendly advise in verse unto
another lover of hirs.
THe cruel have which boyles within thy burning breast,
And seeks to shape a sharp revenge, on them that love thee best:
May warn all faithful friends, in case of ieoperdie,
How they shall put their harmless hands, between y^ barck and tree.
And I among the rest, which wrote this weary song,
Must needs allege in my defense, that thou have done me wrong.
For if i^ simple verse, I chaunc^d to touch thy name,
And touched the same without reproach, was I therefore to blame?
And if (of great good will) I gave my best advise,
Then thus to blame with out cause why, me thinks thou art not wise.
Amongst old written tales, this one I bear in mind,
A simple soul much like my self, did once a serpent find.
Which (almost dead for cold) lay moyling in the mire
When he for pity took it up and brought it to the fire.
No sooner was the Snake, cured of her grief,
But straight she sought to hurt the man, that lent her such relief.
Such Serp^nt seem thou, such simple soul am I,
That for the weight of my good will, am blamed without cause why.
But as it best beseemes, the harmless gentle heart,
Rather to take an open wrong, than for to plain his part:
I must and will endure, thy spite without repent,
The blame is mine, the triumph thine, and I am well content.
Meritum petere, grave.
An discourteous farewell to an unconstant Dame.
IF what you want, you (wanton) had at will,
A steadfast mind, a faithful loving heart:
If what you speak you would perform it still,
If from your word your deed could not reuert.
If youthful years your thoughts did not so rule,
As elder days may skorne your friendship frail:
Your doubled fanfie would not thus recule,
For p^euish pride which now I must bewail.
For Cressyde fair did Troylus never love,
More dear than I esteemd your framed cheer:
Whose wavering ways (since now I do them prove)
By true report this witness with me bear:
That if your friendship be not too dear bought,
The price is great, that nothing gives for naught.
Meritum petere, grave.
A lover often warned, and once again drouen into fantastical flames by the
chase of company, does thus bewail his misfor tunes.
I That my race of youthful years had roon
Always untied, and not (but once) in thrall,
Even I which had the fields of freedom won,
And lived at large, and playde with pleasures ball:
Lo now at last am taken again and taught,
To taste such sorrows, as I never sought.
I love, I love, alas I love in deed,
I cry alas, but no man pitties me:
My wounds are wide, yet seem they not to bleed,
And hidden wounds are hardly heald we see.
Such is my luck to catch a sodeyne clappe,
Of great mischaunce in seeking my good hap.
My mourning mind which dwelt and dyed in dole,
Sought company for sollace of the same:
My cares were cold, and craved comforts coal,
To warm my wile with flakes of freendly flame.
I sought and found, I craved and did obtain,
I woo^ my wish, and yet I got no gain.
For whiles I sought the cheer of company,
Fair fellowship did woonted woes revive:
And craving medcine for my malladie,
Dame pleasures plaster proved a corosiue.
So that by mirth, I reapt no fruit but moan,
Much worse I fear than when I was alone.
The cause is this, my lot did light too late,
The Birds were flowen, before I found the nest:
The steed was stolen, before I shut the gate,
The cates consumd, before I smelt the feast.
And I fond fool with empty hand must call,
The gorged Hawk, which likes no lure at all.
Thus still I toil, to till the barreyne land,
And grope for grapes among the bramble briers:
I strive to sail and yet I stick on sand,
I deem to live, yet drown in deep desires.
These lots of love, are fit for wanton will,
Which finds too much, yet must be seeking still.
Meritum petere, grave.
The lover encouraged by former examples, determines to make virtue of
necessity.
WHen I record within my musing mind,
The noble names of wightes bewicht in love:
Such sollace for my self therein I find,
As nothing may my fixed fancy move:
But patiently I will endure my woe,
Because I see the heavens ordain it so.
For whiles I read and ryfle their estates,
In every tale I note mine own anoye:
But whiles I mark the meanings of their mates,
I seem to swim in such a sugared joy,
As did (percase) entise them to delight,
Though turned at last, to drugges of sower despite.
Peruse (who list) Dan David's perfect deeds,
There shall he find the blot of Berzabe,
Whereon to think, my heavy heart it bleedes,
When I compare my love like her to be:
Vrias wife, before mine eyes that shynes,
And David I, from duty that declines.
Then Solomon this princely Prophets son,
Did Phara^s daughter make him fall or no?
Yes, es, perdie, his wisdom could not shoon,
Her subtle snares, nor from her counsel go.
I nam (as he) the wisest wight of all,
But well I wot, a woman holds me thrall.
So am I like the proud Assirian Knight,
Which blasphemed God, and all the world defied:
Yet could a woman overcome his might,
And daunt his force in all his pomp and pride.
I Holyferne, am dronken brought to bead,
My love like Judith, cutting of my head.
If I were strong, as some have made account,
Whose force is like to that which Sampson had?
If I be bold, whose courage can surmount,
The heart of Hercules, which nothing dread?
Yet Dalila, and Deyanyraes love,
Did teach them both, such pangs as I must prove.
Well let these pass, and think on Nasoes name,
Whose skillful verse did flow in learned style:
Did he (think you) not dote upon his Dame?
Corm^ fair* did she not him beguile?
Yes God he knows, for verse nor pleasant rymes,
Can cons^an^ keep, the key of Cressides crimes.
So that to end my tale as I began,
I see the good, the wise, the stout, the bold:
The strongest champion and the learned man,
Have be^e and be, by lust of love controld.
Which when I think, I hold me well content,
To live in love, and never to repent.
Meritum petere, grave.
The absent lover (in ciphers) disciphering his name, does crave some spedie
relief as follows.
L'Escu d'amour, the shield of perfect love,
The shield of love, the force of steadfast faith,
The force of faith which never will remove,
But stands fast, to bide the broonts of death:
That trusty targe, has long borne of the blows,
And broke the thrusts, which absence at me throws.
In doleful days I lead an absent life,
And wound my will with many a weary thought:
I plead for peace, yet sterue in storms of strife,
I find debate, where quiet rest was sought.
These panges with mo, unto my pain I prove,
Yet bear I all upon my shield of love.
In colder cares are my conceits consumd,
Than Dido felt when false Enaeas fled:
In far more heat, than trusty Troylus fumd,
When crafty Cressyde dwelt with Diomed.
My hope such frost, my hot desire such flame,
That I both fryse, and smoulder in the same.
So that I live, and dye in one degree,
Healed by hope, and hurt again with dread:
Fast bound by faith when fancy would be free,
Untyed by trust, though thoughts enthrall my head.
Revived by joys, when hope does most abound,
And yet with grief, in depth of dollors drowned.
In these assaults I feel my feebled force
Begins to faint, thus weried still in woes:
And scarcely can my thus consumed corse,
Hold up this Buckler to bear of these blows.
So that I crave, or presence for relief,
Or some supply, to ease mine absent grief.
Lenuoie.
To you (dear Dame) this doleful plaint I make,
Whose only sight may sone redress my smart:
Then show your self, and for your servants sake,
Make have post have, to help a faithful heart.
Mine own poor shield has me defended long,
Now lend me yours, for else you do me wrong.
Meritum petere, grave.
I will now deliver unto you so many more of Master Gascoignes Poems as have
come to my hands, who has never been dayntie of h^s doings, and therefore I
conceal not his name: but his word or posie he has often changed and therefore
I will deliver his verses with such sundry posies as I received the^. And
first I will begin with Gascoigns Anatomy.
TO make a lover known, by plain Anatomy,
You lovers all that li^^ beware, lo here behold you me.
Who though mine only looks, your pity well might move,
Yet every part shall play his part to paint the pangs of love.
If first my feeble head, have so much matter left,
If fancies raging force have not his feeble skill bereft.
These locks that hang unkempt, these hollow dazzled eyes,
These chattring teeth, this tre^bling tongue, well tewed with careful cries,
These wan and wrinckled cheeks, well washed with waves of woe,
May stand for pattern of a ghost, where so this carcass go.
These shoulders they sustain, the yoke of heavy care,
And on my bruised broken back, the burden must I bear.
These arms are braunfalne now, with beating on my breast,
This right hand weary is to write, this left hand craves rest:
These sides enclose the forge, where sorrow plays the smith,
And hot desire, has kindled fire, to work his metal with.
The anuile is my heart, my thoughts they strike the stroke,
My lights and lungs like bellows blow, and sighs asce^d for smoke.
My secret parts are so with secret sorrow soken,
As for the secret shame thereof, deserves not to be spoken.
My thighs, my knees, my legs, and last of all my feet,
To serve a lovers turn, are so unable and unmeet,
That scarce they can bear up this restless body well,
Unless it be to see the boure, wherein my love does dwell,
And there by sight eftsoons to feed my gazing eye,
And so content my hungry corpse till dolours do me die:
Yet for a just reward of love so dearly bought,
I pray you say, lo this was he, who^ love had worn to naught.
Ever or never.
Gascoignes araignement.
AT Beauties bar as I did stand,
When false suspecte accused me,
George (quod the Judge) hold up thy hand,
Thou art araygnde of Flattery:
Tell therefore how thou will be tryde?
Whose judgment here will thou abide?
My lord (quod I) this lady here,
Whom I esteem above the rest,
Does know my guilte if any were:
Wherefore her doom shall please me best,
Let her be Judge and Iurour both,
To try me giltlesse by mine oath.
Quod Beauty, no, it sits not,
A Prince her self to judge the cause:
Here is our Justice well you wot,
Appointed to discuss our laws:
If you will guil^lesse seem to go,
God and your country quitte you so.
Then craft the crier called a queste,
Of whom was falshode formoste feere,
A pack of pickethankes were the rest,
Which came false witness for to bear,
The Jury such, the Judge unjust,
Sentence was said I should be trust.
Jealous the Iayler bound me fast,
To hear the verdite of the bill,
George (quod the Judge) now thou art cast,
Thou must go hence to heavy hill,
And there be hangde all but the head,
God rest thy soul when thou art dead.
Down fell I then upon my knee,
All flat before dame beauties face,
And cried, good Lady pardon me,
Which here appeal unto your grace,
You know if I have been untrue,
It was in too much praising you.
And though this Judge do make such haste*
To shead with shame my giltlesse blood:
Yet let your pity first be plaste,
To save the man that meant you good,
So shall you show your self a Queen,
And I may be your servant seen.
(Quod beauty) well: because I guess
What thou do mean henceforth to be,
Although thy faults deserve no less
Than Justice here has judged thee,
Wyl^e thou be bound to stint all strife,
And be true prisoner all thy life?
Yea madame (quod I) that I shall,
Lo faith and truth my suerties:
Why then (quod she) come when I call,
I ask no better warrantise.
Thus am I Beauties bounden thrall,
At her command when she does call.
Ever or Never.
Gascoignes praise of Bridges, now Lady Sands.
IN Court who so demaundes what dame does most excel,
For my conceit I must needs say, fair Bridges bears ye bel^
Upon whose lively cheek, to prove my judgment true,
The Rose and Lilly seem to strive for equal change of hew:
And therwithall so well her graces all agree,
No frouning cheer dare once presume in her sweet face to be.
Although some lauishe lips, which like some other best,
Will say the blemishe on her browe disgraceth all the rest:
Thereto I thus reply, God wotte they little know
The hidden cause of that mishap, nor how the harm did grow.
For when dame nature first had framde her heavenly face,
And thoroughly bedecked it with goodly gleames of grace.
It lyked her so well: Lo here (quod she) a piece,
For perfect shape that passes all Apelles work in Greece.
This bayt may chance to catch the greatest god of love,
Or mighty thundering Jove himself that rules the roast above:
But out, alas, those words were vaunted all in vain,
And some unseen were present there (pore Bridges) to thy pain,
For Cupide crafty boy, close in a corner stood,
Not blyndfold then, to gaze on her, I guess it did him good*
Yet when he felt the flame began kindle in his breast,
And h^rd dame nature boast by her, to break him of his rest,
His hot new chosen love he changed into hate,
And suddenly with myghtie ma^e, began rap her on the pat^.
It grieved Nature much to see the cruel deed:
Me seems I see her how she wept to see her dearling bleed.
Well yet (quod she) this hurt shall have some help I trow,
And quick with skin she couerd it, y^ whiter is than snow.
Wherewith Dan Cupide fled, for fear of further flame,
When angel like he saw her shine, whom he had smit with shame.
Lo thus was Bridges hurt, in cradel of her kind,
The coward Cupide brake her brow to wreke his wounded mind,
The skar still there remains, no force, there let it be,
There is no cloud that can eclipse so bright a sun as she.
Ever or Never.
Gascoignes praise of Zouche late the Lord Greye of Wilton.
THese rustie walls whom cankred years deface,
The comely corpse of seemly Zouche enclose,
Whose ancient stock deriude from worthy race,
Procures her praise, where so the carkas goes:
Her angels face declares her modest mind,
Her lovely looks the gazing eyes allure,
Her deeds deserve some endless praise to find,
To blaze such brute as ever might endure.
Wherefore my pen in trembling fear shall stay,
To write the thing that does surmounte my skill,
And I will wish of God both night and day,
Some worthier place to guide her worthy will.
Where princes peers her due deserts may see,
And I content her servant there to be.
Ever or Never.
Gascoignes passion.
I Smile sometimes although my grief be great,
To hear and see these lovers paint their pain,
And how they can in pleasant rimes repeat,
The passing pangs, which they in fancies feign.
But if I had such skill to frame a verse
I could more pain than all their pangs rehearse.
Some say they find nor peace, nor power to fight,
Which seems strange: but stranger is my state:
I dwell in dole, yet soiorne with delight,
Reposed in rest, yet weried with debate.
For flat repulse, might well apease my will
But fancy fights, to try my fortune still.
Some other say they hope, yet live in dread,
They friese, they flame, they fly alofte, they fall,
But I nor hope with hap to rai^e my head,
Nor fear to stoop, for why my gate is small.
Nor can I friese, with cold to kill my heart,
Nor yet so flame, as might consume my smarte.
How live I then, which thus draw forth my days?
Or tell me how, I found this fever first?
What fits I feel? what distance? what delays?
What grief? what ease? what like I best? what worst?
These things they tell, which seek redress of pain,
And so will I, although I coumpt it vain.
I live in love, even so I love to live,
(Oh happy state, twice happy he that finds it)
But love to life this cognizance does give,
This badge this mark, to every man that minds it,
Love lends life, which (dying) cannot die,
Nor living live: and such a life lead I.
The sunny days which glad the saddest wights,
Yet never shine to clear my misty Moon,
No quiet sleep, a^^dde the mooneshine nights
Can close mine eyes, when I am woe by gone.
In^o such sh^oes my peevish sorrow shrowdes,
That Su^^e and Moon, are s^^ll to me in clouds.
And feuerlike I seed my fancy still,
Which such repast, as most empaires my health,
Which fever first I caught by wanton will,
When coals of kind did stir my blood by stelth:
And gazing eyes, in beauty put such trust
That love enflamd my liver all with lust.
My fits are like the fever Ectyck fits,
Which one day quakes within and burns without,
The next day heat within the boosoms sits,
And shiuring cold the body goes about.
So is my heart most hot when hope is cold,
And quaketh most when I most heat behold.
Tormented thus without delays I stand,
Always in one and evermore shall be,
In greatest grief when help is nearest hand,
And best at ease if death might make me free:
Delighting most in that which hurts my heart,
And hating change which might renew my smart.
Yet you dear dame: Lenuoie.
to whom this cure perteines,
Devise betimes some drammes for my disease,
A noble name shall be your greatest games,
Whereof be sure, if you will work mine ease.
And though fond fools set forth their fitts as fast,
Yet grant with me that Gascoignes passion past.
Ever or Never.
Gascoignes libell of Divorce.
Divorce me now good death, from love and lingering life,
That one has been my concubine, that other was my wife.
In youth I lived with love, she had my lusty days,
In age I thought with lingering l^fe to stay my wa^dering ways,
But now abusde by both, I come for to complain
To thee good death, in who^e my help does wholly now remain,
My libell to behold: wherein I do protest,
The process of my plaint is true, wherein my grief does rest*
First love my concubine, whom I have kept so trim,
Even she for whom I seemd of yore, in seas of joy to swim:
To whom I dare auow, that I have served as well,
And played my part as gallantly, as he that bears the bell:
She cast me off long since, and holds me in disdain,
I cannot pranke to please her now, my vaunting is but vain.
My writhled cheeks bewray, that pride of heat is past,
My stagring stepps eke tell the truth, that nature fades fast
My quaking crooked joints, are combred with the crampe,
The box of oil is wasted well, which once did feed my lamp.
The greenesse of my years, does wither now so sore,
That lusty love leapes quite away, and likes me no more.
And love my le^^man gone, what liking can I take?
In loathsome life that crooked croanc, although she be my make?
She cloyes me with the cough, her comfort is but cold
She bids me give mine age for alms, where first my youth was sold.
No day can pass my head, but she begins to brall,
No merry thoughts conceived so fast, but she co^founds them all.
When I pretend to please, she ouerthwarts me still,
When I would faynest part with her, she ouerwayes my will.
Be judge then gentle death, and take my cause in hand,
Consider every circumstance, mark how the case does stand.
Percase thou will allege, that cause thou can no^^e see,
But that I like not of that one, that other likes not me:
Yes gentle judge give ear, and thou shall see me prove,
My concubine incontinent, a common whore is love.
And in my wife I find, such discord and debate,
As no man living can endure the torments of my state.
Wherefore thy sentence say, divorce me from them both,
Since only thou may right my wrongs, good death now be not loath
But cast thy pearcing d^rt, into my panting breast,
That I may leave both love and life, and thereby parchase rest.
Haud ictus sapio.
Gascoignes praise of his Mystres.
THe hap which Paris had, as due for his desert,
Who fauorde Venus for her face, and skornde Meneruas art:
May serve to warn the wise, y^ they no more esteem
The glistering gloss of bewties blaze, than reason should it deem.
Dame Priams yo^ger son, found out ye fairest dame,
That ever troade on Troyane mold, what followed of the same?
I list not brute her bale, let others spread it forth,
But for his part to spek my mind his choice was little worth
My meaning is but this, who marks the outward show
And never gropes for grafts of grace which in ye mind should grow:
May chance upon such choice as trusty Troylus had
And dwell in dole as Paris did, when he would feign be glad.
How happy then am I? whose hap has bin to find
A mistress first that does excel in virtues of the mind,
And yet therewith has ioind, such favor and such grace,
As Pa^dars niece if she were here would quickly give her place,
Within whose worthy breast, dame Bounty seeks to dwell.
And says to beawty, yield to me, since I do thee excel.
Between whose heavenly eyes, does right remorce appear,
And pity placed by the same, does much amend her cheer.
Who in my dangers deep, did deigne to do me good,
Who did relieve my heuie heart, and sought to save my blood,
Who first encreast my friends, and overthrew my foes,
Who loved all them that wished me well, an liked none but those.
O Ladies give me leave, I praise her not so far,
Since she does pass you all, as much, as Tytan stains a star.
You hold such servants dear, as able are to serve,
She held me dear, when I poor soul, could no good thing deserve.
You set by them that swim in all prosperity,
She set by me when as I was in great calamity.
You best esteem the brave, and let the purest pass,
She best esteemd my poor good will, all naked as it was.
But whether am I went? what humor guides my brain?
I seek to wey the woolsacke down, with one poor pepper grain.
I seem to pen her praise, that does surpass myskill,
I strive to row against the tide, I hoppe against the hill.
Then let these few suffice, she Helene stains for hew,
Dydo for grace, Cressyde for cheer, and is as Thisbye true.
Yet if you further crave, to have her name displaide,
Dame Favor is my mistres name, dame Fortune is her maid.
Attamen ad solitum.
Gascoignes Lullable.
SIng lullabie, as women do,
Wherewith they bring their babes to rest,
And lullabie can I sing to
As womanly as can the best.
With lullabie they still the child,
And if I be not much beguilde,
Full many wanton babes have I
Which must be stilld with lullabie.
First lullaby my youthful years,
It is now time to go to bed,
For crooked age and hoarie hears,
Have won the haven within my head:
With Lullabye then youth be still,
With Lullabye content thy will,
Since courage quayles, and co^mes behind,
Go sleep, and so beguyle thy mind.
Next Lullabye my gazing eyes,
Which woonted were to glaunce apace:
For every glass may now suffice,
To show the furrows in my face:
With Lullabye then wynke a while,
Witth Lullabye your looks beguyle:
Let no sayre face, nor beauty bryghte
Entice you efte with vain delyght.
And Lullabye my wanton will,
Let reasons rule now reign thy thought,
Since all too late I find by skill,
How dear I have thy fancies bought:
With Lullabye now take thine ease,
With Lullabye thy doubts appease:
For trust to this, if thou be still,
My body shall obey thy will.
Eke Lullabye my loving boy,
My little Robyn take thy rest,
Since Age is cold, and nothing coye,
Keep close thy coin, for so is best:
With Lullabye be thou content,
With Lullabye thy lusts relente,
Let others pay which have mo pence,
Thou art to poor for such expense.
Thus Lullabie my youth, mine eyes,
My will, my ware, and all that was,
I can no mo delays devise,
But welcome pain, let pleasure pass:
With Lullabye now take your leave,
With Lullabye your dreams deceive,
And when you rise with waking eye,
Remember Gascoignes Lullabye,
Ever or Never.
Gascoignes Recantation.
Now must I needs recant the words which once I spoke,
Fond fancy fumes so nigh my nose, I needs must smell the smoke:
And better were to bear a faggot from the fire,
Than wilfully to burn and blaze in flames of vain desire.
You Judges then give ear, you people mark me well
I say, both heaven and earth record the tale which I shall tell,
And know that dread of death, nor hope of better hap,
Have forced or persuaded me to take my turning cap,
But even that mighty Jove of his great clemency,
Has given me grace at last to judge the truth from heresy:
I say then and profess, with free and faithful heart,
That women's vows are nothing else but snares of secret smart:
Their beauties blaze are baytes which seem of pleasant taste,
But who deuoures the hidden hook, eats poison for repast:
Their smyling is deceit, their fair words traynes of treason,
Their wit always so full of wyles, it skorneth rules of reason.
Percase some present here, have heard my self of yore,
Both teach and preach the contrary, my fault was then the more:
I grant my works were these, first one Anatomy,
Wherein I painted every pang so loves perplexity:
Next that I was araignde, with George hold up thy hand,
Wherein I yielded Beauties thrall, at her command to stand:
Mine eyes so blinded were, (good people mark my tale)
That once I soong, I Bathe in Bliss, amidde my weary Bale:
And many a frantike verse, then from my pen did pass,
In waves of wicked heresy so deep I drowned was,
All which I now recante, and here before you burn
Those trifling books, from whose lewd lore my tippet here I turn,
And henceforth will I write, how mad is that man's mind,
Which is entyst by any train to trust in womankynde.
I spare not wedlock I, who list that state advance,
Ask Astolfe king of Lumbardie, how trim his dwarf could dau^ce.
Wherefore fair Ladies you, that hear me what I say,
If you hereafter see me slip, or seem to go astraye:
Or if my tongue reuolte from that which now it says,
Then plague me thus, Believe it not, for this is now my faith.
Haud ictus sapio.
I have herd master Gascoignes memory commended by these verses following,
the which were written upon this occasion. He had (in midst of his youth)
determined to abandone all vain delights and to return unto Greyes Inn,
there to undertake again the study of the common laws. And being required by
five sundry gentlemen to wrighte in verse somewhat worthy to be remembered,
before he entered into their fellowship, he compiled these five sundry sor^es of
meter upon five sundry theames which they delivered unto him, and the first
was at request of Francis K^^welma^she who delivered him this theme Audaces
fortuna iunat. And thereupon he wrote this Sonnet following.
IF yelding fear, or cancred villainy,
In Caesar's haughty heart had taken the charge,
The walls of Rome had not been rearde so hye,
Nor yet the mighty empire left so large.
If Menelaus could have ruled his will
With foul reproach to loose his fair delight,
Then had the stately towers of Troy stood still,
And Greeks with grudge had drunk their own despite.
If dread of drenching waves or fear of fire,
Had stayde the wandering Prince amidde his race,
Ascanius then, the fruit of his desire
In Lauine land had not possessed place,
But true it is, where lottes do light by chance,
There Fortune helps the boldest to advance.
Sic tuli.
The next was at request of Antonie Kynwelma: she, who delivered him this
theme, Satis sufficit, and thereupon he vvrote as follovveth.
THe vain excess of flattering Fortunes gifts,
Enuenometh the mind with vanity,
And beats the restless brain with endless driftes
To stay the staff of worldly dignity:
The beggar stands in like extremity.
Wherefore to lack the most, and leave the least,
I coumpt enough as good as any feast.
By too too much Dan Croesus caught his death,
And bought with blood the price of glittering gold,
By too too little many one lacks breath
And strives in streets a mirroure to behold:
So pride for heat, and pouert pynes for cold.
Wherefore to lack the most, and leave the least,
I co^mpt enough as good as any feast.
Store makes no sore, lo this seems contrary,
And mo the meryer is a Proverb eke,
But store of sores may make a malady,
And one to many makes some to seek,
When two be met that bankette with a leeke:
Wherefore to lack the most, and leave the least,
I coumpte enough as good as any feast.
The rich man surfetteth by gluttony,
Which feeds still, and never stands content,
The poor again he pines for penury,
Which lives with lack, when all and more is spente:
So too much and too little both be shente.
Wherefore to lack the most, and leave the least,
I coumpte enough as good as any feast.
The Conqueror with discontented swaye,
Does raise up rebels by his avarice,
The recreaunt does yield himself a pray,
To forrayne soil by sloth and cowardyse:
So too much and too little, both be vice.
Wherefore to lack the most, and leave the least.
I coumpte enough as good as any feast.
If so thy wife be too too fair of face,
It draws one guest (too many) to thine inn:
If she be foul, and foiled with disgrace,
In other pillowes prickst thou many a pin:
So foul prove fools, and fayrer fall to sin.
Wherefore to lack the most, and leave the least,
I coumpte enough as good as any feast.
And of enough, enough, and now no more,
Because my brains no better can devise,
When things be ^adde, a small sum makes store.
So of such verse a few may soon suffice:
Yet still to this my weary pen replies.
That I said last, and though you like it least,
It is enough, and as good as a feast.
Sic tuli,
John Vaughan delivered him this theme. Magnum vectigal parcimonia,
whereupon he vvrote thus.
THe common speech is, spend and God will send,
But what sends he? a bottell and a bag,
A staff, a wallet and a woeful end,
For such as list in bravery so to brag.
Then if thou covet come enough to spend,
Learn first to spare thy budget at the brinke,
So shall the bottom be the faster bound:
But he that list with lavish hand to link,
(In like expense) a penny with a pound,
May chance at last to sit aside and shrink
His harbraind head without dame deinties door.
Hick, Hobbe and Dick with cloutes upon their knee,
Have many times more goonhole groates in store,
And change of crowns more quick at call than he,
Which let their lease and took their rent before.
For he that rappes a royal on his cappe,
Before he put one penny in his pursse,
Had need turn quick and broch a better tappe,
Or else his drink may chance go down the wursse.
I not deny but some men have good hap,
To climb alofte by scales of courtly grace,
And win the world with liberality:
Yet he that yerks old angels out apace,
And has no new to purchase dignity,
When orders fall, may chance to lack his grace.
For haggard hawks mislike an empty hand:
So stiffely some stick to the mercers stall,
Till suits of silk have swet out all their land.
So often thy neighbors banquet in thy hall,
Till Dauie Debet in thy parlor stand,
And bids thee welcome to thine own decay.
I like a Lions looks not worth a leeke
When every Fox beguyles him of his pray:
What sauce but sorrow serves him a week,
Which all his cates consumes in one day?
First use thy stomach to a stand of ale,
Before thy Malmesey come in Marchantes books,
And rather wear (for shifte) thy shirte of male,
Than tear thy silken sleeves with teynter hooks.
Put feathers in thy pillowes great and small,
Let them be princkt with plumes that gape for plummes,
Heap up both gold and silver safe in hooches,
Catch, snatche, and scratche for scrapings and for crummes,
Before thou deck thy hatte (on high) with brooches.
Let first thine one hand hold fast all that commes,
Before that other learn his letting fly:
Remember still that soft fire makes sweet malte,
No haste but good (who means to multiply:)
Bought wit is dear, and dressed with sour salt,
Repentance commes to late, and then say I,
Who spares the first and keeps the last unspent,
Shall find that Sparing yeldes a goodly rent.
Sic tuli.
Alexander Neuile delivered him this theme, Sat cito, si sat been, whereupon
he compiled these seven Sonets in sequence, therein bevvraying his own Nimis
cito: and therewith his Vix been, as follows.
IN haste post haste, when first my wandering mind,
Beheld the glistering Court with gazing eye,
Such deep delyghtes I seemde therein to find,
As might beguyle a grauer guest than I.
The stately pomp of Princes and their peers,
Did seem to swim in flouddes of beaten gold,
The wanton world of young delightful years,
Was not unlike a heaven for to behold,
Wherein did swarm (for every saint) a Dame,
So fair of hue, so fresh of their attire,
As might excel dame Cinthia for Fame,
Or conquer Cupide with his own desire.
These and such like were baytes that blazed still
Before mine eye to feed my greedy will.
2 Before mine eye to feed my greedy will,
Began muster eke mine old acquainted mates,
Who helpte the dishe (of vain delighte) to fill
My empty mouth with dayntie delicates:
And foolish boldness took the whippe in hand,
To lashe my life into this trustlesse trace,
Till all in haste I leapte aloof from land,
And hoyste up soil to catch a Courtly grace:
Each lingering day did seem a world of woe,
Till in that halplesse haven my head was brought:
Waves of wanhope so tossed me too and and fro,
In deep despair to drown my dreadful thought:
Each hour a day, each day a year did seem,
And every year a world my will did deem.
3 And every year a world my will did deem,
Till lo, at last, to Court now am I come,
A seemly swayne, that might the place beseem,
A gladsome guest embraste of all and some:
Not there content with common dignity,
My wandering eye in haste, (yea post post haste)
Beheld the blazing badge of bravery,
For want whereof, I thought my self disgraste:
Then peeuishe pride pufft up my swelling heart,
To further forth so hot an enterprise:
And comely cost began to play his part,
In praising patterns of mine own devise:
Thus all was good that might be got in haste,
To prinke me up, and make me higher plaste.
4 To prinke me up and make me higher plaste,
All came to late that tarried any time,
Pills of provision pleased not my taste,
They made my heels too heavy for to clyme:
Me thought it best that boughs of boystrous oak,
Should first be shread to make my feathers gaye,
Till at the last a deadly dinting stroke,
Brought down the bulk with edgetooles of decay:
Of every ferme I then let fly a lease,
To feed the pursse that paid for peevishness,
Till rent and all were fallen in such disease,
As scarce could serve to maynteyne cleanlynesse:
The bough, the bo^ie, ^yne, ferme, lease and land,
All were too little for the merchauntes hand.
5 All were too little for the merchantes hand,
And yet my brauerye bigger than his book:
But when this hot account was coldely scande,
I thought high time about me for to look:
With heavy cheer I cast my head abacke,
To see the fountain of my furious race,
Comparde my loss, my living, and my lack,
In equal balance with my iolye grace,
And saw expenses grating on the ground
Like lumpes of lead to press my pursse full often,
When light reward and recompense were found,
Fleeting like feathers in the wind alofte:
These thus comparde, I left the Court at large,
For why? the gaynes does seldom quitte the charge.
For why? the gaynes does seldom quitte the charge,
And so say I, by proof too dearly boughte,
My haste made waste, my brave and braynsicke barge,
Did floate to fast, to catch a thing of naught:
Wit^ leisure, measure, mean, and many mo,
I moughte have kept a chair of quiet state,
But hasty heads can not be settled so,
Till crooked Fortune give a crabbed mate:
As busye brains must beat on tickle toys,
As rash invention breeds a raw devise,
So sudden falls do hinder hasty joys,
And as swifte baytes do fleetest fyshe entice,
So haste makes waste, and therefore now I say,
No haste but good, where wisdom makes the way.
No haste but good, where wisdom makes the way,
For proof whereof we see the silly snayle,
Who sees the Soldiers carcass cast away,
With hot assault the Castle to assail,
By line and leisure clymes the lofty wall,
And winnes the turrettes top more cunningly,
Than doughtie Dicke, who lost his life and all,
With hoysting up his head too hastily:
The swiftest bitche brings forth the blyndest whelps,
The hottest Fevers coldest crampes ensue,
The nakedst need has ever latest helps:
With Neuyle then I find this proverb true,
That Haste makes waste, and therefore still I say,
No haste but good, where wisdom makes the way.
Sic tuli.
Richard Courtop (the last of the five) gave him this theme, Durum aneum and
miserab^le aeuum, and thereupon he wrote in this wise.
WHen peerless Princes courts were free from flattery,
The Justice from unequal doom, the queste from perjury,
The pillars of the state, from proud presumption,
The clearkes from heresy, the Commons from rebellion:
Then right rewards were given, by swaye of due deserte,
Then virtues dearlings might be plaste aloft to play their part:
Then might they coumpt it true, that has been said of old,
The children of those happy days were borne in beds of gold,
And swadled in the same: the Nurse that gave them suck,
Was wife to Liberality, and lemman to Good luck.
When Caesar won the field, his captains caught the towns,
And every painful soldiers pursse was crammed full of crowns.
Licurgus for good laws, lost his own liberty,
And thought it better to prefer common commodity.
But now the times are turnde, it is not as it was,
The gold is gone, the silver sunk, and nothing left but brass.
To see a king encroache, what wonder should it seem,
When commons cannot be content, with country Dyade^me?
The Prince may dye a babe, trust up by treachery,
Where vain ambition does move trustlesse nobility.
Errors in pulpit preach, where faith in preesthood fails,
Promotion (not devotion) is cause why clergy quails.
Thus is the stage stakt out, where all these parts be plaide,
And I the prologue should pronounce, but that I am afraid.
First Cayphas plays the priest, and Herod sits as king,
Pylate the Judge, Judas the Iurour verdicte in does bring,
Uayne tatling plays the vice, well cladde in rich array.
And pore Tom Troth is laughed to skorn, with garments nothing gay*
The woman wan^onnesse, she comes with ticing train,
Pride in her pocket plays bo peep, and bawdrie in her brain.
Her handmaides be deceipte, danger, and dalliance,
Riot and Revel follow her, they be of her alliance:
Next these commes in Simme Swash, to see what stir they keep,
Climme of ye Clough the^ takes his heels, it is time for him to creep:
To pack the pageaunt up, commes Sorrow with a song,
He says these iestes can get no grotes, and all this gear goth wrong:
First pride without cause, why he sings the treble part,
The mean he mumbles out of tune, for lack of life and heart:
Cost lost, the counter Tenor chanteth on apace,
Thus all in discords stands the cliffe, and beggrie sings the base.
The players loose their pains, where so few pens are sturring,
Their garments wear for lack of gains, and fret for lack of furring
When all is done and past, was no part plaide but one,
For every player plaide the fool, till all be spent and gone.
And thus this foolish jest, I put in dogrell rhyme,
Because a crosier staff is best, for such a crooked time.
Sic Tuli.
And thus an end of these sieve theames, wherein has been noted, that as the
theames were sundry and altogether diverse, so Master Gascoigne did accomplish
them in five sundry sorts of meter, yea and that seems most strange, he
devised all these admounting to the number of.CCLVIII. verses, riding by the
way, writing none of them until he came at the end of his lourney, the which
was no longer than one day in riding, one day in ^arying with his friend, and
the third in returning to Greys lnne: a small time for such a task, neither
would I willingly undertake the like. The meetres are but rough in many places,
and yet are they true (cum licentia poetica) and I must needs confess, that
he has more commonly been over curious in delectation, then of haughti^ style
in his dilatations. And therefore let us pas^^ to the rest of his works.

Gascoignes gloze upon this text, Dominus ijs opus habet.
MY recklesse race is run, green youth and pride be past,
My riper mellowed years begin to follow on as fast.
My glancing looks are gone, which wonted were to pry
In every gorgeous garish glass that glistred in mine eye.
My sight is now so dim, it can behold none such,
No mirroure but the merry mean, can please my fancy much^,
And in that noble glass, I take delight to view,
The fashions of the wonted world, compared by the new.
For mark who list to look, each man is for him self,
And beats his brain to hord and heap this trash and worldly pelf.
O^r hands are closed up, great gifts go not abroad,
Few men will lend a lock of heye, but for to gain a load.
Give Gave is a good man, what need we lash it out,
The world is wo^drous fearful now, for danger bids men doubt.
And ask how chances this? or what means all this meede?
Forsooth the common answer is, because the Lord has need.
A noble jest by gisse, I find it in my glass,
The same freehold our Savior Christ, con^eyed to his ass.
A text to try the truth, and for this time full fit,
For where should we our lessons learn, but out of holy writ?
First mark our only God, which rules all the roast,
He sets a side all pomp and pride, wherein fond wordlings boast,
He is not fed with calves, as in the days of old,
He cares but little for their copes, that glister all of gold.
His train is not so great, as filthy Satan's band,
A smaller heard may serve to feed, at our great masters hand.
He likes no numbered prayers, to purchase popish meede,
He asks no more but penitence, thereof Cur Lord has need:
Next mark the heathens Gods, and by them shall we see,
They be not now so good fellows, as they were wont to be.
Jove, Mars, and Mercury, Dame Venus and the rest,
They banquet not as they were wont, they know it were not best:
They shrink into the clouds, and there they serve out need,
As planets and signs moveable, by destenies decreede.
So kings and princes both, have left their halles at large,
Their privy chambers cost enough, they cut off every charge:
And when an office falls, as chance sometimes may be,
First keep it close a year or twain, then geld it by the sea.
And give it out at last, but yet with this prouiso,
(A bridle for a brainsicke Jade) durante been placito.
Some think these ladders low, to climb alofte with speed:
Well let them creep at leisure the^, for sure the Lord has need.
Dukes Earls and Barons bold, have learnt like lesson now,
They break up house and come to court, they live not by ye plow*
Percase their rooms be skant, not like their stately boure,
A field bed in a corner coucht, a pallad on the flower.
But what for that? no force, they make thereof no boast,
They feed themselves with delycates, and at the princes cost.
And as for all their men, their pages and their swaynes,
They cloak the^ up with chynes of beef, to multiply their gains.
Themselves lie near to look, when any leaf does fall,
Such croomes were wont to feed poor grooms, but now y^ Lords lick al.
And why? oh sir, because, both dukes and lords have need,
I mock not I, my text is true, believe it as your creed.
Our prelates and our priests, can tell this text with me,
They can hold fast their fattest fermes, and let no lease go free.
They have both wife and child, which may not be forgot,
The scriptures say the Lord has neeed, and therefore blame the^ not.
Then come a little lower, unto the country knight,
The squier and the gentleman, they leave the country quite,
Their halles were all to large, their tables were to long,
The clouted shoes came in so fast, they kept to great a throng,
And at the porters lodge, where lubbers wont to feed,
The porter learnes to answer now, hence hence the Lord has need
His gests came in to thick, their diet was to great,
Their horses eat up all the hey, which should have fed his neat:
Their teeth were far to fine, to seed on porke and souf^,
Five flocks of sheep could scarce maintain good mutton for his house.
And when this count was cast, it was no biding here,
Unto the good town is he gone, to make his friends good cheer,
And welcome there that will, but shall I tell you how?
At his own dish he feeds them, that is the fashion now,
Side bords be laid aside, the tables end is gone,
His cook shall make you noble cheer, but ostler has he none.
The chargers now be changde, wherein he wont to eat,
An old fruit dish is big enough to hold a iointe of meat,
A sallad or a sauce, to taste your cates with all,
Some strange devise to ^eede men's eyes, men's stomachs now be small.
And when the tenauntes come to pay their quarters rent,
They bring some foul at Midsommer, and a dish of Fish in Lent,
At Christmasse a capon, at Mighte^masse a goose:
And somewhat else at Newyeres tide, for fear their lease fly loose.
Good reason by my troth, when Gentlemen lack groates,
Let Plowmen pinch it out for pence, and patch their russet coats:
For better Fermers fast, than Manor houses fall,
The Lord has need, then says the text, bring old Ass, colt and all.
Well lowest now at last, let see the country loute,
And mark how he does swink and sweat to bring this gear about:
His feastings be but few, cast whipstockes clou^e his shooen,
The wheaten loaf is locked up, as soon as dinners done:
And where he wont to keep a lubber, two or three,
Now has he learnd to keep no more but Sim him son and he,
His wife and Mawde his maid, a boy to pitche the carte,
And turn him up at Hal^ontyde, to feel the wynters smarte:
Dame Alyson his wife does know the price of meal,
Her bridecakes be not half so big as she was wont to steal:
She wears no silver hooks, she is content with wursse,
Her pendants and her silver pinnes she puts in her pursse.
Thus learn I by my glass, that merry mean is best,
And he most wise that fynds the mean to keep his tackling best.
Perchance some open mouth will mutter now and than,
And at the market tell his mate, our landlords a zore man:
He racketh up our rentes, and keeps the best in hand,
He makes a wondrous deal of good out of his own measne land:
Yea let such pelters prate, saint Needam be their speed,
We need no text to answer them, but this, The Lord has need.
Ever or never.
Gascoignes good morovv.
YOu that have spente the silente night
In sleep and quiet rest,
And joy to see the cheerful light
That ryseth in the East:
Now clear your voice, now cheer your heart,
Come help me now to sing:
Each willing wight come bear a part,
To praise the heavenly King.
And you whom care in prison keeps,
Or sickness does suppress,
Or secret sorrow breaks your sleeps,
Or dolours do distress:
Yet bear a part in doleful wise,
Yea think it good accord,
And acceptable sacrifice,
Each sprite to praise the Lord.
The dreadful night with darkesome storme^
Had ouerspread the light,
And sluggishe sleep with drowsynesse,
Had ouerpreste our might:
A glass wherein we may behold
Each storm that stoppes our breath,
Our bed the grave, our clothes like molde,
And sleep like dreadful death.
Yet as this deadly night did last,
But for a little space,
And heavenly day now night is paste,
Does show his pleasant face:
So must we hope to see Gods face,
At last in heaven on hie,
When we have chaung'd this mortal place,
For Immortality.
And of such happes and heavenly joys,
As then we hope to hold,
All earthly sightes, all worldly toys,
Are tokens to behold:
The day is like the day of doom,
The sun, the Son of man,
The skies the heavens, the earth the toombe
Wherein we rest till than.
The Raynbowe bending in the sky,
Bedeckte with sundry hewes,
Is like the seat of God on hye,
And seems to tell these news:
That as thereby he promised
To drown the world no more,
So by the blood which Christ has shead,
He will our health restore.
The mistie clouds that fall sometime,
And ouercaste the skies,
Are like to troubles of our time,
Which do but dim our eyes:
But as such dewes are dried up quite,
When Phoebus shows his face,
So are such fancies put to flighte,
Where God does guide by grace.
The carrion Crow, that lothesome beast,
Which cries against the rain,
Both for her hew and for the rest,
The Devil resembles plain:
And as with goonnes we kill the Crow,
For spoylyng our relief,
The Devil so must we overthrow,
With goonshot of belief.
The little Birds which sing so sweet,
Are like the angels voice,
Which render God his praises meet,
And teach us to rejoice:
And as they more esteem that myrthe,
Than dread the nights anoye,
So must we deem our days on earth,
But hell to heavenly joy.
Unto which Joys for to attain,
God grant us all his grace,
And send us after worldly pain,
In heaven to have a place.
Where we may still enjoy that light,
Which never shall decay:
Lord for thy mercy lend us might
To see that joyful day.
Haud ictus sapio.
Gascoignes good night.
WHen thou have spent the lingering day in pleasure and delight,
Or after toil and weary way, do seek to rest at night:
Unto thy pains or pleasures past, add this one labor yet,
Ere sleep close up thine eye too fast, do not thy God forget,
But search within thy secret thoughts what deeds did thee befall:
And if thou find amiss in ought, to God for mercy call:
Yea though thou find nothing amiss, which thou can call to mind
Yet evermore remember this, there is the more behind:
And think how well soever it be, that thou have spent the day,
It came of God, and not of thee, so to direct thy way.
Thus if thou try thy daily deeds, and pleasure in this pain,
Thy life shall cleanse thy corn from weeds, and thine shall be y^ gain:
But if thy sinful sluggishe eye, will venture for to wink,
Before thy wading will may try, how far thy soul may sink,
Beware and wake, for else thy bed, which soft and smoothe is made,
May heap more harm upon thy head, than blows of enmies blade.
Thus if this pain procure thine ^ase, in bed as thou doste lie,
Perhaps it shall not God displease, to sing thus soberly:
I see that sleep is lent me here, to ease my weary bones,
As death at last shall eke appear, to ease my grievous groans.
My daily sports, my paunch full ^ed, have causde my drousie eye,
As careless life in quiet led, might cause my soul to dye:
The streking arms, the yauning breath, which I to bedward use,
Are patterns of the pangs of death, when life will me refuse:
And of my bed each sundry part in shadows does resemble
The sundry shapes of death, whose dart sh^l make my flesh to tremble,
My bed it self is like y^ grave, my sheets y^ winding sheet,
My clothes the moulde which I must have to cover me most mee^:
The hungry fleas which friske so fresh, to worms I can compare*
Which greedily shall gnaw my flesh, and leave the bones full bare:
The waking Cock that early crows to wear the night away,
Puts in my mind the trumpe that blows before the latter day*
And as I rise up lustily, when sluggishe sleep is paste,
So hope I to rise joyfully, to Judgment at the last.
Thus will I wake, thus will I sleep, thus will I hope to rise,
Thus will I neither wayle nor weep, but sing in godly wise.
My bones shall in this bed remain, my soul in God shall trust,
By whom I hope to rise again from death and earthly dust.
Haud ictus sapio.
These good Morrow and good night, together with his Passion, his Libell of
divorce, his Lullabye, his Recantation, his De profund^s, and his farewell,
have very sweet notes adapted unto them: the which I would you should also
enjoy as well as my self. For I know you ^ill, delight to hear them. As also
other very good notes which I have for diverse other Ditties of other men's
deuyse which I have before rehearsed.

Gascoignes De profundis.
The occasion of the vvrighting hereof (as I have herd Master Gascoigne say)
was this* riding alone between Chelmisforde and London, his mind mu^ed upon
the d^yes past, and therewithal he began accuse his own con^cience of much
time misspent, when a great shoure of rain did overtake him, and he being
unprepared for the same, as in a lerken without a cloak, the wether being
very fair and unlikely to have changed so: he began to accuse him self of his
carelessness, and therevppon in his good disposition compiled first this
sonet, and afterward, the translated Psalm of Deprofundis as here follows.

THe Skies began scowle, orecast with mistie clo^des,
When (as I rode alone by London way,
Clokelesse, vnclad) thus did I sing and say:
Behold quoth I, bright Titan how he shroudes
His head abacke, and yelds the rain his reac^*
Till in his wrath, Dan ^oue have soust the (...),
And washed me wretch which in his travail toil.
But holla (here) does rudeness me apeach,
Since Jove is Lord and king of mighty power,
Which can command the sun to show his face,
And (when him list) to give the rain his place.
Why do not I my weary muses frame,
(Although I be well soused in this shoure,)
To wrighte some verse in honor of his name?
Gascoignes council to Douglasse Diue written upon this occasion. She had a
book wherein she had collected sundry good ditties of diverse men's doings, in
which book she would needs entreat him to write some verses. And
therevppon he vvrote as follovveth.
TO bind a bushe of thorns amongst sweet smelling flowers,
May make the posie seem the worse, and yet the fault is ours*
For throw away the thorn, and mark what will ensew,
The posie then will show it self, sweet, fair, and fresh of hew.
A puttocke set on pearche, fast by a falcons side,
Will quickly show it self a kight, as time has often tried.
And in my musing mind, I fear to find like fall,
As just reward to recompense my rash attempts withal.
Thou bidst, and I must bow, thou will that I shall write,
Thou can command my weary muse some verses to endite.
And yet perdie, thy book is fraughte with learned verse,
Such skill as in my musing mind I can none like rehearse.
What follows then for me? but if I must needs write,
To set down by the falcons side, my self a silly kight.
And yet the silly kight, well weyed in each degree,
May serve sometimes (as in his kind) for man's commodity.
The kight can weed the worm, from corn and costly ^eedes,
The kight ca^ kill the ^^owl^iwarpe, in pleasant meads y^ breeds:
Out of the stately streets, the kight can cleanse the filth,
As me^ can cle^se the worthless weeds, from fruteful fallowed tilth.
And only set aside the hens poor progeny,
I cannot see who can accuse the kight for fellonie.
The falcon, she must feed on partritch, and on quail,
A pigeon, plouer, ducke and drake, hearne, lapwing, teale, and ^aile,
Her hungry throat deuours both food and deintie fare,
Whereby I take occasion, thus boldly to compare.
And as a silly kight, (not falcon like that fly,
Nor yet presume to houer by mount Hellycon on hye)
I friendly yet presume, upon my friends request,
In barreine verse to show my skill, then take it for the best.
And Douty Douglas^e thou, that art of faulcons kind,
Give willing ear yet to the kight, and bear his words in mind.
Serve thou first God thy Lord, and praise him evermore,
Obey thy Prince and love thy make, by him set greatest store.
Thy Parents follow next, for honor and for awe,
Thy friends use always faithfully, for so commands the law.
Thy seemly self at last, thou shalt likewise regard,
And of thy self this lesson learn, and take it as reward:
That look how far deserts, may seem in thee to shine,
So far thou may set out thy self, without empeach or crime.
For this I dare a^^w, without self love (alight)
It can scarce be that virtue dwell, in any earthly wight.
But if in such self love, thou seem to wade so far,
As fall to foul presumption, and judge thy self a star,
Beware betimes and think, in our Etymology,
Such faults are plainly called pride, and in french Surquydrye.
Lo thus can I pore kight, adventure for to teach,
The falcon fly, and yet forewarne, she row not past her reach.
Thus can I weed the worm, which seeks to devour
The seeds of virtue, which might grow within thee every hour.
Thus can I kill the mowle, which else would overthrow
The good foundation of thy fame, with every little blow.
And thus can I convey, out of thy comely breast,
The sluttish heaps of p^euish pride, which might defile the rest.
Perchance some falcons fly, which will not greatly grutch,
To learn thee first to love thy self, and then to love to mutch.
But I am none of those, I list not so to range,
I have ma^s meat enough at home, what need I the^ seek change.
I am no peacocke I: my feathers be not gay,
And though they were, I see my feet such fond affectes to stay.
I list not set to sale a thing so little, worth,
I rather could keep close my crease, than seek to set it forth.
Wherefore if in this verse, which thou commands to flow,
Thou chance to fall on construing, whereby some doubts may grow,
Yet grant this only boon, peruse it twice or thrice,
Digest it well ear thou condemn the depth of my devise.
And use it like the nut, first crack the outward shell,
Then try the kirnell by the taste, and it may please thee well.
Do not as barbers do, which wash beards curiously,
Then cut them off, then cast them out, in open streets to lie.
Remember therewithal, my money is tied in chains,
The goonshot of calamiti^ has battred all my brains.
And though this verse escape out, take thou thereat no mark,
It is but like a hedlesse fly, that tumbleth in the dark.
It was thine own request, remember so it was,
Wherefore if thou dislike the same, then license it to pass
Into my breast again, from whence it flew in have,
Full like a kight which not deserves by falcons to be plast:
And like a stubbed thorn, which may not seem to serve,
To stand with such sweet smelling flowers, like praises to deserve.
Yet take this harmless thorn, to pick thy teeth withal,
A tooth pick serves some use perdie, although it be but small.
And when thy teeth therewith, be piked fair and clean,
Then bend thy to^g no worse to me, than mine to thee has been.
Ever or Never.
Gascoignes council given to master Bartholmew Withipoll a little before his
latter journey to Geane. 1572.
MIne own good Bat, before thou hoise up sail,
To make a furrowe in the foming seas,
Content thy self to hear for thine avail,
Such harmless words, as ought thee not displease.
First in thy journey, gape not over much,
What? laughest thou Batte, because I write so plain?
Bleeue me now it is a friendly touch,
To use few words where friendship does remain.
And for I find, that fault has run to fast,
Both in thy flesh, and fancy to sometime,
Me thinks plain dealing bids me to cast
This bone at first amid my dogrell rhyme.
But shall I say, to give thee grave advise?
(Which in my head is (God he knows) full geazon)?
Then mark me well, and though I be not wise,
Yet in my rhyme, thou may perhaps find reason.
First every day, beseech thy God on (...),
So to direct thy staggring steps always,
That he which every secret thought does see
May hold thee in, when thou would go astray:
And that he deigne to send thee safe retoure,
And quick dispatche of that which is thy due:
Let this my Batte be both thy prime and hour,
Wherein also commend to Nostre Dieu*
Thy good Companion and my very friend,
To whom I should (but time would not permit)
Have taken pain some ragged ryme to send
In trusty token, that I not forget
His courtesy: but this is debte to thee,
I promysde it, and now I mean to pay:
What was I saying? sir, will you see
How soon my wits were wandering astraye?
I say, pray thou for thee and for thy mate,
So shipmen sing, and though the note be plain,
Yet sure the music is in heavenly state,
When friends sing so, and know not how to feign.
Then next to GOD, thy Prince have still in mind,
Thy countries honor, and the common wealth:
And flee from them, which fled with every wind
From native soil, to foreign coasts by stealth:
Their traynes are trustlesse, tending still to treason,
Their smoothed tongues are lyned all with guyle,
Their power slender, scarsly woorthe two peason,
Their malice much, their wits are full of wyle:
Eschew them then, and when thou see them, say,
Da, da, sir K, I may not come at you,
You cast a snare your country to betraye,
And would you have me trust you now for true?
Remember Batte the foolish blinkeyed boy
Which was at Rome, thou know whom I mean,
Remember eke the preatie beardlesse toye,
Whereby thou foundst a safe return to Geane,
Do so again: (God shield thou should have need,)
But rather so, than to forswear thy self:
A loyal heart, (believe this as thy Creed)
Is evermore more worth than worldly pelf.
And for one lesson, take this more of me,
There are three Ps almost in every place,
From which I counsel thee always to flee,
And take good heed of them in any case,
The first is poison, perilous in deed
To such as travail with a heavy pursse:
And thou my Batte beware, for thou haste need,
Thy pursse is lynde with paper, which is wursse:
Thy bills of credit will not they think thou,
Be bayte to set Italyan hands on work?
Yes by my faye, and never worsse than now,
When every knave has leisure for to lurk,
And knows thou come for the shelles of Christ:
Beware therefore, where ever that thou go,
It may fall out that thou shalt be entiste
To suppe sometimes with a Magnifico,
And have a fico foysted in thy dishe,
Because thou should disgeste thy meat the better:
Beware therefore, and rather feed on fish,
Than learn to spell fine flesh with such a Letter.
Some may present thee with a pound or twain
Of Spanishe soape to wash thy lynnen white:
Beware therefore, and think it were small gain,
To save thy shirte, and cast thy skin off quite:
Some cunning man may teach thee for to ride,
And stuff thy saddle all with Spanishe wool,
Or in thy stirrops have a toye so tide,
As both thy legs may swell thy buskins full:
Beware therefore, and bear a noble port,
Drink not for thyrste before an other taste:
Let none outlandishe Taylour take disporte
To stuff thy doublet full of such Bumbaste,
As it may cast thee in unkindly sweat,
And cause thy hair per company to glyde,
Strangers are fine in many a propre feate:
Beware therefore, the second P. is Pride,
More perilous than was the first by far,
For that infectes but only blood and bones,
This poisons all, and minds of men does mar,
It fyndeth nookes to creep in for the nones:
First from the mind it makes the heart to swell,
From thence the flesh is pampred every part,
The skin is taught in Dyers shoppes to dwell,
The hair is curlde or frisled up by art:
Believe me Batte, our Countrymen of late
Have caughte such knackes abroad in forayne land,
That most men call them Devils incarnate,
So singular in their conceiptes they stand:
Now sir, if I shall see your maistershippe
Come home disguysde and cladde in queynt array,
As with a pyketoothe biting on your lip,
Your brave Mustachyos turnde the Turkey way,
A Coptanckt hatte made on a Flemmishe block,
A nyghtgowne cloak down trayling to your ^oes,
A slender sloppe close couched to your docke,
A curtold slipper, and a short sylke hose:
Bearyng your Rapier point above the hilte,
And looking big like Marquise of al Beef,
Then shall I coumpte your toil and travail spilte,
Because my second P, with you is chief.
But forwards now, although I stand a while,
My hindmoste P, is worsse than both these two,
For it both soul and body does defyle,
With fouler faults than both those other do.
Short tale to make, this is a double P,
(God shield my Batte, should bear it in his breast)
And with a dashe it spelleth Papistrie,
A perlous P, and woorsse than both the rest:
Now though I find no cause for to suspecte
My Batte in this, because he has been tryde,
Yet since the polshorne Prelates can infecte
Kings, Emperors, Princes, and the world so wide.
And since their brazen heaven bears such a gloss,
As most that travail come home per Papist,
Or else much woorsse (which is a heavy less)
Drowned in errors like an Atheist:
Therefore I thought it meet to warn my friend
Of this foul P, and so an end of Ps.
Now for thy diet mark my tale to end,
And thank me then, for that is all my fees.
See thou exceed not in three double Us,
The first is Wine, which may inflame thy blood,
The second, Women, such as haunte the stews,
The third is Wilfulness, which does no good.
These three eschew, or temper them always:
So shall my Batte prolong his youthful years,
And see long George again, with happy days,
Who if he be as faithful to his feeres,
As he was wont, will daily pray for Batte,
And for Pencoyde: and if it fall out so,
That James a Parrye do but make good that,
Which he has said: and if he be (no, no)
The best companyon that long George can find,
Then at the Spavve I promise for to be
In Auguste next, if God turn not my mind,
Where as I would be glad thy self to see:
Till then farewell, and thus I end my song,
Take it in gree, for else thou do me wrong.
Hand ictus sapi^.
Gascoignes Epitaph upon captain Bourcher late slain in the vvarres in
Zel^^d^, the which has been termed the tale of a stone as follovveth.
Fie Captains fie, your tongs are tied to close,
Your soldiers eke by silence purchase shame:
Can no man pen in meter nor in prose,
The life, the death, the valiante acts, the fame,
The birth, behauioure, nor the noble name,
Of such a feere as you in sight have lost?
Alas such pains would quickly quite the cost.
Bourcher is dead, whom each of you did know,
Yet no man writes one word to painte his praise,
His sprite on high, his carcass here below,
Do both condemn your doting idle days:
Yet cease they not to sound his worthy ways,
Who lived to die, and died again to live,
With death dear bought, he did his death forgive.
He might for birth have boasted noble race,
Yet were his manners meek and always m^lde,
Who gave a guess by gazing on his face,
And iudgde thereby, might quickly be beguilde:
In fiel^e a lion and in town a child,
Fierce to his foe, but courteouse to his friend.
Alas the while, his life so soon should end?
To serve his Prince his life was ever pressed,
To serve his God, his death he thought but dew,
In all attempts as froward as the best,
And all to forwards which we all may rue,
His life so showed, his death eke tried it true:
For where Gods foes in thickest prease did stand,
Bourcher caught bane with bloody sword in hand.
And mark the courage of a noble heart,
When he in bed lay wounded wondrous sore,
And heard alarm, he soon forgot his smarte,
And callde for arms to show his service more:
I will to fielde^ quoth he) and God before.
Which said, he sailde into more quiet coast,
Still praising God, and so gave up the ghost.
Now muze not reader though we stones can speak,
Or write sometimes the deeds of worthy ones,
I could not hold although my heart should break,
Because here by me buried are his bones,
But I must tell this tale thus for the nones.
When men cry mumme and keep such silence long,
Then stones must speak, else dead men shall have wrong.
Finis quod Marmaduke M^rbl^stone.
Gascoignes devise of a mask for the right honorable Viscount Mountacute,
written (as I have heard Master Gascoigne himself declare) upon this occasion,
when the said L. had prepa^ed to solemnise two marriages between his son and
heir and the daughter of sir William Do^mer knighte, and between the son and
heir of sir William Dormer, and the daughter of the said L. Mountacute: there
were eighte gentlemen (all of blood or a^^iance to the said L. Mountacute)
which had determined to present a mask at the day appointed for the said
marriages, and so far they had proceeded therein, that they had already bought
furniture of silks. etc. and had caused their garments to be cut of the
Venetian fashion. New then they began to imagin^ that (without some special
demonstracio^) it would seem somewhat obscure to have Venetians presented
rather than other country men. Whereupon ^hey entreated Master Gascoigne to
deui^e some verses to be uttered by an Actor wherein might be some discourse
convenient to render a good cause of the Ve^etians presence. Master Gascoigne
calling to mind that there is a noble house of the Mountac^tes in Italy, and
therewithal that the L. Mountacute here does quarter the cote of an ancient
english gentleman called Mounth^rme, and ^ath the inheritance of the said
house, did therevppon devise to bring in ^ Boy of the age of twelve or xiiij.
years, who should feign that he was a Mounthermer by the fathers side, and a
Mou^tacute by the mothers side, and that his father being slain at the last
wars against the Tu^ke, and he there taken, he was recoue^ed by the Venetians
to their last victory, and with them sailing toward Venice, they were driven
by tempest upon these coasts, and so came to the marriage upon report as
follows, and the said Boy pronounced the devise in this ^orte.
WHat wonder you my Lords? why gaze you gentlemen?
And wherefore marvel you mez Dames, I pray you tell me then?
Is it so rare a sight, or yet so strange a toy,
Amongst so many noble peers, to see one Pouer Boy?
Why? boys have been allowed in every kind of age,
As Gany^ede that pretty boy, in Heaven is Jove his page.
Cupid that mighty God although his force be fearse,
Yet is he but a naked boy, as Poets do rehearse.
And many a pretty boy a mighty man has proved,
And served his Prince at all assayes deserving to be loved.
Percase my strange attire my glittering golden gite,
Does either make you marvel thus, or move you with delight.
Yet wonder not my Lords for if your honors please,
But even to give me ear awhile, I will your doubts apease.
And you shall know the cause, wherefore these robes are worn,
And why I go outlandish like, yet being english borne.
And why I thus presume, to press into this place,
And why I (simple boy) am bold to look such men in face.
First then you must per stand, I am no stranger I,
But english boy, in England borne, and bred but even hereby.
My father was a knight Mount Hermer was his name,
My mother of the Mountacutes, a house of worthy fame.
My father from his youth was trained up in field,
And always took his chief delight, in helmet spear and shield.
Soldado for his life, and in his happy days
Soldado like has lost his life, to his immortal praise.
The thundering fame which blew about the world so wide,
How that the christian enmie, the Turk that prince of pride,
Addressed had his power, to swarm upon the seas,
With galleys, foists, and such like ships, well armde at all assays,
And that he made his vaunt, the gredy fish to glut,
With g^bs of christians carcasses, in cruel pieces cut.
These news of this report, did pierce my fathers ears,
But never touched his noble heart, with any spark of fears.
For well he knew the trade of all the ^urkishe wars,
And had amongst them shed his blood at many cruel iarres.
In Rhodes his race begone, a slender tall young man,
Where he by many martial feats, his spurs of knighthod wan.
Yea though the piece was lost, yet won he honor still,
And evermore against the ^urkes he warred by his will.
At Chios many know, how hardily he fought,
And how with streams of striving blood, his honor dear he bought.
At length enforst to yield with many captains mo,
He bought his liberty with lands and let his goods ago.
Zechynes of glistering gold, two thousand was his price,
The which to pay his lands must leap, for else he were unwise.
Believe me now my lords although the loss be mine,
Yet I confess them better sold, than like a slave to pine.
"For lands may come again, but liberty once lost,
"Can never find such recompense, as counteruailes the cost.
My self now know the case, who like my fathers lot,
Was like of late for to have lost my liberty god wot.
My father (as I say) enforste to leave his land
In mortgage to my mothers kin, for ready coin in hand,
Began now upon these new^s, which erst I did rehearse,
Prepare himself to save his pawn or else to leese his pheares.
And first his ransom paid, with that which did remain,
He rigged up a proper Bark, was called Leffort Brittayne.
And like a venturer (besides him seemly self)
Determined for to venture me and all his worldly pelf.
Perhaps some hope of gain persuaded so his mind,
For sure his hauty heart was bent, some great exployte to find.
How so it were, the winds now hoysted up our sails,
We furrowing in the foming floudes, to take our best auailes.
Now hearken to my words, and mark you well the same,
For now I will declare the cause wherefore I hither came.
My father (as I say) had set up all his rest,
And tossed on seas both day and night, disdayning idleness,
We left our forelands end, we past the coast of France,
We reached the cape of Finestre our course for to advance.
We past Marrocchus streights, and at the last descried,
The fertile coasts of Cyprus soil, which I my self first spied.
My self (a forewarde boy) on highest top was plast,
And there I saw the Ciprian shore, whereto we sailde in have.
Which when I had declared unto the masters mate,
He lepte for joy and thanked God, of that our happy state.
"But what remains to man, that can continue long?
"What sun can shine so clear and bright but clouds may rise among?
Which sentence soon was proved, by our unhappy hap,
We thought our selves full nere our friends, and light in ^nimies lap.
The Turk y^ tira^t he, with siege had girte the walls,
Of famous Famagosta then and sought to make them thrals.
And as he lay by land, in strong and stately trenche,
So was his power pressed by sea, his christian foes to drenche.
Upon the waltring waves, his foistes and galleys fleet,
More forest like than orderly, for such a man most meet.
This heavy sight once seen, we turned our course a pace,
And set up all our sails in haste, to give such fury place.
But out alas, our wills, and winds were contrary,
For raging blasts did blow us still upon our enemy.
My father seeing then, whereto he needs must go,
And that the mighty hand of God, had it appointed so,
Most like a worthy knight (though certain of his death)
Began clean forget al wailing words as lavish of his breath.
And to his christian crew, this (too short) tale he told,
To comfort them which seemd to faint, and make the coward bold,
"Fellows in arms, quoth he, although I bear the charge,
"And take upon me chieftaines name, of this unhappy barge,
"Yet are you all my pheares, and as one company,
"We must like true companions, together live and die,
"You see quoth he our foes, with furious force at hand,
"And in whose hands our handful hear unable is to stand.
"What rests then to do, should we unto them yield?
"And wilfully receive that yoke, which christians cannot weld.
"No sure, hereof be ^ure, our lives were so unsure,
"And though we live, yet so to live, as better death endure.
"To hear those hellish fends in raging blasphemy,
"Defye our only savior, were this no misery?
"To see the foul abuse of boys in tender years,
"The which I know must needs abhor all honest christians ears.
"To see maids ravished, wives, wom^n f^rst by f^are,
"And much more mischief tha^ this time can let me utter here.
"Alas, quoth he, I tell not all, my tongue is tide,
"But all the slaueries on the earth we should with them abide,
"How much were better than to die in worthy wise,
"And so to make our carcasses, a willing sacrifice?
"So shall we pay the debt, which unto God is due,
"So shall you die in his defense, who deind to die for you.
"And who with hardy hand most turkish tikes can quell,
"Let him account in conscience, to please his maker well.
"You see quoth he, my son, wherewith he lookte on me,
"Whom but a babe, yet have I brought, my partner here to be,
"For, him I must confess, my heart is pensive now,
"To leave him living thus in youth, to die I know not how.
"But since it pleases God, I may not murmr I,
"If God had pleased we both should live, and as god will we die.
Thus with a braying sigh, his noble tongue he staide,
Commanding all the ordinance, in order to be laid,
And placing all his men in order for to fight,
Fell groueling first upon his face, before them all in sight.
And when in secret so he whispered had a while,
He raisde his head with cherefull look, his sorrows to beguile:
And with the rest he prayde, to God in heaven on hie,
Which ended thus, Thou only Lord, can help in misery.
This said, behold, the Turks enclosde us round about,
And seemd to wonder that we durst resist so great a ro^^.
Whereat they doubt not long, for though our power was slender,
We sent them signs by Canon shot, that we meant not to render.
Then might we see them chafe, them might we hear them rage,
And all at once they bent their force, about our silly cage.
Our ordinance bestowed, our men them selves defend,
On every side so thick beset, they might not long contend.
But as their captain wild, each man his force did strain,
To send a Turk (some two or three) unto the hellishe train.
And he him self which saw, he might no more abide,
Did thrust amid the thickest throng, and so with honor died.
With him there died likewise, his best approved men.
The rest did yield as men amazd, they had no courage then.
Amongst the which my self, was taken by Turks alas,
And with the Turks a turkish life, in Turkey must pass.
I was not done to death for so I often craude,
But like a slave before the Gates, of Famagosta saude.
That piece once put to sack, I thither was conveyed.
And under safeguard evermore, I silly boy was stayed.
There did I see such sights as yet my heart do prick,
I saw the noble Bragadine, when he was fleyd quick.
First like a slave enforst to bear to every breach,
Two baskets laden full with earth Mustaffa did him teach.
By whom he might not pass before he kiss the ground,
These cruel torments (yet with mo) that worthy soldier found.
His ears cut from his head, they set him in a chair,
And from a maine yard hoisted him alofte into the air,
That so he might be showed with cruelty and spite,
Unto us all, whose weping eyes did much abhore the sight.
Alas why do I thus with woeful words rehearce,
These werie news which all our hearts with pitttie needs must pearce?
Well then to tell you forth, I still a slave remaind,
To one, which Prelybassa hight, who held me still enchai^d.
With him I went to Seas into the gulf of Pant,
With many christians captives mo, which did their fredom want.
There with the Turkish tirannie we were enforst to stay,
For why? they had advise, that the Vene^^^^ fleet,
Did flote in Argostelly then with whom they hoapt to meet.
And as they waltered thus with tides and billows tossed,
Their hope had hap, for at the last they met them to their cost.
As in O^tober last upon the seventh day,
They found the force of christian knights addressed in good array.
And shall I try my tongue to tell the whole discourse,
And how they did encounter first and how they joined in force?
Then harken now my lords, for sure my memory,
Does yet record the very plot of all this victory.
The christian crew came on, in form of battle pight,
And like a cressent cast them selves preparing for to fight.
On other side the Turks, which trusted power to much,
Disorderly did spread their force, the will of God was such.
Well, at the last they met, and first with cannons thunder,
Each other sought with furious force to slit their ships in sunder.
The Barks are battered sore, the galli^s gald with shot,
The hulks are hit and every man must stand unto his lot.
The powder sendes his smoke into the cruddy skies,
The smoulder stops our nose with stench, the sun offends our eyes,
The pots of lime vnsleakt, from highest top are cast,
The parched peace are not forgot to make them slip as fast.
The wild fire works are wrought and cast in foemens face,
The grappling hooks are stretched forth, y^ pikes are pusht apace.
The halberts hew on head, the brown bills bruze the bones,
The harquebush does spit his spite, with pretty percing stones.
The drums cry dub a dub, the braying trumpets blow,
The whistling fi^es are seldom herd, these sounds do drown the^ so.
The voice of warlike wights, to comfort them that faint,
The piteous plaints of golden hearts, which were with fears attaint.
The groaning of such ghosts as gasped now for breath,
The prayers of the better sort, prepared unto death,
And to be short, each grief which on the earth may grow,
Was eath and easy to be found, upon these floods to flow.
If any sight on earth, may unto hell resemble,
Then sure this was a hellishe sight, it makes me yet to tremble:
And in this blouddie fight, when half the day was spent,
It pleazed God to help his flock, which thus in pound was pent.
The general for Spain, began galde that Ga^ley sore,
Wherein my Prely Ba^^a was, and grieude it more and more:
Upon that other side, with force of swoorde and flame,
The good (...) general did charge upon the same.
At length they came aboorde, and in his raging pride,
St^oke of this Turkish captains head, which blasphemd as it did:
Oh how I feel the blood now tickle in my breast,
To think what joy then pierst my heart, and how I thought me blessed
To see that cruel Turk which held me as his slave
By happy hand of Christians his payment thus to have:
His head from shoulders cut, upon a pyke did stand,
The which Don John of Austrye held in his triumphant hand.
The boldest Bassa then, that did in life remain,
Began tremble at the sight hereof for privy grief and pain.
Thus when these fierce had fo^ght from morning until night,
Christ gave his stock the victory, and put his foes to flight:
And of the Turkish train were eight score Galeys taken,
Fifteen soonk, five and twenty burnt, and brought unto their bane,
Of Christians set at large were fourteen thousand souls,
Turks twenty thousand registered in Beelzebub his rolls.
Thus have you now my Lords, the sum of all their fight,
And trust it all for true I tell, for I was still in sight:
But when the seas were calm, and skies began to clear,
When foes were all or dead or fled, and victors did appear,
Then every christian sought amongst us for his friend,
His kinsman or companion some succor them to lend:
And as they ransackte so, lo God his will it was,
A noble wise Venetian by me did chance to pass*
Who gazing on my face, did seem to like me well
And what my name, and whence I was, commanded me to tell:
I now which waxed bold, as one that escaped had,
From depest hell to highest heaven, began for to be glad*
And with a ^yuely spryte, began to plead my case,
And hid not from this worthy man, mine ancient worthy race:
And told my fathers name, and how I did descend
From Mountacutes by mothers side, nor there my tale did end:
But furthermore I told my fathers late exployte,
And how he left lands, goods and life, to pay son Dieu son dro^t.
Nor of my self I craved so credited to be,
For ^o there were remaining yet, The four to^chbe^rers* that came in with the
actor
These four whom here you see,
Which all were English borne, and knew I had not lied,
And were my fathers soldiers eke, and saw him how he dyed*
This grave Venetian who heard the famous name
Of Mountacutes rehearsed there, which long had been of fame
In Italy, and h^ of self same worthy race,
Began straight with many courteous words in arms me to embrace,
And kissed me on cheek, and bad me make good cheer,
And thank the myghtie God for that which happened there,
Confessing that he was himself a Mountacute,
And bare the self same arms that I did quarter in my scute:
And for a further proof, he showed in his hat,
This token which the Mountacutes do bear always, The actor had a token in
his cap like to the Mount^cutes of Italy.
for that
They covet to be known from Capels where they pass,
For ancient grutch which long age tween those two houses was.
Then took me by the hand, and led me so aboorde
His galley: where there were yfeere, full many a comely Lord:
Of whom eight Montacutes did sit in highest place,
To whom this first declared first my name, and then my race:
Lo lordings here (quod he) a babe of our own bloods,
Who^ Turk^ had taken, his father slain, with loss of lands and goods:
See how God favors us, that I should find him now,
I strange to him, he strange to me, we m^t I know not how:
But sure when I him saw, and gazed in his face,
Me thought he was a Mountacute, I chose him by his grace:
Herewith he did rehearse my fathers valyant deed,
For loss of whom each Mountacute, did seem in heart to bleed.
They all embrast me then, and straight as you may see,
In comely garments trimde me up, as brave as brave may be:
I was in sackcloath I, now am I cladde in gold,
And wear such roabes as I my self take pleasure to behold.
Amongst their other gifts, The token that he did wear in his cappe.
this Token they me gave,
And bad me like a Montacute my self always behave.
Now hearken then my Lords, I staying on the seas,
In consort of these lovely Lords, with comfort and with ease,
Determined with them in Italy to dwell,
And there by train of youthful years in knowledge to excel:
That so I might at last reedifye the walls,
Which my good father had decade by tossing fortunes balls:
And while they slice the seas to their desired shore,
Behold a little gale began, increasing more and more:
At last with raging blast, which from Southeast did blow,
Began send our sails upon these shores, which I full well did know:
I spyed the Chalkie Clyues upon the Kentishe coast,
Whereby our land hight Albion, as Brutus on^e did boast,
Which I no sooner saw, but to the rest I said,
Sia^e di buona voglia, My lords be well apayde:
I see by certain signs these tempests have us cast,
Upon my native country coasts with happy hap at last:
And if your honors please this honor me to do,
In English havens to harbor you, and see our Cities too:
Lo London is not far, where as my friends would be
Right glad, with favor to requite you favor showed to me:
Uouchsafe my Lords (quod I) to stay upon this strande,
And whiles your Barks be rigged new, remain with me on land,
Who though I be a boy, my father dead and slain,
Yet shall you see I have some friends which will you entertain.
These noble men, which are the flower of curtesy,
Did not disdain this my request, but took it thankfully,
And from their battred Barks commanded to be cast
Some Gondalaes, wherein upon our pleasant streams they past
Into the mouth of Thames, thus did I them transport,
And to London at the last, where as I heard report,
Even as we landed first, of this twyse happy day,
To think whereon I leapt for joy, as I both must and may:
And to these lovely lords, which are Magnificoes,
I did declare the whole discourse in order as it rose:
That you my Lord who are our chiefest Mountacute,
And he whom English Mountacutes their only stay impute,
Had ^ounde the means this day to match your son and heir,
In marriage with a worthy dame which is both fresh and fair,
And (as reports are spread) of goodly qualities,
A virgin trained from her youth in godly exercise,
Whose brother had likewise your daughter taken to wife,
And so by double lynkes enchaynde themselves in lovers life:
These noble Mountacutes which were from Venice drouen,
By tempest (as I told before) wherewith they long had strouen
Began now give thanks to God which so did them convey,
To see such honors of their kin in such a happy day:
And straight they me entreat, whom they might well command,
That I should come to my Lord first them to recommaunde,
And then this boon to crave, that under your protection
They might be bold to enter here, deuoyde of all suspection,
And so in friendly wise for to concelebrate,
This happy match solemnized, according to your state.
Lo this is all they crave, the which I can not doubt,
But that your Lordship soon will grau^nt, with more, if more ye might:
Yea were it for no more, but for the Curtesye,
Which (as I say) they showed to me in great extremity:
They are Venetians, and though from Venice reft,
They come in such Venetian roabes as they on seas had left:
And since they be your friends, and kinsmen too by blood,
I trust your entertainment will be to them right good:
They will not tarry long, lo now I hear their drum,
Behold, lo now I see them here in order how they come,
Receive them well my lord, so shall I pray always,
That God vouchsafe to bless this house with many happy days.
After the mask was done, the Actor took master. Tho. Bro. by the hand and
brought him to the Venetians, with these words:
GVardate Signori, my lovely Lords behold,
This is another Mountacute, hereof you may be bold.
Of such our patron here, The viscount Mountacute,
Has many comely sequences, well sorted all in suit.
But as I spied him first I could not let him pass,
I took the card that likt me best, in order as it was.
And here to you my lords, I do present the same,
Make much of him, I pray you then, for he is of your name,
For whom I dare advance, he may your tronchman be,
Your herald and ambassador, let him play all for me.
Then the Venetians embraced and received the same master Tho. Brown, and
after they had a while vvhispered with him, he turned to the Bridegroomes
and Brides, saying thus.
BRother, these noble men to you now have me sent,
As for their tronchman to expound theffect of their intent.
They bid me tell you then, they like your worthy choice,
And that they cannot choose therein but triumph and rejoice.
As far as guess may give, they seem to praise it well,
They say between your ladies eyes does Gentilezza dwell.
I term it as they do, their english is but weak,
And I (God knows) am all to young beyond sea speech to speak.
And you my sister eke they seem for to commend,
With such good words as may be seem a cousin and a friend.
They like your chosen pheare, so pray they for your sake,
That he may always be to you, a faithful loving make.
This in effect is all, but that they crave a boon,
That you will give them license yet, to come and see you soon.
Then will they speak them selves, such english as they can,
I fear much better than I speak, that am an english man.
Lo now they take their leaves of you and of your dames,
Hereafter shall you see their face and know them by their names.
Then when they had taken their leaves the Actor did make an end thus.
And I your Seruidore, vibascio le mani.
These words I learnt amongst them yet, although I learnte not many.
Hand ictus sapio.
Gascoignes vvodmanship written to the L. Gray of wilton upon this occasion,
the said ^. Gray delighting (amongst many other good qualities) in choosing of
his winter dear, and killing the same with his bow, did furnishe master
Gascoigne with a crossebowe cu^ Pertinenci^s, and vouchsafed to use his company
in the said exercise, calling him one of his wodme^. N^w master Gasco^gne
shooting very often, could never hi^^e any dear, yea and often times he let
the heard pass by as though he had not seen them. Whereat when this noble
Lord took some pastime, and had often put him in remembrance of his good skill
in choosing, and redines^e in killing of a winter dear, he thought good thus
to excuse it in verse.
MY worthy Lord, I pray you wonder not,
To see your wodman shoot so often awrie,
Nor that he stands amassed like a sot,
And lets the harmless dear (unhurt) go by.
Or if he strike a do which is but carren,
Laugh not good Lord, but favor such a fault,
Take well I worth, he would feign hit the barren,
But though his heart be good, his hap is naught:
And therefore now I crave your Lordships leave,
To tell you plain what is the cause of this:
First if it please your honor to perceive,
What makes your wodman shoot so often amiss,
Believe me L. the case is nothing strange,
He shootes awrie almost at every mark^,
His eyes have been ^o used for to raunge,
That now God knows they be both dim and dark.
For proof he bears ^he note of folly now,
Who shot sometimes to hit Philosophy,
And ask you why? for sooth I make auow,
Because his wanton wits went all awrie.
Next that, he shot to be a man of law,
And spent some time with lea^ned Litleton,
Yet in the end, he proved but a dawe,
For law was dark and he had quickly done.
Then could he wish Fitzharbert such a brain,
As Tully had, to write the law by art,
So that with pleasure, or with little pain,
He might perhaps, have caught a trewants part.
But all to late, he most mislikte the thing,
Which most might help to guide his arrow straight,
He winked wrong, and so let slip the string,
Which cast him wide, for all his queint conceit.
From thence ^e shot to catch a courtly grace,
And thought even there to wield the world at will,
But out alas he much mistook the place,
And shot awrie at every rouer still.
The blasing baits which draw the gazing eye,
Unfethered there his first affect^on,
No wonder then although he shot awrie,
Wanting the feathers of discretion.
Yet more than them, the marks of dignity,
He much mistook and shot the wronger way,
Thinking the purse of prodigality,
Had been best mean to purchase such a pray,
He thought the flattring face which fleareth still,
Had been full fraught with all fi^elitie,
And that such words as courti^rs use at will.
Could not have varied from the verity.
But when his bonet butte^ed with gold,
His comely cape begarded all with gay,
His bumbast hose, with linings manifold,
His knit silk stocks and all his queint array,
Had picked his pu^se of all the Peter pence,
Which might have paid for his promotion,
Then (all to late) he found that light expense,
Had q^ite quenched out the courts devotion.
So that since then the taste of misery,
Has been always full bitter in his bit,
And why? forsooth because he shot awrie,
Mistaking still the marks which others hit.
But now behold what mark the man does find,
He shootes to be a soldier in his age,
Mistrusting all the virtues of the mind,
He trusts the power of his personage.
As though long limbs led by a lusty heart,
Might yet suffice to make him rich again,
But flussing fraies have taught him such a part,
That now he thinks the wars yield no such gain.
And sure I fear, unless your lordship deigne,
To train him yet into some better trade,
It will be long before he hit the vein,
Whereby he may a richer man be made.
He cannot climb as other catchers can,
To lead a charge before himself be led,
He cannot spoil the simple sakeles man,
Which is content to feed him with his bread.
He cannot pinch the painful soldiers pay,
And sheare him out his share in ragged sheets,
He cannot stop to take a gredy pray
Upon his fellows groueling in the streets.
He cannot pull the spoil from such as pill,
And seem full angry at such foul offense,
Although the gain content his greedy will,
Under the cloak of contrary pretense:
And now adays, the man that shootes not so,
May shoot amiss, even as your Woodman does:
But then you marvel why I let them go,
And never shoot, but say farewell forsooth:
Alas my Lord, while I do muze hereon,
And call to mind my youthful years myspente,
They give me such a boane to gnawe upon,
That all my senses are in silence pente.
My mind is rapte in contemplation,
Wherein my dazeled eyes only behold,
The black hour of my constellation,
Which framed me so lucklesse on the molde:
Yet therewithal I can not but confess,
That vain presumption makes my heart to swell,
For thus I think, not all the world (I) guess,
Shootes bet than I, nay some shootes not so well.
In Aristotle somewhat did I learn,
To guide my manners all by comeliness,
And Tullie taught me somewhat to discern
Between sweet speech and barbarous rudeness.
Old Parkyns, Rastall, and Dan Bractens books,
Did lend me somewhat of the lawless Law,
The crafty Courtyers with their guylefull looks,
Must needs put some experience in my mawe:
Yet can not these with many maystries mo,
Make me shoot straight at any gaynfull prick,
Where some that never handled such a bow,
Can hit the white, or touch it near the quick,
Who can nor speak, nor write in pleasant wise,
Nor lead their life by Aristotle's rule,
Nor argue well on questions that arise,
Nor plead a case more than my Lord Majors mule,
Yet can they hit the marks that I do miss,
And win the mean which may the man maintain,
Now when my mind does mumble upon this,
No wonder then although I pyne for pain:
And whiles mine eyes behold this mirroure thus,
The heard goes by, and farewell gentle does:
So that your lordship quickly may discuss
What blyndes mine eyes so often (as I suppose.)
But since my Muse can to my Lord rehearse
What makes me musse, and why I do not shoot,
Let me imagine in this woorthlesse verse:
If right before me, at my standings foot
There stood a Do, and I should strike her dead,
And then she prove a carrion carkas too,
What figure might I find within my head,
To scuse the rage which ruled me so to do?
Some might interpret by plain paraphrase,
That lack of skill or fortune led the chance,
But I must otherwise expound the ca^e,
I say Iehoua did this Do advance,
And made her bold is stand before me so,
Till I had thrust mine arrowe to her heart,
That by the sudden of her overthrow,
I might endeavor to amend my part,
And turn mine eyes that they no more behold,
Such guylefull marks as seem more than they be:
And though they glister outwardely like gold,
Are inwardly but brass, as men may see:
And when I see the milk hang in her teate,
Me th^nkes it says, old babe now learn to such,
Who in thy youth could never learn the feate
To hitte the whytes which live with all good luck.
Thus have I told my Lord, (God grant in season)
A tedious tale in rhyme, but little reason.
Haud ictus sapio.
Gascoignes gardnings, whereof were written in one end of a close walk
which he has in his Garden, this discourse follovving.
THe figure of this world I can compare,
To Garden plots, and such like pleasant places,
The world breeds men of sundry shape and share,
As herbs in gardens, grow of sundry graces:
Some good, some bad, some amiable faces,
Some foul, some gentle, some of ^roward mind,
Subject like bloome, to blast of every wind.
And as you see the flowers fresh of hew,
That they prove not always the holsomest,
So fairest men are not always found true:
But even as withred weeds fall from the rest,
So flatterers fall naked from their neast:
When truth has tried, their painting tising tale,
They loose their gloss, and all their jests seem stale.
Yet some do present pleasure most esteem,
Till beams of bravery wither all their wealth,
And some again there be can rightly deem,
Those herbs for best, which may maintain their health.
Considering well, that age draws on by stelth,
And when the fairest flower is shronke and gone,
A well grown root, will stand and shifte for one.
Then thus the restless life which men here lead,
May be resembled to the tender plant,
In spring it sprouts, as babes in cradle breed,
Flourish in May, like youths that wisdom want,
In Autumn ripes and r^otes, least store ware skante
In winter shrinks and shrowdes from every blast,
Like crooked age when lusty youth is past.
And as the ground or grass whereon it grew,
Was fat or lean, even so by it appears,
If barreyn soil, why then it changes hew,
It fades fast, it flits to fumbling years,
But if he gathered root amongst his feeres,
And light on land that was well muckte in deed,
Then stands it still, or leaves increase of seed.
As for the rest, fall sundry ways (God wot)
Some faint like froathe at every little puff,
Some smarte by swoorde, like herbs that serve the po^,
And some be weeded from the fyner stuff,
Some stand by proppes to maynteyne all their ruff:
And thus under correction (be it told)
Has Gascoigne gathered in his Garden molde.
Hand ictus sapio.
In that other end of his said close walk, were written these toys in
ryme.
IF any flower that there is grown,
Or any herb may ease your pain,
Take and account it as your own,
But recompense the like again:
For some and some is honest play,
And so my wife taught me to say.
If here to walk you take delyght,
Why come, and welcome when you will:
If I bid you suppe here this night,
Bid me an other time, and still
Think some and some is honest play,
For so my wife taught me to say.
Thus if you suppe or dine with me,
If you walk here, or sit at ease,
If you desire the thing you see,
And have the same your mind to please,
Think some* and some is honest play,
And so my wife taught me to say.
Haud ictus sapio.
In a chair in the same Garden was written this followyng.
IF thou sit here to view this pleasant garden place,
Think thus: at last will come a frost, and al these flowers deface.
But if thou sit at ease to rest thy weary bones,
Remember death brings final rest to all our grievous grone^.
So whether for delyght, or here thou sit for ease,
Think still upon the latter day, so shall thou God best please.
Haud ictus sapio.
Upon a stone in the wall of his Garden he had written the year wherein he did
the cost of these devises, and therwithall this poesy in Latin.
Quoniam etiam humiliatos, amoena delectant.
Gascoignes voyage into Hollande, An. 1572. written to the right honorable
the Lord Gray of Wilton.
A Strange conceyte, a vain of new delight,
Twixte weal and woe, twixte joy and bitter grief,
Has pricked forth my hasty pen to write
This worthless vers^ in hazard of repreefe:
And to mine Alderlieucst Lord I must endite
A woeful case, a chippe of sorry chance,
A tipe of heaven, a lively hew of hell,
A fear to fall, a hope of high advance,
A life, a death, a drearie tale to tell*
But since I know the pith of my pastaunce
Shall most consist in telling of a truth,
Uouchsafe my Lord (en bo^gre) for to take
This trusty tale the story of my youth,
This Chronicle which of my self I make,
To show my Lord what healplesse hap ensewth,
When heddy youth will gad without a guide,
And raunge untied in leas of liberty,
Or when bare need a starting hole has spide
To peep abroad from mother Misery,
And builds Castles in the Welkin wide,
In hope thereby to dwell with wealth and ease.
But he the Lord (whom my good Lord does know)
Can bind or lose, as best to him shall please,
Can save or spill, raise up or overthrow,
Can gauld with grief, and yet the pain appease.
Which thing to prove if so my L. take time,
(When greater cares his head shall not possess)
To sit and read this raunging ragged rhyme,
I doubt not then but that he will confess,
What falls I found when last I leapt to clime.
In March it was, that cannot I forget,
In this last March upon the nintenth day,
When from Grauesend in b^ate I began to iette
To board our ship in Quinborough that lay,
From whence the very twentieth day we set
Our sails abroad to slice the Salt sea ^ome,
And ancors weyde began trust the trustlesse flood:
That day and night amid the waves we ^om^
To seek the coast of Holland where it stood.
And on the next when we were far from home,
And near the haven whereto me sought to sail,
A ^erly chance: (whereon alone to think)
My hand now qu^kes, and all my senses fail)
Began us befall: the Pylot began to shrink,
And all agaste his courage seemde to quayle.
Whereat amazed, the Master and his mate
Began ask the cause of his so sodeyne change.
And from alofte the Steward of our state,
(The sounding plumbe) in haste post have must raung^,
To try the depth and goodness of our gate.
Me thinks (even yet) I hear his heavy voice,
^adome three, four, foot more, ^oote less, that cryde:
Me thinks I hear the fearful whispring noise,
Of such as said full softely (me beside)
God grant this journey cause us to rejoice.
When I poor soul, which close in caban lay,
And there had reached till gaul was welneare burste,
With giddie head, my ^^umbling steps must stay
To look abroad as boldly as I durst.
And whiles I hearken what the Sailors say,
The so^der sings, ^adome two full no more.
Aloof, aloof, then cried the master out,
The Stearesmate strives to send us from the shore,
And trustes the stream, whereof we erst had doubt.
Tw^ene two extremes thus were we tossed sore,
And wen^^ to Hull: until we leyzure had
To talk at large, and eke to know the cause
What mood had made our Pylot look so sad.
At las^e the Dutche with butterbitten jaws,
(For so he was a Dutche, a devil, a swadde,
A ^oole, a drunkarde, or a traitor tone)
Began answer thus: Ghy^zyt te vro^gh here come,
It Is met goet (...): and standing all alone,
Began preach to us, which fools were all and some
To trust him fool, in whom there skill was none.
Or what knew we if Albaes subtle brain
(So to prevent our enterprise by treazon)
Had him subornde to tice us to this train
And so him self ( per Company and seazon)
For spite, for hate, or else for hope of gain.
This must we think that Alba would not spare
To give out gold for such a sinful deed:
And glistring gold can oftentimes ensnare,
More perfect wits than Holland soil does breed.
But let that pass, and let us now compare
Our own fond fact with this his foul offense.
We knew him not, nor where he wond that time,
Nor if he had* Pylots experience,
Or Pylats craft, to clear him self from crime.
Yea moreth an that (how void were we of sense)
We had small smacke of any tale he told,
He powrde out Dutch to drowae us all in drink,
And we (wise men) upon his words were bold,
To r^nne on head* but let me now bethink
The m^sters speech: and let me so unfold
The dept^ of all this folish ouerlight.
The ma^ter spoke even like a skillful man,
And said I sail that Seas both day and night,
I know the tides as well as other can,
From pole to pole I can the courses plight.
I know France, Spain, Greece, Denmark, Dausk and all,
Frize, Flaunders, Holland, every coast I know,
But truth to tell, it seldom does befall,
That English merchants ever bend their bow
To shoot at Breyll, where now our flight should fall,
They send their shafts farther for greater gain.
So that this haven is yet (quoth he) uncouth,
And God grant now that England may attain
Such gains by Breyll, (a gospel on that mouth)
As is desired: thus spoke the master plain.
And since (said he) my self knew not the sown,
How could I well a better Pylot find,
Than this (which first) did say he dwelt in town,
And knew the way where ever sat the wind?
While we thus talk, all sails are taken down,
And we to (...) (as erst I said) began wend,
Till full two hours and somewhat more were past,
Our guide then spoke in Dutch and bad us bend
All sails again: for now quod he (at last)
D^e (...) is goet, dat heb ick weell bekend.
Why stay I long to end a woeful tale?
We trust his Dutch, and up the foresayle goes,
We fall on knees amyd the happy gale,
(Which by gods will full kind and calmely blows)
And unto him we there unfold our ^ale,
Whereon to think I write and weep for joy,
That pleasant song the hundredth and seventh psalm,
There did we read to comfort over annoye,
Which to my soul (me thought) was sweet as balm,
Yea far more sweet than any worldly toye.
And when we had with prayers praysd the Lord,
Our Edell Bloetts, began fall to eat and drink,
And for their sauce, at taking up the board
The ship so struck (as all we thought to sink)
Against the ground, then all with one accord
We (...) ^gayne on knees to pray apace,
And there withal even at the second blow,
(The number cannot from my mind outpace)
Our helm struck of, and we must fleet and flow.
Where wind and waves would guide us by their grace.
The wind waxt calm as I have said before,
(O mighty God so did thou swage our woes)
The selly ship was sowst and smytten sore,
With counter buffetts, blows and double blows.
At last the keele which might endure no more,
Began rende in twain and sucked the water in:
Then might you see pale looks and woeful cheer,
Th^n might you hear lord cries and deadly dinne:
Well noble minds in perils best appear,
And b^ldest har^s in base will never blinne.
For there were some (of whom I will not say
That I was one) which never changed hew,
But pumpt apace, and labord every way
To save themselves, and all their lovely erew,
Which cast the best freight ouerboorde away,
Both corn and cloth, and all that was of weight,
Which halde and pulde at every helping cord,
Which prayed to God and made their conscience straight.
As for my self: I here protest my Lord,
My words were these: O God in heaven on height,
Behold me not as now a wicked wight,
A sack of sin, a wretch ywrapt in wroth,
Let (...) fault past (O Lord) offend thy sight,
But weye my will which now those faults does loathe,
And of thy mercy pity this our plight.
Even thou good God which of thy grace did say
That for one good, thou would all Sodom save,
Behold us all: thy shyning beams displaye,
Some here (I trust) thy goodness shall engraue,
To be chaste vessels unto thee always,
And so to live in honor of thy name:
Believe me Lord, thus to the Lord I said.
But there were some (alas the more their blame)
W^^ch in the pumpe their only comfort laid,
And trusted that to turn our grief to game.
Alas (quod I) our pumpe good God must be
Our sail, our stern, our tackling, and our trust.
Some other cried to clear the shipboate free,
To save the chief and leave the rest in dust.
Which word once spoke (a wondrous thing to see)
All have post have, was made to have it done:
And up it commes in have much more than speed.
There did I see a woeful work begone,
Which now (even now) does make my heart to bleed.
Some made such have that in the boat they won,
Before it was above the hatches brought.
Strange tale to tell, what have some men shall make
To find their death before the same be sought.
Some twixt the boat and ship their bane do take,
Both drowned and flayne with brains for have crushed out.
At last the boat half fraighted in the air
Is hoyst aloft, and on the seas down set,
When I that yet in God could not despair,
Still plioe the pumpe, and patiently did let
All such take boat as thither made repair.
And herewithall I safely may protest
I might have woonne the boat as well as one,
And had that seemd a safety for the rest
I should percase even with the first have gone,
But when I saw the b^ate was over pressed
And pestred full with more than it might bear,
And therewithal with cherefull look might see
My chief companions whom I held most dear
(Whose company had thither trained me)
Abiding still aboard our ship yfeare:
Nay then (quoth I) good God thy will be done,
For with my feeres I will both live and dye.
And ear the boat farrefrom our sight was gone
The wave so wrought, that they which thought to flee
And so to escape, with waves were ouerronne.
Lo how he strives in vain that strives with God,
For there we lost the flower of the band,
And of our crew full twenty souls and odd,
The Sea sucks up, whiles we on hatches stand
In smarting fear to feel that self same rod.
Well on (as yet) our battred bark did pass,
And brought the rest within a mile of land,
Then thought I sure now need not I to pass,
For I can swymme and so escape this sand.
Thus did I deem all careless like an Ass,
When sodaynely the wind our foresayle took,
And turned about and brought us eft to Seas.
Then cried we all cast out the ancor hook,
And here let bide, such help as god may please:
Which ancor cast, we soon the same forsook,
And cut it off, for fear least thereupon
Our ship should bowge, then callde we fast for fire,
And so dischargde our great gunnes euerychone,
To warn the town thereby of our desire:
But all in vain, for succor sent they none.
At last a Hoye from Sea came flynging fast,
And toward us held course as straight as line.
Then might you see our hands to heaven up cast
To render thanks unto the power divine,
That so vouchsafte to save us yet at last:
But when this Hoye began (welneere) boorde our bark,
And might perceive what peril we were in,
It turned away and left us still in carke,
This tale is true (for now to lie were sin)
It left us there in dread and dangers dark.
It left us so, and that within the sight
And hearing both of all the pear at Bryll.
Now ply thee pen, and paint the foul despite
Of drunken Dutchmen standing there even still,
For whom we came in their cause for to fight,
For whom we came their state for to defend,
For whom we came as friends to grieve their ^oes,
They now disdaynd (in this distress) to lend
One helping boat for to assuage our woes,
They saw our harms the which they would not mend,
And had not been that God even then did raise
Some instruments to succor us at need,
We had been sunk and swallowed all in Seas.
But gods will was (in way of our good speed)
That on the pear (lamenting our mysea^e)
Some english were, whose naked swords did force
The drunken dutch, the cankred churles to come,
And so a^ last (not moved by remorce,
But forced be fear) they sent us succor some:
Some must I say: and for to tell the course,
They sent us succor saust with sour despyte,
They saved our lives and spoylde us of the rest,
They stale our goods by day and ^ke by night,
They showed the worst and closely kept the best.
And in this time (this treason must I write)
Our ^ylo^ fled, but how? not empty handed:
He fled from us, and with him did conueye
A Hoy full fraught (whiles we mean while were landed)
With powder, shot, and all our best array:
This skill he had, for all he set us sanded.
And now my Lord, declare your noble mind,
Was this a Pylo^, or a Pilat^ judge?
Or rather was he not of Judas kind:
Which left us thus and close away c^uld trudge?
Well, at the Bryell to tell you what we find,
The Governor was all bedewed with drink,
His trulls and he were all laid down to sleep,
And we must shift, and of our selves must think
What mean was best, and how we best might keep
That yet remaynd: the rest was close in clynke.
Well, on our knees with trickling tears of joy.
We gave God thanks: and as we might, did learn
What might by found in every pynke and hoye.
And thus my Lord, your honor may descerne
Our perils past, and how in ^ur aroye
God saved me your Lordshippes bound for ever,
W^o else should not be able now to tell,
The state wherein this country does persevere,
N^ h^w they seem in careless minds to dwell,
(So did they erst and so they will do ever)
And to my Lord for to bewray my mind
Me thinks they be a race of Bulbeefe borne,
Whose hearts their Butter mollyfyeth by kind,
And so the force of bee^e is clean outworne:
As ^ke their bray^es with double beer are lynde:
So that they march bumbast with butterd bear,
Like soppes of Browesse puffed up with froth,
Where inwardly they be but hollow gear,
As weak as wind, which with one pufft up goes.
And yet they br^gge and think they have no pear,
Because Harlem has hitherto held out,
Athough in deed (as they have suffered Spain)
The end thereof even now does rest in doubt.
Well as for that, let it (for me) remain
In God his hands, whose hand has brought me out,
To tell my Lord this tale now taken in hand,
As how they train their treasons all in drink,
And when themselves for dronk can scarcely stand,
Yet suck out secrets (as themselves do think)
From guests, the best (al^ost) in all their land,
(I name no man, for that were broad before)
Will (as men say) enure the same sometime,
But surely this (or I mistake him sore)
Or else he can (but let it pass in rhyme)
Dissemble deep, and mock sometimes the more.
Well, drunkenesse is here good company,
And therewithal per consequence it falls,
That whoredom is accoumpted Iollytie:
A gentle state, where two such Tenisballes
Are tossed still and better boules let lie.
I cannot herewith from my Lord conceal,
How God and Mammon here do dwell yfeare,
And how the Mas^e is cloked under veale
Of policy, till all the coast be clear:
Ne can I choose, but I must ring a peale,
To tell what hypo^rytes the Nuns here be:
And how the old Nuns be content to go,
Before a man in streets like mother B,
Until they come whereas there dwells a Ho,
( Re: ceiue that half and let the rest go free)
There can they point with finger as they pass,
Yea sir sometimes they can come in themself,
To strike the bargain tw^ne a wanton less,
And (...) now is not this good pelf?
As for the young Nuns, they be bright as glass,
And chaste forsothe: (...) and a^ders (...)
What said I? what? that is a mystery,
I may no verse of such a theme endyte,
Young Rouland York may tell it bette than I,
Yet to my Lord this little will I write,
That though I have (my self) no skill at all,
To take the countnance of a Colonel,
Had I a good Lieuetenant general,
As good John Zuche whereuer that he dwell,
Or else Ned Dennye, (fair might him befall,)
I could have brought a noble regiment,
Of smoogskind Nuns into my country soil,
But farewell they as things impertinent,
Let them (for me) go dwell with mast^r Moyle
Who has behight to place them well in kent.
And I shall well my seelly self content,
To come alon^ unto my lovely Lord,
And unto him (when (...) sport is spent)
To tell some sad and reasonable word,
Of Holland^ state, the which I will present,
In Carts, in Mappes, and eke in Modells made,
If God of heaven my purpose not prevent.
And in mean while although my wits do wade
In rangyng ryme, and flyng some folly forth,
I trust my Lord will take it yet in worth.
Haud lctus sapio.
And now to recomfort you and to end this work, receive the delectable
history of sundry adventures passed by Dan Bartholmew of Bathe, read it and
judge of it.
The Reporter.
TO tell a tale without authority,
Or feign a Fable by invention,
That one proceeds of quick capacitye,
That other proves but small discretion,
Yet have both one and other often been done.
And if I were a Poet as some be,
You might perhaps hear some such tale of me.
But for I find my feeble skyll to faynte,
To fa^e in figures as the learned can,
And yet my tongue is tied by due constrainte,
To tell nothing but truth of every man:
I will assaye even as I first began,
To tell you now a tale and that of truth,
Which I my self saw proved in my youth.
I need not seek so far in coasts abroad,
As some men do, which write st^ange historyes,
For whiles at home I made my child abode
And saw our lovers play their Tragedyes,
I found enow^ which seemed to suffice,
To set on work far siner wits than mine,
In painting out the pangs which make them pi^e.
Amongst the rest I most remember one
Which was to me a dear familiar friend,
Whose doting days since they be past and gone,
And his anoy now com^ unto an end,
Although he seem his angry brow to bend,
I will be bold (by his leave) for to tell,
The restless state wherein he long did dwell.
Learned he was, and that became him best,
For though by birth he came of worthy race,
Yet beuty, birth, brave personage, and the rest,
In every choice, must needs give learning place:
And as for him he had so hard a grace,
That by aspect he seemde a simple man,
And yet by learning much renown he wan.
His name I hide, and yet for this discourse,
Let call his name Dan Ba^tholmew of Bathe,
Since in the end he thither had recourse,
and (as he said) did skamble there inskath:
In deed the rage which wroong him there, was rathe,
As by this tale I think your self will guess,
And then (with me) his loathsome life confess.
For though he had in all his learned lore
Both read good rules to bridle fantasy,
And all good authors taught him evermore,
To love the mean, and leave extremity,
Yet kind had lent him such a quality,
That at the last he quite forgot his books,
And fastened fancy with the fairest looks.
For proof, when green youth lept out of his eye
And left hi^ now a man of middl^ age,
His hap was yet wish wandr^ng looks to spy
A fair young (...) of proper personage,
Eke borne (as he) of honest parentage:
(...) truth to tell, my skill it cannot serve,
To praise her beauty as it did deserve.
First for her head, the hears were not of gold,
But of some other metal farie more fine,
Whereof ^ach ^^inet seemed to behold,
Like glist^ing wiers against the sun that shine,
And therewithal the blazing of her eyne,
Was like the beams of ^ytan, truth to tell,
Which glads us all that in this world do dwell.
Upon her cheeks the lilly and the rose
Did entremeete, with equal change of hew,
And in her gifts no lack I can suppose,
But that at last (alas) she was untrue.
Which flinging fault, because it is not new,
Nor seldom seen in kits of Cresside kind,
I marvel not, nor bear it much in mind.
Dame Natures fruits, where with her face was fraught,
Were so frost bitten with the cold of craft,
That all (save such as Cupides snares had caught)
Might soon epsy the feathers of his shafte:
But Bartholmew his wits had so beda^t,
That all seemd good which might of her be gotten,
Although it proved no sooner ripe than rotten.
That mouth of hirs which seemde to flow with mell,
In speech, in voice, in tender touch, in taste,
That dympled chin wherein delight did dwell,
That ruddy lip wherein was pleasure plast,
Those well shapt hands, fine arms and slender waste,
With all the gifts which gave her any grace,
Were smiling baits which caught fond fools apace.
Why strive I then to paint her name with praise?
Since form and fruits were found so far unlike,
Since of her cage Inconstance kept the keys
And Change had cast her honor down in dike:
Since fickle kind in her the stroke did strike,
I may no praise unto a knife bequeath,
With rust yfret, though painted be the sheath.
But since I must a name to her assig^e,
Let call her now Ferenda Natura,
And if thereat she seem for to repine,
No force at all, for hereof am I sure a,
That since her pranks were for the most vnpure a,
I can appoint her well no better name,
Than this, wherein dame Nature bears the blame.
And thus I say, when Bartholmew had spent
His pride of youth (untied in links of love)
Behold how hap contrary to intent,
(Or destemes ordained from above)
From which no wight on earth may well remove)
Presented to his view this fiery dame,
To kindle coals where erst had bin no flame.
Whom when he saw to shine in seemly grace,
And there withal began mark her tender youth,
He thought not like, that under such a face
She could convey the treason of untruth:
Whereby he vowed, (alas the more his ruth)
To serve this Saint for term of all his life,
Lo here both root and rind of all his strife.
I cannot now in loving t^rmes displaye
His suite, his service, nor his sorry fare:
His obseruaunces, nor his queynt array,
His skalding sighs, nor yet his cooling care,
His waiting still to snatche himself in snare,
I can not write what was his sweetest sour,
For I my self was never paramoure.
But to conclude, much worth in little writ,
The highest flying hawk will s^oupe at last,
The wyldest beast is drawn with hungry bitte,
To ^ate a homely bayte sometimes in haste,
The prick of kind can never be vnplaste,
And so it seemed by this dayntie dame,
Whom he at last with labor did reclame.
And when he had with mickell pain procured
The calm consent of her unwieldy will,
When he had her by faith and troth assured
To like him best, and ay to love him still,
When fancy had of flattery fed his fill,
I not discern to tell my tale aright,
What man but he had ever such delight?
The lingering days he spente in trifling toys,
To whette the tools which carved his content,
The poasting nights he past in pleasing joys,
Wearyng the web which love to him had lent:
I^ such a pinfolde were his pleasures pent
That ^elde he could her company eschew,
Or leave such looks as might his lack renew.
But if by force he forced were to part,
Then might you see how fancy fed his mind,
Then all alone he muzed on his mart.
All com^anie seemd then (but hirs) unkind:
Then sent he tokens true love for to bind,
Then wrote he letters, lines and loving lays,
So to begyle his absent doleful days.
And since I know as others eke can tell,
What skill he had, and how he could endite,
Me thinks I cannot better do than well
To set down here, his ditties of delight,
For so at least I may my self acquit,
And vaunt to show some verses yet unknown,
Well worthy praise though none of them mine own*
No force for that, take you them as they be,
Since mine emprise is but to make report:
Imagine then before you that you see
A wight be witcht in many a subtle sort,
A lover lodgd in pleasures princely port,
Uaunting in verse what joys he did possess,
His triumpes here I think will show no less.
Dan Bartholmew his Triumphs.
Resign king Pryams sons, that princes were in Tr^y.
Resign to me your happy days, and boast no more of joy:
Sir Paris first stand forth, make answer for thy pheare,
And if thou can defend her cause, whom Troy did bye so dear:
What? blush not man, be bold, although thou bear some blame,
Tell truth at last, and so be sure to save thy self from shame.
Then gentle Shepherd sat: what madness did thee move
To choose of all the flowers in Greece, foul Helene for thy love?
Needs must I coumpt her foul, whose first fruits were forlorn
Although she sold her second chafe, above the price of corn.
Alas, she made of thee, a noddye for the nonce,
For Menelaus lost her twice, though thou her foundst but once.
But yet if in thine eye, she seemd a peerless piece,
Ask Theleu^ y^ mighty Duke, what towns she knew in Greece?
Ask him what made her leave her woeful aged sire,
And steal to Athens gyglot like: what? what but foul desire?
Alas pore Paris thou did nothing else but gleane
The partched ears which he cast by, when he had reaped clean:
He sliude the gentle Slip, which could both twist and twind,
And growing left the broken branch, for the^ that came behind.
Yet have thou filld the world with brute, the more thy blame,
And say, that Hellens bewty past each other stately dame.
For proof thou can allege the taste of ten years war,
And how her blasing beams first brought both Greece and Tr^y to jar:
No no, thou art deceiude, the drugs of foul despite
Did work in Menelaus will, not loss of such delighte,
Not love but loathsome hate, not dolor but disdain,
Did make him seek a sharp revenge, til both is foes were slain.
Thy brother Troylus eke, that gemme of gentle deeds,
To think how he abused was, alas my heart it bleedes:
He bet about the bush, whiles other caught the birds,
Whom crafty Cresside mocked to much, yet fed him still with words.
And God he knows not I, who plucked her first sprung rose,
Since Lollius and Chauser both, make doubt upon that gloss.
But this I know too well, and he to far it felt,
How Diomede undid his knots, and caught both brooch and belt,
And how she chose to change, and how she changed still,
And how she died leaper like, against her lovers will.
Content you then good knights, your triumph to resign,
Confess your stars both dim and dark, whereas my sun does shine:
For this I dare avow, without vaunt be it told,
My derling is more fair tha^ she, for whom proud Troy was sold.
More constant to contain, than Cresside to be coy,
No Calcas can contriue the craft, to train her out of Troy,
No Diomede can draw her settled heart to change,
No madding mood can move her mind, nor make her thoughts to range,
For her alone it is, that Cupide blindfold goes,
And dare not look for fear least he his liberty should loose:
At her dame Venus chafes, and pines in ielowsie,
Least bloody Mars should her epsy, and change his fantasy.
Of her the Queen of Heaven does stand in dreadful doubt,
Least ^oue should melt in drops of gold, if once he find her out.
Oh that my tongue had skill, to tell her praise aright,
Or that my pen her due deserts, in worthy verse could write:
Or that my mind could muse, or happy heart conceive,
Some wor^s that might resound her worth, by high Mineruas leave.
Oh how the blooming joys, do blossom in my breast,
To think within my secret thought, how far she steynes the rest.
Me thinks I hear her speak, me thinks I see her still,
Me thinks I feel her feelingly, me thinks I know her will.
Me thinks I see the states, which sue to her for grace,
Me thinks I see one look of hirs repulse them all apace.
Me thinks that hour is yet, and evermore shall be,
Whereine my happy hap was first, her heavenly face to see:
Wherein I spide the writ, which woond between her eyne,
And said behold, be bold, for I, am borne to be but thine.
Me thinks I feel the joys which never yet was felt,
Whom flame before yet never touched, me thinks I feel them melt.
One word and there an end: me thinks she is the sun,
Which only shines now a days, she dead, the world were done.
The rest are twinkling stars, or Moons which borrow light
To comfort other careful souls, which wander in the night.
And night God knows it is, where other ladies be,
For sure my dame adornes the day, there is no sun but she.
Then lovers by your leave, and think it nothing strange
Although I seem with calm content, in Seas of joys to range:
For why, my sails have sound both wind and waves at will,
And depths of all delights in her, with whom I travel still charge.
And ancors being wayed, I leave you all at large,
To steare this seemly Ship my self, such is my mistress
Fato non f^rtuna.
Dan Bartholmew, Dolorous discourse^.
I Have entreated care to cut the thread
Which all to long has held my lingering life,
And here aloof now have I hid my head,
From company, thereby to stint my strife.
This solitary place does please me best,
Where I may wear my willing mind with moan,
And where the sighs which boil out of my breast,
May skald my heart, and yet the cause unknown.
All this I do, for thee my sweetest sour,
For whom (of yore) I counted not of care,
For whom with hungry jaws I did devour
The secret bait which lurked in the snare:
For whom I thought all foreine pleasures pain,
For whom again, all pain did pleasure seem,
But only thine, I found all fancies vain,
But only thine, I did no dolours deem.
Such was the rage, that whylome did possess
The privy corners of my mazed mind:
When hot desire, did coumpt those torments less
Which gaind the gaze that did my fredome bind.
And now (with care) I can record those days,
And call to mind the quiet life I led
Before I first beheld thy golden rays,
When thine untruth yet troubled not my head.
Remember thou, as I cannot forget,
How I had laid, both love, and lust aside,
And how I had my fixed fancy set,
In constant vow, for ever to abide.
The bitter proof of pangs in pleasure past,
The costly taste, of honey mixed with gall:
The painted heaven, which turnde to hell at last
The freedom faind, which brought me but to thrall.
The lingering suit, well fed with fresh delays.
The wasted vows which fled with every wind:
The restless nights, to purchase pleasing days,
The toyling days to please my restless mind.
All these (with mo) had bruised so my breast,
And graft such grief within my gronyng heart,
That I had left dame fancy and the rest
To greener years, which might endure the smart.
My weary bones did bear away the skarres,
Of many a wound, received by disdain:
So that I found the fruit of all those wars,
To be naught else but pangs of unknown pain.
And now mine eyes were shut from such delight,
My fancy faint, my hot desires were cold,
When cruel hap, presented to my sight,
Thy maidens face, in years which were not old.
I think the goddess of revenge deuysde,
So to be wreackt on my rebelling will,
Because I had in youthful years dispysde,
To taste the baytes, which tyste my sansie still.
How so it were, God knows, I cannot tell:
But if I lie, you heavens, the plague be mine,
I saw no sooner, how delight did dwell
Between those little infants eyes of thine,
But straight a sparkling cole of quick desire,
Did kyndle flame within my frozen heart,
And yelding fancy softly blewe the fire,
Which since has been the cause of all my smart.
What need I say? thy self for me can swear,
How much I tendered thee in tender years:
Thy life was then to me (God knows) full dear,
My life to thee is light, as now appears.
I loved thee first, and shall do to my last,
Thou flattredst first, and so thou woldst do still:
For love of thee full many pains I past,
For deadly hate thou seek me to kill.
I cannot now, with manly tongue rehearse,
How soon that melting mind of thine did yield,
I shame to wirte, in this waymenting verse,
With how small fight, I vanquished thee in field:
But Caesar he, which all the world subdude,
Was never yet so proud of Uictorye,
Nor Hanyball, with martial feats endude,
Did so much please himself in policy,
As I (poor ^) did seem to triumph then,
When first I got the Bulwarks of thy breast,
With hole Alarmes I comforted my men,
In foremost rank I stood before the rest,
And shook my flagge* not all to show my force,
But that thou might thereby perceive my mind:
Askaunces lo, now could I kill thy corce,
And yet my life, is unto thee resinde.
Well let them pass, and thin^ upon the joy,
The mutual love, the confidence, the trust,
Whereby we both abandoned annoye,
And fed our minds with fruits of lovely lust.
Think on the Tithe, of kysses got by stealth,
Of sweet embracings shortened by fear,
Remember that which did maintain our health,
Alas, alas why should I name it here.
And in the mydst of all those happy days,
Do not forget the chaunges of my chance,
When in the depth of many way ward ways,
I only sought, what might thy state advance.
Thou must confess how much I card for thee,
When of my self, I card not for my self,
And when my hap was in mishappes to be,
Esteemd thee more, than all the worldly pelf.
Mine absent thoughts did beat on thee al^ne,
When thou had found a fond and newfound choice:
For lack of thee I sunk in endless moan,
When thou in change did tumble and rejoice.
O mighty gods needs must I honor you,
Needs must I judge your judgments to be just,
Because she did forsake him that was true,
And with false love, did cloak a feigned lust.
By high decrees, you ordained the change,
To light on such, as she must needs myslike,
A meet ^eward for such as seek to raunge,
When fancies force, their feeble flesh does strike.
B^t did I then give bridle to thy fall,
Thou hedstrong thou, accuse me if thou can?
Did I not hazard love yea life and all,
To ward thy will, from that unworthy man?
And when by toil I travailed to find,
The secret causes of thy madding mood,
I found naught else but tricks of Cressides kind,
Which plainly provde, that thou weart of her blood.
I found that absent Troyius was forgot,
When Dyomede had got both br^^che and belt,
Both glove and hand, yea heart and all god wot,
When absent Troylus did in sorrows swelt.
These tricks (with mo) thou know thy self I found,
Which now are nedelesse here for to rehearse,
Unless it were to touch a tender wound,
With corosiues my panting heart to perce.
But as that Hound is counted little worth,
Which gives over for a loss or twain,
And cannot find the means to single forth,
The stricken D^are which does in heard remain:
Or as the kindly Spanyell which has sprung
The pretty partriche, for the Falcons flight,
Does never spare but thrusts the thorns among,
To bring this bird yet once again to sight,
And though he know by proof (yea dearly bought)
That selde or never, for his own avail,
This weary work of his in vain is wrought,
Yet spares he not but labors tooth and nail.
So labord I to save thy wandering ship,
Which recklesse then, was running on the rocks,
And though I saw thee seem to hang the lyppe.
And set my great good will, as light as flocks:
Yet h^^ld I in, the main sheate of thy mind,
And stayed thy course by ancors of aduyce,
I woo^thy will into a better wind,
To save thy ware, which was of precious price.
And when I had so harbored thy Bark,
In happy haven, which saufer was than Dover,
The Admyrall, which knew it by the mark,
Straight challengd all, and said thou weart a rouer:
Then was I forced in thy behalf to plead,
Yea so I did, the judge can say no less,
And whiles in toil, this loathsome life I lead,
Came thou thy self the fault for to confess,
And down on knee before thy cruel foe,
Did pardon crave, accusing me for all,
And saydst I was the cause, that thou did so,
And that I spoon the thread of all thy thrall.
Not so content, thou furthermore did swear
That of thy self thou never meant to swerue,
For proof whereof thou did the colors wear,
Which might be wray, what saint y^ meant to serve*
And that thy blood was sacrificed eke,
To manifest thy steadfast martyrd mind,
Till I perforce, constraynde thee for to seek,
These raging seas, adventures there to find.
Alas, alas, and out alas for me,
Who am enforced, thus for to repeat
The false reports and cloked guyles of thee,
Whereon (to often) my restless thoughts do beat.
But thus it was, and thus God knows it is.
Which when I found by plain and perfect proof,
My m^si^g mind then thought it not amiss,
To shrink aside, lamenting all aloof,
And so to beat my simple shiftlesse brain,
For some device, that might redeem thy state,
Lo here the cause, for why I take this pain,
Lo how I love the wight which me does hate:
Lo thus I lie, and restless rest in Bathe,
Whereas I bathe not now in bliss pardie,
But boil in Bale and skamble thus in skathe,
Because I think on thine inconstancy.
And will thou know, how here I spend my time,
And how I draw my days in dolours still?
Then stay a while: give ear unto my rhyme,
So shall thou know the weight of all my will.
When Titan is constrained to forsake,
His lemans couche, and clymeth to his carte,
Then I begin to languishe for thy sake,
And with a sigh, which may bewray my smarte,
I clear mine eyes whom gu^me of tears had glewed,
And up on foot I set my ghostlike corse,
And when the stony walls have often renewed
My pittious plaintes, with Echoes of remorce,
Then do I cry and call upon thy name,
And thus I say, thou cursed and cruel both,
Behold the man, which takes grief for game,
And loves them, which most his name does loath.
Behold the man which ever truly meant,
And yet accusd as author of thine ill,
Behold the man, which all his life has spent,
To serve thy self, and aye to work thy will:
Behold the man, which only for thy love,
Did love him self, whom else he set but light:
Behold the man, whose blood (for thy behoue)
Was ever pressed to shed it self outright.
And can thou now condemn his loyalty?
And can thou craft to flatter such a friend?
And can thou see him sincke in ieoperdie?
And can thou seek to bring his life to end?
Is this the right reward for such desert?
Is this the fruit of seed so timely sown?
Is this the price, appointed for his part?
Shall truth be thus by treason overthrown?
Then farewell faith, thou art no woman's pheare:
And with that word I stay my tongue in time,
With rolling eyes I look about each where,
Least any man should hear my rauing ryme.
And all in rage, enraged as I am,
I take my sheet, my slyppers and my gown,
And in the Bathe from whence but late I came,
I cast my self in dolors there to drown.
There all alone I can my self conueye,
Into some corner where I sit unseen,
And to my self (there naked) can I say,
Behold these braunefalne arms which once have been.
Both large and lust^^, ^ble for to fight,
Now are they weak, and wearishe God he knows,
Unable now to daunt the foul despite
Which is presented by my cruel foes.
My thighs are thyn, my body la^ck and lean,
It has no ^umbast now, but skyn and bones:
And on mine Elbowe as I lie and lean,
I see a trusty token for the nones.
I spy a bracelet bound about mine arm,
Which to my shadow seems thus to say,
Believe not me: for I was but a Charm,
To make thee sleep, when others went to play.
And as I gaze thus galded all with grief,
I find it ^azed almost quite in sunder,
Then think I thus: thus was^eth my relief,
And though I fade, yet to the world no wonder.
For as this lace, by leisure learnes to wear,
So must I fainte, even as the candle wastes,
These thoughts (dear sweet) within my breast I bear,
And to my long home, thus my life it hastes.
Here with I feel the drops of sweltring sweat,
Which trickle down my face, enforced so,
And in my body feel I like wise beat,
A burning heart, which tosseth to and fro.
Thus all in flames I sinderlyke consume,
And were it not that wanhope le^ds me wind,
Soon might I fret my facyes all in fume,
And like a G^ost my ghost his grave might find.
But frysing hope does blow full in my face,
And cold of c^res beco^mes my cordial,
So that I still endure that yrcksome place,
Where sorrow seethes to skald my skin withal.
And when from thence our company me drives,
Or weary woes do make me change my seat,
Then in my bed my restless pain reuyues,
Until my fellows call me down to meat,
And when I rise, my corpse for to array,
I take the glass, sometimes (but not for pride,
For God he knows my mind is not so gaye)
But for I would in comeliness abide:
I take the glass, wherein I seem to see,
Such wythred wrynckles and so foul disgrace,
That little marvel seems it to me,
Though thou so well did like the noble face.
The noble face was fair and fresh of hew,
My wrinckled face is fo^le and fades fast:
The noble face was unto thee but new,
My wrinckled face is old and clean outcast:
The noble face might move thee with delight,
My wrinckled face could never please thine eye:
Lo thus of crime I covet thee to quite.
And still accuse my self of Surcuydry:
As one that am unworthy to enjoy,
The lasting fruit of such a love as thine,
Thus am I tyckled still with every toye,
And when my Fellows call me down to dyne,
No change of meat prouokes mine appetite,
Nor sauce can serve to taste my meats withal,
Then I devise the juice of grapes to dight,
For Sugar and for Sinamon I call,
For Ginger, Grains, and for each other spyce,
Where with I mix the noble wine apace,
My fellows praise the depth of my devise,
And say it is as good as Ippocrace.
As Ippocrace say I? and then I swelt,
My faynting lymmes straight fall into a sown,
Before the taste of Ippocrace is felt,
The naked name in dolours does me drown,
For then I call unto my troubled mind,
That Ippocrace has been thy daily drink,
That Ippocrace has walked with every wind
In bottells that were filled to the brincke.
With Ippocrace thou banquetedst full often,
With Ippocrace thou madst thy self full merry,
Such cheer had set thy new love so alofte,
That old love now was scarsely worth a cherry.
And then again I fall into a trance,
But when my breath returns against my will,
Before my tongue can tell my woeful chance,
I hear my fellows how they whisper still.
One says that Ippocrace is contrary,
Unto my nature and comple^ion,
Whereby they judge that all my maladye,
Was long of that by alteration.
An other says, no, no this man is weak,
And for such weak, so hot things are not best,
Then at the last I hear no liar speak,
But one which knows the cause of mine unrest,
And says, this man is (for my life) in love,
He has received repulse, or drunk disdain,
Alas cry I: and ere I can remove,
Into a sown I soo^e return again.
Thus drive I forth, my doleful dining time,
And trouble others with my troubles still,
But when I here, the bell has passed prime
Into the Bathe I wallow by my will,
That there my tears (unseen) might ease my grief,
For though I sterue yet have I fed my fill,
In privy pangs I count my best relief.
And still I strive in weary woes to drench.
But when I plondge* then woe is at an ebb,
My glowing coals are all to quick to quench,
And I (to warm) am wrapped in the web,
Which makes me swim against the wished wave,
Lo thus (dear wench) I lead a loathsome life,
And greedely I seek the greedy grave,
To make an end of all these storms and strife.
But death is deaf, and hears not my desire,
So that my days continue still in dole,
And in my nights, I feel the secret fire,
Which close in embers, coucheth like a cole,
And in the day has bin but raked up,
With covering ashes of my company,
Now breaks it out, and boyles the careful cup,
Which in my heart, does hang full heavily.
I melt in tears, I swelt in chilling sweat,
My swelling heart, breaks with delay of pain
I freeze in hope, yet burn in have of heat,
I wish for death, and yet in life remain.
And when dead sleep does close my dazeled eyes,
Then dreadful dreams my dolors do increase,
Me thinks I lie awake in woeful wise,
And see thee come, my sorrows for to cease.
Me seems thou say (my good) what means this?
What ails thee thus to languish and lament?
How can it be that bathing all in bliss,
Such cause unknown disquiets thy content?
Thou do me wrong to keep so close from me
The grudge or grief, which gripeth now thy heart,
For well thou know, I must thy partner be
In bale, in bliss, in solace, and in smarte.
Alas, alas, these things I deem in dreams,
But when mine eyes are open and awake,
I see not thee, wherewith the flowing streams,
Of bri^ish tears their wonted floods do make,
Thus as thou see I spend both nights and days,
And for I find the world did judge me once
A witless writer of these lovers lays,
I take my pen and paper for the nonce,
I lay aside this folish riding time,
And as my troubled head can bring to pass,
I thus bewray the torments of my time:
Bear with my Muse, it is not as it was.
Fa^o non fortuna.
The extremity of his Passion.
AMong the toye^ which toss my brain,
and reaue my mind from quiet rest,
This one I find, does there remain,
to breed debate wit bin my breast.
When woe would work* to wound my will,
I cannot weep* nor wayle my fill.
My tongue has not the skill t^ ^ell,
the smallest gri^f^ which gripes my heart,
Mine eyes have not the power to swell,
into such Seas of secret smarte,
That will might melt to waves of woe,
and I might swell in sorrows so.
Yet shed mine eyes no trickling tears,
but fluddes which flow abundantly*
Whose fountain first enforst by fears,
found out the gappe of iealowsie.
And by that breath, it soketh so,
that all my face, is still on flow.
My voice is like the raging wind,
which roareth still, and never stays*
The thoughts which tomble in my mind,
are like the wheel which whirles always,
Now here, now there, now up, now down,
in depth of waves, yet cannot drown.
The sighs which boil out of my breast,
are not like those, which others use,
For lovers sighs, sometimes take rest,
and lend their minds, a leave to muse,
But mine are like the surging seas,
whom calm nor quiet can appeas.
And yet they be but sorrows smoke,
my breast the fordge where fury play^^,
My panting heart, it strikes the stroke,
my fan^ie blows the flame alway^s,
The coals are kindled by desire,
and Cupide warmes him by the fire.
Thus can I neither d^owne in dole,
nor burn to ashes, though I wast,
Mine eyes can neither quench the cole,
which warmes my heart in all this have.
Nor ye^ my fancy make such flame,
that I may smoulder in the same.
Wherefore I come to seek out care*
bese^hing him of courtesy,
To cut the thread which cannot wear,
by pangs of such perplexity.
And but he grant this boon of mine,
thus must I live and ever pine.
Fato non fortuna*
LO thus (dear heart) I force my frantike Muse,
To frame a verse in spite of my despighte,
But whiles I do these mirthlesse meeters use
This rash conceit does reave me from delight.
I call to mind how many loving lays,
How many Sonets, and how many songs
I did devise within those happy days,
When yet my will had not received wrongs.
All which were evermore regarded so,
That little fruit I seemd thereby to reap,
But rather when I had bewrayed my woe
Thy love was light, and lusted still to leap.
The rymes which pleased thee were all in print,
And mine were ragged, hard for to be red,
Lo dear: this dagger dubbes me with this di^t,
And leaves this wound within my iealouse head
But since I have confessed unto care,
That now I stand upon his courtesy,
And that the bale, which in my breast I bare,
Has not the skill to kill me cunningly,
Therefore with all my whole devotion,
To Care I make this supplication.
Fat^ non fortuna.
His libell of request exhibited to Care.
O Courteous Care, whom others (cruel) call,
And rail upon thine honorable name,
O knife that can cut off the thread of thrall,
O sheare that shredst the semerent sheet of shame,
O happy end of every grievous game:
Uouchsafe O Prince, thy vassal to behold,
Who loves thee more, than can with tongue be told.
And now vouchsafe to pity this his plaint,
Whose tears bewray,
His truth always,
Although his feeble tongue be forced to faint.
I must confess O noble king to thee,
That I have bin a Rebel in my youth,
I preast always in pleasures court to be,
I fled from that, which Cupide still eschuth,
I fled from Care, lo now I tell the truth,
And in delights, I loved so to dwell,
Thy heavenly house, did seem to me but hell.
Such was my rage, the which I now repent,
And pardon crave,
My soul to save,
Before the web of weary life be spent.
But mark what fruits did grow on such a tre^,
What crop did rise upon so rash sown seed,
For when I thought my self in heaven to be,
In depth of hell I drowned was in deed:
Whereon to think my heavy heart does bleed:
Me thought I swumme in Seas of all delight,
When as I sunk in puddles of despite,
Alas alas I thought my self beloved,
When deadly hate,
Did play check mate,
With me poor pawn, that no such prancks had proved.
This when I tried (ay me) to be to true,
I wept for woe, I pined all for pain,
I tare my hear, I often changed hew,
I left delight, with dolours to complain,
I shund each place where pleasure did remain,
I cride, I calde on every kind of death,
I strove each way to stop my fainting breath.
Short tale to make, I slept so far in strife,
That still I sought,
With all my thought,
Some happy help to leave my lothed life.
But hope was he that held my hand abacke,
From quick dispatch of all my g^iping grief,
When heat of hate had burnt my will to wrack,
Then hope was cold and lent my life relief,
In every choice hope challengde to be chief.
When coldest crampes had clean or^ come my heart,
Then hope was hot, and warnde my weary smart,
When heart was hardy, hope was still in dread,
When heart was faint,
With fears attaint,
Then hardy hope held up my fearful head.
Thus when I found that neither flowing tears
Could drown my heart in waves of weary woe,
Nor hardy hand could overcome my fears,
To cut the sack of all my sorrow so,
Nor death would come, nor I to death could go.
And yet I felt great drops of secret smart*
Distilling still within my dying heart:
I then perceiud that only Care was he,
Which as my friend,
Might make an end,
Of all these pains, and set my fancy free.
Wherefore (oh Care) grant thou my just request*
Oh kill my corpse, oh quickly kill me now,
Oh make an end and bring my bones to rest,
Oh cut my thread (good Care) I care not how,
Oh Care be kind: and here I make a vow,
That when my life out of my breast shall part*
I will present thee with my faithful heart*
And send it to thee as a Sacrifice,
Because thou have,
Uouchsaft at last,
To end my furies in this friendly wise.
Fato non fortuna.
WHat greater glory can a Keysar gain,
If mad mood move his subjects to rebel,
Than that at last (when all the traitors train,
Have trod the path* of deep repentance well,
And naked need with Cold and Hunger both,
Has bitten them abroad in foreign land,
Whereby they may their lewd devises loath.
When harebraind have, with cold advise is scande)
If then at last, they come upon their knee,
And pardon crave with due submission,
And for this cause, I think that Care of me,
Was moved most, to take compassion.
For now I find, that pity pricks his mind,
To see me ploo^ged still in endless pain,
And right remorse, his princely heart does bind,
To rule the rage wherein I do remain.
I feel my tears do now begin to stay,
For Care from them their swelling springs does soke,
I feel my sighs their labors now allaye,
For care has quenched the coals that made them smoke.
I feel my panting heart begins to rest,
For Care has staide the hammers of my head,
I feel the flame which blazed in my breast,
Are now with careful ashes ouerspred.
And gentle Care, has whet his karuing knife,
To cut in twain the thread of all my thrall,
Desired death now overcomes life,
And we still works to help in have with all.
But since I feel these pangs approaching so,
And lothed life begin to take his leave,
Me thinks it meet, to give before I go.
Such lands, and goods, as I behind me leave.
So to discharge my troubled conscience,
And eke to set an order for mine heir,
Who might (perhaps) be put to great expense,
To sue for that, which I bequeath him here.
Wherefore (dear wench) with all my full intent,
I thus begin to make my Testament.
Fato non fortuna.
His last will and Testament.
IN Jove his mighty name, this eight and twentieth day,
Of frosty bearded Ianuar, the enemy to May:
Since Adam was create, five thousand years I guess,
Five hundredth, forty more and five, as stories do express.
I being whole of mind, (immortal Gods have praise)
Though in my body languishing with pang^ of pain always,
Do thus ordeyne my will which long in woes have wept,
Beseeching mine executours to see it duly kept.
First I bequeath my soul on Charons boat to tend,
Until thy life (my love) at last may light on luckie end,
That there it may awayte, to wait upon thy ghost,
When y^ haste quite and clean forgot what pra^ks now please thee most.
So shall it well be seen whose love is like to mine:
For so I mean to try my truth, and there till then to pine.
My body be enbalmde, and cloazed up in chest,
With ointments and with spiceries of every sweet the best:
And so preserved still until the day do come,
That death deuorce my love from life, and trusse her up in tomb.
Then I bequeath my corpse to couche beneath her bones,
And there to feed the greedy woorms that linger for the nones
To frette upon her flesh, which is too fine therefore,
This service may it do her yet, although it do no more.
My heart (as heretofore) I must bequeath to Care,
And God he knows, I think the gift to simple for his share,
But that he may perceive, I mean to pay my dew,
I will it shall be taken quick, and borne him bleding new,
As for my funerals, I leave that toye at large,
To be as mine executors will give thereto in charge.
Yet if my goods will stretch unto my strange device,
Then let this order be observed, mine heir shall pay the price:
First let the torche bearers be wrapped in weeds of woe,
Let all their lights be virgin wax, because I loved it so.
And care not though the twist be course that lends them light,
If fancy fume, and frewill flame, the^ must they needs burn bright.
Next them let come the quyer, with psalms and doleful song,
Recording all my rough repulse and wraying all my wrong,
And when the deskant sings, in treeble tunes above,
Then let fa burden, say (by low) I lived and dayde for love:
About my heavy hearse, some mourners would I have,
Who might the same accompany, and stand about the grave,
But let them be such men, as may confess with me,
How contrary the lots of love, to all true lovers be.
Let Patience be the Priest, the Clearke be Close conceit,
The Sexten be Symplicitie, which means no disceit.
Let alms of Love be dealt, even at the Chauncell door,
And feed them there with fresh delays, as I have ^en of yore:
Then let the youngest sort, be set to ring Loves bells,
And pay Repentance for their pains, but give the^ nothing else,
Thus when the Dirge is done, let every man depart,
And learn by me what harm it is to have a faithful heart.
Those little lands I have, mine heir must needs possess,
His name is Lust, the lands be loss, few lovers escape with less.
The best of all my goods, which I not here rehearse,
Give learned Poets for their pains, to deck my tomb with verse:
And let them write these words upon my careful chest,
Lo here he lies, that was as true (in love) as is the best.
Alas I had forgot the persons dew to pay,
And so my soul in Purgatory, might remain always.
Then for my privy Tithes; as kysses caught by stealth,
Sweet collings and such other knachs as multiplied my wealth:
I give the Uicar here, to please his gredie will,
A deyntie dishe of sugar soppes but saust with sorrow still:
And twice a week at least, let dight them for his dishe,
O^ frydayes and on wednesdayes, to save expense of fish.
Now have I much bequeathed and little left behind,
And others mo must yet be served or else I were unkind.
Wet eyes and wayling words, Executors I make,
And for their pains ten pound of tears let either of the^ take*
Let sorrow at the last my Suprauisor be,
And steadfastness my surest stead, I give him for his fee:
Yet in his pattent place this Sentence of prouiso,
That he which loves steadfastly, shall want no sa^se of sorrow.
Thus now I make an end, of this my weary will,
And sign it with my simple hand, and set my seal there till.
And you which read my words, although they be in rhyme,
Yet reason may persuade you eke, Thus lovers dote sometime.
The Subscription and seal.
MY Mansion house was Moan: from Dolors dale I came,
I Fato: Non Fortuna, hight, lo now you know my name:
My seal is sorrows sithe, within a field of fame,
Which cuts in twain a careful heart, y^ sweltreth in the same.
Fato non Fortuna.
ALas, lo now I hear the passing Bell,
Which Care appoynteth carefully to knoule,
And in my breast, I feel my heart now swell,
To break the strings, which ioynde it to my soul.
The Cristall y^e, which lent mine eyes their light,
Does now wax dym, and dazeled all with dread,
My senses all, will now forsake me quite,
And hope of health abandoneth my head,
My weary tongue can talk no longer now,
My trembling hand now leaves my pen to hold,
My joints now stretch, my body cannot bow,
My skin lokes pale, my blood now waxes cold.
And are not these, the very pangs of death?
Yes sure (sweet heart) I know them so to be,
They be the pangs, which strive to stop my breath,
They be the pangs, which part my love from thee.
What said I? Love? Nay life: but not my love,
My life departes, my love continues still:
My lothed life may from my corpse remove,
My loving Love shall always work thy will.
It was thy will even thus to try my truth,
Thou have thy will, my truth may now be seen,
It was thy will, that I should dye in youth,
Thou have thy will my years are yet but grene.
Thy penance was that I should pyne in pain,
I have performd thy penance all in woe,
Thy pleasure was that I should here remain,
I have been glad to please thy fancy so.
Now since I have performed every part
Of thy command, as near as tongue can tell,
Content thee yet before my Muse depart,
To take this Sonet for my last farewell.
Fato non fortuna.
His Farewell.
FArewell dear love whom I have loved and shall,
Both in this world, and in the world to come,
For proof whereof my spryte is Charons thrall,
And yet my corpse attendant on thy toome.
Farewell dear sweet, whose wanton will to please
Each taste of trouble seemed mell to me,
Farewell sweet dear, whose doubts for to appease,
I was contented thus in bale to be.
Farewell my life, farewell for and my death,
For thee I lyu'd, for thee now must I dye,
Farewell from Bathe, whereas I feel my breath
Forsake my breast in great perplexity,
Alas how welcome were this death of mine,
If I had did between those arms of thine.
Fato non Fortuna.
This should have bin placed in the dolorous discourse, before the Supplication
to Care in Folio. 430.
The Reporter.
THese vaunting verses with a many mo,
(To his mishap) have come unto my hands,
Whereof the rest (because he ^ayled so
In braggers boat which set it self on sands,
And brought him eke fast bound in follyes bands)
Of curtesye I keep them from your sight,
Let these suffice which of my self I write.
The highest tree that ever yet could grow,
Although full fair it florysht for a season,
Found yet at last some fall to bring it low,
This old said saw is (God he knows) not ge ason:
For when things pass the reach and bounds of reason
They fall at last, although they stand a time,
And bruise the more, the higher that they clyme.
So Bartholmew unto his pain did prove.
For when he thought his hap to be most hie,
And that he only reapt the fruits of love,
And that he swelt in all prosperity,
His comfort changed to calamity:
And though I do him wrong to tell the same,
Yet read it you, and let me bear the blame.
The Saint he served became a crafty devil,
His goddess to an Idol seemed to change,
Thus all his good transformed into evil,
And every joy to raging grief did raunge:
Which Metamorphosis was meruells strange:
Yet shall you seldom otherwise it prove,
Where wicked Lust does bear the name of Love.
This sudden change when he began to spy,
And ^old suspect into his mind had crept,
He bounst and bet his head formentingly,
And from all company himself he kept,
Whereby so far in storms of strife he stepped,
That now he seemed an Image not a man,
His eyes so dead, his color waxt so wan.
And I which always bare him great good will,
(Although I knew the cause of all his grief,
And what had trained and tysed him theretyll,
And plain to speak, what moved his myschiefe,
Yet since I sought to ease him with releife:)
I did become importunate to know,
The secret cause whereon this grudge should grow.
At last with much ado, his trembling tongue
Bewrayde theffect of his vnwylling will,
Which here to tell since it were all to long,
And I therewith too barren am ofskyll,
And trouble you with ^edyous tidings still,
Content you now to hear himself rehearse,
His strange affects in his lamenting verse.
Which verse he wrote of Bathe (as erst was said)
And there I saw him when he wrote the same,
I saw him there with many moanes dysmayde,
I saw him there both fryse and flashe in flame,
I saw him greeu^d when others made good game:
And so appears by his dark discourse,
The which to read I crave your just remorse.
The reporters conclusion unfinished.
WHere might I now ^ind fluddes of flowing tears,
So to suffice the swelling of mine eyes?
How might my breast unload the bale it bears?
Alas alas how might my tongue devise
To tell this weary tale in woeful wise?
To tell I say these tidings now of truth,
Which may provoke the craggy rocks to ruth?
In depth of dole would God that I were drownde,
Where fl^ttring joys might never find me out,
Or graued so within the greedy ground,
As false delights might never breed my doubt,
Nor guilefull love her purpose bring about:
Whose trustlesse trains in colors for to paint,
I find by proof my wits are all to faint.
I am that man whom destenies ordeine,
To bear each grief that grows on the mold,
I am that man which prove unto my pain,
More pangs at once than can with tongue be told,
I am that man (hereof you may be bold)
Whom heaven and earth did frame to scoff and scorn,
I, I am he which to that end was borne.
Suffized not my self to taste the fruit,
Of ^ugred sowres which grow in gadding years,
But that I must with pain of like pursuit,
Perceive such pangs by pattern of my pears,
And feel how fancies fume could fond my pheares:
Alas I find all fates against me bent,
For nothing else I live, but to lament.
The force of friendship bound by holy oath,
Did draw my will into these crooked ways,
For with my friend I went to Bathe (though loath)
To lend some comfort in his dolie days,
The steadfast friend sticks fast at all assayes:
Yet was I loath such time to spend in vain,
The cause whereof, lo here I tell you plain.
By proof I found as you may well perceive,
That all good counsel was but worn in wast,
Such painted pains his passions did deceive,
That bitter gall was mell to him in taste,
Within his will such roots of ruin plast,
As graffes of griefs were only given to grow,
Where youth did plant and rash conceit did sow.
I saw long since his ears were open aye
To every tale which fed him with some hope,
As fast again I saw him turn away
From grave advise, which might his conscience grope,
From reasons rule his fancy lightly lope,
He only gave his mind to get that gain,
Which most he wished and least could yet attain.
Not I alone, but many mo with me,
Had found what fickleness his Idol used,
And how she claimed Cressides heir to be,
And how she had his great good will abused,
And how she was of many men refused,
Who tried her tricks and knew her by the kind,
Save only him she made no lover blind.
But what for this? whose face is plainer seen,
Than he which thinks he walks in a net?
Or who in bale has ever deeper been,
Than he which thought his state might not be bet,
In such a iealosie these lovers iet,
That weal to them does seem to be but we,
And grief seems joy, they hold their fancies so.
Tell him that reason ought to be his rule,
And he allowed no reason but his own,
Tell him that best were quickly to recule,
Before all force by fear were overthrown,
And that his part. etc.
I Have not (hitherto) recovered a full end of this discourse, the author
thereof being more curious in delivery of the same, than he has been
heretofore in any other of his doings. But since my trust is that you will use
that and the rest but for your own private commodity, I am the bolder to
present you with a co^ie thereof imperfect as it is, and now having finished
this written regyster, it amounts to a good round vollume, the which some
would judge worthy the Imprinting, but hoping of your courtesy (vt supra) I
cease wyshing you no less profit than pleasure in readyng and perusyng these
tryfles.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon for Richard Smith.


