A DISCVSSION OF THE POPISH DOCTRINE OF Transubstantiation:

Wherein the same is declared, by the Confession of their own Writers, to have
no necessary ground in Gods Word:

As also it is further demonstrated to be against Scripture, Nature, Sense,
Reason, Religion, the Judgment of the Ancients, and the Faith of our
Ancestors:

Written by THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his
shop at the entering in of Pope's Head Alley out of Lombard-streete. 1624.

This Treatise consists of two parts.
1. A brief Discourse containing diverse Arguments against the Popish Doctrine
of Transubstantiation.

2. A Just Defense of the same Discourse, and Arguments against the Answer of a
namelesse Popish Priest thereunto.

To the Reader.
BE pleased (I pray thee) to understand in a word, as the occasion of
undertaking, so the motive of publishing this Controversy. Having had some
Conference with an Honorable Lady nobly descended, whom some Factors for Rome
had endeavored to pervert, about the Point of Transubstantiation, and Christ's
corporal presence in the Eucharist; I was by her requested to deliver her in
writing, the sum of that that had passed then by word of mouth from me, as
well in way of Answer to the exceptions taken to our Doctrine, as in way of
opposition to the Roman tenet therein. Whereupon within a few days after,
having digested it as well as streights of time would permit, and added some
further enforcements of the general heads then insisted on, I delivered it
verbatim as here thou now have it. Which writing being imparted to one of those
Factors, a speedy answer was promised, and (after long expectation of it) at
length performed, such as here it is exhibited (under the letters of N. P. put
for a Namelesse Popish Priest) without word or syllable detracted, added, or
altered. Unto which I soon after dispeeded a Reply; which was to the same
Honorable Personage also not long after represented. Now having hitherto heard
of nothing returned further thereunto, (albeit some years be past since the
exhibition of it) I have thought good by the advice of some judicious Friends
to publish all together (my Reply only in some few places enlarged) as well
thereby the more fully to clear some objections urged commonly (to the simpler
sort especially) against our Faith and Doctrine concerning that Sacrament, and
our exposition of some passages of holy writ, either concerning, or supposed to
concern the same; as also further to discover (to such especially as are not
so well acquainted therewith) the gross and palpable frauds and falsehoods,
with such Popish Factours too frequent, which in the advised reading and
perusing hereof may easily and evidently be descried. And this is all that (not
listing to detain thee long from the discourse it self) I was desirous by way
of Preface to fore-acquaint thee withal. The Lord vouchsafe thee and us all
true understanding, sound judgment, and a love of the truth both in this and
in all other things.

Thine in our common Savior, THO: GATAKER.

Errata.
IN the Text. page 31. line 21. for said read say. p. 33. lin. 10 for these r.
those, l. 20. for a man's r. man's l. 23. for difficulty r. difficulties p. 39.
l. 3. for confimeth r. confirms l. 12. for maine r. maime l. 27. for
commodioas r. commodious p. 40. lin. 5. for to pass r so pass p. 41. l. 11.
for and r. with p. 42. l. 8. for is r. is not p. 47. l 7. for Cross r. Gross.
p. 51. l. 24. put out simply and p. 53. l. 7. for these r. in those p. 54. l.
17. for to conclude r. concluded p. 56. l. 25. after Christ's put in body p. 60.
l. vlt. for things r. thing p. 64. l. 30. for Catechizing r. Catechisings p.
65. l. 5. for one r. of one p. 66. l. 17. for Gloss r. Gospel p. 74. l. 9.
for this r. this is p. 75. l. 30. for their r. that their p. 87. l. 34. for;
either r. either; p. 99. l. 24, 26, 36. put out 1. 2. 3. l. 35. for receive r.
receiving p. 103. l. 5. after they put out was p. 199. l. 9. for Galathians r.
Galatians p. 148. l. 10. for conversion r. conversion) l 33. for it) r. it. p.
149. l. 35. for here read how l. 37. for before. r. before? p. 1^0. l. 25. for
body r. bodies p. 151 l. 20. for therefore r. thereof, p. 152. l. 4. for to as
r. as to l. 26. for bread r. bred p. 154. l. 31. for what r. what this p. 155.
l. 31. for like like r like nature p. 158. l. 28. for whinch r. which l. 34.
for those r. that those p. 169. l. 8. for Christ r. Christ's p. 171. l. 3 for
places r. place. p. 187. l. 16 for seemed r. seem p. 189. l. 27. for assumped
r. assumpted p. 197. l. 31. for cannot r. can not p. 199. l. 24. for in r. is in
l. 33. for that is r. that which is p. 202. l. 21. for prooe r. prove p. 212.
l. 13. place the (before The contrary p 219. l. 20. for tempored r. tempered. p
222. l. 29. after not put out he p. 226. l. 19. for Emissemus r. Emissenus.

In the Margent page 13. letter z. for signifitatiue r. significatiue p 17. l.
e. for Videt r. Vide and p. 20. * for dentis r. dentibus p. 21. * for mittar r.
mittam p. 33. l. vst for est. et r. esset p. 64 l. m. for Lenserus r Leu^aeus
p. 66. l. k for Greg. 8 r. Graec. 82. p. 98. l q. for (...) p. 100. * for hom.
r. nom. p. 118. l. f. for ducatur, iestis r. ducaturi estis, p. 131 l. b. sor
oniensis r. omensis p. 138. l. s remove Gal 4. 3. to p. 139. p. 140. l. f. for
l. 8. r. l. 1. p 165. l. b. for Sticorum r. Stoicorum p. 173. l. c. for Gerob.
r. Gorol. p. 177. l. l. for pa^is r. panis p. 192. l. x. for and r. ad l. a.
for frantur. r. frangitur l. b for sacerdotes r sacerdos p. 199. l x. for
Christum r. Christi p. 219. l. u for (...). p. 220 for (...).

A Brief Discourse containing diverse Arguments against the Popish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.
THE Question is, whither Christ be corporally present in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist by virtue of a Transubstantiation or a real conversion of the Bread
and Wine into the natural Body and Blood of Christ. This those of the Church
of Rome affirm, we deny; and refuse to yield to for these Reasons.

1. That which no Scripture enforces upon us, that in matter of Faith we are
not bound to believe. For the Scripture is the Rule of our Faith. In his, quae
aperte posita sunt in Scriptura, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem,
moresque viuendi. Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
In it (says August.) are found all those things, Which concern faith and
good life. And, Hoc quia de Scripturis authoritate^ non habet, eadem facilitate
contemnitur, qua probatur. Hieron. in Math. c. 23.
That which has not authority from it, (says Jerome) may as easily be
rejected, as it is auerred. And, Nihil de co constat, quia Scriptura non
exhibet. Tertull. de carn. Christ.
Of that (says Tertullian) there is no certainty, that the Scripture has not.

But that Christ is present corporally in the Sacrament of the Eucharist by
virtue of any such Transubstantiation or real conversion of the Creatures into
the natural Body and Blood of Christ, no Scripture enforces us to believe.
Nor are we therefore bound to believe it.

That no Scripture enforces us to believe it, shall appear by examination of
those places that are alleged commonly to prove it. The places usually
produced are principally two.

The former place is out of the Institution it self; those words of our
Savior, This is my Body. Matthew. 26. 26. Mark 14. verse. 22. Luke 22. verse. 19.
1. Corinthians. 11. verse. 24.

That these words enforce us not to believe any such thing, is thus proved. If
these words may well be taken figuratively, as well as some other speeches of
the like kind in Scripture, and other the like phrases usual in ordinary
speech, then these words enforce us not to believe any such thing. But these
words, This is my Body, may well be taken figuratively as well as other
speeches of the like kind in Scripture, to wit, Genesis 41. 26, 27. Septe^ boues,
and septem spicae septem anni sunt: and non dicit septem annos significant.
Aug. in Leuit. quaest. 57.
The seven kine, and the seven ears are seven years: Apoc. 17. 12.
The ten horns are ten Kings: 1. Cor. 10. 4.
The Rock was Christ: and as other phrases usual in ordinary speech, as
Intuentes tabulam aut parietem dicimus; Ille Cicero est; ille Salustius, ille
Achilles, ille Hector: hoc flumen Simois; illa Roma, cum aliud nihil sint quam
pictae imagines: and omnes fere imagines earum rerum quarum imagines sunt,
nominibus appellati solent. Aug. ad Simpl. lib. 2. quaest. 3.
when pointing to the pictures of Alexander, Caesar, William the Conqueror,
Virgil, Liuie and the like, we say, This is Alexander that conquered Asia; This
is Caesar that conquered France; This is King William that conquered England;
This is Virgil that wrote of Aeneas; This is Liuie that wrote the Roman
story; and the like.

These words therefore enforce us not to believe that Christ is corporally
present in the Sacrament, by virtue of any such Transubstantiation.

The truth hereof is acknowledged even by our Adversaries themselves. Cardinal
Bellarmine grants that Haec verba necessario inferunt, aut veram mutationem
panis, vt volunt Catholici, aut mutationem metaphoricam, vt volunt Caluinistae;
nullo autem modo sententiam Lutheranorum admittunt. Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 2.
c. 19.
these words, This is my Body, may imply either such a real change of the
Bread as the Catholics hold, or such a figurative change as the Caluinists
hold, but will not bear that sense that the Lutherans give them. And, Cardinal
Caietan acknowledges and freely confesses, that Non apparet ex Euangelio
coactivum aliquod ad intelligendum haec verba proprie. Cajetan. in Thom. part.
3. quaest. 75. art. 1.
there appears not any thing out of the Gospel that may enforce us to
understand those words properly. This is my body. And he adds that Ex
subi^nctis verbis non potest concludi euidenter praemiss^ verba esse
intelligendaproprie. Ibid. Et postea; cum ^uius relationis veritate stat
praeiacentem esse veram solum in sensu metaphorico: vt patet in exemplo, Petra
autem erat Christus, non proprie sed metaphorice inteiligenda. Et similiter
illa propositio, (Hoc est corpus meum) esset vera, si in solo metaphorico sensu
esset p olata.
nothing in the text hinders but that those words, This is my body, may as
well be taken in a metaphorical sense, as those words of the Apostle, The
Rock was Christ: and that the words of either proposition may well be true,
though the thing there spoken be not understood in a proper sense, but in a
metaphorical sense only. And I find alleged out of Bishop Fisher in a work
of his against Luther (for the book I have not) these words; Hactenus
Matthaeus; Neque est hic vnum verbu^ vnde probetur in Mis^a nostra vera carnis
and Sarguinis Christi presentia. Joan Rof^e^s. contr. Captiu. Babylon.
There is not one word in S. Mathewes Gospel, from which the true presence of
Christ's flesh and blood in our Mass may be proved. Ex Scriptura probari non
potest. Ibid.
Out of Scripture it cannot be proved. Thus by the Confession of our
Adversaries themselves, our Saviors words may well bear that meaning that we
give them, and there is nothing in the Text that may enforce us to expound or
understand them otherwise.

It is absurd therefore for any to reason thus, as many yet are wont to do;
Christ says, This is my Body: and we are bound to believe Christ: and
therefore we must needs believe that Christ is corporally present in the
Sacrament. Since that the words of Christ by our Adversaries their own
confession may be most true, and yet no such thing at all be meant by them, or
intended in them. And the same may well be showed, (as Caietan points us to
it) by the like. For must we not believe the Apostle as well as Christ? or must
we not believe Christ as well in one place as in an other? But the Apostle
says, that 1 Corinthians. 10. 4.
The Rock was Christ: And yet no man believes therefore that the rock was
turned into Christ; though he believe the Apostles words in that place. Yea our
Savior himself says; Luke 12. 20.
This Cup is the new Testament: and, Matthew. 26. 28.
This Cup is my Blood. And yet is no man so senseless as therefore to believe
that the Cup which our Savior then held, was turned either into the New
Testament, or into Christ's blood. As well therefore may a man prove that the
Rock was turned into Christ, because the Apostle says Non dicit, Petia
significat Christum; sed tanquam hoc esset, quod vtique per substantiam non
erat, sed per significationem, Petra autem erat Christus. Aug. in Leuit. quae.
57.
not, The Rock signified Christ, but expressly, The Rock was Christ: or that
the communicants themselves are turned into bread, because the Apostle says,
1. Cor. 10. 4.
We are all one Bread: or that the Cup was turned either into the New
Testament, or into Blood; because our Savior says, This Cup is the New
Testament; and, This Cup is my Blood: as that the bread is turned into the Body
of Christ, because our Savior says of it, This is my Body. The Rock was
Christ only symbolically and sacramentally, by representation and resemblance:
and the Cup, that is, the wine in the Cup, (for so our Savior says it was,
Math. 26. 29.
the fruit of the vine) was the New Testament, as Genesis 17. 13.
Circumcision the Covenant, as Genesis 17. 11.
a sign and Romans 4. 11.
a seal of it. And in like manner is the bread said to be the Body of Christ,
as Exo. 12. 11.
the Paschal Lamb is called Petra Christus in signo, Aug. in Joan. tract. 26.
quia significat Christum. Idem. epist. 102. Ibi Petra Christus; nobis Christus
quod in altari ponitur. Idem in Joan. tract. 45.
the Passover, not really or essentially, but typically and sacramentally, as
a type and sign of the same. Yea so the Ancient Fathers expound the words.
Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis corpus suum illum fecit, Hoc est
corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei. Tertull. contr. Marcion. lib.
4. cap. 40.
The Bread (says Tertullian) that Christ took and distributed to his
Disciples he made his Body, saying, This is my Body, that is, a figure of my
Body. And, Dominus non dubitauit dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret
corporis sui. Aug. contr. Adimant. cap. 12.
The Lord (says Augustine) doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he
delivered the sign of his Body. And he gives elsewhere a reason of such
manner of speech; to wit, because Solet res quae significat eius rei nomine
qua^ significat nuncupari. Aug. in Leuir. quaest. 57. Aliquando res que
significat, nomen eius rei qua^ significat accipit. Idem epist. 102. Solent
imagines rerum earum nominibus appellari, qua^um imagines sunt. Idem ad Simplic
l. 2. q. 3.
Signs are wont to be called by the names of the things by them signified: and
Si sacramenta quand^m similitudinem eatum retum quarum sunt Sacramenta, non
haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac auiem similitudine plaerumque
etiam ipsarum retum nomina accipiunt, Aug. epist. 22.
Sacraments by the names of those things whereof they are Sacraments, in regard
of the similitude that they have of them. And so, says he, Sicut secundum
quendam modum Sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi est; Sacramentum
sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est. Aug ibid.
the Sacrament of the body of Christ is in some sort the Body of Christ; and
the Sacrament of the blood of Christ is the blood of Christ.

Yea you shall find that which we herein maintain, evidently confessed and
confirmed by the Gloss upon Augustine in the Popes own Canons. Augustines
words inserted into the Corpse of the Canon Law are these; Sicut coel^stis panis
quae Christi caro est, suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuein sit
sacramentum corporis Christi, illius viz. quod visibile, quod palpabile,
mortale in cruce, positum est: vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis quae sacerdotis
manibus fit Christi passio mors, crucifixio, non rei veritate, sed significante
mysterio: sic sa^ amentum fidei, quod baptismus intelligitur, fides est. Aug.
apud Great. de consecra. d 2 c. Hoc est.
As the heavenly Bread, which is the Flesh of Christ, is in it own manner
called the body of Christ, when as in deed and truth it is a sacrament of
that body of Christ, which being visible, palpable, and mortal was placed on
the Cross: and that immolation of Christ's flesh which is done with the Priests
hands is called Christ's passion, death, and crucifying, not in the truth of the
thing, but in a mystery signifying it: so the Sacrament of faith, whereby we
understand Baptism, is faith. And the Popish Gloss upon that place thus
speaks; Coelestis, id est, coeleste sacramentum quod vere representat Christi
carnem, dicitur corpus Christi, sed improp^^e: vnde dicitur, suo modo; sed non
rei veritate, sed significante mysterio; vocatur Christi corpus, id est,
significat. Gloss. ibid.
The heavenly bread, that is, the heavenly Sacrament, which truly represents
the slesh of Christ, is called the Body of Christ, but improperly: and
therefore is it said, In it own manner, but not in the truth of the thing, but
in a significant mystery. So that the meaning is, It is called the body of
Christ, that is, it signifies the body of Christ. Thus word for word the
Gloss.

Thus you see what our very Adversaries themselves grant us concerning the
exposition of these words, This is my body: and that which may be gathered from
them. The words of Christ prove not necessarily (says the Romish Cardinal)
that the bread is turned into Christ's body. And, when the bread is called
Christ's body, the meaning is, (says the Popish Canonist) that it signifies
Christ's body. And what is this, but the very same that we say?

To conclude, as Dominus ait, ^pse est Elias: ipse au^em ait, Ego non sum
Elias. Recte Johannes proprie, quia Dominus figurate. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 4.
Augustine well observes, Christ says, Mat. 11. 14.
John is Elias; and John himself says, Ioh. 1. 12.
I am not Elias: and yet neither of them cross the other, because John spoke
properly, and Christ figuratively: So Christ says, This bread is my body, in
one sense; and we in another sense that it is not his body: and yet we cross
not Christ; because we speak properly, he figuratively, as the Gloss it
self confesses. And on the other side they were Mat. 26. 60, 61.
false witnesses though they alleged Christ's own words mis-expounded of the
material Temple, which Ioh. 2. 19. 21
he meant of the mystical Temple, his humanity. And so may others be, though
they allege Christ's own words of the bread being his body, urging that as
spoken properly, that by him was figuratively spoken.

If it be objected that by this our denial of Transubstantiation, and of
Christ's corporal presence, we make the Sacrament to be nothing but bare bread.

I answer, that notwithstanding such Transubstantiation and corporal presence
be denied, yet it makes the Sacrament no more to be but bare bread; then it
makes the water in Baptismus etsi Deus non est, magnum camen aliquid est, quia
sacramentum est Dei. Aug. de vnic. Bapt. c. 5.
Baptism to be but bare water, because all deny any such conversion or
corporal presence in it. A piece of wax annexed as a seal to the Princes
Patent of pardon or other like deed, is of far other use, and far greater
effic^cy and excellency then other ordinary wax is, though it be the very same
in nature and substance with it, and with that which it was it self before it
was taken unto that use. And so is the bread in the Lords Supper, being a seal
of Gods covenant, and of Christ's last will and Testament, of fair other use,
and of far greater efficacy and excellency then any other ordinary bread
is, though it be the same still in nature and substance with it, and the same
with that for substanse that it was before it was so consecrated. That which
Pope Gelasius and Theodoret, both expressly anouch. Certe sacramenta quae
sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi, diuina res est, etc. et tamen esse non
desinit substan^ vel natura panis and vini, sed permanent in suae proprietate
naturae: and certe imago and similitudo corporis and sanguinis Christi in
action mysteriorum celebratur. Gelas. Ep. Romans de 2. in Christo nature. in
Bibliothec. Patr. tom. 4.
Surely the Sacraments (says Gelasius) which we take, of Christ's body and
blood, are a divine thing, and thereby therefore are we made partakers of the
divine Nature: and yet cease there not to be there the nature or substance of
bread and wine, but they abide still in the propriety of their own Nature: And
certainly an image and similitude of Christ's body and blood is celebrated in
those mysteries. And, Neque enim signa mystica post sanctificationem recedunt a
sua natura: manent enim in priore substantia and figura and forma Theodoret.
dialog. 2.
The mystical signs (says Theodonet) after the sanctification do not forgo
their own nature, but retain still their former substance, and figure, and
form. And again, the same Theodoret, Qui quod natura corpus est triticum and
panem appellauit, and vitem rursus seipsum nominauit, is symbola and signa quae
videntur, appellatione corporis and sanguinis honorauit non naturam mutans, sed
naturae gratiam adiiciens. Theodoret. di^log. 1.
He that called that which is by nature his body, Ioh. 12. 24.
wheat, and Ioh. 6. 51.
bread, and again named himself Ioh. 15. 1.
a vine; he has honored the symbols and signs which we see, with the titles
of his body and blood, not changing the nature of them, but adding grace to it.

Thus they, and thus we: and yet neither do they nor we therefore make the
Sacraments of Christ's body and blood nothing but bare bread and wine.

The latter place usually alleged to this purpose, is that large Discourse our
Savior has concerning the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood.
Ioh. 6. 51-58.

True it is indeed, that if the bread and wine in the Eucharist be
transubstantiated into the natural body and blood of Christ, and there be
such a corporal presence, as Papists imagine; it must needs follow that
Christ's very flesh is eaten, and his very blood it self is corporally drunk
in the Sacrament: And to this purpose also Pope Nicholas in that solemn form
of recantation that he enjoined Berengarius inserted into the body of the
Canon, auoweth that Verum corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi and non sacrame^tum
solum, sensualiter, and non in sacramento solum, sed in veritate manibus
sacerdotum tractari, and sidelium dentibus atteri. Nicol. Pp. de consecra. d.
2. c. Ego Barengarius.
the very body of Christ in the Eucharist is broken with the Priests hands, and
torn in pieces with men's teeth, not sacramentally only, but sensually: and
that all that hold the contrary deserve to be eternally damned. A sensual
indeed and a senseless assertion, yea an horrible and an hideous speech; full
fraught (I may well say, though it proceeded from a Pope, who, they say, cannot
err) with extreme impiety and blasphemy, and such as Christian e^res cannot
but abhor to hear. In so much that their own Glosser upon the place well
warns us to take heed how we trust him, Nisi sane intelligas verba
Berengarii, in maiorem incides haeresm, quam ipse habuit. Glos. ibid.
Lest (...) fall into a worse heresy then Berengarius ever held. But thus one
monstrous opinion breeds and begets another. And this indeed must needs
follow upon the former. The corporal presence of Christ in the thing eaten,
must needs infer and enforce a corporal eating of him: and to prove the
same they press commonly our Saviors words in that place of eating his flesh
and drinking his blood. Which as, with some of the Ancients indeed, they
understand of the Eucharist, so they expound (though without their consent
therein) of a corporal and carnal eating of Christ's flesh.

But neither are those words of our Savior to be understood of any such
corporal eating and drinking: nor does Christ at all in that whole Discourse
speak of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; which was not then as yet instituted,
but of feeding on him spiritually by faith, which is done not in the Sacrament
only, but out of it also.

And first, that the place is not to be understood of any such corporal
eating and drinking, it is aparent.

For it is a good and a sure Rule that Augustine gives: Si praeceptiua locutio
flagitium aut facinus videtur iubere, figurata est. Aug. de doct. Christi. l.
3. c. 16.
If in any precept some heinous or flagitious thing seem to be enjoined, you
may thereby know it to be a figurative speech. I need not apply this general
Rule to the point in hand; Augustine does it for me. He instanceth in that
very particular that we now treat of. Nisi manducaueritis, etc. Facinus vel
flagitium videtur iubere. Figura est ergo, praecipiens passioni Domini esse
communicandum and s^au^ter atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis
caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit. Aug. ibid.
Unless you eat (says he) the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his
blood, you have no life in you. It seems to enjoin an heinous and flagitious
thing. It is a figurative speech therefore, commanding us to communicate with
Christ's passion, and sweetly and profitably to lay up in our memory, that his
flesh was crucified and wounded for us. So that this place by Augustines Rule,
and his own application of it is to be understood figuratively, and does not
therefore infer any corporal feeding.

2. That this whole Discourse of our Savior is not to be understood of any
Sacramental or corporal, but of spiritual eating only, it is likewise
apparent.

For 1. None are saved, but such as so feed on Christ, as is there spoken of.
Ioh. 6. 53.
Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, (says our Savior) and drink
his blood, you have no life in you. Aeternam ergo vitam non habet, qui istum
panem no^ manducat, nec istu^ sanguinem bibit: Nam temporalem vitam sine illo
habere homines possunt, aeternam vero omnino non possunt. Aug. in Joan. Tract.
26.
He has not therefore life eternal, (says Augustine,) that eats not this
bread, and drinks not this blood. For temporal life men may have without it;
but eternal life without it in no wise can they have. But many are and shall
be saved by Christ, that never Sacramentally fed on Christ in the Eucharist,
yea that never eat at all of the Eucharist, or saw it, or knew of it: as not
only the ancient Fathers that lived before Christ's Incarnation, who yet, (as
Augustine well observes) Escam eandem spiritualem qua^ nos manducauerunt. Aug.
in Joan. Tract. 26. and 45.
did eat the flesh of Christ spiritually as well as we do now, and were saved
by the death and passion of Christ, which, as Bernard speaks, Mors eius
profuit ante qua^ fuit. Ber. Sermon. de coen. Dom.
was effectual even before it was actual; and the Thief on the Cross, that
Luke 23. 43.
passed thence to Paradise the same day that he dyed: but many Infants also
that die ere they come to years of discretion, as the Council of Trent
acknowledges, Docet sancta Synodus parvulos vsu rationis carentes nulla
obligari necessitate ad sacramentalem Eucharistiae communionem. Council.
Trident. Sess. vit. Can. 4. Siquis dixerit, parvulis antequam ad annos
discretionis peruenerint, necessariam esse Eucharistiam, anathema sit. ibid.
accursing all those that hold, mis-expounding the words of Christ in that
place, that all Infants are damned that receive not Christ's body and blood in
the Eucharist. Which yet Ecce Innocentius Papa sine baptismo Christi, and sine
participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi vitam non habere parvulos dixit.
Aug ad Bonif. l. 2. c. 4. Sanct. Innocentius parvulos definiuit, nisi
manducauerint carne^ filii hominis, vitam prorsus habere non posse. Idem contr.
Julian. l. 1. c. 2. Hoc idem habet and idem de pecc. mer. and remiss. l. 1. c
20. and 24. and ad 2. Epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 22. and ibid. l. 4. c. 4. and de
veeb. Ap. 8.
one of their own Popes sometime held and maintained; and which would
necessarily follow, if that place were to be understood of the Sacramental
eating of Christ in the Eucharist. It is not therefore the Sacramental eating
of Christ in the Eucharist, that is there spoken of.

2. All that feed on Christ so as is there spoken of, are sure eternally to
be saved. For so our Savior himself says. Ioh. 6. 50, 51. 58.
If any man eat of this bread, he shall never dye, but live for ever. And,
Ioh. 6. 54.
whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal life; and I
will raise him up at the last day. And, Ioh. 6. 56.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
And, As I live by the Father se * Ioh. 6. 57.
He that eats me shall live by me. Non ita est in hac esca, quam sustentandae
temporalis vitae causa sumimus. Nam qui eam non sumpserit, non viuet: nec tamen
qui ea^ sumpserit, viuet. In hoc vero cibo and potu, i. corpore and sanguine
Domini non ita est. Nam and qui eam non sumit, non habet vitam, and qui eam
sumit, habet vitam, and hanc vtique aeterna^. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 26.
It is not (says Augustine) with this meat as with our bodily food. That
unless a man take, he cannot live: but take it he may, and yet not live; he
may die, after he has taken it. But in this food of our Lords body and blood
it is not so. For both he that takes it not, can not live; and he that takes
it, lives eternally. For, Sicut enim, fiquis liquefactae cerae aliam ceram
infuderit, alteram cum altera per totum commisceat; necesse est, siquis carn^m
and sanguinem Domini recipit, cum ipso ita coniungatur, vt Christus in ipso,
and ipse in Christo inueniatur. Cyril. in Joan. l. 4 c. 17.
As if one pour melted wax upon other wax, the one is wholly mixed with the
other: so it must needs be (says Cyril) that if any man take Christ's body and
blood, he be so joined with him, that he be found in Christ, and Christ in him;
and Romans 8. 1.
consequently that he be saved by Christ. But many feed upon that that is
given in the Eucharist, that yet are eternally damned Multi de altari
accipiunt, and moriuntur; and accipiendo moriuntur. Vnde dicit Apostolus;
Iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. Nonne buccella Dominica venenum fuit Iudae?
and tamen accepit, Aug. in Joan. Tract. 26.
Many take it, and die; (says Augustine,) yea many die in the taking of it. He
eats and drinks judgment to himself, says the Apostle. And was not the
morsel that Christ gave Judas, poison to Judas that took it? And again; Hujus
rei Sacramentum de mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad
exitium. Res vero ipsa cuius sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad
exitium, quicunque eius particeps fuerit. ibid.
The Sacrament hereof is taken at the Lords Table by some to salvation, by
others to destruction. Whereas the thing it self whereof it is a Sacrament, is
taken to salvation by every one that is partaker thereof, to destruction by
none. If all be saved then that eat of Christ's flesh in that manner that
Christ speaks of in that place. But all are not saved that eat corporally
what is offered them in the Eucharist: it must needs follow that Christ speaks
not of any corporal eating of him in the Eucharist in that place.

But we need not insist longer upon the proof hereof. For that our Saviors
whole discourse in that place is not to be understood of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, but of feeding on Christ spiritually, is confessed and acknowledged
not by one or two only, but by many Popish writers of great note, Cardinals,
Schoolmen, Canonists, Professors, Jesuits and others; as by name, by Cusan.
epist. 7. ad Bohem.
Cardinal Cusane, Caietan. in Thom. part. 3. quaest. 80. art. 12. and in Joan.
cap. 6.
Cardinal Cajetan, Gabr. Biel in Can. Miss. lect. 84.
Gabriel Biel a great Schooleman, Astesan. sum. lib. 4. tit. 17. quaest. 2.
Astesanus a Canonist, Ruard Tapper. explic. artic. 15.
Ruard Tapper, and Joan Hessel. de commun. sub vna specie.
John Hessels Professors of Divinity at Louaine, and Cor. Iansen harm. Euan.
c. 59.
Cornelius Johnson a great Here I must crave: pardon for stiling this Johnson
or Iansenius a Jesuit, being mistaken in him, and understanding himnow to be
none, A Popish Bishop only he was of Gaunt in Flanders.
Jesuit; the most of them by Cardinal Bellarmine himself alleged and
acknowledged to hold as we do, that those words of our Savior, speak only
of a spiritual eating, and Non agi in hoc capite de sacramentali manducatione
and potu corporis and sanguinis Domini. Bellarm. de sacrament. Euchar. l. 1. c.
5:
not of any corporal, yea or sacramental either. According whereunto it is
acknowledged not by Augustine only, but by Johnson the Jesuit, who at large
disputes and confirms that which we say, both grounding upon Ioh. 6. 27. 29.
35. 47.
the words of our Savior himself, that to eat Christ's flesh in the manner
there spoken of, is nothing else but Hoc est manducare cibum qui non perit,
etc. Quid paras ventrem and dentes? creed and manducasti. Aug. in Joan. Tract.
25. Idem est manducare Christum, and credere in Christum. Iansen. harmon. c. 59.
to believe in Christ.

Since then the places produced to prove this corporal presence of Christ in
the Sacrament, are by our Adversaries their own confession such as either do
not necessarily prove the point, or are otherwise to be understood, we have
little reason to yield unto them therein.

Hitherto we have showed that no Scripture enforces us to believe, as those of
the Romish Church hold, concerning the real conversion of the outward Elements
in the Eucharist into the natural Body and Blood of Christ, and a corporal
presence of either necessarily flowing there from.

Now 2. that the Bread and Wine remain in substance and nature still the same,
and are not so converted into the very Flesh and Blood of Christ, we further
thus prove.

1. We reason from the very course of the Context in the q Mat. 26. 26.
Story of the Institution. Jesus took bread, and blessed, and * In hac enim
narratione omnia haec verba, accepit, benedixit, fregit, dedit, vnum
accusatiuum b^euiter regunt, Panem. Steph. Dura^t. de rit. Eccl. l. 2. c. 38.
n. 15.
brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, This is my Body.
Whence I thus reason; Look what our Savior took, that he blessed; what he
blessed, that he brake; what he brake, he delivered to the Disciples; what he
delivered to them, of that he said, This is my Body. But Deus in Euangelip
panem corpus suum appellans. Tertull. contr. Marc. l. 3. c. 19.
it was Bread that he took, the Evangelist so says, and Bread therefore that
he blessed, bread that he brake, bread that he delivered, and bread
consequently of which he said, This is my Body. And hence are those speeches so
frequent in the Ancient Fathers. Panem in quo g^iae actae sunt, corpus esse
Domini sui. Iren. contr. Valent. l. 4. c 34.
The Bread that has been blessed (says Irenaeus) is its own Lords body. God
in the Gospel (says Tertullian) calls bread his Body. Panis est corpus
Christi. Aug. apud Great. de consecr. d. 2. c. Qui manducant.
The Bread (says Augustine) is the Body of Christ. Panis, quem fregit Dominus,
deditque discipulis, est corpus Dom^ni. Hieron. ad H^dybiam. (...). Praecepisti
vt credamus, expone vt intelligamus Quomodo est panis corpus euis, and calix,
vel quod habet calix, quomodo est sanguis eius? Ista ideo dicuntur Sacramenta,
quia aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur: quod vide. (...) speciem habet
corporalem, quod intelligitur fructum habet spiritualem. Aug. apud Beda in 1
Cor. 10
The Bread, (says Hicrome,) that the Lord brake, and gave his Disciples, is
the Lords body: And if we ask, how Bread is or can be Christ's body? as we may
well do, and v it is no new Question; It was long since asked by the Ancients
and answered by them. The Author of that work in Cyprian of Christ's principal
works; (to pass by all others;) Dedit Dominus noster in mensa propriis
manibus panem and vinu^, in cruce vero manib. militum corpus tradidit
vu^nerandum, vt in Apostolis secretius impressa si^cera veritas, et vera
sinceritas exponeret gentibus, quomodo vinum et panis caro esse^ et sanguis, et
quibus rationibus causae effectibus conuenirent, et diuersa nomina vel species
ad vna^ reducerentur essentiam, et significantia et significata eisdem
vocabulis censerentur. Author de Cardinal. Christi oper. c. de vnct.
Our Lord (says he) at the Table in his last Supper, gave Bread and Wine with
his own hands, and on the Cross he gave up his body to be wounded with the
Soldiers hands, (Mark, bread at the Table, his Body on the Cross,) that the
sincere truth and true sincerity more secretly imprinted in his Apostles,
might expound to the Nations, how Bread and Wine were Flesh and Blood, and by
what means the causes agreed with their effects, and diverse names or kinds
were reduced to one essence, and the things signifying and signified were
called by the same names. In which last words he most evidently shows, how
Bread is said to be Christ's Body; to wit, because signs and the things by them
signified are wont to have the same titles given them. The Bread is Christ's
Body: as Ioh. 6. 48. 51.
Christ himself is bread; Corpori quidem symboli nomen imposuit, symbolo vero
corporis. Thodoret. dialog. 1.
Christ giving (says Theodoret) the name of the sign to his Body, and the
name of his body to the Sign. Or, The Bread is Christ, as 1 Cor. 10 4.
the Rock was Christ; as Ibi Petra Christus, nobis Christus quod in altati Dei
ponitur. Aug. in loan. Tract. 45.
Augustine well observes. Yea that the Bread is said to be Christ's Body is
apparent, and that it can in no other sense so be said, Cardinal Bellarmine
himself confesses: Haec sententia, Hic panis est. corpus meum, aut accipi
debet tropice vt panis sit corpus Christi signifitatiue, aut est plane absurda
et impossibilis: nec enim fieri potest, vt panis sit corpus Christi Bellan. de
^uchar. l. 1. c. 1.
This sentence (says he) This Bread is my Body, either must be taken
figuratively, that the Bread be Christ's body significatiuely, (that is, by
signification only) or else it is altogether absurd and impossible: for it
cannot be that the Bread should be the Body of Christ: (he means,
essentially, or otherwise then by signification or representation.) So that The
Bread is said to be Christ's body: the course of the Text shows it; and the
Ancients commonly acknowledge it: but it cannot so be (says Bellarmine) but
figuratively. In no other sense therefore are our Saviors words to be
understood.

2. We reason from the express words of Scripture, wherein after Consecration
there is said to be Bread and Wine in the Sacrament. 1 Cor. 10. 16
The Bread which we break (says the Apostle) is it not the Communion of
Christ's Body? It is apparent by the Story of the Institution that Mat. 26. 26.
Consecration goes before fraction. The Bread is blessed, that is,
consecrated, (for Benedictio consecrat Ambr. de initiat. myster. c. 9. Prece
mystica consecratu^. Aug. de trinit. l. 4. apud Great, de consecr. d. 2. c.
corpus et sang.
the Benediction is in truth the Consecration) before it be broken. But it is
bread (says the Apostle) even when it is broken. It is bread therefore still,
even after it is consecrated. Yea, is it bread when it is broken? and is it not
bread when it is eaten? Yes, if the Apostle may be credited; even when it is
eaten 100. 1 Cor. 11. 26.
For as ost (says he) as you eat this bread, and, 1 Cor. 11. 27.
Whosoever shall eat this bread unworthily. And, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man therefore examine himself, and so eat of this bread. It is not so
often called Christ's Body, but it is called bread as often, even after it is
consecrated, and by consecration made Symbolically and Sacramentally Christ's
body. The Apostle then tells us of the one Element that it is bread even
after it is consecrated: and of the other our Savior himself says that it is
wine. For after that he had delivered them the Consecrated Cup, he tells them
that Mat. 26. 29. Mar. 14. 25. Ostendit vinu^ esse, quod benedictum est. Clem.
Alex. paedag. l. 2. c. 2.
He will drink no more of this Fruit of the Vine, etc. Now the fruit of the
vine what is it but wine? There was wine (says Augustine) in the mystery of
our redemption, when our Savior said; I will drink no more of this fruit of
the vine. And yet was that after consecration that he spoke it. And if it be
wine still, then sure it is not essentially Christ's blood, howsoever it may
well be symbolically, as we say.

So Origin; Vinum fuit in redemptionis nostrae mysterio, cum dixit, non biba^
amodo de hoc gel^mine vitis. Aug. de dogmat. Eccles. c. 75. Et Burchard.
decret. l. 5. c. 2.
In the first place he gave his Disciples bread. Yea, Fragmenta panis
discipulis dedit. Cyril, in Joan. l. 4. c. 14.
He gave them (says Cyril) pieces of bread. And, Cyprian says. Vinum fuisse,
quod sanguinem suum dixit. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3.
It was wine, that he called his blood. And, Quando mysterium hoc tradidit,
vinum tradidit. Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 83.
He delivered wine, (says Chrysostom) when he delivered this mystery: which
he proves also by those words of our Savior, Of this fruit of the vine.

And here let me debate the matter with those that use to press us with
Christ's words, which yet we think not much to be pressed with, if they be
understood as they ought; Primu^ dat panem discipulis suis. Origin in Mat. hom.
12.
Christ says, This is my Body: And shall we not believe what he says? The
Apostle says it is bread that is broken, and that is eaten in the Eucharist:
and our Savior himself says, it was the fruit of the vine that he gave them
in the Cup. And will they not believe what the Apostle says, or what Christ
says? Or shall we believe those that tell us contrary to the express words of
either, that the one is not bread, though the Apostle say it is: or the other
was not wine, albeit our Savior say it was? For how our Saviors words may be
true in the one place, though the bread be not essentially, but symbolically
Christ's body, we can easily show, and themselves see and acknowledge, as has
formerly been shown. But how the Apostles and Christ's words should be true,
or bear fit sense in the other places, unless there be bread and wine in the
Eucharist after consecration, I suppose, they will not easily show.

If they will say, it is called bread because it was bread before, as Exodus 7.
12. Baculus, i. draco, nomine eius rei ex qua versa, et in quam reuersura. Aug.
in Exodus quaest. 21.
Aarons rod is called a rod, after it was turned into a serpent.

I answer: The reason is not alike.

For 1. The Serpent was made of that Rod: but it is absord to say that Christ's
body is made of bread. Yea the Papists themselves are at a stand here, and
cannot well tell what to say. For they say indeed commonly, that Panis
conuertitur in corpus Christi. Bellar. de Euchat. l. 3. c. 11. 19.
the Bread is turned into Christ's Body: and they say sometime also that Corpus
Christi ex pane fieri non est absurdum. ibid. c. 24.
Christ's body is made of bread: and that Christi corpus ex pane conficiunt
sacerdotes. ibid.
the Priest makes Christ's body of bread. Yea Bellarmine sticks not to say,
that Vere corpus illud quod suit crucifixu^, factum suit ex pane. ibid.
That body of Christ which was crucified, was truly, or verily made of bread.
They may believe him that lift. And yet they deny that Nego Christi corpus
absolute a sacerdotibus fieri. ibid.
Christ's Body is made by the Priest: (He makes Christ's body of bread, and yet
Christ's body is not made by him:) or that Corpus Domini in Eucharistia non
producitur, sed solum succedit pani. ibid.
the body of Christ is produced of bread, but does succeed only in the room
of bread. But it is absurd to say a thing is made of that in the room whereof
it only succeeds, or is turned into that that succeeds only in the room
of it: or to call a thing seriously (for in mockery indeed sometime we do) by
the name of some other thing, only because it is now in the place where that
thing before was: unless it be in some Magical action, Exodus 7. 12.
Videbantur esse quod non erant ludificatione venefica. Aug. in Exodus quest. 21.
wherein that seems to be done that indeed is not, and so the speech is not
according to the truth of the thing, but according to that that seems to be.
In a word we may truly say, of that Serpent, that it was once a Rod: but we
cannot truly say of Christ's body, that ever it was bread.

2. The Serpent there though termed a Rod, because it so had been, and Exodus
7. 15.
should again so be, yet appeared evidently to be a Serpent, in so much that
Exodus 4 3.
Moses himself at the first sight was afraid of it. And so we shall find it
to have been ever in all miraculous conuersions, that the change wrought in
them was apparent to the outward sense, to the sight, as in the water turned
into blood, to the taste, as Ioh. 2. 9.
in the s Exodus 7. 20.
water turned into wine. Whereas in the Sacrament there is no such matter. We
see no flesh there, we taste no blood there. Nay we see evidently the contrary
to that these men affirm. For we see Bread and Wine there: and we find the
true taste of either. And we have no reason upon their bare words to distrust
either sense, and believe the contrary to that that we see and taste, only
because they say it. Quod vidistis, panis est and calix; quod nobis etiam oculi
renunciant: quod autem fides vestra postulat instruenda, panis est corpus
Christi, and calix est sanguis. Aug. apud Bedam in 1 Cor. 10.
That which you see (says Augustine) is bread and a cup: that which our eyes
also inform us: that which your faith requires you to be informed of, is,
that the bread is Christ's body, and the cup his blood: which they cannot be but
figuratively, as Bellarmine before confessed. A mystery we acknowledge, we
deny a miracle: Aliquando ad significatione^ aliquam fit species vel
aliquantulu^ mansura, sieut serpens, aeneus, vel per acto ministerio
transitura, ficut panis ad hoc factus in accipiendo sacramento consumitur, sed
quia haec hominibus nota sunt quia per homines fiunt, honore^ tanqua^ religiosa
habere possunt, stupore^ tanqua^ mira non possunt. Aug. de Trin. l. 3. c. 10.
they may be honored, says Augustine, as religious things, not wondered at as
strange miracles,) save in regard of the supernatural effects of them, in
regard whereof there is a miraculous work as well in Baptism, as in the
Eucharist. And yet no such miraculous transubstantiation in either. Regula est,
quod si possumus saluare Scripturas sacras ^er ea quae naturaliter videmus, non
debemus ad miraculum, vel ad potentiam diuinam recurrere. Aegidius Hexaemer. l.
2. c. 3.
It is a rule (says the Schooleman) that where we can salve Scriptures by that
which we see naturally, we should not have recourse to a miracle, or to what
God can do.

3. We reason from the nature of Signs and Sacraments. That which Romans 3. 11.
the Apostle says of one Sacrament, to wit, Circumcision, is true of all: for
there is one general nature of all: Sacraments are Signs. Sacramentum, i.
sacrum signum. Aug. de ciuit. l. 20. c. 5. Bern. decoen. Dom. Thom. sum. part.
3. q. 60. art 1.
A Sacrament, (says Augustine) that is a sacred Sign. And, Signa, cum ad res
diuinas pertinent, Sacramenta appellantur. Aug. Epist. 5.
Signs appertaining to divine things are called sacraments. Now this is the
Nature of Signs that Signu^ omne aliquid aliud preter se significat. Aug de
doct. Christam. l. 3. c. 1.
they are one thing and signify another thing: that they signify some other
thing beside themselves, or diverse from themselves. And in like manner, (says
Augustine) Sacramenta quoniam signae sunt rerum, aliud existunt, and aliud
significant. Aug. contra Maxim. l. 3 c. 22. videt eundem supra ex Beda in 1
Cor. 10.
Sacraments being Signs of things, they are one thing, and they signify some
other thing. But the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist are Signs of Christ's body
and blood, as has been before showed, and the Ancients generally auow: And
therefore are they not essentially either. They signify Christ's body and
blood: and what they signify they are not. And Miserabilis animae seruitus
signa pro rebus accipeie. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 5.
It is a miserable servitude (as Augustine well says) for men to take the
Signs for the things themselves by them signified.

4. We reason from the nature of Christ's Body, even after his Passion and
Resurrection. Christ's natural Body has flesh, blood and bones, the limbs and
lineaments of an humane body, such as may be felt and seen to be such. This
appears plainly by that which he said to his Disciples after he was risen
from the dead, when they misdoubted some delusion: Luke 24. 39.
Behold mine hands and my feet: f In Ecclesia offeruntur panis and vinum,
antitypa carnis and sanguinis Christi. Macar. hom. 27. quomodo appellant and
Basil. in liturg. Greg. Naz. orat. in Gorgon. Theod. dial. 1. alii passim.
for it is I my self: Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones
as ye see me have.

But that which is delivered, handled, and eaten in the Eucharist has no such
thing. Videmus nec par esse nec simile; nec carne indutae imagini, nec
invisibili deita^i, nec membrorum lineamentis: Est enim ro^undae figurae, and
sensu vacans. Epiphan. Sermon. anchor.
It is not in any wise, (says Epiphanius) equal or like unto Christ, either
his humanity that is clad with flesh, or his Deity that is invisible, or to
the lineaments of his limbs, For it is round, senseless, and liuelesse: as
Christ himself is not. It is not therefore the natural body of Christ. Our
sight and sense evidently inform us the contrary; (howsoever Bellarmine boldly
sticks not to tell us that Per consecrationem fit vt Christi corpus vere and
visibilitet adsit super mensam Bellar. de missa. l. 1. c. 12.
Christ's body is verily and visibly upon the board, after that the words of
Consecration be once uttered: they think belike they may make men believe any
thing. And our Savior himself teaches us by sight and sense to judge of his
Body. Quasi ad singulos quosque cunctantes adhuc voc^ corporea vtatur and
dicat, Quid turbati estis? etc. Quid laborat intellectus, vbi magister est
aspectus? Leo. epist. 22.
As if to this day, (says Pope Lee) he spoke still to each one that sticks
and staggereth, as he spoke there to his Apostles. Why sticks our
understanding, where our sight is our Teacher? I may well say here as Augustine
in somewhat the like case, Vereor ne ipsis sensibus nostris facere videamur
iniuriam, quando id loquendo suademus, vbi omnes vires officiumque sermonis
facilime superat euidentia veritatis. Aug. epist. 57.
I fear least we seem to wrong our s^^ser, in seeking to prove or persuade
that by speech, wherein the evidence of truth exceeds all that can be said.

5. We reason from the Nature of all true Bodies. Col. 3. 1.
Christ's body is in Heaven: Philip. 3. 20.
from whence we look for him. And Act. 3. 21.
there is to abide till the end of the world. Now a true natural body as
Christ's still is, cannot be in two, much less in twenty, or rather in twenty
hundred places at once: which yet Christ's body must needs be, if that be true
that they say. Augustine questioned by one Dardanus how Christ could be both
Luke 23. 43.
in Paradise and in heaven at once (supposing Heaven and Paradise to be two
several places, howsoever 2 Cor. 12. 24.
with the Apostle Paul they are not) makes answer, that he could not as he was
man, or in his humanity his body and his soul; though he might as he was God,
or in his Deity, that is every where. And he adds, Vnus Jesus Christ, vbio;
perid quod Deus est, in coelo autem per id quod homo Aug. Epist. 57.
The same Jesus Christ, is every wherein his Deity, but in heaven in his
humanity. And further in his discourse hereof, says he, Take spaces and
places from bodies, and they will be no where, and because they will be no
where, they will not be: Take bodies from qualities, and wanting wherein to
subsist, they must needs cease to be: and yet in the Popish host are qualities
found, o August ad Darda^. ep. 57.
(as before) that have no subject body to subsist in, being not the qualities
of Christ's body, and yet having no other body for them to subsist in; for they
are the qualities of Bread, and yet there is no bread there, (if they say true)
to bear them. Every Body therefore must needs have a certain place: and they
are so circumscribed with and confined unto that place, that they cannot at the
same time, or so long r Spacia locorum toll corporibus, nusquam erunt: and
quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt. Toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporum, non
erit vbi sint, and ideo necesse est vt non sint. Aug. Epist. 57.
* Ita loca suis molibus tenent, vt distantibus spaciis simul esse non possiut,
Aug. ibid.
as they keep that place, be in any other place but it. And so is it also even
with the glorified body of Christ Jesus. Nulla ratione extra nostri est
corporis veritate^. Leo. Ep. 72.
Christ's body (says Leo) in no respect differs from the truth of our bodies.
And therefore, Christ (says Gregory Nazi^nzen) in regard of his body is
circumscribed and contained in a place: in regard of his spirit (or his Deity)
he is not circumscribed, nor contained in any place. And Augustine, Sursum est
Dominus, sed etiam hic est veritas Dominus: Corpus enim Domini in quo
resurrexit vno loco esse opottet: veritas eius vbique diffusa est. Aug. in
Joan. tract. 30.
Our Lord * Docemus eunde^ Christum circumscriptum corpore, incircumscriptum
spiritu; qui loco continetur, and loco non continetur. Greg. Naz. ad Clodon.
and apud Thedoret dialog. 1.
is above; but our Lord the Truth is here too. For our Lords body wherein he
rose again must needs be in one place, but his Truth (that is, his divine
power) is diffused into all places. And therefore, Noli dubitare ibi esse
hominem Christum, vnde venturus est. Ascendit in coelum; nec aliunde quam inde
venturus est angelica voce testante, quemadmodum ire visus est in coelum. i. in
eadem carnis forma atque substantia, cui immortalitatem dedit, natural non
abstulit. Secundum hanc formam non est putandus vbique diffusus. Cauendum est
enim, ne ita diuinitatem astruamus hominis, vt veritatem corporis auferamus.
Aug. Epist. 57.
Doubt not (says he) but that the Man Christ is now there, from whence he is
to come. He is gone up into heaven: and thence he shall come, as he was seen
to go thither, (the Angel says it;) that is, in the same form and substance
of flesh, which though he have given immortality unto it, yet he has not
taken nature away from it. According to this form he is not every where. For
we must take heed, that we do not so maintain the deity of the Man, that we
overthrow the verity of his Body. In a word; As the Angel reasons, speaking
to the women that sought Christ in the Sepulcher; Mat 28. 6.
He is not here: for he is risen again. So reasons the same Augustine
concerning Christ's bodily presence, reconciling those two places that might
seem the one to cross the other: Mat. 28. 20.
Behold I am with you till the worlds end: And, Mat. 26. 11.
Me shall you not have always with you.'' In regard, (says he) of his
Majesty, his providence, his grace we have him always here. But in regard of
his flesh, which the word assumed, which was borne of the Virgin, nailed on the
cross, etc. We have him not always. And why so? Because he is gone up into
``Secundum maiestatem suam, prouidentiam, gratiam, impletur, Ecce ego vobiscum.
Secundum carnem vero etc. non semper habebitis vobiscum. Quare? Quomam ascendit
in coelum and non est hic. Aug, in Joan. tract. 50.
heaven, and he is not here. And again speaking of Christ^ being on earth and
not in heaven as man, and yet in both places as God: Homo secund. corpus in
loco est, and de soco migrat: and cum ad alium lolum venerit, in eo vnde venit,
non est. Deus vbique totus est, nec secumd. spatia tenetur locis. Idem in Joan.
tract. 13.
Man according to his body is in a place, and passes from a place; and when
he comes to another place, is not in that place from which he came. But God
is every where, and is not cont^ined in any place.

So that the Romanists if they will have Christ's Body in the Eucharist, they
must fetch it out of Heaven, and indeed as if they had so done, Iube haec
perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar muum, in conspectu
maieiestatis tuae. Cano^ Missae.
they do in their Mass request God to send his Angels, to carry it up again
thither: And their Gloss says, that so soon as men set their teeth in it, it
retireth instantly thither: though that cross their common tenent. Or rather
they must frame a new body, and so make Christ have two bodies, one that
remains whole still in heaven, and another that the Priest makes or creates
here upon earth. But what speak I of two Bodies? Christ * Mat. 28. 6.
must have as many several Bodies as there be consecrated Hoasts: for Totus
Christus est sub v^raque specie disiunctim. Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 4. c. 21.
the whole Body of Christ, (they say) is in each Host; yea more then so, there
is an whole entire man's body flesh, blood, and bones with all limbs and
lineaments (for so it must needs be, if it be Christ's natural Body) not in
every Communicants mouth only, but in every crum of the Hoas^ that they break
of it, when they crush it between their teeth; as they also flatly and
precisely affirm. And by * Certum est, quod quam cito species dentis teruntur,
tam cito in coelu^ rapitur corpus Christi. Glos. de consecr. d. 2. c. Trib. 9.
this reason the whole body of Christ, (against all reason; For it is a
principle in Nature that The whole is ever greater then any part:) shall be
less in quantity then the least limme or member of his Body, then a nails
paring of his little finger: then which nothing is more absurd and senseless.
Ipsum immortale corpus minus est in part quam in toto, August. Epist. 57.
Even an immortal body, (says Augustine speaking of and instancing even in
Christ's body,) is less in part then it is in c Totum Christi corpus est sub
part speciei. Glos. ad Great. de consecr. d. 2. c. Qu^ manducant. Totum corpus
Christi est in qualibet part hostiae. Innocent. 3. apud Bie^ de Can. Miss.
lect. 80. In quolibet puncto sacramenti totum est corpus Christi. Gabr. Biel
ibid.
the whole. cum sit corpus substanstantia, quantitas eius est in magnitudine
molis eius. Ergo distantibus partibus quae simul esse non possunt, quoniam sua
quaeque spacia locorum tenent, minores minora, and maiores maiora, non potuit
esse in singulis quibusque partibustota vel tanta, sed amplior est quatitas in
amplioribus partibus, breuior in breuioribus, and in nulla part tanta, quanta
per totum Aug. ibid.
For a body being a substance, the quantity thereof consists in the
greatness of bulk. And since that the parts of a body are distant one from
another, and cannot all be together, because they keep each one their several
spaces and places, the less parts lesser places, and the great greater, there
cannot be either the whole quantity, or so great a quantity in each single
part, but a greater quantity in the greater parts, and a lesser in the less,
and in no part at all so great a quantity as in the whole: But if their
opinion be true any part of Christ is in quantity as great and greater then
his whole body, and his whole body less then any part of it is.

But how, will you say, is Christ's Body and Blood conneighed unto us, or how is
his flesh eaten and his blood drunk then in the Eucharist, if it be not really
there present?

I might with Aug. well in a word answer this Question: How (says he) shall I
hold Christ when he is not here? How can I stretch mine hand to Heaven, there
to lay hold on him? Send thy faith thither (says he) and thou have him. Thy
forefathers held him in the flesh; hold thou him in thy heart. You have him
always present in regard of his Majesty, but in regard of his Flesh, as
himself told his Disciples, not always. But for fuller satisfaction I answer:

1. Sacraments are Romans 4. 11.
seals annexed to Gods covenant. And as a deed being drawn of the Princes
gift concerning office, land or liuelyhood, and his broad seal annexed to it,
and that deed so drawn and sealed being delivered, that office, or that land,
though lying an hundred miles of, is Quomdo tenebo absente^? quomodo in coelum
manu^ mittar, vt ibi sedentem teneam? Fidem mitte and tenuisti. Parents tui
tenuerunt carne, tu tene cord. Etiam absens praesens est. Secundum praesentiam
maiestatis semper habemus Christum. Secundum praesentiam catnis recte dictum
est discipulis, Me semper non habebitis. Math. 26. 11. August. in Joan. tract.
50. Et idem Epist. 59. Quomodo tangeret, cum ad Patrem ascendiss^t, nisi forte
fidei profectu and mentis ascensu?
therein and thereby as truly and as effectually conueighed and assured unto
the party unto whom the same deed is so made, and to whose use and behoof it
is so delivered, as if it were really present: So these seals being annexed to
Gods Covenant of grace concerning Christ, his Flesh and Blood, and his Death
and Passion, and our title too and intere^t in either, the things themselves,
even Christ's body and blood themselves (though sited still in Heaven) are as
truly and as effectually conueighed with them and by them unto the faithful
receiver, when they are to him delivered, as if they were here really and
corporally present.

2. We receive Christ in the Eucharist, as in the Word and Baptism: wherein
also we do truly receive him, yea, and feed on his flesh and blood, as well
as in the Encharist, albeit he be not corporally exhibited in either. Romans 6.
4. Non ait sepulturam significamus, sed prorsus ait, co^sepulti sumus:
Sacramentum ergo tantae rei non visae eiusdem rei vocabulo significauit. Aug.
ep. 23. Col. 2. 12.
We are buried together with Christ (says the Apostle) by Baptism into his
Death. And, h As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. Tingimur in passione Domini. Tertul. de Bapt.
We are dipped in our Lords passion: says Tertullian. Sprinkle thy face with
Christ's blood, says Hierome speaking of Baptism, that the destroyer may see
it in thy forehead. Habes Christum in praesenti per fide^, in praesenti per
signum, in praesenti per baptismatis sacramentum, in praesenti per altaris
cibum 8: potum. Aug. in Joan. tract. 50.
Thou have Christ (says Augustine) at the present by faith, at the present by
the sign of him, at the present by the Sacrament of Baptism, at the present
by the meat and drink of the altar. Yea, Nulli est aliquatenus ambigendum,
tunc vnumque^que fidelium corporis and sanguinis Domini participem fieri,
quando in baptiismate me^brum Christi efficitur. etc. quando ipse hoc quod
illud sacramentum significat, inueni^. Aug. ad Infant. apud Bedam in 1 Cor. 10.
No man ought to doubt (says Augustine) but that every Faithful one is made
partaker of the Body and Blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made a member
of * Tolse hyssopum, intinge in sanguine: videat exterminator sanguinem in
front tua, Hieron. in Psalm. 85.
Christ: and that he is not estranged from the communion of that Bread and Cup,
though he depart out of this life ere he eat of that bread and drink of that
Cup, because he has that which that Sacrament signifies.

And for the Word, Christiani omni die carnes agni comedunt, i. carnes verbi
Dei quotidie sumunt. Origin. in Genesis hom. 10.
Christian men (says Origin) eat every day the flesh of the Lamb, because
daily they receive the Flesh of Gods word. And; Vide Agnum verum, etc. Iudaei
carnali sensu comedant carnes Agni: nos comedamus carnem verbi Dei. Ipse enim
dixit, Nisi comederitis carnes meas, etc. Hoc quod modo loquimur, carnes sunt
verbi Dei. Idem in Number. hom. 23.
The true Lamb is Ioh. 1. 29.
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: for 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Christ our Passover is offered for us. Let the Jews in a carnal sense caete
the flesh of a Lamb: but let us eat the flesh of the Word of God. For he
says, unless ye eat my flesh, ye shall have no life in you. This that I now
speak is the Flesh of the Word of God. And again, Bibere dicimur sanguine^
Christi non solum sacramentorum ritu, sed and cum sermones eius recipimus, in
quibus vita consistit, sicut ipse dicit, verba quae loquor, spiritus and vita
sunt. Orig. in Number. hom. 17.
We are said to drink Christ's blood not in the Sacramental rites only, but
when we receive his word, wherein life consists; as he says, Ioh. 6. 63.
The words that I speak are Spirit and Life. And, Hierome also understands
those words of our Savior, Quando dicit, Qui non etc. licet and in mysterio
possit intelligi: tamen verius corpus Christi and ^anguis eius sermo
scripturarum est, doctrina diuina est. Hieron. in Psalm. 147.
He that eats not my Flesh and drinks not my blood; not of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist only, but more specially, or as he speaks, more truly, of
Christ's word and doctrine: and adds therefore, that t When we hear the word
of God, both the word of God, and the Flesh of Christ, and his Blood is powered
in at our ears. If in the Sacrament of Baptism then, and in the Ministry of
the word we truly receive Christ, and become partakers of Christ, yea we eat
and drink Christ in either as well as in the Eucharist, what needs any such
real transmutation more in the one then in the other?

6. We reason from the Quality of the Communicants in the Eucharist. If
Christ's body be really and corporally present in the Eucharist: then all that
eat of the Eucharist, must of necessity eat Christ in it. But many eat of
the Eucharist, that yet eat not Christ in it. For none but the faithful feed
on Christ: none eat him, as we showed before, but those that live by him, yea
and in him; that are living members of his mystical Body. Whereas many wicked
ones eat of the Eucharist; many eat of it, that are out of Christ. Illi
manducabant panem Dominum: ille panem domini contra Dominum. August. in Joan.
tract. 59.
The other Disciples (says Augustine) did eat that Bread that is the Lord:
Judas did eat the Lords Bread against the Lord. And disputing against those
that hold that wicked men * Quando audimus sermonem Dei and sermo Dei, and caro
Christi, and sanguis eius in auribus nostris funditur. Ibid.
should be saved, if they lived in the Church, because they fed on Christ in
the Eucharist, says, that such wicked ones are not to be said to eat Christ's
body, because they are not members x Nec isti dicendi sunt manducare corpus
Christi, quoniam nec in menbris computandi sunt Christi. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l.
21. c. 25.
of his body. And that Ipse dicens, Qui manducat, etc. loan. 6. Ostenditquid
^it non sacramento tenus, sed reuera corpus Christi manducare, etc. q. d. Qui
non in me manet, and in quo ego non man^o, non se dicat aut existimet manducare
corpus meum, aut bibere sanguinem meum. Ibid.
Christ when he says, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides
in me and I i^ him; does thereby show what it is truly, and not sacramentally
only to eat Christ's body and to drink his blood, and that no man eats his
body and drinks his blood, that abides not (...) Christ and Christ in him.
And again he says: Escam vitae accipit, and aeternitatis poculum bibit, qui
in Christo manet, and cuius Christus habitator est. Aug. in senten. 139.
He receives the Bread of Life, and drinks the Cup of eternity, that
abides in Christ, and in whom Christ dwells. Qui discordat a Christo, nec
carnem eius manducat, nec sanguinem bibit, etiam si tantae rei sacramentum ad
iudicium suae praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter accipiat, Ibid.
But he that disagreeth from Christ, neither eats his Flesh nor drinks his
Blood, though to his own judgment for his presumption he daily receive
indifferently the Sacrament of so great a thing. And again: Qui manducant and
bibunt Christum, vitam manducant and bibunt. Illum ^^nducare est refici: illum
bibere est vivere. Quod in sacramento visibiliter sumit^^, in ipsa veritate
spiritualiter manducatur and bibitur. Aug. apud. Great. de consecr. did. 2. c.
Qui mand.
They that eat and drink Christ, eat and drink life. To eat him is to be
made again, to drink him is to live. That which is taken visibly in a
Sacrament, is eaten and drunk spiritually in the truth it self. For, Iste
cibus and potus eos a quibus sumitur immortales veraciter and in corruptibiles
facit. Hoc est ergo manducare illam carnem and illum potum biber^, in Christo
manner and illum m^nentem in se habere. Ac per hoc, qui non manet in Christo,
and in qui non mane^ Christus, proculdubio non manducat spiritualiter ca^ eius,
nec bibit eius sanguinem, licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus
sacramentum corpotis Christi Aug. in Joan. tract. 26.
This meat and drink makes those that take it truly immortal and
incorruptible. This is therefore to eat that flesh and drink that drink, for
a manto abide in Christ, and to have Christ abiding in him. And consequently he
that abides not in Christ, nor Christ in him, without doubt does not eat his
flesh nor drink his blood spiritually, though carnally and visibly with his
teeth he crush the Sacrament of Christ's Body. To Augustine I add Origin, who
having spoken what shall anon be related of Christ's typical and symbolicall
Body, as he calls the Sacrament: Et haec quidem de typico symbolicoque
corpore. Multa porro and de ipso verbo dici possunt, quod factum est caro
verusque cibus, quem qui comederit, omnino viuet in aeternum, quem nullus malus
potest edere. Etinim si fieri posset, vt qui malus adhuc perseueret, edat
verbum factum ca^em, cum sit verb^ and panis viuus, nequ^que scriptum fuisset;
Quisquis ederit panem hunc, viuet in aeternum. Origin in Math. 15.
Much (says he) might be said more of the Word it self that became Flesh and
true Food, which whosoever eats shall surely live for ever, and which no
evil man can eat of. For if it were possible that any man, that continues
evil still, should eat of the Word that became Flesh, since it is the living
Bread, it had never been written, Ioh. 6. 58.
Whosoever eats of this Bread, shall live for ever. It is impossible then
that any wicked man, or any that are damned should eat Christ: But many wicked
men eat of the Eucharist, many are damned that eat of it. The Eucharist
therefore is not really Christ.

Lastly, we reason from those things that are done about, or may be fall those
Creatures that in the Eucharist are consecrated, which cannot be done to or
betide now Christ's glorified Body.

1. The Eucharisticall Bread was Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor.
11. 24.
broken in pieces and divided into parts by our Savior at his last Supper. And
the like rite was observed 1 Cor. 10. 16.
by the Apostles in the administratiof the Eucharist: And is Bellar. de Miss.
l. 2. c. 10. Nicol. Pp. de consecr. d. 2. c. Ego Bereng. Biel in Can. Miss.
lect 80. Durand ration. divine. l. 4. part. 2. in 6. part. Can. and Durant. ex
Bestarione de rit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 38.
in the Romish Church also not unusual. But as Christ (says the Apostle) is
not divided; so Christ's Body is not divided into parts; as they themselves
confess; nor broken into pieces. 1 Cor. 11, 24.
His Body indeed is said to be broken, not that it was really broken into
pieces; but as by the Prophet it is said, that Dominus voluit conterere cum.
Hieron. Esa. 53. 10.
It pleased God to break him, and to put him to grief: (which was fulfilled
in those pains and torments that for us he sustained) and as we use to say of
men that with grief and care they are broken. Otherwise it was never broken;
much less is it now broken, being wholly quit even of all those infirmities
that it was so broken with before. Yea the Papists themselves not daring to
auow that of Christ's very body; are enforced to affirm, that every
Communicant receives Totu Christi corpus singu^^ accipiunt. Gabr. Bie^ in Can.
Miss. lect. 80.
the whole and entire body of Christ. Yet they receive but a part, (says their
own Canon, as you shall hear anon) of the Element in the Sacrament. That
therefore, that is so divided there, is not Christ's natural Body. And here the
Popish Glosser is strangely troubled to salve and reconcile the words of their
Canons, and to make their own doctrine agree with the sayings of some of the
Ancients there cited. There is inserted into the Canon, this saying of
Augustine; Nec quando manducamus, parts de illo facimus. Et quidem in
sacramento sic fit; and norunt fideles quemadmodum manducent carne^ Christi.
Vnusquisque accipit parte^ suam. Vnde and ipsa gratia parts vocantur. Per
parts manducatur in sacramento, and man^t integer totus in coelo, manet
integer totus in cord tuo. Aug. de verb. Euang. apud Great. de conscr. d. 2. c.
Qui mand. and apud Bedam in 1 Cor, 10. Quae Durandus etiam ex Gregorio citat
rational. divine. l. 4. p 2. in 6. p. Can.
We do (...) make parts of Christ, when we eat him. Indeed in the Sacrament
we do so, and the faithful know how we eat Christ's flesh there. Each one
takes his part: and the Eucharist it self is therefore called their Parts.
Christ is eaten by parts in a Sacrament, and yet remains whole in Heaven; and
yet remains whole in thy heart. On which place says the Glosser; Supra,
eade^ did. Ego Bereng. contr. Gloss. ad c. Qui mand.
This is contrary to that which Pope Nicolas says, in Berengarius his
Confession. And so it is indeed, for therein (as before you heard) it is said,
that not the Sacrament only, but Christ's very Body it self is broken by the
Priest. But that cannot be, says the Gloss; for Glorificatum corpus laesionem
aliquam pati non potest Ibid.
a glorified Body cannot suffer any such maime or harm. And therefore says
the same Gloss, Nominibus pa^tium appellatur corpus and sanguis Christi, vel
ipsae species quae per parts diuiduntur vocantur corpus and sanguis Christi,
scil. significanti mysterio. Gloss. Ibid.
The Body and Blood of Christ is called by the name of Parts, or the Species
that are divided are called the Body and Blood of Christ, in a significant
mystery: that is, as we say, because in a mystery they signify Christ's Body
and Blood. That then which is taken in the Sacrament is divided into parts, and
eaten by peece-meale: But Christ's natural Body is not so divided, or taken
corporally. That therefore that is taken in the Eucharist is not Christ's
natural Body. To conclude; Christ when he brake, either he brake Bread or his
Body: but he brake not his Body; for his Body remained entire still: he brake
Bread therefore; and so the Evangelist says, Mat. 26. 26.
He took Bread and brake it: and yet Christus prius consecrauit, quam fregit,
and benedicendo consecrauit. Durant. de rit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 38. number. 15.
he had blessed it, and so consecrated it first, as Innocent. Pp. apud Gabr.
Biel lect. 39.
Pope Innocent and other Popish writers confess: It remained Bread still
therefore even after Consecration: when as Cyril speaks, Fragmenta panis
discipulis dedit. Cyril. in Johan. lib. 4. cap. 14.
He gave his Disciples fragments of Bread: for of his Body it could not be.
Yea, that which they break at this day, either it is Christ's very body, or but
bread: not Christ's body. For, Corpus Christi si fra^geretur and diuideretur,
corrumperetur, quod est impossible, cu^ sit impassibile. Gabr. Biel. lect 80.
Christ's body if it were broken and divided, would be spoiled, says Biel the
Schooleman; but that it is impossible, because it is impassible: Therefore
Bread only. For what they speak (out of Pope Innocent therein crossing Pope
Nicholas, as Vide Durand. rational. divine lib. 4. part. 2. in 6. part. Canon.
Durand also well observes of dividing nothing but Color, sapor and pondus.
Hostiens. sum. l. 3. de conser. altar. number. 17.
the color, and shape, and savor, and weight, and the like accidents, is
frivolous, and contrary to the words of the Institution that admit no such
sense.

I might add hereunto that which Pope Nicholas acknowledges, that if the body
of Christ be corporally in the Eucharist, it is not only broken by the Priests
hands, but Nicol Pp. vbi supra.
torn to pieces also with men's teeth: And though the Evangelist tell us that
Ioh. 19 36. Exodus 12. 46.
No bo^e of him was broken, Psalm. 34 20.
God indeed so kept them, that not one of them was broken, even when Psalm. 22.
16.
they pierced Ioh. 20. 25.
with nails his hands and his feet: yet if it be as they say, his very bones
must needs be broken between their teeth that here chew him: and he sustaineth
more hard measure in that kind by the teeth of his own Disciples, then he did
then at the hands of those that were his executioners. Hard teeth they have
doubtless that can so easily break bones: and hard hearts that can find in
their heart to use their Savior so hardly. Quis tam stultus est, vt id quo
vescitur, credat esse Deum? Cic. de not. Deor.
Who is so sottish (says the Heathen man) as to think that that he eats to
be God. Theodor in Leuit. qaest. 11. (...):
What man in his wits (says Theodoret) will account that to be God which either
he abhors, or that he offers to the true God, and himself eats? And who
is so impious, say I, as to eat thus that which he thinks to be God?

2. That which is consecrated in the Eucharist is subject to corruption,
putrefaction and foul abuse: Christ's natural body now glorified is not so.
That therefore is not Christ's natural body, that is consecrated in the
Eucharist. That which is consecrated in the Eucharist, I say, is subject to
corruption. For, Si ad res ipsas, quibus sacramenta tractantur, animum
conferamus, quis nesciat eas esse corruptibiles? Si ad id, quod per illas ^es
agitur, quis non videat, non posse corump^? Aug. de Bapt. l. 3. c. 10.
If we regard those visible things (says Augustine) wherewith we administer
the Sacraments, who knows not that they are corruptible? But if we respect
that that is intended in them, who sees not that it cannot be corrupted? The
Elements in the Eucharist, if they be kept any long time, are prone to
putrisie. In regard whereof their counterfeit S. Clement Qualiter tenere
debemus in sacramentis, te ex ordine nos decet instruere. Clem. Pp. epist. ad
Jacob. fratre^ Dom.
instructing (for so he speaks) the Apostle S. James how to deal with the
Sacrament (How shameless are they that dare obtrude such things on the Church
of God? how blockish and sottish that believe them?) does very gravely and
sagely admonish him to have special care of Reliquias fragmentoru^ corporis
Domini custodire debent, ne qua putredo in sacrario inueniatur, ne portioni
c^^poris Domini grauis inferatur iniutia. Clem. Ibid.
keeping the relics of the Host, or the fragments of Christ's body, (for so
he calls them) from growing moldy in the Pyx, and Ne murium stercora inter
fragme^ta portionis Dominicae appareant. Clem. Ibid.
that no mouse dung be found among the fragments of Christ's portion; lest great
wrong be done to some portion or piece of Christ's body. (And yet they told us
before that Christ's body is not parted.) And Cardinal Bellarmine tells us of
the Sacramental wine, that it cannot be kept long but it will grow sour. Or
if they be taken, they are consumed, and Col. 6. 22.
perish (as the Apostle speaks) in the use of them. Panis ad hoc factus in
aceipiendo sacramento consumitur. Aug. de Trinit. l. 3. c. 10.
The Bread (says Augustine) that is made for this use, is in the Sacrament
consumed. But Christ's natural Body is in no wise consumed. Nulla panem hunc
multitudo consumit, nulla antiquitate veterascit. Author. de cardin. Christi
oper. c. de coen. Dom.
No multitude (says one) consumes this bread; no continuance makes it stale.
Reficit nec deficit: sumitur, nec consumitur tamen. Ex Aug. Beda. in 1 Cor. 10.
and Aug. in Joan. tract. 13. and de verse. 27.
That heavenly food refreshes, and yet never fails: it is never spent at
all, though it be never so often taken. Ioh. 6. 27.
It never perishes (says our Savior) but lasts to life eternal. Yea in
many places the manner was anciently, if any bread were left after the
celebration of the Sacrament, either to Aug. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l.
2. c. 26. Euagr. histor. l. 4. c. 34. Niceph. hister. l. 17. c. 25. and Council.
Matiscon. 2^ can. 6.
distribute it among the Catechumeni, who might not as yet receive the
Eucharist; or to Hesych. in Leuit. l. 2. c. 8. and Bern. epist 88.
burn it with fire, in d Vinum conseruari non potest, quin acescat. Bellar. de
Pont. Romans l. 4. c. 14.
imitation of Exodus 12. 10.
the Paschal Lambs remainders; which yet it is to be thought they would not
have done with it, if they had held it to be Christ's body. Yea to this day the
Romanists are enjoined in their Church Canons, Omne sacrificiu^ sordida
vetustate perditum, igne comburendum est. Burchard. decret. l. 5* c. 50. ex
Conc. Aur. c. 5.
if the host grow moldy or Vel integrum, and in eo vermis, vel a vermibus
consumptum. Durand. rat. divine l. 4. de (...) part. Can.
breed mites; (neither of which, I suppose, Christ's Body now can do,) Or n if
a sick body that has bin houseled, bring it up again; Or Si casu gulae
Eucharistiam euomuerit. Missal. in cautel.
if the Priest being drunk before chance to spew it up again; Incineretur.
Ibid. and Du^and. Ibid.
to burn both the one and the other, Contritum cum vino sumatur, nisi horror
sit sumere. Duran.
if no man be found so hardy as to take either, and Iuxta altar recondatur.
Missal. pro reliquiis custodiatur. Durand.
to lay up, or reserve, the ashes, of it for a relic: and Si canes
lambuerint, vel a canibus consumitur, poeniteat 100 dies. Burch. l. 5. c. 48,
49. ex Poenitent. Theodor. and Romans
if the dogs chance to lick that up that the Priest cased himself of, he must
do double penance for it. Or Petr. de Lap. resol. dub. cap. 7* art. 3. dub. 7.
apud Viret. de sacrif. Miss. l. 3. c. 17.
if a mouse h Si corpus Christi infirmo datum rejicitur. Durand. Ibid.
chance to pick their God almighty out of the Pyx (of which more anon) and
she can be taken again, she must be opened, and Christ's body, if it may be,
picked out of her, and if no man have a stomach to so delicate a morsel, both
she and it must be burnt, and the ashes reserved. For that that is both taken
and kept by the Communicanes: let them not blame us if with due reverence to
such holy mysteries, we argue from our Saviors own words; the Ancients have
done so before us: Mat. 15. 17.
Whatsoever (says our Savior) goes into the mouth, enters not into the
heart, but goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught, Mark. 7. 19.
which is the purging of all meats. Whereupon as Augustine says, having
spoken both of the food that is 1 Timothy 4. 4.
sanctified for the sustenance of our bodies, and of the bread that they used
to give to the Catechumeni after the celebration of the Sacrament, Ista ciborum
sanctificatio non efficit, vt quod in os intrauerit, non in ventrem vadat, and
in secessum emittatur per corruptionem: vnde ad aliam escam quae non
corrumpitur exhortatur nos Dominus. August. de peccat. mer. l. 2. c. 26.
This sanctification of meats hinders not, but that that which goes into the
mouth, goes into the belly, and is by corruption cast out into the draught;
whereupon our Lord exhorts us to Ioh. 6. 27.
another meat that corrupts not: So Origin speaking of the Sacrament it
self, De typico symbolicoque corpore. Origin.
of the typical and symbolicall Body of Christ; (for so expressly he
explaineth himself:) Quod si quicquid ingreditur, etc. and ille cibus qui
sanctificatur per verbum Dei perque obsecrationem iuxta id quod habet materiale
in ventrem abit, and in secessum eiicitur. Nec materia panis, sed precatio quae
illi adiicitur and super illum dictus sermo efficit vt profit non indigne
Domino comedenti illum. Origin. in Mat. c. 15.
If, says he, whatsoever goes in at the mouth, goes into the belly, and is
cast out into the draught: then even that Bread also that is sanctified (or
consecrated; all is one) by the word of God and by prayer, as it is material,
goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught: nor is it the matter of
the bread, but the prayer added to it, and the word spoken of it, that makes
it profitable to the worthy receiver. But to say so or to think so of Christ's
blessed and glorious Body were most hideous, most horrible. Well therefore
says Ambrose; Non iste panis est, qui vadit in corpus, sed panis vitae
aeternae, qui animae substatiam fulcit. Ambr. apud Great. de confecr. did. 2.
c. Non iste.
It is not this Bread that goes into the belly, but the Bread of eternal
life, that sustaineth the substance of our souls. And Augustine expressly
tells us that Non hoc corpus quod videtis ma^ducaturi estis, and bibituri
illum sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis
commendavi: spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
We are not to eat that body that the Jews saw, nor drink that blood which
they shed that crucified Christ; but there is a Sacrament commended unto us,
which being spiritually understood will put life into us. Nihil absurdius fingi
potest, quam Eucharistia nutriri mortalem substantiam corporis nostri, and
cibum esse ventris non mentis Eucharistiam. Bellar. de Euchar. l 2. c 4.
There can nothing be imagined more absurd (says Bellarmine himself) then to
think that Christ's Body should nourish the mortal substance of men's bodies,
and so should be the food, not of the mind, but of the belly. But by the
Popish doctrine this it must needs do and worse then this; the Popish doctrine
therefore is most absurd.

Lastly, what can be more horrible, then to imagine that Christ's body, or any
part of it, should be not in the belly of a man, but in the belly of a beast?
Aures piae hoc abhorrent audi^e, quod in ventre muris vel in cloaca sit corpus
Christi. Bonauent. in 4. Sent. did. 13. quaest. 2. art. 1. apud Aftesan. sum.
part. 4. tit. 17. quaest. 2.
Christian ears (says Benauenture) abhor to hear that Christ's body should
be in the draught or in a mouses maw. Yet by this Popish doctrine both the one
and the other too must needs be, if a mouse chance (as he may) to meet with a
consecrated Host. Nor do the Popish writers ordinarily make dainty of it to
acknowledge as much. If a pigge or a dog, (says Alexander of Hales) should
swallow down an whole consecrated host, I see not why or how Christ's body
should not pass into its belly. And, b Si canis, vel porcus deglutiret hostiam
consecratam integram, non video quare vel quomodo corpus Domini non
trai^ceretur in ventrem canis vel porci. Alex. Ales, sum. part. 4. quaest. 3.
mem. 1. art. 2.
Thomas Aquinas, Brutum animal per accidens corpus Christi manducat. Thom. sum.
part. 3. quaest. 80. art. 3.
A brute beast may by accident eat Christ's body. And, Etiamsi mus vel canis
hostiam consecrata^ manducet, substantia corporis Christi non desinit esse sub
specibus, etc. sicut etiam, s^ proiiceretur in ^utum. Thom. Ibid.
Though a Mouse or a Dog eat a consecrated Host, yet the substance of Christ's
body cease not to be there, no more then it does, if the Host be cast into
the dirt. Si dicatur, quod sumat, non est m^gnum inconueniens, cum
sceleratissimi homines istud sumant. Glos. ad Great. de consecr. did. 2. c. Qui
been.
If it be said (says the Glosser) that a mouse eats Christ's Body, there is
no great inconvenience in it; since that the most wicked men that are, receive
it. Nemo carne^ illam manducat, nisi prius adorauerit. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
Nene eats Christ's flesh (says Augustine) but he that first worshippeth it.
And I doubt much whether any of these dogs, pigs, or mice, ever adored it:
howsoever Cardinal Bellarmine and some others tell us either of Iumentu^ corpus
Christi suppliciter adorauit. Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 8. ex Antonin. sum.
hist. part. 3. tit. 24. c. 3. Sect. 2. and Sur. tom. 3. in vita Anton^^ de
Padua.
an Horse or an Ass that worshipped the Host. But let them and their brutish
miracles and imaginations, go together. Yet so necessarily does this follow
upon their doctrine of the Eucharist; that whereas some of their Doctors seem
to doubt Quid a mure comeditur cum sacramentum corroditur? Lomb. sent. l. 4.
did. 13. A.
what the mouse eats when she meets with an Host, and makes a good meal
of it; And the great Master of the Sentences says, Deus nouit. Ibid.
God knows; for he knows not; but he enclineth rather to think, that Dici
potest, quod corpus Christi a brutis non sumitur, quamuis videatur. Ibib.
the mouse eats not Christ's body, though she seem so to do; whereupon the
Masters of Paris give him a wipe for it by the way, and said, the Master is out
here. And others of them, to salve the matter, would coin us a new miracle,
and say, that Quam cito mus rodit, corpus Christi esse desinit. Bonauent. in
sent. l. 4. d. 13. p. 1. q. 2. art. 1. and Astesan. sum l. 4. tit. 17. q. 2.
so soon as the mouses mouth comes at it, or her lips kiss it, Christ's Body
conueigheth it self away, and Panis miraculose reuertitur. Innocent. de Miss.
l. 4. c. 11. and Fortalit. fid. lib. 3. consid. 6. imposs. 17.
the bread miraculously comes again in the room of it: Et haec opinio
communior est, and honestior. Astesan. Ibid.
and this (say they) is the commoner and the honester opinion. Here is miracle
upon miracle; such as they are. Yet Thomas Aquinas their Angelicus Doctor.
chief Schooleman, and one that could not be deceived herein, for they say
that his doctrine of the Sacrament l Hic Magister non tenetur. Censur Paris.
was confirmed by Miracle, a wooden Crucifix miraculously saluting him with
these words, Been scrip sisti de me, Thoma. Erphurd. de fact. memor. c. 9. 5.
Thou have written well of me, Thomas; tells us peremptorily that it cannot
be otherwise, if Christ's body be in the Eucharist, but that Mice and Rats must
eat it, when they meet with the Host and make meat of it. Quida^ dixerunt,
quod statim dum sacramentum tangitur a mure vel cane, desinit ibi esse corpus
Christi. Sed hoc derogat veritati sacramenti. Tho^. sum. part. 3. q. 80. a. 3.
Some say (says he) that so soon as the Sacrament is touched by a dog or a
mouse, Christ's Body cease to be there: But this opinion derogateth from the
truth of the Sacrament. Thus you may see what hideous, horride and horrible
conclusions this carnal and Capernaiticall conceit of Christ's corporal
presence in the Eucharist has bred and brought forth, and must needs breed
and bring forth with all those that uphold it.

The Sum of all that has been said.
1. THat there is nothing in the Gospel whereby it may appear that those words
of our Savior, This is my Body, may not be figuratively understood, is by
Cardinal Caietan confessed.

2. That our Saviors words of eating his flesh and drinking his blood are to
be understood not corporally but spiritually, is acknowledged by many Popish
writers of great note: and is, beside other Reasons, by a Rule given by
Augustine evidently proved.

3. That the Elements in the Sacrament remain in Substance the same, and are
not really transubstantiated into Christ's Body and Blood, is euinced by diverse
Arguments.

1. From the Course of the Context, which plainly shows, that Christ brake
and delivered no other then he took and blessed.

2. From the express words of Scripture, that calls the one Bread, and the
other Wine, even after consecration.

3. From the Nature of Signs, whose property it is to be one thing, and to
signify another thing.

4. From the Nature of Christ's Body, that has flesh, blood, and bones, which
the Eucharisticall bread has not, that. which our taste, our sight, and our
sense informs us, by which our Savior himself has taught us to discern
his body.

5. From the nature of every true Body, such as Christ's is, which cannot be in
many places at once, nor have any part of it greater then the whole.

6. From the quality of the Communicants, good and bad, promiscuously feeding
on the Elements in the Eucharist, whereas none but the faithful can feed upon
Christ.

7. From these infirm and unseemly, yea foul and filthy things that do
usually, or may befall the Elements in the Eucharist, which no Christian ear
can endure to hear that they should befall Christ's blessed and glorious body.

Whence I conclude, that since this Corporal presence, such as the Church of
Rome maintains, has no warrant from Gods word, as their own Cardinal
confesses; and is besides contrary to Scripture, to nature, to sight, to
sense, to reason, to religion, we have little reason to receive it, as a truth
of Christ, or a principle of Christianity, great reason to reject it, as a
figment of a man's brain, yea as a doctrine of the devil, invented to wrong
Christ and Christianity.

It is the Rule of a Schooleman.

We ought not to add more difficulty unto the difficulties of Durand. in
sent. lib. 4. did. 11. quaest. 3. Non oportet difficu tates fidei
difficultatibus superaddere; quin potius iuxta documentum Scripturae conandum
est obscuritates elucidare. Et ideo, ex quo vnus modus est clare possibilis and
intelligibilis, alius antem non est intelligibilis, videretur probabiliter quod
ille qui est possibilis and intelligibilis, est et eligendus and tenendus.
Christian belief. But rather according to that which the Scripture teaches,
we should endeavor to clear that that is obscure. And therefore since that
the one manner of Christ's presence in the Eucharist is clearly possible and
intelligible, whereas the other is not intelligible (yea, nor possible
neither,) it seems probable that that manner of his presence that is possible
and intelligible should be chosen and held.

A JUST DEFENSE OF THE FORMER DISCOVRSE AND ARGVMENTS AGAINST THE ANSWER OF A
NAMELES Popish Priest thereunto:
Wherein is set down; first, his Answer word for word, and then a Refutation
thereof, according to his own Distribution of it.
Division I.
NOBLE Lady, I find your N. P.
Divine utterly ignorant and unacquainted with the Authors works by him
frequently cited.

For example, page 9. he terms Cornelius Iansenius more then once a Jesuit:
whereas the first leaf of his book (if he had ever seen it) witnesses him
to have been a Bishop of Flaunders, and no Jesuit. Like herein to an other of
his own coat (for I guess him to be a Minister, who to my self and other
worthy persons confidently auerred Cardinal Bellarm. to have been an English
man borne at Harr^^ on the Hi^^; where there has been indeed an ancient
family of the Bellamies, not Bellarmines, as he foolishly conceived.

Secondly, page 5. he cites an authority out of Pope Gelasius written by a
far different Author of that name Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine mentioned
together with his works by Photius Bibliotheca sua Codice 102.

Thirdly, in his 2. page, on the false report of an other namelesse Author like
to himself, ignorant and insincere in his assertions, he makes Bishop Fisher
to affirm the reali presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament not to be
gatherable out of any one word in Scripture, contrary to Bishop Fishers, yea
Luthers own doctrine in innumerable places.

Fourthly, having traced him throughout his whole Treatise, I find him to be a
mere collector out of other Authors: and for his best Arguments be has stolen
Bellarmines objections against our doctrine, craftily dissembling his full and
solid solutions of them in those very places: which is the usual trade of
such Protestant petie writers. His proofs are tedious, superficial, and
stuffed with impertinent allegations, maimedly and corruptly produced: with a
very bad hand (which I suppose is his own) he inserteth many notes wholly idle
and impertinent to his purpose; as I have in reading his papers particularly
observed: which is to me an evident sign, that he hoped his papers should
never come to the view of other then Ladies and unlearned pers^ unable (...)
exam^^^ them.

It is the usual manner of those that defend a bad T. G.
cause, to leave the matter, and fall foul on the adverse party, and (like the
crauen Cock, that having (...). Xenoph. in sympos. Et inde (...). Aristoph. in
^quitib.
eaten garlic, by his strong and stinking breath endeavors to drive him
away from him, whom he is not able well to bicker with) by railing, re^iling
and abundance of bad language to seek to beat off their adversary, or by
lying and out-facing to cry down those that they deal with, when by evidence
of truth and strength of Argument they are unable to convince them; hoping by
such means to delude the simpler sort at least, that cannot so well discern
their shifts.

This as I have heretofore by experience found to be the common practice of
Popish companions; so this Defendant loath to degenerate from the kind he
comes of, at the first dash begins with, charging the Divine he deals
with to be one utterly ignorant, unacquainted with the Authors works that he
cites, a petty-writer, a mere collector, a false filcher, a foul corrupter,
a superficial disputer, and what not?

This is his charge: Let us hear how he proves it.

1. He terms Iansenius, whom he cites, more then once a Jesuit, when he is
not. It is true indeed: I confess, I do twice so term him, and I took him
to have been so: wherein if I were mistaken, the matter is not great. I hope
the authority of a famous Bishop, and a great writer of special note among
them, our of a work of his written Magna eruditione, ac iudicio maturo
Scriptum. Tho. Gozeus S. Theol. Profess. Louan. and lib. Visitat.
with much learning and mature judgment, as the Louaine professor
acknowledges; and approved Communi doctorum viroru^ iudicio. Io. Molan.
Cen^or Apostolicus and Regius.
by the common judgment of the learned among them, as the King of Spaines (to
whom also it is dedicated) and the Popes Censurer of books testifies, may
well be deemed of as much weight as the word or work, (if not of any, yet) of
many a Jesuit at least.

As for the idle tale he tells of the Bellarmines and Bellamies, which a
Minister forsooth should take the one for the other, and thereupon affirm Card.
Bellarmine to have been borne at Harrow on the Hill; it may well be thought to
have been brought in for no other end (being so little to the purpose) but to
let us understand that he is a man of some worth; for so much he intimates
when he says, it was averred to himself and other worthy persons. He
doubts (belike) that his work would scarce make his worth known, if he
should not otherwise acquaint us with it. The thing it self is like enough to
be but a mere fiction; and might easily be requited with the tale of the
Friar, that Marnix Beehiue.
took Messiah for the Mass, and so would prove out of the Gospel that
Christ said Mass; or of the Priest Hundred merry Tales
that took vnigeniti written short, for viginti, and so read to his people,
Gods twenty sons; or of him Poggii facet.
that bad the Epiphanie day, but could not tell whether it weere an he or a
she-Saint; or of him H. Steph. apolog. for Herod. l. 1. c. 39.
that bad Solin Cancro for an Holy Day, because he found it written in red
letters; and with many more the like, probable enough, if the learning of their
lacke-Latin Priests be well weighed.

But, had I ever seen the first leaf of his book, I might have known him to
be a Bishop of Flanders and no Jesuit. As if as often as one either reads or
alleges any Author, he must needs turn always to the title page, to see
what his style is: or as if Iansenius might not as well be Bishop of Gaunt, as
Bellarmine a Cardinal, and (if I mistake not) Archbishop of Capua, and yet
for all that a Jesuit. His proof therefore of my being unacquainted with this
Author, (whom, I suppose, he will find me better acquainted with then he
would) is very silly and slight: and the exception such, as shows that he
wanted matter of moment to except against.

But I hope when this Bishop of Flanders book comes to be reprinted again,
they will take that course with him, (if they have not leaft their old guise)
that they have done formerly with many others; to wipe out of him whatsoever in
this kind or any other, either makes directly against them, or discovers
the weakness of such grounds as they labor to build their gross errors
upon. Of which their false and fradulent dealing, it shall not be amiss to
insert one Example by the way; the rather, because it concerns the point here
debated. Whereas therefore in the time of Carolus Calvus King of France and
Emperor, above 800. years since, there was Non paru^ schis^^ate diuidu^tur,
quide mysterio corporis sanguinisque Christi non eadem sentientes eloquuntur.
Bertram praefat. ad Carol. Imper.
much disputation and dissension in the Church about the doctrine of the
Sacrament, one Bertram a man Vir in diuinis Scripturis valde peritus, and in
literis disciplinarum secularium egregie doctus; nec minus vi^a quam doctrina
in signis. Trithem. in Catalog.
of great note in those times both for life and learning, willed by the
Emperor to declare his judgment therein, wrote a learned discourse thereof,
wherein he confimeth by the testimonies of Augustine, Ambrose, and others of
the Ancients, the very same that we now hold: and among other things affirms
that Appar^t quod multa inter se differentia separatur; quantum est inter
pignus, and eam rem pro qua pignus traditur; inter imaginem, and rem cuiu^ est
imago; inter speciem, and veritatem. Bertra^. de corp. and sang. Dom. quaest. 2.
there is as great difference between Christ's body that was borne of the
Virgin Mary, and that which is daily received with the month in the Sacrament,
as there is between the pledge, and that for which the pledge is given,
between the image, and that whereof it is an image, and between the type and
the truth. Now the Popish purgers authorized to maine and mangle Authors, as
well old as new, cum privilegio, without control, lighting among others on
this book of Bertrams, use these words of it, and of their own confessed
courses in this kind. Index Expurgat. Belgic. in tit. B.
Albeit (say they) we make no great reckoning of this book, and therefore
should not greatly care if it were utterly lost, and were no where to be had;
(I cannot blame them if they wish it, and many other the like, burnt and
abolished) yet seeing that the book has been often printed, and reprinted,
has been read of very many, is known commonly by the name of a book
forbidden, and the Heretics by diverse Catalogues of Books prohibited, are
sure there is such an one, etc. And besides, since that in other old catholic
writers we bear with very many errors, we extenuate, we excuse them,
Excogitato commento persaepe negamus, and commodum eis sensum affingimus.
with some devised shift or other we very often times deny them, and by faining
give them some commodio as sense, (such they mean as may serve their own
turns) when in disputations with our Adversaries they are objected unto us.
(Mark, I pray you, the common dealing of these men in disputation, not charged
on them by us, but confessed by themselves; and then judge you what fidelity or
sincerity in cyting of Authors, is to be expected at their hands.) We see not,
why Bertram should not find the like favor with us: The rather, Ne haeretici
ogganniant, nos antiquitatem pro ipsis saciente^ ex^^ere and prohibe^^.
L^st the Heretics should be snarling at us, and telling us that we burn up
and prohibit antiquity, when it makes for them against us. Which, you see,
in this Author they would feign, if either they could, or durst do it. So at
length they resol^ to do Bertram the favor to mangle and misuse his whole
book, and having put in, and put out what they list themselves, to let him to
pass, taught to speak for them now, that spoke all against them before. I may
well say here, as Arnobius an ancient Father, sometime said; Intercipere
scripta, and publicam velle submergere lectione^, non est Deos defendere, sed
veritatis testificationem timere. Arnob. contr. gent. lib. 3.
To intercept writings, and seek to suppress things published, what is it but
to be afraid of having the truth told and testified?

2. From the first idle Exception I pass to a second, as false, as the former
frivolous. He cites, says he, an authority out of Pope Gelasius, written by
a far different Author of that name, Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine. Had not
mere malice and a mind bent to cavil, either blinded this wrangler, or made
him wilfully to wink, he might easily have seen (that which he could not
also be ignorant of) in my very quotation, that the style and ^itle I give him,
is no other then is commonly given him by Popish writers, as among others by
Gelasii Episcopi Romani, etc. Biblioth. Patru^ a Margar. la Bigne 2. edit.
Paris. 1589. tom. 4. Et ib. in margin, Gelasius 1. Afer. anno Dom. 564.
Margarinus la Bigne, and those with him (besides many Sic enim in edit. Basil.
1528 and Tigur. 15^1.
others) that gathered together the works of the ancient Fathers, in the
fourth T^me of their great Library sundry times printed, which (...) note there
also in the Margin where I cite him. So that it is a mere false and friu^^us
cavil to tax me for cyring Gelasius by (...) title that he knew well to be
given him, (yea and that truly too, as anon shall evidently be ^ed) by those
of their own side that have at sundry times set him out by no other name but
of G^lasius Pope or Bishop of Rome.

But how does this trister prove that he was not Bishop of Rome? Forsooth,
because Photius makes mention of one Gelasius Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine,
that wrote against the Heretics called Anomoei. The place wringeth them, and
therefore they would feign shift off the Author, from being Bishop of Rome at
least. And B^llarmine, Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 27. Qua^qua^ de Romans
Pont. l. 4. c. 10. haesitantius idem, vel Gennadii vel Gelasii Caesariensis.
he tells us that it was one Gelasi^^ a Bishop of Caesarea, of whom Iereme
makes mention. But Baronius confuteth Bellarmine; (here is Cardinal against
Cardinal:) and Baron. ^nal. tom. 6. anno 496. Opus illud Gelasio Palestino
nullo modo potest asscribi.
says, it cannot be that Gelasius: their times are too far asunder: both he
was dead and his next successor, before that business was on foot, that he
deals in. Thus they stick not to make men write books after they are dead,
and laid up in their graves. But who is he then, says Baronius? for Bishop of
Rome he must not be. He is Baron. ibid. Sed and Greg. de Valent. de Transsub.
l. (...). c. 7. and C^^. loc. com. l* (...). c. 8.
that Gelasius (says he) that Photius makes mention of: and this Defendant
says the same. Gennadius and diverse other, tells us that Gelasius of the
City of Rome Bishop, wrote against the Eutychians and Nestorians. And that is
the very title of the book^ that I cite. Now Photius tells us of another
Gelasius Bishop of Caesarea, that wrote against the Anomaeans. Therefore says
Baronius, and from him this Defendant, the one must needs be the other. As if
two Bishops of the same name could not write books against Heretics, but
they must needs be by and by the same. But observe s Ge^nad. in Catalog. Et cum
eodem consentiunt Anastasius, Platina, P^ilip. Bergom. Trithem. and alii.
I pray you, how hansomely these things hang together. The Athanas* ^mine
contra Anomaeos d^alog. 2. quos Maximo ttibui restatur* Schottus ad. Photium.
Chrysostom. contr. Ancmaeos. hom. 2. Aug. de haeres. c. 54 dissimilem per omnia p^i
asserentes filium. Socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 45. and Sozom, hist l. 4. c.
29. (...).
Anomaeans were Arrians and Aetians, so called, because they held the Son to
be unlike the Father. The u Eutychians heretics, that held that Christ's
humanity was turned into, or swallowed up of his deity. And now mark how
these men reason; Gelasius of Caesarea (says Photius) writ against those that
oppugned Christ's divinity: and this Gelasius writes against those that took
away his humanity: this and the other therefore must needs be all one. Rather I
reason on this manner: Gennadius reports that G^lasius Bishop of Rome writ
against Eutyches and Nestorius: so does this whom I cite; and all Editions of
him, so style him: this Gel^sius therefore was Bishop of Rome. And how does
this now prove, that v Theod. haeres. fabul. l. 4. Enagr. hist. l. 2. c. 16.
Thedor. Rhaet. de hae^^l. Isidor. Orig. l. 8. c. 5. Humanem naturam a diuina
absorptam.
I cite Authors, whose works I am altogether unacquainted with, when the work
I cite in their own printed Editions has no other title, then that I give it?

But for the further and fuller clearing of the truth in this point, and the
vindicating of this piece of Antiquity to his right Author: Besides that
Phetius flatlyaffirmeth that that Gelasius that wrote against the Anomaei, is
the same with that Gelasius whom they would have this Author to be, to wit, he
that wrote of the Nicene Council, but (...). Pho^. bibliot. cod. 89. Et. ibid.
de altero. illo; (...) etc.
one that both for style and learning goes far beyond him: Nor is the frame
of this Authors discourse such as he describes his to have been in that
work, to wit, (...). ibid cod 102
fastidiously and childishly, or youthfully at least, full of Logic rules and
terms, for which himself makes an Apology; which this neither does, nor
(writing in a far other strain) needed to do: As also that in this very
work, the Author intimates himself to have been Bishop of Rome, or (as he
speaks) of (...). ibid.
the Apostolic Sea: Nor is it needful that with Cum sedem Apostolicam vestra
dilectio vnanimiter teneat, consta^ter praedicet, sapienter defendat, etc.
Melchior Canu^ we turn sedem into fidem, as (to shift off this Author) he
would there do: Besides all this, I say, Eulgentius an African Bishop who lived
together in the same time with Pope Gelasius, and was his own Countriman, does
(as Fulgentius qui codem ^^mpore vixit, etc. Gelas^ Papae absque ulla
dubitatione adscrihit. Henr. Spondan. epi^om. Baron. not. ad ann. 496.
Hen^y Spondan the Popes Protonotary himself informs us) Beatae memoriae
Papa Gelasius. Fulgent. ad Ferrand. respons. 2.
ascribe this work to Pope Gelasius, cyting out of it certain passages; as
Joan Pp. 2. non 1. in epist. contr. ^utych. in Biblioth. Pa^r. ^om. 4. edit. 2.
John the second, who not long after succeeded this Gelasius in the same sea,
also does. That which puts this truth so far out of all doubt, that
Spondan by such evidence undeniable convinced, is enforced to Spondan. vbi sup.
control Cardinal Baronius and those other of their own writers therein. It
is clear therefore that this Gelasius was not Bishop of C^sare^, as this
Defendant would have him; but Bishop of Rome, as I allege him, above a
thousand years since, and both held and taught then the same doctrine of the
sacrament of the E^ch^rist, that we do at this day.

But let him give me leave here to tell him of a trick too common with him and
those of his coat; to wit, as to coin and forge Fathers, such as never were,
not a few; so to cite often in their discourses in matters of controversy
Authors and writings, either justly suspected, or evidently spurious and
counterfeit. In which kind this Defendant is more then once or twice faulty.
To omit Cyril of Jerusalem his Catecheticall Sermons, which even Marc. Vd. ser.
Catalog. Codic. MS. apud Posseuin. Quem Cytillum esse puto.
Popish writers themselves dare not confidently auow; and diverse passages in
them bewray to be of a later date, then that Cyril whom they are fathered on.
As also his citing of the very self same Author sometime as Aug. de verb. dom.
sermon. 28.
Augustine, and sometime as Ambr. de sacram. lib. 5 cap. 4.
Ambrose, which it may well be was neither, and may the rather be so deemed
even for this cause, because he bears the name of both; which both sure he
could not be: He cites these confessed counterfeits as authentical Authors;

1. Di^nysius Areopagita, branded long since in Photius his time, Vt
pseude^igrapha videntur a Ph^ti^ n^tari. Posseui^* i^ apparat.
as Posseuine confesses, for a counterfeit; Caietan (...) Act. 17.
doubted of by C^ietan; (...) schol* ad ^ieron* de Scrip. Eccl^ and in decla^^
a^ Paris. cens.
denied by Grocinus; Valla in Act. 17. and Erasm. praefat. ad paraphras. in 1
Cor.
derided by Ualla and diverse others.

2. The passion of S. Andrew pretended to be written by the Ministers of
Ach^ia: which Dr. White (not ours but theirs) writing of this very Argument,
confesses to be Sed sit apo^, ^t est absque controue^^ia, (...) Quod diuus
Andreas locutus ad Patres Memoratur, etc. Wh^ diacos. M^.
without controversy an Apocryphal story: and contains manifest untruth,
if Bellarmine himself may be believed.

3. Cyprian de cardinalibus Christi operibus; which Falso tribuitur Cypriano.
Posseuin. in apparat.
Posseuine, Non esse stylus arguit. Erasm. not. in (...).
Erasmus, Cypriani. non est, Po. (...) de Commun. sub vtr. spec.
Hesselius, and many other P^pish writers flatly deny to be Cypriaus, yea or
any one Au^* ris Cypriano, imo and Augustino posterioris. Beliarm. de am^.
great. l. 6. c. 2. (...)* ^or ignoratur. Bellar. de script. Eccles.
n^ere Cyprians time.

4. Eusibius Emissenus his Homelies; which whose they are, says Bellarmine, is
not known; Baron. annal. tom. 6.
Baro^i^s con^th to have been foolishly set out under his name; and Sixth.
Sene^s. bibloth. l. 4.
Six^ S^sis (besides many others) affirms to have bee^e patched together by
some Latin Author out of other men's writings, whereas E^sebi^s was a Greek.

I add only what Bellarmine says of the most of these Auth^rs together.
Di^nysius his book (says he) Eusebius his Homilies, and Cyprians Sermons of
Christ's Cardinal works, Apud nonnullos dubiae su^, sc^ipturae, vel etiam
supposi^. Bellar. de saera^. confi^. l. 2. c. 7.
are with some counted doubtful, yea or counterfeit writings: (...) nor is it
certaine^ whether they be theirs, whose names they bear. Yea of some of them
he o Licet non sit certum an sint illi quoru^ no^ina praeferunt. Ibid.
says elsewhere, that Reuera (...), s^, Emiss^ non po^u^e ess^ (...) Bellrr.
in recogni^^ and d^ Euchar. l. 2. c. 30.
it is certain Reuera no^ est Cyp^. Idem de confirm. l. 2. (...). 7. and de
E^^ha^. l. (...). c. 13^
they are not. And yet are these of the principal Authors that this Defendant
to uphold his tortering fabrique produces; albeit the things alleged out of
them do not greatly stand him in steed, as shall appear when we come at
them. But such counterfeit feips do they commonly tender us, and will needs
enforce us to accept them for curr^nt (...); when they know that their own
Critics have marked and bored them for such, neither will they pass in
payment among themselves.

3. His third Exception is that he cites a namelesse Author, ignorant and
insincere, like himself; who m^keth Bishop Fisher affirm the real presence
of Christ's body in the Sacrament not to be gatherable out of any word in
Scripture. True it is, I say, that I find Bishop Fisher all^adged to affirm,
that there is no one word in the Gospel, from which the true presence of
Christ's flesh and blood in their M^sse may be proved. Which because I had not
the (...) my self, nor knew where to have it, I thus only allege. And now, to
put the matter wholly out of suspense; that ignorant and insincere Author like
my self, as (...) ^rmeth him, who shall no longer be namelesse, is that right
Re^erend Prelate, now Lord Bishop of Winchester, In Respon^. ^d Apolog. Card.
Bellar. (...). Praefat. monitor. Se^nis Princip. Iacobi Reg. cap. 1.
in his elaborate work against Bellarmines Apologi^; who (I doubt not) both
had the book by him there cited, and cited the words no otherwise then they
are in the book. No^ (I think) is this Popish Doctor so extremely
brazen-faced (though they have many of them in their brows too much of that
metal) that he dare challenge that M^rour of learning for an ignorant Author.
I should esteem it but to great a grace to be counted ignorant as he is.

4. Fourthly, having traced him through his whole Treatise ^e finds him to be
a mere collector out of other Authors, and to have stol^e out of Bellar. his
^bi^ctions, co^c^aling his answers: and in a word all so poor and so weak,
that it may seem written only for Ladies and ideotes, unable to examine. I
say no more here in way of defense for my self but this only; that this
should have been rather discovered by him in particular, then thus charged in
general, unless he could in the prosecution of it have better discharged
himself then he has done hitherto. The truth is; he himself is so much
beholden to Bellarmine, that he is feign ever and anon to refer his Reader
to seek in him what he should say (if he thought it at least worth the saying)
himself. As if it were a good proof of what he auerreth, or a sufficient
resutation of what he finds objected, to say, that Bellarmine has largely
proved the one, or Bellarmine has sufficiently answered the other. Which if
he have done either, he has done more by much then he often attempteth once to
do. And surely his manner of dealing, beside the slightness and slenderness
of his Answers, with a wet finger (as we say) passing by the manifold
allegations produced as well out of the Ancients, as out of their own
Authors, does give a shrewd suspicion, that he thought this his writing would
never be examined by any either learned or unlearned, unless they were such as
wanted even common sense, sufficient to discover the absurdity of diverse
passages therein.

To give your Ladyship a taste of some of them before hand.

Absurd Positions, and Contradictions.
1. He says, that Diuis. 4. 1.
a Testament, as all learned know, may well signify a Legacis. 2. He makes
Ibid.
our Savior to say, This my Blood is the Testament in my blood. 3. He says,
that Ibid.
Christ's blood is offered in the Eucharist, vnbloodily, or not as blood. 4. He
expounds a place of Theod^ret thus; * The x Ibid.. 4.
Sacramental Signs, that is, the Accidents, retain still the same Substance,
that is, the same Accidents, 5. He says that Diuis. 6.. 3.
Christ's Body is in the Eucharist, but without bodily existence, that is, his
body is there, but not as a body. 6. That Ibid.
it is there, and yet it follows not that it is eaten, though that that is
there be eaten. 7. He maintains Ibid.
a corporal eating of Christ in the Sacrament, and yet that he is not there
corporally eaten. 8. He affirms that Ibid. ad Arg. 2.
all are not saved that believe in Christ, and so fe^de spiritually on Christ.
9. He says that Diuis. 8.. 1.
the Son of God is contained in the bread that is ea^en in the E^ch^rist;
whereas they dery any br^ at (...) to be there. 10. He maintains that Ibid..
3.
a thing may truly be said to be turned (...) that that comes only in the
place of it. 11. He affirms that Diuis. 9.. 1.
one and the self same thing may (...). 12 That Diuis. 11.. 4.
Christ's body in the Sacrament has no exte^ bigness a^ (...). 13. He
affirms Diuis. 14.. 1.
Christ's very body to be present in the Sacrament but in a spiritual manner,
or as a Spirit; and therefore can no more there be broken, then Angels wounded
i^b^di^s ^ffirmed, or then his De^ on the Cross; and that nothing but
acc^^^nts are broken in the Euch^rist. 14. That Ibid.. 3.
Christ's hiding himself in the Sacr^^ent is (...) ex^ion of him. 15. He says,
that Diuis. 14.. 3.
Christ is not touched in the Sacrament, and yet we touch him: that he in^th
(...) there, and yet he cannot be touched of us. 16. He says, that Ibid.. 1.
Christ's body is not abused, though mice and Rats eat it. 17. That Ibid.. 4.
their Mass is the very self same with Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross, and
yet it is unbloody. 18. He makes Ibid.. 8.
Christ himself a memorial of himself.
Cross and wilful falsehoods and falsifications.
1. That Diuis. 4.. 2.
I affirm Sacraments to be nothing but bare Signs and Types: and that, Diuis.
14.. 8.
we make the Sacrament but a bare Memorial of Christ. 2. Diuis. 35.. 1.
That I affirm them to be nothing but bare bread and wine. 3. That Ibid.. 2.
I affirm Caietane, Bellarmine and Gratian to say the same. 4. That Diuis. 6..
2.
Iustine Martyr describes the Celebration of the Sacrifice and Sacrament of
the Eucharist just as they now celebrate it. 5. That Diuis. 13.. 1.
the Fathers affirm that I^das received Christ's natural body. 6. That Diuis.
14.. 5.
all Christians in the World celebrate as, they do. 7. That Ibid.. 7.
Augustine and all the ancient Fathers understand Christ's words John 6.
literally, and not figuratively. 8. That Ibid.. 8.
all the Fathers expound those words property, This is my body. 9. That Ibid.
Christ did not say of the Eucharist Cup, I will drink no more of this fruit
of the vine. 10. That Ibi.. 11.
the Centurists blame all the Fathers almost of Constantines time universally
for teaching Transubstantiation, and adoration of the Sacrament. 11. That
Ibid.. 12.
the ancient Britens held the same. 12. That Diuis. 8.. 1.
Origin, Basil, Jerome, and Augustine make the sin of such as come unworthily
to the Sacrament equal with the sin of those that betrayed and killed Christ.
But pass we from his Preamble to the Work it self.

Division 2.
HIs first end^ for three leaves together is to pr^ that there is nothing in
the Gospel, whereby it N. P.
may appear that those words of our Savior, This is my Body, may not be
understood figuratively as well as other speeches of the like kind in
Scripture; as when, Genesis 41. 26.
Seven kine are said to be seven years; Apoc. 17. 1^.
ten Horns ten Kings; 1. Cor. 10. 4.
The Rock was Christ, etc. So he; not telling withal his Reader (as he ought
to have done, like an ingenuous solid Author) the many differences noted by
Lib. 1. de Euchar c. 11.
Bellarmine and other Catholic Authors soluing this very Objection, between
Christ's literal words, This is my Body, and other figurative speeches; these
being simply and without any other explication uniformly recounted by three
Evangelists, as also by Saint Paul, in their historical narrations: whereas
where the Lamb is called the Passover, the Rock is said to be Christ, etc.
Something is still added in the text, to explicate the literal and true
meaning of them. The Lamb (for example) is called in the same place the
sacrifice of the Passover: Christ is said to be a spiritual Rock, etc. And
the very scope of visions and parables does still show in what sense the words
of them are literally to be taken: ^s the seven kine, ten horns, etc.

Besides in all such figurative speeches, Semper predicatur de disparato
disparatum: One thing is said to be another, which cannot be ^dually or
specifically the ^ame, but wholly different in nature from it. A man, (for
example) as Christ was, cannot (...) ^narily be a Vine, a Lion, a Rock, etc.
But in Christ's words, This is my body, no such absurdor impossible thing is
affirmed; but only that the substance which he had in his hands, was his body
made by the miraculous conversion of bread into it; Christ's words being
operative (says S. Ambros. de myster. cap. 9.
S. Ambrose) and omnipotently able to make that to be which is signified by
them in in these words. Perhaps thou will say; I see another thing: How prove
you to me, that I take the body of Christ? And this remains yet for us to
prove, that it is not what nature framed, but what benediction has
consecrated: and that the force of benediction is greater then the force of
nature: because even nature it self is changed by benediction. Moses holding a
wand in his hand, did cast it from him, and it became a serpent. Now if man's
benediction were of such force, as that it could change nature; what say we of
that same divine Consecration, where the words of our Lord and Savior do
work? For this Sacrament which thou take is made by the speech of Christ.
And if the speech of Elias was of such pow^^ as to draw fire from heaven; shall
not Christ's words be of fo^ce to change the forms of the elements? Thou have
read of the works of the whole world: Because he spoke the word, they were
made; he commanded, and they were created. The word of Christ then, which of
nothing could make that which was not, cannot it not as well change those
things which are into that which before they were not? Since it is not a less
matter to give new natures unto things then to change natures, etc. Lib. 4. de
Sacram.
It is indeed Bread before the words of the Sacraments: But after that
consecration is once added unto it, of bread it is made the flesh of Christ,
etc.

S. August. Sermon. 28. de verb. Dom.
I have told you, (says S. Augustine) that before Christ's words that which is
offered on the Altar is called bread: but when Christ's words are uttered, it is
called no more bread, but his body. And explicating the Title of the 33.
Psalm, wherein these words are written, Et ferebatur in manibus suis; And-he
was carried in his own hands: Who (says he, conc. 1.) is able to conceive how
this can happen in man? For who is carried in his own hands? A man may be
carried in the hands of an other: But in his own hands he cannot be carried.
How this may be literally understood in David, we find not. But in Christ we
do. For Christ was carried in his own hands, when giving his body he said,
This is my Body. For then did he carry that body in his own hands, etc.

When as Christ himself (says S. Cyril) affirms and says of the bread,
This is my Body, who may presume to make any doubt thereof? And when the same
Christ confirms and says, This is my Blood, who can doubt, and say it is not
his blood? Again, Cyril. Catech. 4. mystagog.
Let us not consider it as mere bread, or bare wine. For it is the body and
blood of Christ. For although the sense teaches thee that it is bread and
wine, yet let thy faith confirm thee, that thou judge not the thing it self
by thy taste. And a little after; This knowing for most certain, that the
bread which we see is not bread, although thy taste thinks it to be bread,
but that it is the body of Christ: and the wine which we behold, although to
the sense of tasting it seems to be wine, yet that it is not wine indeed,
but the blood of our Savior, etc.

S. Chrysostom. homil. 60. ad popul. Antioch.
Let us believe God (says S. Chrysostom) in every thing; not gainsaying him,
though what he says may seem absurd to our sense and cogitation. I beseech
thee therefore, that his speech may overcome our sense and reason. Which point
we are to observe in all things: but especially in holy mysteries; not only
beholding those things which lie before us; but also laying hold of his words;
for his words cannot deceive us: but our sense may easily be deceived. And
elsewhere lib. 3. de Sacerd. O miracle! says he: O the bounty of God! he that
sits above with his Father, even in the same instant of time is handled with
the hands of all, and delivers himself to such as are willing to entertain
and embrace him. Again, Elias did leave his garment to his disciple. But the
Son of God ascending to heaven did leave his flesh. But Elias by leaving it
was deuested thereof: Whereas Christ leaving his flesh to us, yet ascending to
heaven there also he has it.

AFter that he has thus spent some part of his railing T. G.
Rhetoric in traducing and vilifying this Protestantical Divine his Adversary,
asignorant, unacquainted with the Authors he cites, a petty writer, a mere
collector, a filcher, a falsifier, etc. and disgraced his Discourse as
consisting of proofs tedious, and superficial, and allegations impertinent
maimedly and corruptly produced; and (that nothing may escape him without some
nip) written with a very bad hand, which he takes to be his own; and the
party therefore one (it may be) not so fit to write for Ladies as himself,
being both a man of worth (as before he intimated himself to be) and writing a
fair hand too, though not very Scholerlike, as the work it self shows: He
comes now to deal with the matter and substance of the Discourse.

Where the first Proposition, that he undertakes to oppugn, as I propound it,
is this:

These words in the Gospel, This is my Body, may well be taken figuratively.

(Which how it may be, I show by some instances: to wit; these other in
Scripture; Genesis 41. 26.
The seven kine, are seven years: Apoc. 17. 12
The ten horns, are ten Kings: 1 Cor. 10. 4.
The Rock was Christ: or as those other in ordinary speech; This is Caesar:
That is Cicero, etc.

Nor is there any thing in the Gospel that may enforce the contrary.

Now this worthy man that taxes me for a mere Collector, and a filcher out of
Bellarmine, has nothing here to answer, but what he fetches from Bellarmine,
whom he says I filch all from.

But let us see how well he urges and makes good Bellarmines answers.

1. The words are simply, and without any other explication, simply and
uniformly (for so in his scholerlike manner he speaks) recounted by three
Evangelists and Saint Paul. And therefore they cannot be taken figuratively.
For that must follow, or else he speaks nothing to the purpose. We shall not
need to go far to discover the weakness of this consequence. The Math.
26. 27, 28. Mark. 14. 23, 24. Luke 22. 20.
three Evangelists, and 1. Cor. 11. 25.
S. Paul speaking of the other part of this Sacrament, do all simply and
without another explication uniformly (to retain his own precise terms)
say, This Cup is, etc. therefore the Cup cannot be taken figuratively there:
which if it be not, they must invent a new Transsubstantiation of some other
matter or metal then the p Luke 2^. 20. 1. Cor 11. 21.
fruit of the Vine, either into the New Testament, or into Christ's blood. q
Math. 26. 27, 8. Mark. 14. 24.


2. When the Lamb is called the Passover; and the Rock said to be Christ,
something is added in the Text to explain the literal true meaning of them.
The Lamb for example in the same place is called the Sacrifice of the
Passover. Christ is said to be a spiritual Rock, etc.

1. It is not true that he says; that in the same place where the Lamb is
called the Passover, the same Lamb is called the Sacrifice of the Passover:
There is no more said, Exodus 12. 11. but this; Ye shall eat it in have; it is
the Lords Passover: there being nothing by way of explication there added. But
after indeed verse 27. not the Lamb precisely, but the whole Service is said
to be the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover. When your Children shall ask you,
What service is this that you observe? Then shall you say, It is the Sacrifice
of the Lords Passover.

Neither is Christ said to be a spiritual Rock. 1. Cor. 10. 4. But the real
Rock is called a spiritual Rock: as the Manna, and the water that issued
from it are called 1. Cor. 10. 3, 4.
spiritual meat and drink: And that Rock for matter corporal, for use
spiritual, is said, as Augustine well observes, Non dicit, Petra significabat
Christum; sed, Petra erat Christus. Aug. in Leu. q. 57. and Beda; and Haimo in
1. Cor. 11. Petra i^m erat in creatura, and per actionis modum nuncupata est
nomine. Christi, quem significabat: sicut and Isaac Christus erat, cum ad se
immolandum ligna portabat. Idem Aug. de Trinit. lib. 2. cap. 6.
not to signify, but to be Christ: Nothing being added more to intimate a
figurative sense there, then here in the words, This is my Body, which two
speeches both Aug. in Joan. tract. 45.
Augustine and Caietan. in Thom. part. 3. quaest. 57. art. 1.
Caietan compare the one with the other.

2. It is senseless thus to reason; In some places where figurative speeches
are used, something is added to explicate them: therefore wheresoever nothing
is added to explicate the figure, the words are not, or cannot be figuratively
taken.

3. In many of the instances given, no such explication is added; as these,
Apoc. 17. 12
The ten Horns are ten Kings; Genesis 41. 26.
The a Mat. 28 9.
seven Kine are seven years: This is Caesar: This Cicero, etc.

4. In the very Context there is added that which shows the sense to be
figurative. For that which is called Christ's blood by the Evangelist in the one
verse, is expressly said to be the fruit of the vine in the next verse. And that
which is called Christ's body by the Apostle, is immediately after, more then
once or twice expounded to be 1 Cor. ^1. 24, 26, 27, 28.
bread.

3. The very scope (says he, or Bellarmine by him) of visions and parables
does still show in what sense the words are literally to be taken; as, the
seven kine, ten horns, etc.

And does not the very nature of signs and Sacraments show in what sense the
words used of, or in them, are to be taken? to wit, figuratively and
symbolically, not properly or essentially. For what are Signs and Sacraments
but real parables? both therefore termed Mysteries, as (...). Chry^^st. in 1
Cor. hom 7. Idem fere Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 1. and contr. Max. l. 3.
c. 22,
Chrysostom notes; because one thing is seen in the one, as heard in the
other, and some other thing understood. Or what is more v^uall then (as Aug. in
Leuit q. 57. and epist. 23. and ep. 102. and ad Simplic. l. 2. q. 3. and in
Ioa^. tract. 63.
Augustine and Author de Cardin. Christi oper. sermon. de Coen. Heruaeus sub
Anselmi nomine in 1 Cor. 10. Thom. de differ. verb. divine. and human. etc.
others well observe) that Signs and Sacraments be called by the names of
those things, which they are signs and sacraments of? What Sacrament also is
there, wherein or whereof such speeches are not used? Circumcision is called
Genesis 17. 13.
the Covenant: the pasohall Lamb, Exodus 1^. 11.
the Passover: the Rock, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Christ: Bap^^sme, Ti. (...). 5.
the Laver of Regeneration. And in like manner, says Sicut secundum quendam
modum sacramentum corpotis Christ^ corpus Christi est, sacramentum sanguinis
Christi, sanguis Christi^st; ita sacramentum fidei fides est. Aug. ep. 23.
Augustine, is the bread Christ^ body; the name of the thing signified (says
Theodoret. dialog. 1.
Theodoret) being given to the sign. So that whereas this worthy writer thus
argues out of Bellarmine; In visions and parables the very scope ever shows
that the things spoken are to be vnstoode figuratively: But these places, the
seven kine, and the ten horns, are visions and parables: And therefore the
things therein spoken are to be taken figuratively. Why may not we as well
reason on this wise? The very nature of signs and sacraments leads unto
this, that when the names of the things whereof they are signs and sacraments
are given unto them, it is to be understood not properly, but figuratively.
But it is a Sacrament wherein and whereof these speeches are used, This is my
body, and This is my blood: These words therefore, wherein the name of the
thing signified is given to the Sacrament, are to be understood figuratively.
And so he has from his own grounds by due proportion somewhat more to
conclude then was before required; to wit, not only, that there is nothing
that may enforce us to expound them literally, but that there is somewhat of
moment to induce us to expound them figuratively.

4. In all such figurative speeches (says he further out of Bellarmine) Semper
praedicatur de disparato disparatum; One thing is said to be another, when it
cannot be indi^idually or specifically the same, but wholly different in nature
from it. A man for example, as Christ was, cannot but similitudinarily be a
Rock, a Vine, or a Lion. But in Christ's words, This is my body, no such absurd
or impossible thing is affirmed; but only that the substance which he had in
his hands was his body made by the miraculous conversion of bread into it.

1. In this speech of our Savior, This is my body, as well as in that speech
of the Prophet, Ezec. 5. 5.
This is Jerusalem, or in that speech of the Apostle, 1. Co. 10. 4
The Rock was Christ, is one thing, to wit, bread (as is afterward proved
both by the course of the context, the words of the Apostle, and the doctrine
of the ancient Fathers) said to be an other thing, to wit, the flesh of
Christ, which is wholly different in nature from it. Nor can this worthy
Disputer prove the^ contrary, unless you grant him the point in question,
which here he shamefully beggeth to make good his Assertion, to wit, that
that which Christ had in his hands was his body made by the miraculous
conversion of bread into it?

2. A man may as well be a rock; as a rock may be a man, or bread may be
flesh. And why was it not as possible for the rock to be turned into Christ,
and so to become Christ, as for bread to be turned into the body of Christ,
and so to be the flesh of Christ? that the one might be understood properly as
well as the other. If they will say, It is impossible that the rock should be
turned into the flesh of Christ, before Christ was incarnate, I might answer
them, as they use to do us; that God is able to do all things. And
questionless it is Yea some of them in effect confess the one to be as well
possible as the other: Ante incarnationem Christi potuit. Eucharistia fuisse
ita vera sicut nunc. Et tum fuisset sub speciebu^ verum and ide^ corpus Christi
illud quod sumptum est de virgin sicut modo. etc. Gabr. Biel. in Can. Miss.
lect. 47.
as possible that the rock should be turned into that flesh, that as yet was
not; as that a little thin wafer cake, or the compass of it at least, should
contain Christ's whole and entire body here on earth, while the very self same
individual body should be whole and entire still in heaven. A creature may as
well be, and yet not be at once, as a natural body may at the same time be
wholly and entire thus contracted on earth, and yet whole and entire also in
his full stature in heaven. Yea how is it not a thing absurd and impossible,
that Christ's body sitting whole and entire at the table, should hold the
selfsame body whole and entire in its two hands on the table, and should give
the selfsame body away whole and entire over the table to twelve several
persons, to go severally into each of their mouths still whole and entire,
and to become so many whole and entire humane organicall bodies in their
mouths, as in chewing they made pieces of that that was given them, and yet
the selfsame body that they did thus take and eat, remain sitting there
still unstirred and untouched? If these things be not absurda absurdorum
absurdissima (as he speaks) as monstrous absurdities as ever were any, I know
not what are.

3. Observe how these men that cannot endure to hear us say, This, or that
thing is impossible: yet tell us themselves of many impossibilities; and that
even then also when they speak of these miraculous mysteries, in the confuting
one of another. It is impossible (says this worthy writer) for a man, as
Christ was, otherwise then similitudinarily, to be a rock, or a vine. Thom.
Aqui. contr. Gent. l. 1. c. 48
It is impossible (says Aquinas) that a man should be an Ass. Est impossible
quod panis sit corpus Christi. Gloss. ad Great. de conscr. d. 2. c. Panis est
It is impossible (says the Gloss) that bread should be Christ's body.
Impossibilis est plane haec sententia, nisi tropic e accipiatur. Bellar. de
Euchar. l. 1. c. 1.
It is altogether impossible (says Bellarmine) that this sentence, This bread
is my body, should be true properly. Gabr. Biel. in Can. Miss. lect. 80.
It is impossible (says Biel) that Christ's body should be broken or divided
and so be spoiled, being impassible. Thon. Aq. sum. part 3. q. 81. art. 3.
It is impossible (says Aquinas) that Christ in his last Supper should give
his body impassible. Idem ibid. q. ^7. a. 1.
It is impossible that his body being now impassible should be altered in shape
or hew. Ibid. q. 76. a. 8.
It is impossible that Christ's body in his proper shape should be seen in any
other place, but that one only wherein he is definitiuely. Ibid. art. 6.
It is impossible that the substantial form of bread should remain after
consecration: or that the substance of bread and wine should abide there. Ibid.
q. 75. art. 2.
It is impossible that Christ's body by a local motion should come to be in
the Sacrament. Ibid. q. 76. a. 6.
It is impossible that the same thing should both rest and move at once.
Bellar. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 16.
It is impossible that the same body should by local motion arrive in diverse
several places at once. It is impossible that Christ's should personally assume
the bread in the Sacrament. Thom. sum. p. 3. q. 75. a. 3.
It is impossible that Christ's body should be in the Sacrament any other way
but by the conversion of bread into it. All these and many other
impossibilities they tell us of, that cannot endure to hear us speak of any.
Now if they will tell us why these things are impossible, we shall as soon
tell them again in their own words, why such a Transubstantiation and real
presence, as they dream of, is impossible. z Ibid. a. 2.


4. How does this follow: There is no impossible thing affirmed in Christ's
words: Therefore they must needs be taken properly, or they cannot be taken
figuratively? He might by the same reason prove that the Apostles words where
he says of himself, 1 Cor. 15. 3^
I die daily; or where he says, Gal. 2. 19.
I am crucified together with Christ; or where he says of the Galathians that
Gal. 3. 1.
Christ was crucified among them; or the Psalmists as some fantastical Vide
Drus. quaest. l. 2. q. 39 and Paul. Rieium de anima coeli.
Rabbines have held, where he says of the Heavens, that Psalm. 19. 1.
they relate Gods glory, etc. or our Saviors, where he says, that Luke 16.
24.
the tongue of the Rich man's soul was in torment; must of necessity be all
understood literally and properly, because there is nothing simply impossible
affirmed in them.

. 5. He tells us in Conclusion; that the meaning of our Savior Christ's
words is this; The Substance which I hold in my hands is my Body made by the
miraculous conversion of bread into it. But where is ought in the Text that
inti nateth this miraculous conversion? yea if this were the sense of them, it
should be made Christ's body ere those words were spoken of it: Whereas he and
his associates commonly hold that this miraculous conversion is wrought by
those words, This is my body, and In vltimo instanti, in quo pro^ertur vox
vltima, ponitur effectus verboru^ in esse. Bellar. de Euchar. l 1. c. 11.
is not effected till those words be all out; which they give the Priest a
special charge thereof Vno spiritu. tractim dicat. Cu^tel. Miss. in Missali.
to utter speedily with one breath. And here let this profound doughty Doctor
give an ignorant petty writer leave to demand of him, what is meant by the word
This, in those words, This is my body; (for I suppose he will not be so
absurd as the Glosser is, to say that Ad haec dico, quod per hanc dictione^,
Hoc, nihil demonst^a^ur. Glos. ad Gr^t. de conscr. d. 2. c. Timorem and alii
nonnulli apud Durand. ration. divine. l 4. part. 2. in 6. part. Canon.
Hoc or this there signifies nothing at all:) or what that substance was (as
he speaks) that Christ held in his hands when he spoke the word, Hoc, or
this. If it were Christ's body made before of bread, then the uttering of those
words did not then, nor does now work any conversion of the bread into
Christ's body: for nothing can be turned into it self, or into that that
already it is: or Si substantia panis fuisset adhuc, quando Christus offerebat
Apostolis cibum illum coelestem, pronomen, Hoc, demonstra^^e^ panem, and de
pane dixis^et, quod esset corpus suum, etc. quod 'est impossible. Christ. de
Cap. Font. de necess. correct. schol. Theol. ad Sixth. 5. Pp. l. 1. c. 2.
if it were bread still, (as for ought ap peareth in the text, still it was)
then must this needs be the sum and sense of Christ's words, This bread is
my body: and so by his own rule, when disparatum de disparato dicitur, one
thing is said to be another different in nature from it, it must needs be taken
figuratively.

6. Well wotting that there was no such thing either in the Text, or gatherable
(to use his own terms) out of it: he would feign find out some Author,
that would say that for him, that the text it self will not; and alleagdeth
therefore some few Testimonies. Concerning which I might well say, as he
says, if I would do as he does, that they have been answered long since by
the L. Morney, the B. Morton, D. Fulke, and others, and he does not deal
sincerely in concealing their Answers; and so turn my Reader over to them, as
his manner is, when he has nothing to answer. But I answer to them severally.

1. Ambrose is alleged out of his books de Mysterijs, etc. and de
Sacramentis: which books, howsoever Vide Rob. Coqui Censura^ Patrum. edit. 2.
for diverse passages of them, and phrases used in them, they may well be
doubted of whether they were written by him or no; and Posseuine himself
implies that some have denied it, when he says, that Cum reliquis paene
omnibus Posseuin. apparat.
all almost hold them to be his: and part of them (as we shall see anon) goes
commonly under another name: yet not to stand thereupon, but admit them for
his. Nothing there said does necessarily enforce any such Transubstantiation as
the Romanists hold; yea some subsequent words, if they had been annexed,
would evidently speak against it.

For first, Ambrose there expressly teaches, that the creatures of bread and
wine still abide even after Consecration, which utterly overthrows the Popish
Transubstantiation. If (says he) there were so much force in the word of the
Lord, (in the work of Creation) that those things began by it to be that
before were not; how much more operative is it to cause Vt sint quae erant, and
in aliud commutentur. Ambr. de sacram. l. 4. c. 4. citatus etiam a Lumbard.
sentent. l. 4. d. 20. D. and Tho. Aqui. sum. p. 3. q. 7 8. a. 4.
that things should be still what they were before, and be changed into another
things. So that by this Ambroses confession the elements remain still what
they were, and yet are changed indeed, which we deny not, into that which they
were not; as wax is turned into a seal, being annexed to a deed; though it
remain still for substance what erst it was.

2. That which Ambrose says in the latter place, that De sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
This bread is bread before the words sacramental; but when consecration
comes to it, it is of bread made Christ's flesh; that he speaks in these
words De myster. c. 9.
in the former place, which this mangler of him omitteth; Ante benedictionem
alia species nominatur; post consecratione^ corpus Christi significatur.
Before the blessing of the heavenly words is another kind named, but after
Consecrationis Christ's body signified. And again De sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
in the latter place: Wine and water is put into the Cup, but by Consecration
it becomes blood. Thou will say, Speciem sanguinis non video; sed habet
similitudinem
I see no kind or show of blood. But it has (says he) a similitude of it.
For as thou have taken a similitude of death in (Baptism, he means as lib.
3. cap. 7. so) Similinudinem pretiosi sanguinis bibis.
thou drinkest a similitude of Christ's precious blood, etc. And thereupon he
concludes, Didicisti ergo, quia quod accipis, corpus est Christi.
Thou have learned now, that that which thou receiuest is Christ's body. So that
it is in regard of signification and similitude that the one is said to be
Christ's flesh, and the other his blood, as this Ambrose explicateth himself.

3. Expounding what manner of change he means, when he says, They are
changed into that which erst they were not. De sacram. l. 4. c. 4. Tu ipse ante
fuisti; sed era^ vetus creatura: Posteaquam consecratus es, noua creatura esse
cepisti.
Thou thy self (says he) wast before; but thou wast an old creature: after
thou wast consecrated, thou begannest to be a new creature; which newness yet
(as Tertullian well observes) imports Tam vetustatem hominis quam nouitatem
ad moralem non substantialem differentiam pertinere defend^mus. Tertul. de
resurr. carn.
no corporal, but a spiritual change in the party so consecrated, not in
substance, but in quality differing from what he was before.

4. In the next De sacram. l. 4. c. 5.
Chapter, relating the words of their Church Liturgy then in use, he calls
that holy oblation, Quod est figura corporis and sanguinis. D. n. l. c. y Ibid.
c. 5.
a figure of Christ's body and blood: which they entreat God to accept of,
Sicut suscipere dignatus es munera Abel, and sacrificiu^ Abrahae.
as he did Abels gifts, and Abraham's sacrifice, etc. which cannot be
understood of the very real sacrifice of Christ himself, unless they will
make the Priest an intercessor to God the Father in the behalf of Christ
Jesus. Of which also more hereafter.

2. Out of Augustine are cited two Testimonies. In the former whereof he
shows, how judicious he is in the choice of his allegations, (that for which
he taxes the Divine he deals with) and how well seen in and acquainted with
the Authors he alleges. There are diverse Sermons set out under Augustines
name, (for this is no new thing with them to forge daily as well new works, as
new writers) which they cite many of them, sometime under the name of
Augustine, sometime under the name of this or that other Father: for they can
find Fathers for their bastards as they list themselves. Of these many by
Bellar. de scrip. Eccles.
Bellarmine, Baron annal. tom. 4.
Baronius, Eras. in censur
Erasmus, Louaniens. in censur. append tom. 10.
the Divines of Louaine, and diverse others are confessed to be mere
counterfeits. One whereof is the Sermon de Verb. Dom. 28. which this worthy
Writer here cites; and indeed is nothing else but a whole Chapter verbatim
taken out of the fifth book of that work de Sacramentis, which he cited last
before as Ambroses. So that he does herein as Captains, that wanting of their
full number borrow one of an other, and so produce the same party by one name
to day as one man's soldier, and by an other name the next day, as an other
man's soldier, a gun-man (it may be) to day, and a pike-man to morrow. For this
Author was but even now Ambrose; and now he is suddenly become Augustine; as
if some such spel had been said over him, as they suppose to be said over
their Host. And thus (as their common guise is) they make their coined
creatures, like plaiers on a stage, sometime to act one part, and sometime
another. And this may well give just cause to suspect the authority of the
Author, when sometime he is Ambrose, and sometime Augustine, and it may well be
neither. For he is hardly ever believed that is taken once in two tales. And
this Erasmus his annotation would have given him some hint of, had he been so
well acquainted with the Authors he cites as he would seem to be. Besides
that this Ambrose, or Augustine, or what ever he be, when he is cited to give
in evidence, says nothing but this, that that which before Christ's words is
called bread, is after them called no more bread, but Christ's body. Which
unless it be meant, that it is not called only bread, but Christ's body also,
Deuteronomy. 5. 3. Ier. 3. 22, 23. Hos. 6. 6. Non enim Dominus respuit sacrificia; sed
non vult illa, si ab^que miserico^dia sint. Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 7.
which manner of speaking is not unusual) he will not deny himself to be most
manifestly vnture: for he acknowledges a little after that even after
consecration the Apostle diverse times so terms it. And if it be so
understood, what makes it either against us, who acknowledge (with the
Ancients,) that it is commonly called, as all other signs ordinarily, by the
name of the thing it signifies; or for them, who should prove, not that it is
commonly called Christ's body, but that it is really and essentially it. It is
no more then as if one had said; Wax before it is set to a deed and
imprinted, is called wax: but after that, it is not called wax, but a Seal.
Mean while it may hence appear, that either this Writer (what ever he be) is
scarce well acquainted with the writings of those Fathers that he cites, or
else he is wretchedly bent to abuse and delude those that he deals with.

The latter Authority is taken out of Augustines first Sermon on Psalm. 33.
wherein he says, that Christ was carried in his own hands, when he said, This
is my body. And here again this great Doctor shows either his little
acquaintance with Augustine, or his fraudulent dealing with those whom he
desires to delude. For Augustine repeating again in the very next Sermon what
he had delivered in the former, puts in those words, which show what his
meaning was: When he commended (says he) unto them his body and blood, he
took into his hands, what the faithful know: (that was nothing, they
themselves will grant, but Math. 26. 26.
bread, when he took it.) And Ipse se portabat quod^m modo. Aug. ibid. conc. 2.
he carried himself after a manner, when he said, This is my body. And if you
will know what that, after a manner, means, Augustine himself will best tell
you, where he says elsewhere; Sacramenta plae^unque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina
accipiunt, etc. Ergo secundu^ quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi;
corpus Christi est. Aug. epist. 23.
The Sacrament of Christ's body is after a manner Christ's body: because
Sacraments for the most part be are the names of those things whereof they are
Sacraments. After a manner then it is the body of Christ. And yet is it bread
still. For so Augustine again Aug. de ver. Dom. Sermon. 3^.
elsewhere; Panem que^ Dominus gestauit in manibus.
It was Bread that Christ carried in his hands at his last Supper: Ipsam coenam
fide quotidie manducamus: credimus in Christum quem fide accipimus. Modicu^
accipimus, and in cord saginamur.
Which Supper we to this day eat daily by Faith; and in it by faith receive
Christ, in whom we believe; and taking a little modicum, are spiritually fatted.

His third Author is S. Cyril, that should be Bishop of Jerusalem a little
after the time of Constantine the Great: An Author not without good cause
shrewdly suspected. Under his name our Popish Father-forgers have set out
diverse things: Among others an Epistle of his that should be written to S.
Augustine of S. Ieromes decease, and of the miracles that he wrought. Which
Epistle is so gross and ridiculous, writing of the death of one that many a
long year out-liued him that should write it, that albeit many of them are not
ashamed to Lensorus de purgator. Eckius hom. 2. Dominic. 3. Aduent. Peers. de
tradit. and alii.
cite it as Cyrils for the maintenance of sundry Popish points, yet others of
them are enforced Bellarm. censur. apud Posseui^.
to confess the work countorfeit, and stick not to brand the Baron annal.
tom. 5. ann. 420. and in Martyrolog. Romans Sept. 30.
Author of it for an heretical impostor, and a loud lier. And of late they
have set out under the name of the same Cyrill Posseuin. in appar. tom. 2. in
August.
two books of Catechizing; which besides sundry passages in them that argue a
late writer, as Catech. 4. and 10. and 13.
where he speaks of the Invention of the Cross as L^^^um crucis testatur
apud nos apparens, vsque ad hodiernum diem, and apud illos, qui secundum fidem
ex ilio capie^tes, hinc uniuersum orbem fere iam replerunt. Catech. 10.
a matter long before his time, and says that the whole world was then filled
with the pieces of it, whereas Baron. annal. tom. 3. an. 326.
the true Cyril was living at the very time when the Cross is reported to have
been found by Helen; the same Catech^sings are Ios. Simler. in Biblioth. and
Gretz. contra. Petr. Molin.
reported to be found in some written copies under the name one John Bishop of
Jerusalem, of which name there was Magdeburgen^. Centur. 8. cap. 10.
one about the 2. Nicene Council, some hundreds of years after that Cyrils
decease. So that they may as well cite that second Council of Nice for the
adoration of Images, as this counterfeit Cyril for their Transubstantiation,
unless they can bring sounder proof for him, and better inform us what he
is, and whence he came. The authority of this Catechiser is no better then the
authority of that Epistler for ought can be showed; which yet Vernier. in
magn. and universe. council.
in this very Argument is also produced, and Vide Eckium vbi sup.
is enforced upon us as an indubitate and authentical Author. Such bastard
pearls, Bristow diamonds, and glass bugles are these poor pedlars, like pety
chapmen feign to stuff their packets with, for want of better and choiser
wares. And yet may we but have leave to expound this Cyril, or whosoever he is
else, by himself, we shall soon show him to say no more then we willingly
admit. For in Catech. mystag. 4.
the same Catechizing that is here alleged, (...).
Do not regard (says he) these things, as bare ^read and wine. And in Catech.
mystag. 3.
the Catechizing next before; (...)
Do not suppose that ointment to be bare ointment. For as the Bread of the
Eucharist, after the invocation of the holy Ghost, is (...).
no longer bare bread, but Christ's body: so this holy Ointment after
invocation is (...).
no more bare or common ointment, but a gift of Christ and the holy Ghost, by
the presence of his Deity. And look what he says concerning the not trusting
of our senses in the matter of the Eucharist, the same does Author de initiat.
mist. c. (...).
the Ambrose before cited say of the Sacrament of Baptism. Quid vidisti?
Aqu^s. Sed non solas, etc.
What see thou? says he. Water: but not water alone, etc. First, the Apostle
teaches thee to contemplate not the things that are seen but the things that
are not seen. Believe the presence of the Deity. For how could it work
there, if it were not present. And again afterward; Non solis corporis tui
credas oculis: magis videtur quod non videtur.
Believe not thy bodily eyes alone: that is better seen that is not seen. And
say not we as much? that it is not bare bread, nor bare wine that is offered us
in the Eucharist, (whatsoever this lying wretch hereafter shamelesly auoweth,
as when we come to it shall be showed) which is all that our outward sense is
able to inform; but spiritual signs and seals, and effectual instruments
of grace, which the eye of our soul is alone able to conceive, and our faith
to assure us of.

4. Chrysostom is alleged; but little to the purpose. The former allegation
is here cited out of Sermon 60. ad Popul. Antioch. which Sermon this Answerer,
had he been so well acquainted with the Author he cites, as would beseem
such a Doctor as he professes himself to be, he should have found to be an
Homily never made by Chrysostom, but by some other composed of part of two
Sermons of his, on the Gloss of S. Matthew pieced together, to wit, the 83.
and the 51. according to the Latin, or the 82. and 50. according to the Greek.
The place produced is out of the 83. on Matthew: for that is the proper place
of it. In which Sermon Chrysostom speaks no more of the Eucharist, then he
does of the Sacrament of Baptism, in the very next words. Chrysostom. in Math.
Lat. Sermon. 83. Greg. Sermon. 8^.
It is no sensible thing (says he) that Christ has left us, but in things
indeed sensible matters all intelligible. (...).
In like manner it is in Baptism. By a sensible thing, to wit, water is the
gift given, but the thing that is there wrought, to wit, regeneration and
renovation, is a thing intelligible. If thou were not corporal, he would have
given thee the gifts themselves naked and spiritual: but because thy soul is
conjoined with thy body, thereforeby sensible things he gives thee things
intelligible. And in Chrysostom. in Math. Lat. Sermon. 51. Grae. Sermon. 50.
the other Sermon out of which that Homily is pieced: Believe thou that the
same supper wherein Christ himself sat down, is now celebrated. For there is
no difference between this and that. For (...) etc.
it is not a man that does the one, and Christ the other. But it is Christ
himself that does both the one and the other. When therefore thou see the
Priest reaching somewhat to thee: (...).
do not imagine that it is the Priest that does it, but that it is Christ's hand
that is stretched out to thee. For as when thou art baptized, (...), etc.
he does not baptize thee; but it is God that holds thy head by his
invisible power; and neither Angel nor Archangel, nor any other dare approach
and touch: So is it now also. Now what is here spoken but of Mysteries or
Sacraments in general, applied after in particular, as well to Baptism as to
the Eucharist? and therefore may as well prove a real or essential
transmutation in the one as in the other: and if not in both, in neither, since
the very same things are spoken of either: to wit, that we must in either
regard not so much what our bodily eye sees, as what the spiritual eye of the
believing soul by faith apprehends, and upon ground of Gods word believes:
and that by things sensible are things intelligible conueighed to us, and
effected in us as well in the one as in the other.

The 2. place of Chrysostom is out of his 3. book de Sacerdotio. Wherein this
alleadger of him fares as ill as in the former allegation. Chrysostom. says
indeed that Christ that sits above with his Father in heaven, is (...).
at that time (to wit, when the Eucharist is celebrated) held in the hands of
each one, and offreth himself to those, that will claspe him about and embrace
him. But not to insist upon what was above said by him, that Christ himself
and not Man both there and in Baptism administreth; nor upon other phrases in
the same place used by him, both before of the same Eucharist, that (...).
the people are all died purplered in it with Christ's blood; and afterward of
Baptism, that in it (...).
we are buried together with Christ: Which cannot be understood but
figuratively: he shows in the very next words to those here cited, what his
meaning was in them, and how all this is done, when he says; (...).
And this they do all then with the eyes of faith.

The third place is not, as he seems to cite it, out of the same book, but
out of his 2. Sermon ad populum Antiochenum. He found them joined together in
Bellarmine, out of whom he has all, and therefore took them (it seems) to
be both out of one book. Chrysostom there says that Christ has left us his
flesh, and yet has it still in Heaven. But how that may be verified, he
himself shows in the same place a little before, when he says, that Erat
posthae duplex Elias ille: Et erat sursum Elias, and deorsum Elias.
there was a twofold Elias, (whom he compares Christ withal,) when Elias was
translated, an Elias above, and an Elias beneath; he means Elisaeus, on whom
2. King. 2. 5
rested the spirit of Elias, whom he therefore esteems a symbolicall Elias;
as John the Baptist is called Mal. 4. 5.
Elias, because he came Luke 1. 15.
in the power and the spirit of Elias, and so was also Elias, as Math. 11. 14
our Savior auerreth (and Aug. in Joan. tract. 4.
Augustine well observes) though Ioh. 1. 21.
not essentially Elias, yet Math. 17. 12, 13.
Elias symbolically. And so here in like manner. Christ's essential flesh is in
heaven, whither they must also, says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. homil.
24.
ascend, and fly up like Eagles, that will have it: his symbolicall Flesh is
here upon earth, as the Symbolicall Elias was, in the Sacrament of his body;
which (says Augustine) Secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi
corpus Christi est. Aug. ep. 23.
in some sort is his body, being a Sign and Sacrament of it.

And thus you see what substantial proofs this great Blusterer has brought
to prove their Transubstantiation: and how well he has acquit himself for a
man well read in the ancient Fathers, as hereafter he boasts himself to be.

Division 3.
THis is the true Doctrine of the ancient Fathers: and N. P.
so plainly and unanswerably do they teach the literal understanding of our
Saviors words, and the miraculous conversion of the bread and wine of the
Altar by the omnipotent force of them into the body and blood of Christ;
telling us that we must not believe our sense or reason telling us the
contrary; nor conceive it so impossible, as our carnal and gross Adversaries
pretend, for the body of our Savior to be in heaven, and in numberless
places of the earth together i^sibly existing. Whose plain testimonies are in
a whole Book together by learned Lib 2. de Euchar.
Bellarmine truly and particularly collected: where also he refuteth the
shifting answers of Protestanticall Divines unto them; soluing all Objections
gathered out of their obscurer sayings against Catholic doctrine. Who is by
this Minister ignorantly or maliciously traduced, and made directly against the
whole drift of his Controversy to teach a probability at least of Protestant
Doctrine about the figurative and tropicall sense of our Saviors words, This
is my Body; because disputing against Luther; supposing as well as he the
literal sense of our Saviors words, argumento ad hominem, by an Argument
drawn from Luthers own grounds, he drives Luther either to confess
Transubstantiation necessarily purported in our Saviors words, This is my
Body; or for to admit barely (against the known opinion of himself and all
his disciples) a figurative and metaphorical understanding of them. For if
Christ's words be literally to be understood, and bread also admitted to remain
in the Sacrament, the Pronoune, Hoc, This, would naturally and necessarily
demonstrate it, and not the body of Christ inuisibly therein present, and so
bread in our Saviors speech should falsely be affirmed to be Christ's body:
Whereas if bread remain not, but be truly converted into Christ's body, no
such absurd and impossible sense follows out of the literal understanding of
Christ's words. Why then does this Minister falsely make Bellarmine in this
place seem to affirm that there is nothing in the holy Text, that may enforce
us to believe that Christ is corporally present in the Sacrament, or (which is
all one) that may enforce us literally and not figuratively to understand
Christ's words, etc. Ignorance and mistaking must be my adversaries best means
to salve this falsehood and many others which do ensue afterward.

IN the next place having digressed all this while from T. G.
the Argument he should have answered, he adds that that which they teach
concerning the literal sense of Christ's words and the miraculous conversion of
the bread and wine into the very body and blood of Christ, is the true doctrine
of the ancient Fathers: and to save himself the labor of proouing that which
neither he, nor any of his side shall ever be able to make good, he turns his
Reader over to Bellarmine, out of whom he picked all that before he had said,
and tells him that he has both proved it, and refuted all the shifting
answers of the Protestanticall Divines. Bellarmine (it seems) is his Ajax,
behind whose shield he must shroud himself, or else he dare abide no brunt
of encounter again.

Now to make Bellarmine again some part of requital, because he is so much
beholden to him, he will do his best to clear him from either the ignorant or
malicious abuse of this bad Minister, by whom he is traduced and made directly
against the whole drift of his Controversy to teach, a probability at least
of the Protestant doctrine concerning the figurative sense of our Saviors
words, and to affirm, etc. It is true; I say that Bellarmine grants, and so
Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 10.
he does, (I have set down his own words; they are not, nor can be denied)
that these words, This is my body, may imply either such a real change as the
Catholics hold, or such a figurative change, as the Caluinists hold: and that
is all I say of him. The truth contrary to the maine drift and scope of his
controversy, (as it falls out often with those that against their own
knowledge maintain error) did start from him unawares. Nor is the question
now de re, but de propositione, as Bellarmine there speaks: the question is
not of the maine matter in controversy whether Christ did really convert the
Bread into his Body; which Bellarmine affirms; but whether that speech of our
Savior may not bear such a figurative sense as we give, which Bellarmine in
plain and precise terms grants. And all that this his Champion can say for
him is nothing but this, that Bellarmine does not say that which in express
words I have cited out of him, without alteration of any one syllable; and the
falsehood therefore lies manifestly on him that denies it, when he knows
them to be Bellarmines own words in precise terms. But he hops (it
seems) that with facing he may carry away any thing.

I will add a little more out of Bellarmine, and yet no more then himself in
precise terms says. Scotus in sent. l 4. did. 11. quaest. 3.
Scotus and Cameracens. ibid.
Cameracensis, two great Schoolmen, grant that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation cannot necessarily be gathered out of the text of the
Evangelists; howsoever they hold it, because the Church of Rome, that cannot
err, has so expounded it. And Bellarmine himself Bellar. de Euchar. l. 3. c.
23.
grants that Non est omnino improbabile.
this is not improbable: For Etiamsi Scriptura, qua^ nos adduximus, videatur
tam clar^, vt possit cogere hominem non prote^uum, tamen an ita si^ merito
dubitar^ potest, cu^ homines doctissin^i, ac acutissimi, etc. contrar. sentiant.
though the Scripture (says he) that we bring, may seem so clear, that it
may constrain a man that is not wilful to yield it, yet it may well be
doubted, whether it be so or no; since most learned men, and most acute, such
especially as Scotus was, are of a contrary mind. And now we have besides
Scotus and others, three Cardidinals, Card. Bellarmine, Card. Caietan, and
Card. Cameracensis, all confessing that the Popish doctrine of
Transubstantiation cannot clearly or unanswerably be proved by Scripture. I
conclude then with mine Adversaries grant; It is all one (says he) to say that
there is nothing in the text that may enforce us to believe that Christ is
corporally present in the Sacrament, and to say that there is nothing to
enforce us literally and not figuratively to understand Christ's words. Card.
Caietan freely confesses the latter: and unless he can disprooue Caietan
(which as yet he has not assaied to do) he must by his own confession yield
the former.

Division 4.
PAge 3. He makes a great stir in asking, how the Chalice N. P.
may be called the new Testament in our Saviors blood. I answer him, because
our Saviors blood by the effusion whereof his last W^ll and Testament was
confirmed and our eternal inheritance purchased and applied unto us, is in
this Chalice really contained and vnbloodily offered on the altar for us. For
the word Testament (as all learned men know) is apt to import not only the
interior act of the dying man's Will, but also the authentical instrument or
deed, wherein that his dying Will is contained, and his legacy conueighed unto
us, which here in the Chalice is our Saviors blood to cleanse and inebriate
de^^^t souls.

Afterward in the same page confusedly and tediously he endeavors to show
the bread and wine to be no other then bare signs and types of Christ's true
body and blood; as Alexanders picture represents his absent person; as
Circumcision is called the Covenant, because it was a sign thereof, etc.
either not vnderstatding like a dull Scholar his Master Caluines doctrine, or
over sawcily willing to contradict him; who toward the end of his book de
Coena Domini expressly denies bread and wine to be empty signs of our
Saviors body and blood, but such signs as have the signified substances of
our Saviors body and blood conjoined with them. For In cap. 11. ad Cor. 1.
Christ (says he) is no deceiuer to delude us with bare figures, etc.
According to which doctrine of Calvin it will be easy for my Adversary
himself to salve many of his own objections: that for example, which he
makes out of Tertullian, page 3. saying, The bread which Christ took and
distributed to his Disciples he made his body, saying, This is my body, that
is, a figure of my body. For as Caluines former words import, so also
Tertullian means, the sacramental symbols not to be naked signs of Christ's
absent body and blood (as the Minister would have them) but such signs as have
the signified substance conjoined unto them; as smoke is the sign of fire;
warm blood of life; the fiery tongues over the Apostles, in that day of
Pentecost, and the Dove over our Savior in his Baptism, were signs of the
holy Ghost present, etc. Which manner of being signs of Christ's body and blood
does not exclude but suppose the Accidents of bread and wine to contain the
true substances of our Saviors body and blood in them. So is Saint Augustine
to be understood, where he says, Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body,
when he delivered the sign of his body. And when out of Gratian my Adversary
cites those words, The heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ, etc. is
a Sacrament of Christ's body visible, palpable, mortal, and pierced on the
Cross, etc. So when Theodoret and Gelasius affirm the substance and nature of
bread and wine still to remain in the Sacrament; they mean not physical
substances and nature of bread and wine still to remain after the
consecration, but only the accidents to remain unaltered in their nature,
signifying and containing our Saviors body and blood under them. And if he
had cited the place of Theodoret fully out, he had utterly overthrown his
heretical and fraudulent purposes of citing him. His words are these: Neither
do the sacramental signs after consecration depart from their nature; for
they remain (note how he speaks of the signs not of the substances of
bread and wine remaining) in their former substance figure and form to be
seen and touched as before: but they are by our understanding conceived to be
as they are made; and they are believed and adored according to our faith of
them. So judicious and learned is mine Adversary here and in other places, in
the choice of his Arguments and Authorities alleged against us. But howsoever
he fails in that, he will be sure to help out the matter by maiming and
corruptly citing such testimonies. I have just cause to suspect his like
dealing in citing Gratians Gloss on S. Augustines words in the precedent
page, and Caietans words cited by him page 2. But I have not these Authors now
by me to examine the places in themselves. And they are of so small esteem
with us, especially Caietan in his dangerous and inconvenient manner of
expounding Scripture with more subtilty many times then truth, as I cannot but
wonder to see the Minister so to magnify him, as if he were the Oracle of our
Church, and his ipse dixit and bare assertion so certain a proof as it could
not be denied by us.

IN the next place therefore, skipping over this Confession T. G.
of Caietan, that there is nothing in the Gospel that may enforce us to take
those words of our Savior properly, This is my body: but that they may for
ought that is in the Text be taken figuratively as well as those words, The
Rock was Christ.

As also leaping quite over the Answer given to that Objection that we are
bound to believe our Savior, when he says, This my body: as if we could not
believe those words of his, unless we believe Transubstantiation: whereas
their own writers grant that the words of our Savior may be true, though no
such thing be: He picketh out here and there some by-matter to be nibling
upon, that he may seem to say somewhat, though he keep aloof off from the
maine matter.

And first, because he thought he had found out a pretty quirk and a strange
crotchet, which he was desirous to vent: He says I make a great stir in
asking, how the Chalice may be called the New Testament in Christ's blood. I
half suspect that some body has sometime pus^ed him with this Question; and
he is willing therefore here to explicate it for the saluing of his own credit,
the rather having lighted upon a new device, that he thinks will easily help
out. For I move no such Question, much less make such ado about asking it,
but say only, We must believe our Savior as well, when he says, This Cup is
the new Testament, or This Cup is my blood; as we must believe him when he
says, This is my body: and that either may be true, though there be no such
real conversion either of the Cup into the new Testament, or Christ's blood in
the one, or of the Bread into his body in the other. And his part had been (if
he meant to keep to the point) to show why the one may not be true in a
figurative sense as well as the other.

But let us hear how learnedly (though it be beside the matter) he
explicateth our Saviors words, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood.
Thus forsooth; My blood in this Chalice really contained and vnbloodily offered
on the altar is that by the effusion whereof my last Will and Testament is
confirmed, and the eternal inheritance purchased and applied unto us: and it
is therefore called the New Testament in my blood. Did any man in his right
wits (think we) ever expound Scripture on this manner? Yea but he has a
singular piece of Schollership by himself to justify his Exposition. For all
learned men (says he) know that the word Testament is apt to import, not the
dying man's Will only, but the deed wherein it is contained, and the legacy
conueighed by it; which here in the Chalice is our Saviors blood, to cleanse
and inebriate devout souls, etc. If he had been himself inebriated when he
writ this, he could not lightly have been more absurd. For,

1. By this exposition of his, our Savior should say, This Cup, that is, this
blood contained in the Chalice, is the New Testament in my blood. And so Not
unlike Hugo Card. on Luke (...). Hic est calix in sanguine m^o, i. sanguis meus
in calice.
Christ's blood shall be not in the Chalice only, but in his blood; would any
reasonable man say, My body is in my body; or, My blood is in my blood? But
they care not what absurd language they fasten upon our Savior, so it may make
for their own turn.

2. There is the blood of Christ really contained in the Chalice, and yet this
blood is vnbloodily offered. It is vnbloodily offered, and yet it is really
blood; yea there is nothing there but blood. True it is the ancient Fathers often
term the Eucharist (...). Eusebius. demonstr. l. (...). c. 6. Chrysostom. nomine
in Psalm. 95. and alii.
an unbloody sacrifice; which shows their speeches, where they say, that
Chrysostom. vt supr.
the Altar and the people are besprinckled and dyed purplered with blood, were
metaphorical and hyperbolicall: and well might they so call it, not dreaming
of any such bloody stuff in the Chalice, as these men seem to imagine. But
how there can be an unbloody offering, where there is much more blood then
flesh; and Christ offered vnbloodily, where men drink nothing but mere blood;
yea if Chrysostomes speeches were to be taken properly, where all the
Communicants are dyed red with blood, let any reasonable man judge.

3. All learned men (he says) of which number I hope he counts himself one)
know that a Testament is apt to import, not a will only, or a deed, but a
legacy too. Vsus loquendi Magister: Use is the Lord and Master of language.
Loquendu^ cum multis: sentiendum cum paucis.
We should think (they say) as the best, speak as the most; and Vtendum plane
sermon, vt nu^mo, cuius publica forma est. Quintil. institut. ^. 1. c. 10.
use, as such coin, so such speech, as is commonly current. We ignorant and
unlearned Protestanticall Ministers are unacquainted with this learning. But I
would request him, if he can here, as well for the saving and saluing of of
his own credit, as for our better instruction, to produce any one learned man
besides himself and For from Bellarmine also (it seems) he has this: who to
those two significations of a Testament de Euchar. l. 1. c. 11. which all
acknowledge: adds this third, pro bonis a testatore legatis. de Euchar. l. 4.
c. 19.
his associates, that ever so said, or ever so spoke, that ever called a legacy
by the name of a Testament. Such learned men (I see) as he is, may say what
they list; we unlearned must speak by rule, when we speak, least such learned
men as he is control us if we do otherwise, for ignorant.

4. Mark (I beseech you) this learned man's Logic, how soundly and
substantially he argues. This word Testament may well signify either a Will
or a Legacy: ergo Christ's blood wherewith his last Will was confirmed, may
well be termed the New Testament. What connection there is between these two
Propositions, the one produced by him to prove the other, let any one, that is
not utterly senseless, consider.

5. Let it be observed, how these men that cannot endure at our hands to hear
of any figure in the words of our Savior, though one never so frequent, in
signs and Sacraments especially, which both they grant these things to be; yet
themselves in the explicating of them are enforced to fly to figures, yea take
liberty to themselves to coin and forge such figures, as were never heard of
before, either in holy writ, or in profane writer. For let him if he can, show
a legacy so termed in either.

Lastly, Christ's blood indeed may in some sense be said to inebriate men's
souls, and the Ex Psalm. 23. 5. Hieron. ad Hedyb. q. 2. Ruffin. in Psalm. 22.
Ambr. in Psalm. 1 ^8. sermon. 21. and alii.
Ancients sometime so speak. But that which is in the Chalice, if it be taken
(which the Priest sometime may chance to do) ouerlargely, will (as Aquin sum.
part. 3 quaest. 77. art. 6.
Aquinas well observes) inebriate the body and not the soul: which I never
yet heard that Albeit the whore of Babylon be said to be drunk with blood.
Apoc. 17. 6.
blood did, or could do. And therefore we have cause to think, if we see the
Priest drunk with it, yea we have reason to believe, because we know he well
may, that it is not Christ's blood, but Mat. 26. 19.
the fruit of the Genesis 49. 11. (...). Sirac. 50. 16. 1 Mac 6. 34. (...).
Eustath. ad Iliad. (...). Clem. ^ex. paed. l. 1. c. 6. Vinum sanguinem terrae
dixit Androcydes apud Plin. hist. not. l. 14. c. 5. (...). H^liod. apud
Fulgent. mythol. l. (...). c. (...). ^um vuaru^ sanguis, cruentus liquor,
purpura potabilis, violeum nectar. Cassod. v^r. l. 12.
vine, the blood of the grape, that is in the Chalice, and produces such
effects.

2. In the next place, like a man in a maze going backward and forward, as
uncertain which way to turn himself, Afterward (says he, relating, but
misrelating, as his usual manner is, some things spoken before) confusedly and
tediously he endeavors to show the bread and wine to be no other then bare
signs and types of Christ's body and blood, as Alexanders picture represents
his absent person, as Circumcision is called the Covenant, because it was a
sign thereof, etc.

True it is, I say these words of our Savior, This is my body, may as well be
understood figuratively, as those speeches are where the Rock is called
Christ, and when pointing to the pictures of Caesar and Alexander (it is the
comparison that Aug. ad simplic. lib. (...). quaest. 3.
Augustine uses) we say, This is Caesar, and That is Alexander. And in Answer
to the Objection before recited; I say, that the Cup, that is, the wine in the
Cup, is said to be the New Testament, as Circumcision the Covenant, because Hic
calix est nouum Testamentum, i calix quem vobis trado nouum Test. significat,
vt Fulgent. vel nouum Test, confirmat. Haimo in 1 Cor. 11.
a sign and seal of it. But that the bread and wine are no other then bare
signs and types, etc. I no where say: It is his untruth, not mine assertion. I
say expressly more then so, that they are not signs only, but seals, and
signs and seals so effectual, (as after I show) that by them the things
signified by them, and sealed up in them are truly and effectually, yet
spiritually, conueighed unto those that do faithfully receive them. He
deals herein but as Bellarmine (whom he imitateth) does with Calvin, one
while charging him to make the Sacramemt Nihil nisi symbolum reuocans ad
memoriam Christi Passionem. Bellar. de Euchar. l. 1. c. (...).
nothing but a symbol and memorial of Christ's passion, and so no better
(says he) nay nor so good as a Crucifixe, and yet elsewhere acknowledging
that he makes it not a sign only, but Sigillum obsignans and confirmans
promissionem verbo factam. Ibid. l. 1. c. 1.
a seal also confirming and sealing up Gods promises made in the Word.

But like a dull Scholar (he says) herein I understood not my Master Calvin.
Mat. 2^. 8.
Master in these matters we acknowledge none but Christ; whose Word alone is
absolutely authentical with us. Calvin we reverence as a worthy servant of
Christ. And as dull a Scholar as I am, I understand him well enough, where in
that book he calls Transubstantiation a device of the Devil; Eorum
consecratio ab incantationis specie nihil differt.
their Consecration a kind of Incantation; Transubstantiatio co^mentum Diaboli.
the Mass an Histrionicall action; and the Priest acting it a mere Ape. The
signs indeed, says he, in the Eucharist are not Nuda signa. f Non tamen
quasi pane inclusum, aut signo visibili ^ocanter affixum. etc.
naked signs, but such as have the truth of the thing conjoined d Mera fimiae
ae mulatio, and actio histrionica.
with them, (that which is true of Baptism, as well as of the Lords Supper.)
Yet not enclosed in them, nor carnally but spiritually partaked. Nor does God
delude us with bare figures, though there be no such real change of the
elements in the Eucharist, more then he does us now in Baptism, or did the
Israelites of old, when he fed them with 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
spiritual food and water in the Wilderness.

2. And here again, I cannot say cunningly, but knauishly rather, having
falsely related my words, and passing over mine Answer to this very Objection,
wherein they challenge us to make the Sacrament nothing but bare bread; which
by the instance of the other Sacrament of Baptism, besides other proofs, I
show evidently to be otherwise, (as if he thought that like an hare by i^mping
and wheeling to and fro, he should keep himself safe from being traced and
taken, when either he reported gross untruths, or dissembled those things that
it stood him upon to give answer unto, if he would either make good their
cause, or overthrow ours.) He runs back to an allegation of Tertullian, and
then forward again to Theodoret, etc. and (if his words may bear weight with
us) he would make us believe that this Doctrine of my Master Calvin, if like a
dull Scholar I had sooner understood him, would salve many of my Objections,
as namely, that of Tertullian; This is my Body, that is, a figure of my body;
and the like speech of Augustine; and what I cite out of Gratian to the like
purpose, etc.

Surely this man was of that opinion that (...). Polyq. hist. lib. 4.
Polybius says some are, who think other men cannot see them, if they wink
themselves. The Question is whether our Saviors words, This is my Body, may
not be, or are not to be figuratively understood; not whether the bread and
wine be bare Signs or no, which none say, but this shameless wretch contrary
to mine express words affirms me to affirm. This being the Question I
produce Tertullian, who precisely so expounds them, This is my Body, that is,
a figure of my body. I produce Augustine, who not only does the like; but
renders a reason also why he so does, to wit, because Signs and Sacraments
are called That which Rib^ra the Jesuit also observes in Apoc. 14. (...).
Pervulgatum est in Scriptura, vt figura nomen habeat rei figuratae.
vsuaelly by the names of those things that they signify and represent. I
produce the Gloss on Gratian, that says; It is called Christ's body
improperly, not in the truth of the thing itself, but in a significant
mystery: and that when it is said that it is called Christ's body, the meaning
of the words are, that it signifies Christ's body. All which produced to
prove that our Saviors words are to be understood figuratively, (which how
pregnantly they do prove, he cannot but see, that will not wilfully win^ke)
he can give no answer unto; but says only they may be so^d with that which
Calvin says that they are not bare signs; which neither is denied, nor is
any part of the Argument here in hand.

4. Thus having leapt a page back, he now iumpeth again as fa^re forward;
where he lights again upon Pope Gelasius (for so is his work styled in all
editions of him, and so by Fulgentius he is proved to be; howsoever they would
feign shift him of, because he is so expressly against their
Transubstantiation, as he is also against their mangling of the Sacrament, and
giving the bread without the Cup, which Gelas. Papa apud Great. de consecrat.
did. 2. c. Comperi^us. Sine grandi sacrilegio non potest prouenire
he condemns as gross Sacrilege) and with him upon Theodoret, that speaks
in effect the same with him.

Theodoret and Gelasius both auerre that the Elements in the Eucharist after
consecration retain still not the same shape and form only, but the same
Nature and Substance. Can any thing be more plain? or any testimony more
pregnant? Yet this nimble-headed Doctor wants not * And this also after
Morman apud Rid ^eium de Coe^. Dom. has Bellarmine de Euchar. l. 2. c. 27. And
it is as good that that he says elsewhere that the Accidents are as
Substances in the Sacrament. de Euchar. l. (...). c. 2.
aneuasion for it, such as it is. For (says he) Theodoret and Gelasius do not
mean thereby that the physical nature and substance, but the Accidents (that
is, the shape and outward ^o^me, etc.) only remain unaltered. They say that
they retain still the same both shape and substance too. And this shameless
fellow sticks not to tell us that they mean contrary; that they retain the
same shape, but not the same substance. It is Maledicta glossa, quae corrumpit
textum.
a cursed gloss (they say) that corrupts the Text. Yet such is the gloss
that this Sophis^er gives Gelasius and Theodoret, not corrupting only, but
directly crossing that that they say, and denying them to say that that in
precise terms they do. The Substance, say they: Not the Substance, says he.
The Substance, say they: that is, The Accidents, says he. Not unlike that
Gloss on Gratian, that expounds, We ordain, Statuimus. i. abrogamus. Gloss.
ad Great. did. 4. c. Statu^mus. Et Gloss. ad Cod. lib. 3. de Iudicus leg.
Quoties. Quo magis i. quo minus. Et Alciat. parerg. l. 7. c. 13. Imperare,
(...). parere, test Duareno disput. l. 1. c. 34.
that is, We ^brogate, or disannull. If this be not a most sorry and senseless
shift, I know not what is.

But yet will you see another as gross as the former? By Sacramental Signs
(says he) Theodoret means not the Substances of Bread and Wine; but the
Accidents only; for either those then, or else nothing at all.

1. Here is a new distinction between the Elements of Bread and Wine, and the
Sacramental signs in the Eucharist. And indeed if their doctrine be sound and
true, neither Bread, nor Wine, are ever, or ever were Signs of Christ's body
and blood in the Eucharist, though the Ancients commonly so term them. For
before Consecration they are not; and in Consecration they cease to be, as they
say: and after Consecration they cannot be, because they have now no being: and
so consequently they never are.

2. Here is a strange Interpretation, and a most abfurd assertion: The
Sacramental Signs, that is, the Accidents, retain still their Substance,
that is, their Accidents. This is like Christ's blood in his blood, that we had
a little before. These are abstruse riddles indeed: and it is no great
marvel, if dull pates and shallow brains cannot easily conceive them.

3. Will you see how gross and palpable this evasion is? Theodoret and
Gelasius (says Bellarmine, whom he learned some of this from) Idem prorsus
docent. Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 27.
teach the very self same thing. Now look what Theodoret calls the
mystical Signs, that Gelasius terms expressly Bread and Wine. By the
mystical Signs therefore in Theodoret is the Bread and Wine meant, not the
Accidents (as this corrupt and corrupting Glosser says) of either.

4. Yea but if Theodoret had been fully cited, all had utterly been
overthrown, and the Ministers heretical and fraudulent purpose of citing him
had been defeated.

If lying and out-facing would serve the turn, this man would be sure ever to
give his Adversary the overthrow. Hear you but Theodoret at large; and then
judge, if this man have not either Quomodo Canus Autorem Legendae (vt^
appellant) Aureae, ait hominem fuisse ferr^i oris and plumbei cordis. Loc. com.
l. 11. c. 6. Reg. (...). Sed and frontis aereae, vel aheneae, rectissime
addidisset.
a brazen brow, or a leaden brain, or both.

The work of Theodoret is a Dialogue, wherein he brings in disputing an
Orthodoxe Divine against an Heretic, that held that Post resurrectionem
amisit humanitas naturam suam; and accepit caro mutationem in naturam
diuinitatis.
after Christ's resurrection his Hemanitie lost it own nature, and his flesh
was turned into his Deity; in the same manner as these Transubstantiators now
say that the Bread in the Euchorist loses it own nature, and is really
changed into Christ's natural body. In debating of this Question they light
upon the Eucharist, and fall to dispute how the Bread is there said to be
Christ's body, and what change is wrought on it. The Heretic would have it
changed to fit his turn, as our Papists now hold. The Orthodoxe Divine says
it is no more turned into Christ's body, then Christ's body is now turned in
heaven into his Deity. But you shall have them both verbatim in their own
words.

Orthodox. Theodoret. Dialog. 2. qui and (...). You may if you will in steed of
Orthodoxe and Heretic put Protestant and Papist.
Tell me; the mystical Signs which are offered God by Gods Priests, what say
you are they Signs of?


Heretic. Of the Lords Body and Blood.


Orthodox. Of a body that is truly? or of one that is not truly?


Heretic. Of one that is truly.


Orthodox. Very well. For of the Image there must needs be some Original. For
Painters imitate nature; and draw Images of such things as are seen.


Heret. True.


Orthodox. (...), etc.
If then the divine mysteries represent that that is truly a body, then the
Lords body is a true body still, not changed into the Nature of the Deity, but
filled with Divine glory.


Heret. You have in good time made mention of the divine Mystery, for even
thereby will I show you that the Body of our Lord is turned into another
Nature. Answer you therefore my Question.


Orthodox. I will.


Heretic. What call you the gift that is offered before the Priests Invocation?


Orthodox. I may not tell openly, because it may be there be some here that
are not yet initiated.


Heretic. Answer then aenigmatically.


Orthodox. The food that is made of certain grain.


Heret. The other Sign, how call you it?


Orthodox. By that common name that signifies some kind of drink.


Heret. But after sanctification how do you call them?


Orthodox. The body of Christ, and the blood of Christ.


Heret. And do you believe that you are made partaeker of Christ's body and
blood?


Orthodox. I do believe so.


Heret. As then the Signs of the Lords body and blood are one thing before the
Priests prayer; but after it are changed and become another: So the Lords body
also after his Assumption is changed into a divine Substance.


Orthodox. You are taken now in a net of your own weauing. (...).
For the Mystical Signs do not after Sanctification depart from their own
Nature. For they remain still in their former Substance, and figure and form;
and may be seen and touched as before: But they are understood to be that
which they are made; and they are believed and adored (or Quomodo Tertull. adv.
Hermog. Adoro plenitudme^ Scripturarum. Et Aug. Ep. 164: Baptismum Christi
vbique veneramur.
reverenced) as being those things that they are believed to be. Compare then
the Image with the Original, and you shall see the Similitude. For it is meet
that the Figure be like to the Truth. For (...).
that Body has indeed its former form, and figure, and circumscription, and
to speak in a word, bodily Substance. But since the Resurrection it is become
immortal, and such as no corruption or destruction can befall; and it is
vouchsafed to sit at Gods right hand; and is worshipped of every creature, as
being called the Lords natural Body.


Heretic. Yea but the mystical Sign changes his former Name. For it is not
any more called as it was before, but it is called a Body. In like manner
therefore should the Truth be called God and not a Body.


Orthodox. Me thinks you are very ignorant. For it is not only called a Body,
but it is called, Ioh. 6. 35.
Bread of Life. So the Lord himself called it. And moreover the Body it self
we call a divine Body, and a quickening Body, and the Lords Body: and teach that
it is not the common Body of any man, but the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is God and Man. For Heb. 13. 8.
Jesus Christ is yesterday and to day the same, and for ever.

Will you hear more yet of Theodoret? In his first Dialogue; out of which I
cite also one or two Sentences, which this scambling Answerer has not list (it
seems) to take notice of; he brings in the same Parties thus discoursing
together.


Orthodox. Theodoret Dialog. 1. qui and (...).
Do you not know that the Lord called himself a Vine?


Heretic. I know that he said, Ioh. 15. 1.
I am the true Vine.


Orthodox. And how call you the juice of the fruit of the Vine?


Heretic. Wine.


Orthodox. When the soldiers opened Christ's side with a spear, what says the
Evangelist did then issue ont?


Heretic. Ioh. 19. 34.
Water and Blood.


Orthodox. The Patriarch Jacob then calls Christ's blood the blood of the
Grape. For if Christ be called a Vine, and the frnite of the Vine; and streams
of blood and water issuing out of Christ's side trickled down his whole Body;
he is fitly Genesis 49. 11. Hinc Tertull. contr. Marc. l. 4. Ita and ^unc
sanguinem suum in vino consecrauit, qui tunc vinum in sangine figurauit.
said by him to wash his coat in wine, and his raiment in the blood of the
Grape. For as we call the mystical fruit of the Vine after sanctification the
Lords blood; so does he call the blood of the true Vine, the blood of the
Grape.


Heretic. That which was propounded has both mystically and clearly been
shown.


Orthodox. Though the things said be sufficient; yet I will add another
proof.


Heretic. You shall do me a pleasure, because the more profit in so doing.


Orthodox. Do you not know that God called his body Bread?


Heretic. I know it.


Orthodox. And elsewhere again he called his Flesh wheat.


Heretic. I know that too. For, Ioh. 12. 24.
unless the wheat corn, says he, fall into the ground, etc.


Orthodox. Now in the delivery of the Sacraments (...).
he called Bread his Body; and that which is poured into and mixed in the Cup,
Blood.


Heretic. He did so call them.


Orthodox. Yea but (...).
that which by nature is his Body is also justly termed his Body; and in like
manner his Blood.


Heretic. It is acknowledged.


Orthodox. Our Savior indeed, (...).
he changed the Names, and imposed that Name on his Body that was the Name of
the Symbol and Sign of it: and on the Symbol or Sign he imposed that Name,
that is the Name of his Body. And so having named himself a Uine, he called
that that was a sign Blood.


Heretic. It is true that you say: But why did he thus change the Names?


Orthodox. Because his will was, that those that are partakers of those divine
Mysteries, should not attend the nature of the things that they see; but for
the change of the Names believe the change that by grace is wrought. For he
that y Ioh. 6. 32, 33, 35.
called that that by Nature is his Body, wheat and bread, and again, named
himself a Vine; (...).
he honored the Symboles and Signs that we see with the appellation of his
Body and Blood, not changing Nature, but to Nature adding Grace.


And at length, the Orthodoxe Divine thus concludes: (...).
It is clear that that holy Food is a Symbol and a Sign of Christ's body and
blood, the name whereof it bears. For our Lord when he had taken the Symbol
or Sign, said not, This is my Deity; But, Matthew. 26. 26, 28.
This is my Body; and again, This is my Blood: and else where, Ioh. 6. 51.
The bread that I will give, is my Flesh that I will give for the life of the
world.

You have heard Theodoret at large. It remains now to consider how he
overthrows that which I produce him for, to wit, that the bread and wine in
the Sacrament remain for substance still the same; and that the Bread is
called Christ's body figuratively; as his body is elsewhere called Bread; and
the wine his blood figuratively, as himself is termed a Vine: Or to consider
rather, if you please (because that any one at the first sight may see) how
fitly this man's explication of Theodoret agrees with Theodorets own words.

By Sacramental Signs (says he) Theodoret means not the Substance of Bread
and Wine.

1. He understands by the mystical Signs that that is offered to God by
Gods Priests. And does the Priest then offer nothing to God but accidents
only? Indeed they tell us that Genesis 14. 18. Quo loco tamen vulg. versio, non,
Obtulit, sed, Protulit. Et Card. Caietan. in Genesis Nihil scribitur hic de
sacrificio seu de oblatione, sed de prolatione, qua^ Josephus dicit factam ad
reficiendum victores.
Melchisedech offered bread and wine; and that their Priests are Vide Bellar. de
missa. l. (...). c. 24. and 25. and Rhemens. in Heb. 7. 12, 17.
Priests after the order of Melchisedech, and so Rhemens. ibid.
offer such offerings as he did. And the ancient Fathers, alluding to that
story by them allegorised, say, Offertur sub sacerdote Christo quod protulit
Melchisedech. Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 17. c. 17. i. panes and vinum: vt
Theodoret. in Psalm. 109. Vide and Clem. Strom. l. 4. Tertull. adv. Iudaeos.
Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 34. etc.
that Bread and Wine are offered to God in the Eucaarist. But in the Popish
Mass according to their opinion of it, no such thing can be offered, because no
such thing is there present.

2. More particularly explaining himself he says that by the one sign he
means the food that of certain grain is made, and by the other the fruit
of the Vine. And is there any such food or fruit at all that is no physical
substance, or that consists of Accidentia tamen mera nutrire corpora humana;
and Species tantumdem facere quantum alias substantias, asserunt Patres
Inquisitores in Indic. Belg. expurg. lit. B. Nec id mirum esse debet: cum
Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 2. non accidentium sed substantiae rationem velit
habere, vti sunt in Sacramento.
mere accidents? He deserves to be fed, till he starve, with such food, that
would feed or infect rather men's souls with such draffy stuff as this is.
Yea in precise terms he says, that Christ called Bread (not the accidents of
bread) his Body, as he called his Body elsewhere bread.

3. The very maine drift and scope evidently manifests his meaning; which is
to show that the Lords Body, though it be not a common body, but has glorious
endowments, yet remains a true body still; as the Sacramental bread though
it be not common bread, yet retains still it former nature and substance, and
is true bread still.

4. If we ask Theodoret himself what he means here by Substance; and
whether he take the word in such sense as it is usually taken; he tells us
himself a little before he enters into this discourse, that (...). Corpus
ergo substantia vocandu^: Accidentia, non substantias, nominate co^uenit, quae
corpori and accidunt and recedunt. Theodoret, dialog. 2.
by Substance he understands a body; and by Accidents (which he opposes to
Substance) such things as betide bodies and yet may depart from them. And they
may as well say, that by Substance Theodoret meant Accidents, when he says
that Christ's body retains still the same bodily substance; as they may say
he so means, when of the bread, which he compares therewith, he says the
very same. But what take I so much pains Super vacuis laborat impendiis qui
solemn certat facibus adiuuare. Anaclet, apud Great. c. 6. q. 1. In rebus vero
apertis argumentari tam sit stultum, quam in clarissimum Solemn mortale Iumen
infer. Quintil. institut. l. 5. c. 12.
to set up a light when the Sun shines? (the proof is so plain, and his
meaning so perspicuous, that it may seem Ipsius solis radio putes scriptum; ita
claret. Tertul. de resurr. car.
written, as Tertullian speaks, with a beam of the Sun) save to lay open a
little this man's shameless carriage and senseless shifts, who yet with a
confident face tells his Reader, that his Adversary both here and
elsewhere shows how learned and judicious he is in the choice of his
authorities; as if this allegation made wholly for them and against us, were it
read all out, or were nothing pertinent (at least) to the purpose.

5. In conclusion, for Gratians Gloss, acknowledging the truth by us
maintained that our Saviors words are figuratively to be understood; and
Cardinal Caietan confessing; that they may well bear that sense: having
nothing (and that is marvel, for he dare say any thing) to except against;
either he excuses himself that he has not the books by him, as if they
were not commonly in Paul's Churchyard to be had, if he had listed to look
after them. A bad excuse (as we say) is better then none at all with him.

Only he adds that they are both of small account with them; Caietan
especially: In regard whereof he wondereth that I should so much magnify him,
as if he were the Oracle of their Church, etc.

For the former, none can be ignorant, what Authority among their Canonists the
Glosses have: and in the place cited the rather, because he builds upon
Augustines own words. For the latter, I cite him only by the name of
Cardinal Caietan (nor had they many Cardinals in his time for learning his
equals) one of our Adversaries: that is all my magnifying of him. But mine
Adversaries lips must need overrun. Yet of what repute and esteem Caietan
was for both kinds of learning, as well Philosophy as Divinity; to omit the
titles commonly given him in the Inscriptions of his works by those that set
out some of them, stiling him Professor Theologiae eminentissimus.
the most eminent Doctor and professor of divinity; his Commentaries on Thomas
(whence this testimony is taken) Luculentisma and plane diuina.
most luculent and even divine Commentaries; his smaller Treatises Aurea
opuscula.
golden works; I may refer you to the works themselves, so many, so
learned, so elaborate; and to the story of his life written by Antonius
Fonseca, and set out with some of them. It is apparent, and it is enough, that
a prime Cardinal of the Sea of Rome confesses ingenuously, that the words of
our Savior, This is my body, may be siguratiuely taken for ought in the text,
were it not that their Church, Nam Papa virtualiter est tota Ecclesia. Herv. de
potest Papae. Vide Bellar. de Council. and Eccles. l. 1. c. 18. Sed and Georg.
Dounam Derens. Ep. de Papa Antichrist. l. 4. c. 6.
that is, the Pope, will have them otherwise expounded.

Division 5.
HE concludes his first Discourse thus, page 5. Thus they; and thus we: and
yet neither do they, nor N. P.
we therefore make the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood ANY thing but bare
bread and wine. Which Corollarium of his plainly so delivered may make any man
see the Protestanticall Communion truly anathomized and plainly showed to
have nothing holy, heavenly and divinely (as the Fathers speak) therein
contained, but bare bread and wine, which any man may eat when and where he
pleases, remembering withal our Saviors passion, Never Caietan, never
Bellarmine, never Gratian, never Father or other Catholic Divine of our
Church believed or taught this gross and sacrilegious doctrine as my
Adversary in his words, They, and We, falsely pretends. Neither does
Calvin or any other noted Divine of their Church speak at least, whatsoever
they think, so poorly and grossly of this Sacrament; but they endeavor with
Epithets and words to cover the bready nakedness thereof, making it seem
mysterious at least, if not miraculous. Blessed Saint Dennis great Scholar of
Saint Paul himself, I will here presume to ask thee. If the Sacrament of the
Altar be but bare bread and wine, why do thou so absurdly speak and
blasphemously praey unto it, in this manner? S. Dennis Hierch. Eccles. cap. 3.
part. 3.
O most divine and holy Sacrament, vouchsafe to open those signifying signs,
and appear perspicuously unto us; and replenish the spiritual eyes of our
soul with the singular and clear splendour of thy light, etc. Why likewise,
thou holy Martyr and great Doctor of Christ's Church Saint Itaeneus, living so
near the Apostles times, as to know great Polycarpus S. John's disciple, and
deeply seen in the knowledge of heavenly verities, do thou deny this bread
after consecration to be any more accounted common bread, but the Eucharist
consisting of two things, heavenly and earthly; that being received into our
bodies they may be no more corruptible, having the hope of resurrection? If no
more then bare bread and wine be in this Communion, as my Adversary affirms,
why did ye, noble Confessors of the first Nicene Council will us, Patres in
votis primi Nicen. Con^.
in this divine table not to regard only bread and wine proposed, but to
eleuate our mind by faith, and behold on this table the Lamb of God taking
away the sins of the world by Priests vnbloodily sacrificed; and receiving
his body and blood to believe them to be symboles and pledges of our
resurrection? etc. O holy Ephrem renowned so for thy great learning and
singular sanctity, as Saint Jerome testifies thy writings to have been read
in the Church after the holy Scriptures, why do thou will us not to search
after these inscrutable mysteries, etc. but to receive with a full assurance of
faith the immaculate body of the Lord, and the Lamb himself entirely? adding
those words which cannot agree to such a communion of bare bread and wine as
this Minister teaches; The mysteries of Christ are an immortal fire: search
them not curiously, least in the search thou become burned, etc. telling us
that this Sacrament does exceed all admiration and speech, which Christ our
Savior the only begotten Son of God has instituted for us. Finally why do
other ancient and chief Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church call the
consecrated bread and wine on the Altar dreadful mysteries, the food of life
and immortality, hidden Manna, and infinitely excelling it, a heavenly banquet,
the bread of Angels humbly present while it is offered, and devoutly adoring
it, etc. If there be no more but bare bread and wine therein received in
memory of our Saviors passion; as my Adversary affirms of his
Protestanticall Sacrament.

THe next Diuisi^^ he makes entrance into with a T. G.
gross and shameless deprauation; and thereupon prosecuteth it to the end
with an impertinent digression.

Having cited the forenamed Testimenies of Theodoret and Gelasius in mine
Answer to that Objection brought commonly against us, as if by a denial of
such a real presence as Papists maintain we should make the Sacrament to be
nothing but bare bread; I conclude both mine Answer and the Allegation of those
two Authors in these words; Thus they, (to wit Gelasius and Theodoret) and
thus we: and yet neither do they nor we therefore make the Sacraments of
Christ's body and blood NOthing but bare bread and wine. Now this shameless
wretch wanting matter to be dealing with, turns me NOthing into ANY thing (a
man able indeed with his shameless and senseless shifts to pick any thing
out of nothing) and relates my words in this manner to a clean contrary
sense; Thus they; and thus we: and yet neither do they, nor we therefore make
the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood ANY thing but bare bread and wine.

Had either I or my Transcriber, for the truth is, Yet I remember now that the
Marginall notes were of mine own writing; which peradventure occasioned his
gird at mine hand.
it was not mine own handwriting that he had: I write a worse hand I
confess, then he is aware of, that accounts that so bad an one: If either I
or he, I say, had slipped here with the pen, as I suspected he might have
done, till I saw the copy again that this Answerer had; yet the whole tenor
of my speech, wherein I show that the bread and wine in the Eucharist are no
more bare bread or bare wine, then the water used in the Sacrament of Baptism
is bare water, would sufficiently have showed my meaning. But when the copy
that was delivered him, remaining in the custody of that Noble Personage for
whom at first it was written, is found apparently to have the words in the
very same manner as I have before cited them, I cannot devise Dic alique^, dic,
Quinti^^ane, colorem. Iuven. sat, 6.
what color this audacious wretch can bring to salve his own credit with,
and excuse his corrupt carriage. It argues not a bad, but a desperate cause,
that without such senseless and shameless shifts cannot be vpheld. And I
beseech your Ladyship well to consider, what credit is to be given to these
men alleging Authors, (Fathers, Councels, etc.) which they know you cannot
your self peruse and examine, when they dare thus palpably falsify a writing
that you have in your own hands, and may have recourse to when you will.

2. Now having thus laid a lewd and loud untruth for the ground of his ensuing
Discourse:

1. He falls into an Inuectiue against our Protestanticall Communion, as
acknowledged by me to have nothing holy, heavenly and divinely (for so it
pleases him to speak) therein contained, but bare bread and wine, etc. adding
withal, that never C^ietan, never Bellarmine, never Gratian, never Father or
other Catholic Divine believed or taught this sacrilegious doctrine (a lie he
means, of his own forging) as my Adversary in these words, They, and we,
falsely pretends.

In which words first (for he cannot forbear f^lsifying for his life, no not
then and there where he charge others with falsehood) he intimates that in
those words, Thus they; I should have reference to Caietan, Bellarmine, and
Gratian: whereas my words evidently point at Gelasius and Theodoret, whose
own words in precise terms I had next before cited.

2. He charge me falsely to say that of the Eucharish, that neither I, nor
any of our Divines ever said: yea which being by way of Objection before
produced, I not only disauow and disprooue, approouing freely and at large
proouing the contrary; but in this place in plain terms conclude the direct
contrary unto in the very words by him fowly falfified.

3. He runs out (to give us some taste of his rolling Rhetoric as well as
his loose Logic) into a solemn invocation of his forged S. Dionyse, together
with some of the Ancients, (as if he were raising of Spirits with some
magical enchantment, to fight with a shadow, and to skirmish with a man of
straw of his own making) to testify in that against us that he would feign
put upon us, but none of us (by his own confession) ever said or do say.

Thus he has nibled here and there, cauilled at bymatters, coined lies,
forged and faced; but given no direct Answer to the Argument, whereunto he
should have answered, and whereby it was proved that these words of our
Savior, This my body, may well bear a figurative sense; so expounded by the
Ancient Fathers, and confessed by their own writers; not so much as attempted
to prove the contrary thereunto.

3. Now howsoever I might very well let pass, as impertinent, those citations
and sayings of the Authors here summoned to give in either testimony or
sentence against that that none of us auoweth, and which therefore, though all,
that either they do say, or he would have them say, were true, did no way
cross us, or once touch us in ought that is herein affirmed of us; and I had
sometime therefore determined wholly to pass by them, for fear of ouercharging
this Discourse: yet considering that some weak ones peradventure may stumble
at some passages in them, especially as they are unfaithfully by this alleadger
of them here translated: I have thought good now ere we part with them, to
examinine what they say, that may seem to make in any sort not against that
here charged on us, which we utterly deny, but against that which of this
Sacrament we hold otherwise.

The first testimony is S. Dennis his, showed before to be but a counterfeit by
the confession even of Popish writers themselves. But whosoever he were (for
Illum esse de quo in Actis fit mentio, soli, in hac luce literarum, imperiti,
and cum linguae Graecae, tum antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae penitus rudes audent
affirmare. Casaub, ad Baron. annal. exerc. 16. ss. 43.
certain enough it is that he was not the party whose name he bears, but
one of a far later time, unknown utterly to Athanasius, Eusebius, and
Jerome, though curious searchers and enquirers after the works of those that
were before them, Scripta Dionys^i ante tempora B. Georgij non videntur fuisse
cog^ita mundo Bellarm. in Indic. Scrip. MS. apud Rob. Cocum in Cens. Patr. Qui
and u^dendus de Dionysio isto. Et Anastasius Biblioth, ad Carol, Reg. apud
Andr. Riuet. in specim. Critit. l. 1. c. 9.
nor known commonly to the world before Gregory's days, as Bellarmine also
himself acknowledges) he makes little for them in this point, either in
that that here is alleged, or in ought else that Bellarmine can fish or fetch
out of him. His words in the place here cited are these and no more: O most
divine and holy Mystery, symbolically discovering those (...).
enigmaticall ensoldments, be declared brightly unto us, and replenish our
intellectual eye sights with (...).
single (or immixt) and vnenueloped light. These (I say) his words are as
near as I can express them: Which I so do to give you a taste of this Dennis
his style, writing rather like Dithyrambos concinit. Ma^sil. Fi^in. Genus
dicendi cothurno Tragi^o vel Dithyrambicis ampullis non multum distat. Casaub.
vbi sub.
a Dithyrawhicall Poet (the boldest sort of them) then like a sober and sound
Divine; as (...) Col. 2. 18. De his rebus magno supercilio pronuncians, de
quibus Paulus e coelo tertio reuersus non ausus est hiscere. Eras. de ver.
Theol.
taking upon him to determine the degrees, orders, and offices of the Angels in
heanen, which other Iren. co^t. Valent. l. 2. c. 55. Cyril. nomi. catech.
mystag. 2. Aug. enchit. c. 58. De Athanasio vide Sixth. sen. biblioth l. 3. de
Greg. and Bern. Eckium hom. 4. de Michael. and Riber in Heb. c. 1.
the Ancients durst not do; so discoursing of them and such other matters as
he entreats of in an affected swelling and abstruse strain, and coining a
world of strange words and phrases no where else to be found. And no more
they are then these; which I add, because to the end of his allegation this
fellow puts an, etc. as if the Author had in that place used some longer
discourse of that kind. Nor is the sp^^ch (as he would have it) a prayer; but
a mere prosopopoei^, or rhetorical compellation, directed not to the Elements
alone, but to the Eucharist, or the Lords Supper (if with the (...) Cor. 11.
20. vide Casaub. ad Baron. exer. 16. sect. 32.
Apostle Caluinistae sine scripturae autoritate, sine veterum exemplo, si^e
ratione, sine iudici^ coenam vocant. Maldonat. in Math. c. 26.
they will give us leave at least so to term it) the whole Mystery, or
mysterious rite, as (...).
the word there used properly imports. Which Pachymeres the Greek
paraphraser of this Dennis well paralleleth with another of Gregory
Nazianzenes of the same nature; (and as well might Bellarmine or this Defendant
have alleged the one as the other.) Who in his Easter Day Sermon turning his
speech to the Festiuity it self, and then from it to Christ himself, the
substance of it, as Nicetas also well observes; x O great and holy Passover
(says he) the purgation of the whole world. (...).
For I will speak to thee as t^ some living thing. O word of God, and light,
and life, and wisdom, and might. For I take delight in reckoning up all thy
titles. Have thou this Oration as well^g^atul^torie as supplicatorie, and so
forth. And Nicet as thereupon; Those * (...)
words, O Pasch or Passover, Ad festum ipsum perinde ac vita praeditum refert.
he speaks or refers to the Feast it self. But those, O word of God, and
so forward, by way of acclamation he directs to Christ the spiritual
Passover. Nor is it unlike to the speech that Ambr. makes * Ad Christum
spi^itale Pascha per acclamationem dirigit.
in general to the Element of water, though with more special allusion and
application to the water of Baptism: O qua, quae Sacramentum Christi esse
mesuisti: quae omnia lauas, nec lauaris. Ambr. in Lue. l. 10. c. 22.
O water that have merited (that is, in the usual language of those Auncieuts,
too much abused by our Adversaries, have been vouchsa^ed the grace) to be a
Sacrament of Christ: that washest all, unwashed of any. Thou bring in the
first; thou closest up the last Mysteries. The beginning is from thee; and the
end in thee: or rather thou make us to be without end. And so he goes on in
a long speech to the Element, which yet no wise man will say that he had any
purpose there to pray unto. Nor any more had this Dennis g Tu incipis prima, tu
co^ples perfecta mysteria. A te principium; in te finis. vel potius tu facis vt
finem nesciamus, etc
when he discoursed thus to the Eucharist; the rather to be admitted and so
conceived in him, considering his Poetical and aenigmaticall vain and manner
of discourse. I might well put them in mind of that Hymn of theirs, wherein
they thus if not invoke, at least parley with the Cross:

O aue, Crux, spes vnica: Hoc passionis tempore, Auge piis iustitiam; Reisque
dona veniam.
All h^ile, O Cross, our only Hope;
This Passion time [thy power set open:]
In righteous Persons grace increase:
To sinful souls their sins release.
Which howsoever they would feign salve with such a prosopopoeia Gabr. Vasquez
de Adorat. l. 2. c. 4. dis. 3. number. 430. and Bellar. de cult. Sanct. l. 2. c.
24.
some of them; yet Thom. Aq. sum par. 3. quae. 25. art. 4. Crux adoratur
adoratione latriae.
Aquinas ingenuously confesses that therein they give divine worship to the
wooden Cross: or of the like speeches that in a form both of praise, and
prayer, they use to Salve sancta facies nostri Seruatoris, Impressa panniculo
niuei candoris, Dataque Veronicae signum ob amoris: Nos ab omni macula purga
vitiorum: Atque nos consortio iunge beatorum, etc. Oration a loanne Pp. 22.
instituta. Antidot. animae.
the Veronicke or the print of Christ's face in a towel; and O veneranda Zona,
fac nos haeredes aeternae and beatae vitae, etc. Oration ab Euthymio composita.
to our Ladies girdle, and other the like, wherein they crave ^o less of them,
beside sundry other graces, then to be cleansed from all sin, and to attain
eternal happiness: in so much that one of their writers relating the latter
of them breaks out into these words; O quam magna and mira petit a veneranda
Zona. Lipoman.
O how many, and how marvelous things are requested of that holy girdle! To
which I might well adioyne also, what Aquinas says, that Crucem alloquimur and
deprecamur quasi ipsum crucifixum. Thom. vbi sup.
they speak and pray to the Cross as to Christ crucified himself: and what
Bellarmine tells us that their Sic concionatores alloquuntur imaginem
crucifixi, etc. Bellar de imagine. c. 23.
Priests and Friars in the pulpit are wont to say to the wooden Crucifix, Tu
nos redemisti, etc.
Thou have redeemed us, and reconciled us to God the Father. Which he thus
salueth, that this they say to it, not as it is a piece of wood, nor as it is
an image neither, but as it supplyeth the place of him whom it represents,
that is, Dicuntur Christo, cuius imago vicem gerit.
they say it to Christ, whose Deputy and vicegerent the Image there is. And
yet from all this (though too too bad and gross indeed, yea absurd and
blasphemous by this man's own grant) will no man infer, that they hold either
that girdle to be the Uirgin Mary, or either the wooden Cross, or the stained
towel, or the carved Crucifix to be Christ himself. So that though that of
Dennis were a prayer indeed, which yet plain it is that it is not, yet were
it not, by their own grounds and graunts, sufficient to prove that he held
the Sacrament therefore to be Christ himself. I add only what Ex Aug. de
ciuit lib. 18. c. 28. Bed. in 1. Cor. 10.
from Augustine venerable Bede has, that holy Omnia significantia videntur
quodammodo earum rerum quas significant sustinere personas.
Signs not only are called by the names, but do in some sort sustain the
persons also of those things that they represent. Which as being well
considered it may help to clear many speeches of the Ancients wherein they
speak those things of the sacred Elements, which cannot be understood but of
the things by the^ signified, so it occasioned them to take the more liberty
to themselves for such Rhetorical compellations, as before have bin spoken of.
Yea, but elsewhere (may some say,) and that but a little after, he turns
himself to the Host, which is said there to be his better or above him, and
therefore At certe purus panis non supra nos est. Bellarm. de Euch. l. 2. c. 3.
not bare bread; excusing himself to it, that he presumes to deal with it.
Indeed so it pleases Bellarm. Ibid.
Bellarmine to cite him as if he had said; Pontifex quod hostiam salutarem
quae supra ipsum est litet, etc.
The high Priest, that he sacrifices the saving Host, that is above him, Se
excusat ad ipsum exclamans, etc.
excuses himself to him, or to it, crying out; Thou have said, Do this; etc.
But let Dennis speak in his own language, or but Perionii versio a Lansselio
Soc. Ies. subornata and suppleta.
as their own writers translate him, and both Bellarmines mis-alleadging of
him will soon be discovered, and the force of his reason drawn from thence
utterly dissolved. That which he says is word for word thus; Dionys. Hierarch
Eccles cap. 3. part. 3.
The divine Hierarch standing at the divine Altar, (...).
celebrateth (that is, praises and extolleth) Christ's holy divine works out
of his most divine care of us for our salvation by the goodwill of his Father
in the Holy Ghost by him consummated. Which having celebrated, and by
contemplation with intellectual eyes taken a venerable and spiritual view of
them, he passes unto (...). Sacrificium quod signis continetur. Lauss.
the symbolicall celebration (or, holy administration) of them, and that (...).
according to divine Tradition: Wherefore religiously and hierarchically (that
is, as becomes an Hierarch, or a Bishop) after the holy celebration (or,
(...). Diuinorum operu^ lauds.
solemn praise) of those divine works, (...). De sacrificio quod ipsius
dignitatem superat se purgat. Laus.
he makes an Apology for himself in regard of that boly service (or,
sacrifice, as they translate it, though It is used by this Author often. speaking
of Baptism. chap. 2.
the word be more general) that is to worthy for him to deal with, crying out
to him, (to whom but to Christ Jesus before mentioned?) Thou have said, Do
this in remembrance of me. And then (...). etc.
having requested that he may be vouchsafed the grace of performing this holy
and divine service in holy manner, and that those that are to communicate may
religiously partake in it, he performs the most divine service, etc. For
uncovering (...).
the bread that was hitherto covered and undivided, and dividing it into many
pieces, and (...).
distributing to them all the one only Cup, be does symbolically, further
their unity, (...).
thereby performing his most holy service. Now where is there here any mention
of an Host? or affirming that Host to be above him or better then himself? or
making any speech at all to it? And yet if it were Christ, to whom should he
direct his speech more fitly then to it? what should he speak to him as sited
elsewhere, when he has him corporally there present? The rather if, as they
tell us, Corpus Christi, sieve Christus, ibi videt and audit, quamuis non
loquitur, ne deprehendatur. Bonauent. in sent. I. 4. did. 10. quaest. 2.
he sees there what we do, and hears what we say, though he say nothing
himself, because he would not be discovered. Yea but he acknowledges the holy
service then and there to be performed, to be too worthy for him to deal with?
And does not the Apostle say as much of the ministry of the word; that (...);
2. Cor. 2. 16.
no man is sufficient, or (...). i. (...). vt Math. 3. 11 and 8. 8. Luke 3. 17.
and 7. 6.
worthy enough for such a work? Or may not the same truly be said of the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the administration of it? There is nothing here then
in either allegation that may at all help to establish the Popish
Transubstantiation. And yet this is all, that out of this Dennis Bellarmine is
able to produce. Who though indeed otherwise not free from sundry fantastical
conceits, yet is so far from enclining to that prodigious fancy, that the
whole tenure of his discourse concerning that Sacrament (as the ancient
Scholiast also has well observed on him) runs clean another way. He
calls the Eucharist, (as you have heard) (...).
a symbolicall service; and (...).
a distribution of bread and a Cup: and the bread and the Cup used in it, (...).
symboles or signs, and (...).
images, or (...).
pictures, and (...).
paternes (...).
resembling the truth of their principals, to which he does also there oppose
the^. And not we, but the Monk Maximus aunciently expounding him, (...).
Maxim. Schol. in Hierarch. Eccles. c. 3.
Mark you (says he) how still he calls this divine service a Symbolicall
service; that is, (...).
a service (says he) consisting of Symboles or Signs; and (...). Maxim. ibid.
the holy gifts themselves signs or symboles of the true things above. And
again, (...). Ibid.
He calls them pictures and images of true things unseen. And if we ask him
what that word Symbol or Sign signifies; (...). Idem in interpret. nom.
A Symbol or Sign (says he) is a thing sensible taken for something
intelligible, as bread and wine for the spiritual and divine food and
refection, and the like. Yea hereupon he infers that (...). Idem in schol.
because these things are Symboles and Signs, they are not therefore the truth
it self. For (...). Idem in cap 4.
the image (says he elsewhere, and that from Dennis himself too) albeit it
have never so near a resemblance, yet in substance differs from that whereof
it is a resemblance. Dionys. eccles. hierar. c. 4
The thing indeed it self (says this Dennis) that by an exact image or
picture is represented, is, if we may so say, thereby (...).
doubled, while (...).
the truth is showed in the type, and (...).
the precedent or principal in the picture or pattern; but yet there is for
all that a diversity of substance in either.

From this Dennis his own grounds therefore, we may well reason and conclude
thus against the Popish doctrine which they would have him to uphold. No
picture is the same in substance with that whose picture it is: But the bread
and wine in the Eucharist are pictures and images (so he terms them) of the
spiritual food, to wit, the body and blood of Christ. They are not therefore
the same in substance with it. Or as Maximus directs us; No type is the
Truth: (...). Maxim in lib de divine. nomin. c. 4.
for it were then no type: But these (...).
are Types: and consequently other then the Truth.

The second allegation is out of Irenaeus: 1. Irenaeus (says he) denies the
bread after consecration to be any more accounted common bread, but 2. The
Eucharist, consisting of two things, heavenly and earthly, that being received
into our bodies they may be no more corruptible, having the hope of
resurrection. These words indeed are found the most of them in Irenaeus, but
are foulely disioynted, and related in other manner then they lie in Irenaeus
his context. As the bread (says he) that is from the earth after divine
invocation is no more common bread, but the Eucharist consisting of two things,
the one earthly, the other heavenly: So our bodies receive the Eucharist are
not now corruptible, having the hope of resurrection. 3. Where first, He
denies the bread after consecration, to be any more Non iam communi pani, etc.
common bread: as before him Justin Martyr, that they received those creatures
(...). Justin. apolog. 2.
not as common bread, or common drink. And does not their Cyril (as before you
heard) deny the oil also after it is consecrate, to be any more (...). Cyril
catech. mist. 3.
common oil? Or may we not say truly as the Ancients also often do? yea dare
any Christian man say otherwise, but that the water in Baptism being once
consecrated, is no more Non iam aqua communis. Chrysostom. hom. in Psalm. 22. and
Greg. Nyssen, de Baptism. (...) Irenaeus contr. Valent. l. 4. c, 34.
common Water? There is nothing then hitherto said by Irenaeus of the bread,
but what may truly be said of any other consecrated creature: since that holy
and common in this sense oppose and expel either other. Secondly, he says
that the Encharist consists of two things, the one earthly, the other
heavenly. And do not all Sacraments the same? Or does not Baptism the like?
you may be pleased to consider, what out of their own Ambros. nom. de initiat.
mist c. 3.
Ambrose was before said of it; as also out of Gregory Nyssene is here after
related. For it is nothing to the purpose that Bellarmine obiecteth, that no
man would say that the water of Baptism consists of two things, the one
earthly, the other heavenly: For neither * Greg. Nyssen. de baptis.
does Irenaeus say that the bread of the Eucharist, but the Eucharist it self
of such two things consists. But I n Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 6.
would feign know how the Eucharist according to their doctrine should, when
the bread is once consecrated, consist at all of any earthly thing, when the
substance thereof is (as they say) thereby utterly abolished? Sure Irenaeus his
Eucharist consisting of matter in part earthly, and theirs having none at all
such, are not one and the same. Thirdly, Irenaeus says that our bodies
receiving the Eucharist are no more now corruptible; in regard of hope and
expectation he means of their future resurrection, which thereby they are
assured of and sealed up unto: (for otherwise who sees not that they are not
yet incorruptible?) as he afterward expounds himself. And what is said more
here of the Lords Supper, then Ad spem resurrectionis Baptizatur corpus quae
nisi corporalis, non alias sic baptismate corporali obligaretur. etc. Tertull.
de resurr. carn. Hinc Hilar. de Trinit. l. 9. Regeneratio baptismi
resurrectionis est virtus.
Tertullian and others say of Baptism, to wit, that by it the Flesh also has
its assurance of resurrection to life eternal? yea let them look back but a
line or two, and they shall soon see, how little Irenaeus favors their
cause? Quomodo dicunt carne^ in corruptionem deuenire etc. quae a corpore
Domini and sanguine alitur. Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
How (says he) say they that the flesh perishes and lives not everlastingly,
that is nourished with the body and blood of Christ? He affirms our flesh to
be nourished with that which he calls the body and blood of Christ. And
elsewhere more plainly: Quando mixtus cali^ and fractus panis percipit verbum
Dei, fit Eucharistia sanguinis and corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur and
consistit carnis nostrae substantia. Idem l. 5. c. 4.
When the Cup mixed, and the bread broken receives the word of God, it
becomes the Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ, of which the substance
of our bodies grows and consists. Idem ibid.
Now how deny they the flesh to be capable of life eternal, that is nourished
with Christ's body and blood? And again, Ea dispositio quae est secundum
hominem, quae ex carnibus and neruis and ossibus consistit, de calice, qui est
sanguis eius nutritur, and de pane qui est corpus eius augetur. Ibid.
That part of man that consists of flesh, sinews and bones, is nourished by
the cup that is his blood, and grows, or is increased by the bread that is
his body. The same with that, which out of Iustine we shall hereafter further
consider of, that Ex (...). Justin. apolog. 2,
our flesh and blood are nourished by the Eucharisticall food by a change
thereof, that is, it being changed and turned into them. But to say so
Eucharistia nutriri corporis nostri substantiam nih^l fingi potest absurdius.
Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 2 c 4.
of the very body and blood of Christ is, by these men's own grants, most
absurd. That in the Eucharist therefore that Irenaeus, and before him Iustine,
speak thus of, is not the very flesh and blood of Christ it self, but
Offerimus ei, non quasi indigenti, sed gratias agentes donationi eius, and
sanctificantes creaturam. Irenaeus l. b. 4. cap. 34.
the creature sanctified, as he himself terms it; or Primitias earum quae
sunt eius creaturatum offerentes.
the first fruits of Gods creatures, which in way of thankfulness, Offerens
ei cum gratiarum action ex creatura eius. Ibid.
with thanksgiving, he says, they offer unto God; why so termed, is out of
Augustine and others showed elsewhere.

The third allegation is (as he says) out of Patres in votis primi Niceni
Consilii.
the voices of the Fathers in the first Nicene Council. Where I might well out
of Cardinal Baeronius except, that there are Baron. annal. tom. 3. anno 325.
number 62. and 63.
no^ Acts of that first Nicene Council now extant: and that the work out of
which this allegation is taken, is I Would ex Photio, ibid. et annal. tom. 6. anno
496.
no record of those Acts, but a story only of that Council, written by one
that lived long after it, Baron ibid. and Greg. de Valent. de transubstan. l.
2. c. 7.
whom they themselves account to be but a sorry obscure fellow, and one of no
great credit. But let the Author, or the Relator rather, pass; and let us
hear his relation. Those holy Confessors (says he) will us at the divine
Table not to regard only bread and wine proposed, but to eleuate our mind by
faith, and be hold on the holy Table the Lamb of God, etc. by Priests
vnbloodily sacrificed; and receiving his body and blood to believe them to be
symboles and pledges of our resurrection. Here is nothing at all that any way
hurts our cause. First, they acknowledge (...)
bread to be and abide in the Euchaerist: which these men utterly deny.
Secondly, they will us (...)
not basely to regard therein the bread and cup, or the elements only. And the
very same in the same place of Baptism they say, that (...). Gelas. Cyzic de
act. Conc. Nic. diatyp 4.
we must not so much regard in it the water that we see, as the power of God
accompanying it; of which we shall speak more upon another the like occasion
Diuis. 8. sect. 4.
hereafter. Thirdly they will us (...). etc. Ibid. diatyp. 5.
to lift up our mind, and by faith to consider (for so their words are) the
Lamb of God lying on the Table. And by faith we grant that he is not seen
and considered only, but received also in the Eucharist. Fourthly, they say,
not (as this man translateth it) that he is vnbloodily there sacrificed, but
that he is (...). Ibid.
without sacrificing there sacrificed; that is not really, but Mystice
immolatur, and in mysterio Christi passio traditur. Paschas. Pp. apud Great* de
cons. did. 2. c. Iteratur.
mystically and symbolically sacrisiced; or Non rei veri^^te, sed significante
mysterio. Aug. ibid. c. Hoc est.
not in truth of the thing, but in a mystery signifying the same: as out of
Pope Pascasius and Augustine in their Canons themselves speak. Fifthly, they
say, that we receive his body and blood in the Encharist; yea they are
reported to say (which he omitteth here) that we do (...).
truly receive them: which that we do truly also and effectually (according
to our doctrine) though spiritually and not corporally, has Discourse Argument
(...). Answer to Objection.
already been shown, and shall Division 12.
in his due place again be further confirmed. And lastly, that these are
(...).
symboles or pledges of our resurrection; which how they was are was before
showed out of Tertullian, who Caro abluiter, vngitur, signatur, manuum
impositione adumbratur, corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, etc. Tertul. de
resur. carn.
from those Sacraments and sacred rites and exercises in general (as well
other as these) that the body partaketh in, draws Quam Deus sacramentis suis
disciplinis que vestiuit, cuius munditias amat, castigationes probat, passiones
adpreciar, haeccine non resurget? Ibid.
Arguments to confirm the faith of the resurrection of it.

The next allegation is out of S. Ephrem, whose both praises and speeches he
has borrowed from Bella. de Euchar. l. 3 c. 19.
Bellarmine: which Bellarmine when he has cited, adds withal in a bravery,
as if the proofs were so pregnant that there were no gainesaying of them, Idem
ibid.
To this testimony our adversaries neither do answer, nor indeed can answer
ought. That none had then answered, was not much to be marvelled: as Harding
answer to Jewel. art. 10. Sect 6.
Harding says of their Cyrill; few had yet the q Sacrificia Deo grata de bonis
carnis adolentur Deo.
sight of him. One of that name indeed wrote many things Hieron. in catolog.
Script.
in the Syriacke tongue long since, having no skill at all in the Greek. And
under his name our Popish Fatherbreeders have of late set out a many of Sermons
and Treaeises, that have no testimony at all from antiquity the most of them;
translated (as they tell us) out of Greek, which he good man never spoke;
quoting some of them Greek Authors at large, whom he never understood;
wanting all of them that A cumen sublimis ingen i. Hieron. catal. scr
subtilty and sublimitie of wit, that Jerome commends in Ephrems works, and
Hieron. ibid. and Sozom. hist. l. 3. c. 16.
appeared even in the trarslations of them, as both he and others affirm of
them; very sorry and silly things a great part of them; not free from gross
untruths and In his last Will and Testament, that he never in all his life
spoke foolish word, nor cursed any one, nor was contentious, etc. And yet the
direct contrary in his Relation to the Monks of his Con^ersion.
contradictions, yea and ridiculous too, if not impious assertions; as that
Saluete omnes Sancti, saluete Apostoli, Prophetae, etc. De poenit. c. 7.
the damned spirits in hell salute all the Saints in y (...). Theodoret. hist.
l 4. c. 19. and Sozom. l. 3. c. 16.
heaven, and by name the Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, the Patriarchs,
Monks, and the Uirgin Mary: and lastly their Tot fere mutationes, inuersiones,
and additiones, dum iste omittit quae ille habet, and contra, quot verba.
Riuet. specim. Criti. l. 3. c. 21.
several editions of them so chopped and changed, mangled and made up again,
cut off or pieced out, as they pleased that had the breeding of them, that
scarce any one of them is any whit like another. The testimonies cited out of
him could not be answered, before the Author himself was hatched, and his
works abroad in men's hands, that they might be seen and known what they
were. And now that they are seen and known what they are, they appear plainly
to be such, that they are not worthy of any answer. Unless it be deemed
equal that we be tied to answer to every saying that is alleged out of any
counterfeite, that they shall at any time thrust out with the glorious title of
some Ancient Father clapped on his Frontispice. And yet neither are this Authors
words (what ever he be) by the Cardinals good leave, for all his great brag,
so pregnant and full for them that no answer can be given to them. He says
that the mysteries of Christ are most admirable and inscrutable: and who
denies it? this follow himself Division. 12.
brings in Calvin and Beza saying the same: and that men ought not to Curiose
rimari.
pry over curiously into them: wherein not we, but their Qui tamen ipse in
Eccles. Hierar. c. 2. (...).
S. Dennis is faulty, and their Vide Eras. in moria, and in enchirid. Sarcer.
de vanit. Schol. Theolog. Statum lacessunt omnipollentis Dei calumniosis
litibus: Fidem mintuis dissecant ambagibus: Vt quisque lingu^ nequior; Soluunt
ligantque quaestionu^ vincula Persyllogismos Plectiles Quid non libido mentis
humanae stru^t? Quid non malo^um prutiat? Prudent. apotheos.
Schoolmen who with their wanton wit have therein exceeded all bounds as well
of modesty as of measure: Pa^ticipa corpori Domini tui fide.
that we partake with our Lords immaculate body by faith: (for so in Uossius
his edition are his words distinguished) which we may well without any such
corporal presence of it, as See Division 12. number. 2.
by their own Authors is confessed: that Certum quod agnum ipsum integrum
comedis.
we must be assured that we eat the Lamb himself whole: which is contrary,
not to our doctrine, who say and show evidently, that See Division 6. Sect. 6.
the Fathers did as much that lived even before Christ was incarnate, but to
Ibid. Sect. 1. number. 4.
the doctrine of their Pope Nicholas, as elsewhere is showed. So that here is
nothing that we need so much to stick at, or that should be deemed so
unanswerable: unless he will press us with that that follows, that Ignem and
spiritum ma^ducandum ac bibendu^ praestitit nobis, corpus sci^. and sanguinem
suum. Ephre^. ibid.
Christ gives us fire to feed on, when he gives us his body: as Chrysostom
says sometime that Chrysostom, de Euchar. in encaen.
fire flows from the Lords table, and it is a coal of fire that we receive
in the Eucharist. Which if they will expound figuratinely and spiritually, as I
suppose they must needs, let them give us the like liberty to understand the
former words in like manner. I will add only and so leave this Ephrem, what
in the very same discourse himself says: Quaenam sit ista potio atque
perceptio disc^re nostrum est. Ephrem de non scruta^ not. Dei.
what this potion and perception is (says he) it is our part to learn: (And
it is lawful then belike, yea and our duty too, to make some kind of inquiry
into it.) Mark diligently, how Christ taking bread into his hands, Benedixit
and fregit in figuram corporis sui.
blessed it, and brake it, for a figure of his immaculate body; and how he In
figuram sanguinis sui benedixit. ib.
blessed the Cup, for a figure of his blood. Which words (I take it) incline
rather to our doctrine then to theirs. And yet further in the same Treatise:
Fidei oculis etc. Dei agnu^ sincere intuetur.
With the eyes of faith, when like light it shines bright in a man's heart,
does he clearly see the Lamb of God, that was slain for us, and that has
given us his holy and immaculate body Vt eo perpetuo vescamur.
perpetually to feed upon, and to partake of unto remission of sins. Si quis
hunc side^ oculum possider, pate^ter and lucide con^picit Dominum.
This eye of faith he that has, does clearly and openly see the Lord, and
Fide agni immaculati corpus manducat and sanguinem bibit.
by a sure and full faith eats of the body of that immaculate Lamb, the
only begotten son of the heavenly Father, and drinks his blood, etc. By
faith (says he) we see the Lamb of God, (as expounding that that was said
out of the story of the Nicene Council before) and by faith we seed on him,
and his body and blood, and partake of him, perpetually; and not in the
Eucharist only. Which as it fitteth not their orall manducation, which without
faith may be effected, so it agrees well with that spiritual feeding, that
we expound our Saviors words of. So little does this their Ephrem further or
avail them in this Argument.

Lastly, for the high terms and stately titles that the Ancient Fathers give
the Eucharist; let him but compare them with (...). Dionys. hier. eccles. c. 2.
Punici Christiani Baptis. salutem, Sacramentum corporis Christi vitam vocant.
Aug. de pecc. mer. l. 1. c. 24.
those that they give to its elder sister, the other Sacrament of Baptism, and
I suppose he will find little odds between either. Only for what he says
of their affirming that the Angels adore it: let the places be produced, and
they shall then be answered. That they are present often, (and if present, no
doubt present with much reverence) as well at the celebration of the Lords
Supper, as at other parts of Gods worship; and Heb. 1. 6
that they adore him who is therein represented, (which is all that Chrysostom
says in the places produced out of him by De Euchar. l. 2. c. 22.
Bellarmine) we deny not: and of Baptism in effect their In praefat. ad
Catechis.
Cyrist says as much. But that they do adore as y 1 Cor. 11. 10.
God a piece of bread or a sorry wafer cake, as the Papists do in their Mass,
therein committing as gross idolatry (it is Talis error qualis in orb
terrarum nunqua^ visus vel auditus fuit. Tolerabilior est enim error eorum qui
pro Deo colunt statuam aurea^ aut argenteam, aut alterius materiae imaginem,
quomodo Gentiles Deos suos venerabantur, vel pannum ubrum in hastam eleuatum,
quod narratur de Lappis, vel viua animalia vt quondam Aegyptii, quam eorum qui
frustum panis, etc. Coster. Jesuit, enchirid. de Transubstan.
their own grant, if it be not Christ, which we well know it is not) as ever
any was in the world, that we utterly deny, nor will this Defendant ever be
able to produce any one Orthodox Father that ever so said. And thus much for
his allegations, though produced here to no purpose, to disprooue (as they
might well enough without hurting of us) no assertion of ours, but a fiction of
his own framing; nor was it necessary therefore that they should have been
answered. Let us now proceed to the next part of his Answer.

Division 6.
HIs next ground for overthrowing our literal understanding of Christ's words
and real presence of his true N. P.
body and blood in the Sacrament, is an unlearned and slender manner of
proouing our Saviors large discourse in S John. 6. not to be at all
understood of sacrament all manducation, but spiritual eating his flesh and
blood by believing in him. And first he quareleth at Pope Nicholas manner of
speech, making Berengarius in the abiuration of his heresy to affirm not
only the sign, but the body it self of Christ to be handled by the Priests
hands, and rent and bruised with the teeth of the faithful, etc. Which manner
of speech was purposely by Pope Nicholas in a Council of learned Doctors
devised to make this slippery shifting heretic make a direct and plain
confession of his faith concerning our Saviors being present in the hands of
the Priest consecrating the Sacrament, and mouths of such as receive him
impassible now in his own corporal nature glorified, and incapable of renting
or any kind of corporal mutation, as being not with the sacramental signs
also quantitatiuely extended, but indiuisibly and after a spiritual manner
existing, yet really handled and received as Angels in assumpted bodies are
said to be seen, and felt, and as S. John Baptist likewise Ioh. 1. said he
saw the holy Ghost, when he only saw a Dove the sign of his presence, etc.
which manner of speech is not v^usuall with the holy Fathers. Thou see him,
(says S. Chrysostom speaking of Christ in the Sacrament) Thou touchest him,
Thou eatest him, etc. Which is the same in sense which Pope Nicholas affirms,
only he explicateth somewhat more particularly the division and fraction of
the sacramental forms containing the very body and blood of Christ, under
them all and each particle of them entirely and vndeuidedly remaining. Insomuch
as John Husie falsely wont by our Adversaries to be claimed for Patron and
faithful witness of their doctrine, sings thus in certain verses of
Christ's presence and manner of being received in the Sacrament, which he with
us to his dying day constantly believed, as now also his disciples do after
him;

Non est panissed est Deus
Qui in cruce pependisti
Non augetur consecratus;
Nec diuisus in fractura,
Homo liberator meus:
Et in carne defecisti:
Nec co^sumptus fit mutatus;
Plenus D^us iu statura.
It is not bread, but God and Man my Redeemer, who hanged on a Cross, and died
in flesh for me. He is not increased on multiplied by Consecration, nor
divided in breaking of the Host, but God full in stature. So likewise S. Andrew
in his passion authentically (as Lib. 2. de Euchar.
Bellarmine proves) written by the Clergy of Achaia present thereat, told the
Procounsul Egeus; I daily offer to God, who is one and omnipotent, not the
flesh of Bulls and blood of Goats, but the immaculate Lamb upon the Altar,
whose flesh when all the multitude of faithful people has received, the Lamb
sacrificed integer persevere at ac viuus; does live and remain entire, etc. So
as Pope Nicholas doctrine understood of Christ's flesh being eaten in the
Sacrament, needs not Gratians Gloss to save it from heretical blaspemy and
the danger of a worse opinion then Berengarius renounced, unless he had
taught Christ's flesh in it self to have been torn with teeth and bloodily
eaten, as the Capharnites imagined; and S. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
the Gentile persecutors were went to object against poor Christians, that
they did eat the flesh of a certain man in their synaxes and meetings;
calling them men eaters, etc. to wit, because they did eat bread and drink
wine consecrated by the miraculous force of Christ's words into his natural
flesh and blood; as Saint Iustine that holy Martyr and great Christian
Philosopher told Aurelius the Emperor in his second Apology for Christians;
where he describes (as much as it was fit for him to open the heavenly
mysteries of our faith to the Gentiles) the whole order of the Sacrifice and
distribution of the Sacrament as it is now celebrated by us: this being the new
Oblation of the New Testament, as Lib. 2. c. 32.
S. Irenaeus terms it, instituted by Christ in his last Supper, and that
clean Sacrifice which Malachie foretold should succeed in place of the Jewish
Sacrifices, and be offered by the Gentiles in all places.

IN the next place I proceed to discuss the words of T. G.
our Savior concerning the eating his flesh and drinking his blood. John 6.

Where first I quarrel (he says) at P. Nicholas his manner of speech devised
purposely (as this mine Adversary here informs us) in a Counsel of learned
Bishops to make a slippery shifting heretic, make a direct and plain
confession of his faith concerning the real presence. His words are, as I have
related the^, that the very body of Christ in the Eucharist is broken with the
Priests hands, and torn in pieces with men's teeth, not sacrame^tally only, but
sensually. Which palpable absurdities, and carnal and Capernaiticall
assertions this Defendant would feign salve if he could; (but he shows
himself therein but a sorry Quackesaluer.)

1. By citing (besides some of his own counterfaits, of which more anon) a
saying of S. Chrysostom, affirming that the faithful see, and touch, and eat
Christ in the Eucharist: which neither they nor we deny; nor is it ought to the
purpose, unless Chrysostom should also say, that he is eaten in such sort as
Pope Nicholas averreth, not sacramentally only, or spiritually, but even
sensually: so he says. For so Galat. 3. 1.
the Galathians also saw him crucified (as the Apostle tells them) in their
sight: and some of the Ancients say that even Quotidie nascitur Christus.
Hieron. nomine in Ps. 86. Quotidie nobis crucifigitur: quotidie resurgit. Idem
in Psalm. 95. Quod Bern. explicatius, in vigil. nativ. ser. 6. Immolatur adhuc
quotidie, donec mortem eius annuncia^ us: (...) videtur, dum natiuitatem eius
fideliter repraesentamus.
at this day he is crucified.

2. By telling us that Christ's glorified body is incapable of renting: which
if it be so, how says Pope Nicholas that it is torn in pieces? This is a
strange manner of saluing him, to tell us that that cannot be done, which he in
precise terms says is usually done. And mark here (I pray you how these men
Quod Cardano S^al. de su^ti^. exerc. 149. More Cingarorum in Alpinis mercatibus
intus for as mitt^nt corrigiolam.
play fast and loose with us. They tell us, when we press them with the
indignity of the thing, that Christ's body cannot be bruised now or broken:
and this is (it seems) when they speak mystically or shiftingly, as he
speaks. But when they make a plain and direct confession (for so he says
Pope Nicholas did when he thus spoke, and no forms are more exact, says
``Nullae sunt exactior^s formulae loquendi in materia fide^, quam eae, quibus
vtuntur, qui haeresin abiurant Bellar. de imag. c. 22.
Bellarmine, then those forms of abiuration are) then they acknowledge that
according to their says and belief (if they believe at least as they speak,
and do not dally with us and delude us) Christ's very body is sensually rent
and torn in pieces in the Sacrament.

3. By granting that if he had taught that Christ's flesh in it self were torn
with teeth, etc. it were indeed heretical blasphemy. And what other thing (I
pray you) does Pope Nicholas affirm, when he says that Non solum sacramentum,
sed verum corpus and sanguine^ Christi in veritate sensual^ter, and non in
sacramento tantum tracta ^i and frangi Durand. ex Nicol. in ration. divine. l.
4. p. 2. ad 6. p. can.
Christ's very body not in the Sacrament only, but in very truth and sensually
is torn in pieces with men's teeth? This is not to excuse him, but to accuse
and condemn him both of heresy and blasphemy.

4. By affirming that the Popes words need not Gratians Gloss to save them
from any such imputation. Yet Gabriel Biel a great Schooleman (whom we rather
believe) freely confesses that Pope Nicholas in so saying Veritatem excessit
Gabr. Biel in Can Miss. lect 80.
exceeded the truth; (as another Gloss on Gratian also Gloss. ad Great de
consecr did. 2. c. vtrum.
elsewhere acknowledges) and while he sought to shun one error ran into
another: wherein Quae nec Roffensis co^tra Oecolamp. l. 2. c 12. nec Caietanus
lib. de coena Domini ab errore liberare potuerunt. Canus loc. Co^mun. l. 5. c.
1.
others also of their own writers dare not defend him. So that the Pops
sitting in his Chair, yea and in Council too, with all his learned Bishops,
like himself, round about him, consistorially to censure and to determine
truth in matter of faith, may yet err for all his infallibility, so much and
so often b^agged of. And it was not unwisely done of Bellarmine to let this
pass, De Pontif. Romans lib. 4.
where he relates and refuteth as well as he may, the several errors and
heresies that their Popes are charged with.

* 2. Here by the way (though little to the present purpose, to wit, the
clearing of Pope Nicholas) that he may fill up his Discourse with some show of
allegations;

1. He tells us that John Husse was of their judgment concerning the
Sacrament; and alleges a sorry Rome to prove it; which whence he has, I
know not, nor am able to say, what Husse sometime held: But sure I am that in
the Council of Constance one of the Articles, wherewith he was charged, and
for which condemned, and (contrary to the Emperors safeconduct granted him)
perfidious^^ burnt, was Council. Constant. Sess. 15. art. 17.
the denial of Transubstantiation as a device invented to delude simple people
with: and the teaching and maintaining as well publicly as privately that the
substance of bread, and material bread, remained after Consecration in the
Sacrament; deposed by many that had heard him, and that had argued about it
with him.

2. He cites a few Fathers, some forged, as the Author of the Passion of S.
Andrew; some falsified, as that of Iustine Martyr; (which shall by and by be
examined) some saying nothing but what we will willingly yield him, as both
Irenaeus, and that also out of the apocryphal Story of S. Andrew: which
howsoever he says that Bellarmine (which is his wonted manner of proof) has
proved to be authentical: Yet neither are his proofs pregnant; no just
antiquity being produced for it; and by To which add Card. Baronius Annal.
Tom. 1. ann. 44. nu. 42. and 43. and ann 69. number. 34. acknowledging as much.
others of their own (as we showed before) it is confessed to be apocryphal:
and, if we may believe Bellarmine himself, there is some gross untruth in it.
For this uncertain Author affirms that S. Andrew was not nailed with nails,
but with cords eyed to the cross, (as their counterfeit Abdias Babylon.
histor. lib. 3.
Abdie also says) that he might live the longer in pain, as he did preaching
two days together as he hung there alive: Whereas, if Bellarm. de cult. Sanct.
l. 2. c. 27.
Bellarmine may be believed, it was not so, but he was with nails fastened, as
Ioh. 20. 25.
Christ was, to the Cross.

But to leave that, as saying nothing that we need stick at; no more then we
do at ought that out of Irenaeus is alleged. I may not let pass his
falsifying of Iustine Martyr; whom having so little occasion to allege here,
he may well seem for no other end to have alleged, but to falsify what he
says of this Sacrament; in which kind he has the best gift one of them that
ever I knew any. Iustine Martyr (says he) in his 2. Apology, where, as far as
was fit, etc. he describes the whole order of the Sacrifice and distribution
of the Sacrament as it is now celebrated by us, tells Antoninus the Emperor
that they did therein eat bread and drink wine converted by the miraculous
force of Christ's words into his natural flesh and blood. Now hear Justines
own words: Having spoken before of Baptism: After this (says he) is there
bread and a cup of water and wine presented to the Prelate of the brethren: Who
receiving the same sends up praise and glory to the Father of all, by the
name of the Son and the holy Ghost; and at large gives thanks to him for
being vouchsafed to be by him reputed worthy of these things. And when he has
ended his prayers and thanksgiving, all the people answer, Amen. Now when the
Prelate has given thanks, and all the people have answered, those that we
call Deacons, give to each one of those that be present to partake of
Eucharisticatum. i. sanctificatum and benedictum. Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. c.
10.
the blessed Bread, and wine and water, and they carry of it to those that be
not present. And this food is with us called the Eucharist; which none may
partake of but those that believe, have been baptized, and live as Christ
taught. For we receive not these things as common Bread and Wine; but in like
manner as Christ our Savior being by the word of God incarnate had flesh and
blood, so have we been taught that the food Eucharistiam factum. Ibid. l. 2.
c. 4.
blessed by the word of prayer that is from him, whereby our blood and flesh by
a change are nourished, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus Christ incarnate.
For so in the Gospels have the Apostles delivered that Jesus enjoined them,
having taken the bread and given thanks to say, Do this in remembrance of me;
This is my Body: And taking the Cup likewise, and having given thanks to say;
This is my blood; and to give it to such only.

Now first tell me (I pray you) where there is any mention of a Sacrifice in
Iustine, distinct especially from the Sacrament, that this corrupter of all
almost that he deals with, should say; Iustine describes the whole order of
the Sacrifice and distribution of the Sacrament. True it is that the Fathers
term the Lords Supper often a Sacrifice; (as we also in our Liturgy:) partly
in regard of the Vnde and Eucharistia dicitur. Iansen concord. cap. 131. Vide
Aug. epist 120. and Eusebius. demonstr. Euang. l. 1. c. 10.
spiritual Sacrifice of praise therein offered; and partly because it is a
lively representation and commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice Heb. 13. 15.
once offered on the Cross; (as their Lombard. sent. l 4. d. 22.
Master of the Sentences himself explaineth it;) and partly also because
Tertull. contr. Marc. l. 4. Ambr. in Luc. c. 1. Gaudent. in Exodus tract. 2. and
Aug. contr. Faust. l. 6. c. 5. and l. 20. c 21. and contr. advers. leg. and
proph. c. 18.
it succeeds in the room of the Passover, and those other Sacrifices, that
in the old Testament were offered. But that they ever dreamed of any other
Sacrifice distinct and diverse from the Sacrament, no Papist shall ever be able
to prove. Nor either out of our Saviors words, or Iustines report can be
gathered.

2. Observe how justly Iustine describes the whole order of this Sacrifice and
distribution of the Sacrament, as it is celebrated by them. Yea, mark and
judge (I pray you) whether his description of it come nearer unto ours or unto
theirs.

1. Where are all those crossings and bendings, and ^ringes, and turnings, and
eleuations, and adorations, and mimicke gestures, and apish sooleries that
their Masse-bookes enjoin?

2. As well the cup as the bread is given to all present; which Iustine also
says that Christ enjoined them to give; and which Pope Gelasius Diuisio vnius
eiusdem mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest provenice. Gelas. Pp. apud
Great. de consecr. d. 2. c. ^o^perimus.
says cannot be severed from the Bread without great Sacrilege. Whereas with
them the people may not meddle at all with it.

How many toys are there in theirs that are not touched at all in Iustine? And
again, what is there in Iustines relation, that is not found in our
Protestanticall (as he terms it) communion? that sending of it home
ordinarily only excepted, which neither they themselves use ordinarily when
they celebrate, and the danger of repair hindering access (it seems) then
occasioned.

3. Where does Iustine say, as this corrupt corrupter reports him, that they
eat bread and drink wine converted by the miraculous force of Christ's words
into his natural flesh and blood? No one word in him of a miraculous
conversion, nor of their being the natural flesh and blood of Christ. There is
mention indeed of a change, and that a natural change, not of the creatures
into Christ's natural flesh and blood, but of the blessed food, Or the food
made the Eucharist (as De Eucharist. lib. 2. c. 4.
Bellarmine translateth it) into our flesh. Which words though Bellarm. ibid.
Bellarmine would feign wrest awry, because they wring him, yet no Grammar will
admit any other sense of them. From whence it is apparent that the blessed
food that Iustine speaks of, is not really, but symbolically and
figuratively Christ's body. For Eucharistia nutriri substantiam corporis nostri,
nihil absurdius fingi potest. Bellarm. Ibid.
there can nothing be devised more absurd (says Bellarmine) then that the
Substance of our bodies should be nourished with Christ's flesh. But our flesh
and blood (and that, I hope, is the substance of our Bodies; as Irenaeus also
expressly speaks) are nourished (says Iustine) by the blessed food, or by
the Bread and Wine made the Eucharist, and that (...). N. P.
by a * Ex quibus augetur carnis nostrae Substantia. Iren. l. 4 c. 5.
change of the things received. The blessed food therefore that Iustine
speaks of, is not really Christ's natural Body, as this mis-reporter and
mis-expounder of him affirms.

NEither can ever the Minister prove his ensuing Assertion, that Christ's
corporal presence in the thing eaten must necessarily infer and enforce a
corporal and carnal manner of eating him, unless his body had therein a
corporal extensiue and sensible manner of existing; which is by no Catholic
Author affirmed; and so no heinous and unseemly thing is in such a manner of
receiving Christ's body committed: For avoiding whereof we should be enforced to
run to a figurative interpretation of our Saviors speeches, Ioh. 6. So as to
exclude the real receiving of our Saviors flesh and blood in the Sacrament;
as out of an obscure place of S. Austin, cited by him page 7. and fully Lib. 2.
de Euchar.
answered by Cardinal Bellarmine, he falsely gathers; the place proouing no
more but that our Saviors speech concerning the eating of his flesh and
drinking of his blood is figurative so far forth as that his flesh was not
carnally to be eaten, but after a Sacramental and invisible manner, as the
signs of bread and wine do contain them; the chief end of his being so
received by us being indeed to communicate with Christ's passion, and profitably
to lay up in our memories that his flesh was wounded for us, as S. Austin in
that place affirms. Whose Vide apud Bellarm. l. 2. de Euchar.
plain places for the real receiving of our Saviors body and blood in the
Sacrament my superficial Adversary takes no notice of, but as Eeles love
rather to hide themselves in dirt then to swim in clear waters; so are he and
his companions glad to hide themselves and their heretical novelties, in dark
and obscure places of the holy Fathers, not regarding their pregnant and plain
testimonies for us, and against them, unanswerably in other places expressed.

3. AT length he pleases to recollect himself and T. G.
return to the matter in hand. Christ's corporal presence (says he) in the
thing eaten, does not necessarily infer and enforce a corporal and carnal
manner of eating him, unless his body had therein a corporal, extensiue and
sensible manner of existing.

To pass by these mystical and metaphysicall terms, wherewith he and his
Associates are wont to enwrap and inuolue themselves, like Eeles in mire and
mud (as himself speaks) that their absurd and senseless doctrines, or
dotages rather, may not be discerned; nor to insist upon the implication of
contradiction, when he says that Christ's body is corporally, that is, bodily
present in the Eucharist, and yet has there no corporal, that is, bodily
existence: a body bodily present, and yet not bodily existing; like the
Marcionites riddles in Tertullian; A man no man; Flesh no flesh; r Vide
Tertull. de carn. Christi, and contr. Marc. lib. 4. and 5.
a body no body; blood no blood: or, A body; but not as a body; with blood, but
not as blood; in a place, but not as in a place; with qualities, but not
qualitatiuely; with quantity, but not quantitatiuely. Such strange fancies and
prodigies are these men's brains possessed with.

1. If the one do not follow upon the other, Pope Nicholas was much to blame,
when he inferred thereupon that Christ's very body was sensually (that is as
much, if not more then corporally) chewed and eaten in the Eucharist.

2. If it be true that Bellarmine tells us, that Carnaliter in nobis manner
per Eucharistiam, Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 12.
by the Eucharist Christ remains carnally in us: which he cites also, but
with a foul hand, and Per Eucharistiam.
some of his own words foisted in, as a saying of S. Hilaries: then sure he
must needs carnally be eaten of us. And to see how inconstant error is, and how
contrary to it self: one while he says that there is Manducatio corporalis.
Ibid.
a corporal eating of Christ's body in the Sacrament; as their common tenent
is: (and how is he not then corporaelly eaten?) and that Christ carnally
thereby abides in us: And yet again another while; out of Athanasius, that
Manducationem corporis Christi non debere carnaliter accipi. Ibid. c. 11
the eating of Christ's body is not carnally to be taken, nor is Carnali modo.
Ibid. c. 14.
in a carnal manner to be understood.

In a word; 1. Either Bread or Christ's body must needs be corporally eaten in
the Eucharist: but not bread, if we believe them; for there is none there: and
to say that mere accidents only are chewed and fed upon is most senseless
and absurd: It remains therefore that Christ's body, if that alone be there,
be corporally eaten there, as Pope Nicholas before affirmed.

2. Either Christ's flesh is eaten there corporally, or spiritually only. If
corporally, why does this fellow stick at it, and is so loath to acknowledge
it? If spiritually only, why urge they those passages of John 6. to prove
(...) corporal and bodily manducation of Christ's body in the Eucharist? And so
come we to examine that place by them so much and so often urged to prove such a
carnal eating of Christ.

4. Here this profound and learned Doctor tells us, that his superficial
Adversary has in an unlearned and slender manner endeavored to prove that
our Saviors discourse there is not to be understood of Sacramental
Manducation, but of spiritual eating his flesh and blood by believing in him.

I propound two Propositions to be proved.

1. That the words are not to be understood of any such corporal eating and
drinking, as they hold.

2. That Christ does not in that whole discourse speak of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, which was not as yet instituted, but of such spiritual feeding on
Christ, as is performed, not in the Sacrament only, but out of it also.

The former I prove by a plain place of S. Augustine; which this Adversary,
referring us still for an answer to Bellarmine, (from whom he borrows the
most that he has) says is an obscure place, and is pleased a little after to
term it no better then dirt, which we Protestants, like Eeles, desire to
hide our selves in.

1. Were it not an absurd thing for Augustine to speak ^bscurely there, where
he gives rules for the opening and right understanding of places obscure?
where should he speak more plainly and perspicuously then there; where his
maine aim is to make things clear?

2. This shifters answer borrowed from Bellarmine is but a bare shift; to wit,
that the place proves no more, but that our Saviors speech concerning the
eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood is figurative so far forth, as
that his flesh was not carnally to be eaten, and in a bloody manner, as flesh
sold in the shambles is wont to be eaten, etc. As if flesh bought in the
shambles used to be eaten raw and in bloody manner. Here is a deal of dirt
indeed and mud raised to trouble Augustines clear water. The Question is
whether our Saviors words be to be understood properly or figuratively. Non
possunt figurate accipi sed proprie. Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. c. (...).
They say properly; and not figuratively: Augustine says figuratively; and so
consequently, not properly: which is as much as is here required. Caro Christi
vere ac proprie manducatur. Bellarm. de Euchar. (...). 1. c. 11.
Christ's body (says Bellar mine) is with the body properly eaten in the
Eucharist. But it is no proper, but a figurative eating, says Augustine, that
Christ speaks of John 6. It is no such eating of Christ's body therefore, as
they imagine to be in the Eucharist. Yea so contrary to them, and so pregnant
for us is that passage of Augustine, that in Fulbertus his works, where those
words of his are related, they have with a foul insertion branded them for
Facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere. Figura est ergo, ^icet hereti^us, etc.
Apud Fulbertum in excerp^is post Se^m ^o tr. Iud. p. 168.
heretical.

Yea but (says mine Adversary) there are many plain places in Augustine,
cited by Bellarmine, for the real receiving of Christ; which my superficial
Adversary takes no notice of. Bellarmine is still much in this man's mouth;
and the superficialnesse of his silly and unlearned Adversary. But this (I am
sure) is a very unlearned, slender and superficial proof of points
questioned, to turn his Reader over still for satisfaction to some other. Yet
I will do him the couttesie, since he tells us of other plain places in
Augustine to present him with one of them, though such an one (it may be) as
will not easily go down with him. Augustine speaking of this place in John on
Psalm. 98. says that Christ having used those words, Ioh 6. 35.
Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you have
no life in you. When some understood them Stulte carnaliter.
foolishly and carnally, he taught them to understand them Spiritaliter
intelligere.
spiritually; saying, Ioh. 6. 63.
It is the Spirit that quickneth; the flesh profits nothing: the words that I
speak are Spirit and life. As if he should have said; understand you
spiritually what I have spoken. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducatur, iestis
and bibituri illum sanguine^ quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent.
You are not to eat that body which you see, and to drink that blood which
they will shed that shall crucify me. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendaui:
spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos. Etsi necesse est illud visibiliter
celebrari, oport^t tamen inuifibiliter intelligi. N. P.
I have commended a kind of Sacrament unto you; which being spiritually
understood will quicken you. Though it must be visibly colebrated, yet is it
inuisibly to be understood. Thus Augustine in plain terms: and yet if we
believe these men, the very same body of Christ that was then seen, and that
very same blood that was shed on the Cross is orally eaten and drunk in the
Eucharist.

ANd surely if the Authority of holy Fathers might prevail with the Minister
further then himself lists, he cannot be so ignorant as not to know that all
the ancient Doctors expounding or treating of Christ's words, Ioh. 6. have
literally understood them of the Sacrament, as learned Tolet in c. 6. Joan.
Tolet, Saunders in lib. de illo cap.
Saunders, Bellarm. lib. 1. de Euchar.
Bellarmine, and other of our divines have particularly proved; collecting
from them invincible Testimonies also, to prove the verity of our Saviors
body and blood really in the Sacrament contained and received: Insomuch as S.
Austin affirms S. John purposely to have emitted all mention of the Sacrament
in our Saviors last Supper, because he had in the 6. Chap. of his Gospel so
particularly expressed the promised excellency and heavenly fruits thereof: and
many evident and unanswerable Arguments are by Catholic expositors of that
Chapter made to prove the same; which with silence my Adversary ouerpasseth.
First, (for example) our Savior from the 31. to the 60. verse of that Chapter
makes a difference betwixt the gift which his Father had given to the Jews
loving the world so as to give his only begotten Son for it, and the gift
which himself meant to give to them, speaking of the one as a gift already
past; but of the other as of a gift afterward to be given unto them.
Secondly, He compares the eating of his flesh to the Israelites eating of
Manna in the desert; which was a corporal food really eaten by them. Thirdly,
If by eating his flesh and drinking his blood our Savior meant no other thing
then that they should believe in him, it had been a strange course in him, who
so thirsted after the salvation of souls by an obscure manner of speaking to
drive away so many, such persons especially as had formerly followed him,
without any word added, which might open this obscure doctrine unto them; as
Card. Tollet excellently relates there the whole process of our Saviors
doctrine.

5. MY second Proposition is, that Christ in that T. G.
whole Discourse John 6 does not speak of the Eucharist.

That Augustine and diverse others of the ancient Fathers do expound it of
feeding on Christ, yet not corporally, but spiritually in the Sacrament (for so
Iansen. harmon. Euang. cap. 59. Sed and Gabr. Biel i^ Can. Miss. lect. 36.
Bishop Iansenius also ingenuously confesses that Augustine holds it to be
understood of seeding on Christ spiritually, not corporally; yea and so De
comestione sacramentali ait Dominus; Accipite and comedite; Hoc est corpus
meum: de comestione spirutuali dicit; Nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis,
etc. non habebitis vitam in vobis. Innocent. Pp. apud Durand in ration. divine.
l. 4. p. 2. ad p. 6. Can. and Biel in Can. lect. 36,
Pope Innocent himself, witness Durand, and Biel, and Magister apud Bonauen.
in l. 4. sen. d 9. q. 1.
Peter Lombard also, witness Bon^uenture, expound it:) I deny not; nor does it
at all impeach our cause in the maine point here in question of Christ's
corporal presence. Yet the rather herein we are enforced (together with
diverse Popish writers) to depart from them in that their exposition; so far
forth as they understand the same as directly speaking of the Eucharist, (as
for the one moitie of that discourse also even See below Bellar. de Eucharist.
l. 1. c. 5.
Bellarmine himself does) in regard of some erroneous consequences that they
were by that means enforced unto, which even the Papists themselves now
condemn, and for other weighty reasons, as in my first writing I show.

Yea but Catholic Expositors (says this Answerer) by many evident and
unanswerable Arguments have proved that it is so to be understood; which his
Adversary also (says he) euerpasseth with silence.

And say I, A Catholic Expositor (in their language) to wit, Corn. Iansenius
(no Jesuit now, for so this Answerer has informed me, and yet) a Bishop of
Flanders, in a work of his by common consent of the learned among them well
approved of (they are the Popes own Censurers words of it) has by evident
and unanswerable Arguments proved that it cannot so be understood; which this
mine adversary also ouerpasseth with silence: And the like also does Friar
Ferus: and Gabriel Biel at large in the place above recited.

But he will at length (I hope) say somewhat himself.

1. Our Savior (says he) makes a difference there between the gift which
his Father had ^iuen the Jews, and the gift that himself meant to give,
speaking of the one as past, of the other as to come: This out of Bellarmine.

I marvel where this man learned his Logic. He never is luckie in the
framing of his Consequences. There is a difference between the gift that God
the Father had given; and the gift that Christ would give: Ergo Christ's words
must needs be understood of his corporal presence in the Eucharist. How hang
these things together? or by what nec^ssity of consequence does the one follow
from the other?

For first, Are they diverse gifts that God the Father had given and that
Christ would give? then the words are not meant of Christ's corporal presence
in the Eucharist. For therein the very same Christ that the Father gave is
given to the faithful, as we say, spiritually; to both faithful and
unfaithful, as they affirm, corporally. And therefore the gift is not diverse,
as he says, but the self same.

2. If he say that the gift is diverse in regard of the diverse manner of
giving: who knows not that Christ, who had been given by his Father (and yet
by himself also) in his incarnation; was after Mat. 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 2.
given also by himself (and yet Romans 4. 23. and 8. 32.
by his Father also) in his passion. So their own Iansenius expounds his
words, that Quam and in mortem dabo. Iansen. vbi sup.
he would give his b^die also unto death: and Friar Ferus that In mortem ad
crucem. Fe^us in Joan. 6.
he would give it unto death on the Cross: for Illic coquetur panis iste.
Fer. ibid.
there (says he) was that bread to be basked: and there that flesh of his
(says Bonauenture) was to be boiled. Yea so Gregory of Valence, My flesh that
I will give, Quam dab^ 1. qua^ ^fferam pro mund^ vita. Greg. de. Val. de sacr.
Mis. 1. 1. c. 3.
that is, that I will offer for the life of the world: Where (think we) but on
the Cross?

2. Christ (says he) compares the eating of his flesh to the Jews eating of
Manna; which was a corporal food really eaten by them: and he must needs
therefore speak of the Eucharist. Bellarmine was not so absurd indeed as to o
In cruce facta est de^octio ca^^is, etc. Bonauen. in sent. l 4. c. 9. q 2.
argue on this manner. As if the Manna were not also a spiritual type of
Christ: and Christ might not as well compare the type with the truth; as the
type with the countertype; the type of the Manna 1 Cor. 10. 3.
a spiritual food then really taken with the spiritual eating of Christ that
was therein figured.

Or (...) ^f he might not compare our spiritual feeding on him with some
corporal food really eaten (which both here and elsewhere it is confessed, as
shall presently be showed, that he does) and yet not mention the Sacrament of
the Eucharist at all.

Bellarmine says indeed that Bellar. de Euchar. li. 1. c. 5.
Christ compares there with the Manna his body, not as it is received by
faith alone, (and then belike by Bellarmines grant it is truly so also
received, even out of the Sacrament) but as in the Sacrament it is received.
But how does he prove it?

1. From the Apostle, where 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3.
he compares Baptism with the red Sea, and Manna with the Eucharist.

But how does this follow; The Apostle does so there: therefore our Savior
does so here? especially considering how diverse the scope of either in either
place is. The Apostles scope is to show that 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
the old Israelites had as good and as sure outward pledges of Gods favor and
love as we Christians now have; and yet Verse. 5-12.
were not spared when they provoked him to wrath, for all that. Our Saviors
scope is to prove that the spiritual food of his flesh, which Ioh. 6. 27.
he there tendered them and advised them to seek after, was much more excellent
and of far greater virtue and efficacy, then the Manna that their Fathers
did once eat in the Wilderness. For, that Vide quae ex Cyri^lo Iansen.
concord. cap. 59.
that (considered as corporal food) was it self corruptible, and could not
Ioh. 6. 49.
preserve them that eat of it from death, whereas this was Verse. 27.
food incorruptible, and being spiritually fed on would cause them Verse. 50. 51.
to live for ever. For the Apostles purpose therefore it was necessary to
consider the Manna as a Sacrament and to compare the Eucharist with it, as with
our Baptism he had paralleled the Red Sea before. But for our Savior so to
do there was no necessity at all: Nor indeed does he consider the Manna there
as a Sacrament, no more then the Jews did, that there mentioned it to him; nor
does he speak cught of the Sacrament where he speaks of the Manna, as
Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 5. and 7. see below.
Bellarmine also himself acknowledges. His speech to them occasioned by the
Verse. 26.
bread that they had eaten of, and Verse. 31.
the Manna that they spoke of, is the very like to that other speech of his to
the Samaritane woman, occasioned by Ioh. 4. 7 10.
the water that he had asked of her; Verse. 13. 14.
He that drinks of this water shall thirst again; but he that drinks of
the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst more, etc. Which had it
been considered, would easily have assoyled those difficulties, that (as Vide
Iansen. in Joan. 6. 49.
Iansenius observes) so much troubled Augustine, and Caietan, yea and
Iansenius himself too. Nor was there any necessity that the bread of the
Eucharist should be more mentioned in the one place, then the drink of it in
the other.

2. Because Quia corpus Domini vt sumitur sola fide, non defuit veteribus.
Bellar. ibid.
Christ's body, as by faith it is received, was not wanting to those of old
time, that lived before Christ's Incarnation.

What he gives us here we take, that Christ's body was by faith received
even before he was incarnate. But how proves this that Christ therefore
spoke there of a sacramental eating of it? and not rather that he called home
those his carnal followers, from the corporal feeding, either on Ioh. 6. 26.
the bread that they had eaten of, or the Verse. 31.
Manna that they mentioned, and Verse. 34.
would feign still have been fed with, that they might live without labor, not
to an eating of sacramental bread, which they would not have much misliked,
but to that Verse. 27.
spiritual feeding, Verse 50, 51.
which as well their holy forefathers, as all true and faithful Christians
now, were eternally saved by. Yea this may be confirmed by Bellarmines own
grants: Who first confesses this as Constat in magna part capitis de
Eucharistia non agi. Solu^ quaestio est de illis verbis, Panis quem ego dabo,
etc. and sequentibus Bellarm, de Euchar. l. 1. c. 5.
a certain truth, that there is no mention at all of the Eucharist in all that
our Saviors discourse, before those words, (which were spoken after he had
done Verse. 3, 49.
speaking of the Manna) Verse. 51.
The bread that I will give is my flesh, that I will give for the life of the
world. 2. He grants expressly that those words, Verse. 35.
I am the brad of life; he that comes to me shall not hunger, etc. do Non
pertinent ad Sarramentum proprie Ibid. c. 7.
not properly belong to the Sacrament. 3. He observes Triplicis panis mentio
fit. Bellar ibid.
a three fold bread spoken of by our Savior: the first, that Panis materialis.
material bread, Verse. 11. 12.
that Christ had fed them withal: the second Secundum panem dicit seipsum esse.
spiritual bread, Verse. 33. 41, 51.
himself incarnate, Verse 27.
which he wishes them to get, and must Verse. 29. 35.
by faith be apprehended, that it may feed and refresh ^s: the third (he might
well have said Verse. 49.
M^nna, which he omitteth, termed also Verse. 31. ex P^ l. 78. 24, 25.
bread there, but) Panis Eucha^st cus. Ibid.
the sacramental bread (says he) expressed in those words. Verse. 51.
the bread that I will give, is my flesh that I will give for the life of the
world: as if this were not the same spiritual bread that he spoke of before.
4. Being pressed with this that there is no bread at all in the Eucharist o De
pane que^ da^u^us erat in coena. Ibid. c. 6.
(as they say) k and therefore it cannot be the sacramental bread that is there
spoken of, neither can it be meant of the bread that Christ was to give in the
Supper, as he elsewhere had said: he says that Non significat panem
triticeum. Ibid. c. 7.
bread there signifies not wheaten bread, Nec corpus Christi absolute.
nor Christ's body absolutely, but Cibum generatim.
meat or food in general: and so the sense of it is this; The bread, that is,
the meat, that I will give, is my flesh it self, that is to be crucified and
stain for the salvation of mankind. And he adds that Pan^s, i. cibus, etc.
Ibid.
peradventure our Savior called his flesh sometimes bread, to show that under
the species of bread it was to be eaten. So that all the force of Bellarmines
Argument is but merely coniecturall, and depends upon a peradventure, which
he cannot certainly auerre. But t Fortasse ideo carnem suam aliquoties panem
appellauit, etc. Ibid.
without all peradventure he affirmed before that the bread of which our
Savior said; Ioh. 6. 32.
My Father gives you the true bread from heaven; and Verse 33.
The bread of God is he that came from heaven and gives life to the world:
and Verse. 35.
I am the bread of life; he that comes to me shall never hunger; and he
that believes in me shall never thirst: and Verse. 41.
I am the bread that came down from heaven: and again, Verse. 48.
I am the bread of life: and verse. 50.
This is the bread that came down from heaven, that whosoever eats thereof
should never die: and verse. 51.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever: that the bread I say, of which he said all
this, was not the Encharist, or the sacramental bread, and none of all this
directly and properly concerns it. And well may we put it out of
peradventure, that the bread of which our Savior says verse. 51.
it is his flesh that he will give for the life of the world, and verse. 54.
whosoever eats of it, has life everlasting; verse. 53.
which no man also can have without it; is no other then that of which he had
before said, that verse. 35. 48.
it is himself, and that verse. 33.
it gives life to the world, and verse. 50. 51.
life everlasting to every one that eats of it: the rather also for that our
Savior himself so informs us when he says, (not Transitum facit ad panem
Euchar. Bell. ibid.
passing as Bellarmine would have it from a second bread to a third, but more
particularly expressing what the second bread was, and repeating more fully
what before he had said) verse. 51.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven: (...) verse. 35, 41, 50.
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: verse. eodem.
and the bread that I will give (what bread, think we, but the same that he
was even then speaking of? which yet was Bellar. vbi sup. c. 5. and 7.
none of the sacramental bread, says Bellarmine) is my flesh that I will give
for the life of the world. Those ensuing passages therefore are not meant of
the sacramental bread or the Eucharist, no more then the former. But leave we
Bellarmine, and return we to this our Defendant, whom we are principally now
to deal with.

His last Argument out of Tolet is not so much for the Eucharist, as against
the spiritual eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood by faith. If our
Savior had meant nothing but that they should believe in him, it had been a
strange course by such an obscure manner of speaking Ioh. 6. 66.
to drive away so many that had formerly followed him and believed in him,
without any word added that might open this dark doctrine.

To omit that here again he departs from Augustine, who Aug. in Ioa. tract.
26.
says thus expressly; Our Lord being about to give the holy Ghost called
himself bread exhorting us tobeleeue in him. Credere in eum, hoc est manducare
panem viuum.
For to believe in him is to eat that living bread. He that believes in him
feeds on him, Qui credit in eum, manducat. In^sibiliter sa^r, quin
invisibiliter renascitur: iuf us nouus in^us est: vbi novell^r, ibi satiatur.
he is fatted inuisibly, because he is inuisibly bred again: he is there
filled, where he is renewed. And again, Sang^ em fuderunt cum saeuire^t,
biberunt cum crederent. Aug (...) Joan. tr. 1. Saeuieutes ^ude^u^t, credentes
biberunt. de temp. 74. and de verb. Dom. 59.
They that shed Christ's blood, drank his blood when they believed in him; and
C^edendo biberunt, quem saeuiendo fuderunt. Idem. in Joan. tr. 8.
they drank it by believing in him.

1. It pleased our Savior sometime, as to Ioh. 3. 3.
Nicodemus, and to Math 13. 10, 13, 14.
the people oft-times, to speak things in obscure Parables, which yet to them
he did not explicate. See Chrysostom. on Joan. hom. 46.
Nor may any tax the wisdom of Christ without impiety for so doing. Yea Sic
oportebat vt diceretur, quod non ab omnibus intelligeretur. Aug. in Joan. tr.
27.
so (says Augustine) he spoke that here which he would not have all to
understand.

2. Those that went away from him upon it, were (as our Savior himself
intimates) Read Joan. 6. verse. 26. 36, 64, 69, 67, 69.
such as followed him only to be fed; and did not believe in him.

3. If his meaning had been that they were to eat of his very flesh it self
miraculously made of bread, as these men would make us believe, had it not
been as obscure and as difficult for them to have conceived it?

4. It is not true that our Savior added nothing to explicate himself.
Augustine in the place before cited Exponit quomodo id fiat quod loquitut; and
quid sit manducare corpus cius and sanguinem bibere. Aug. in Joan. tr. 26.
Citante etiam Biele in Can. Iect. 36. Beda in 1 Cor. 11. and Fulbert. in
excerpt. Exposuit modu^ attributionis and doni sui. Aug. ibid. 27.
shows that he did. And both in the beginning, when Ioh. 6. 32. 33
he first told them of this bread: and d they desired him ever to give them of
it; he makes them answer in these words; Verse. 35.
I am the bread of life: He that comes to me shall never hunger; and he that
believes in me shall never thirst: and in the process of his speech again,
Verse. 47.
Uerely, verily, I say unto you, He that believes in me, has life
everlasting: Whereby Iansen. harmon. cap. 59.
says Iansenius, they might well have understood, in what manner he would
give them his flesh to eat. Who also thence gathers (agreeably to Augustine
and other of the Ancients) that Idem esse manducare se, and credere in se. Et
Biel. Idem est in Christum credere, and in Christum ite: and qui credit in
Christum, incorporatur Christo; and per hoc manducat Christum.
it is all one to feed on Christ, and to believe in him: As also in the
Conclusion and shutting up of all, when he saw how they mistook him: Verse 63.
It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh avails nothing: the words that I
speak are spirit and life. In which words says ^ansen vbi sup.
the same Iansenius (out of Chrysostom, Theophylact, and b Verse. 34.
Augustine) he shows how they should understand what before he had said.

MY Adversaries Arguments to the contrary are merely N. P.
topicall, and prove nothing. For first it is false, that the faithful Jews
before Christ did sacramentally receive our Savior as well as we: which he
barely affirms and proves not, page 7.

Secondly, those words of Christ, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man
and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you; was a precept
respectively given and only obliging such persons to an actual receiving of
the Sacrament as they were to whom it was vttred; such persons (to wit) as are
by age capable of Sacramental manducation. And surely if Christ's words be
only understood, as my Adversary would have them, of spiritual eating Christ
by faith, they must necessarily import a precept more impossible to be
fulfilled by children then sacramentally to receive him. For sooner may
children receive the Sacrament, especially drink of the consecrated Chalice
(as anciently in the Greek and Latin Churches they were went to do) then
actually believe in him.

His next Argument page 8. makes more (if this Minister had wit to discern
the force thereof) against his own exposition of Christ's words, then it does
against our understanding of them. For as all that receive Sacramentally
Christ's flesh and blood, are not saved; no more are all that spiritually and by
faith eat him. This being sufficient for the verity of our Saviors speeches
that the Sacrament is ordained to produce those excellent and heavenly effects
which Christ's promises there import in the souls of such as worthily receive
it; and such centrarily as come unworthily thereunto receive death and
judgment to themselves by it.

As for those few Catholic writers who have denied Christ's words in that 6.
Chap. of Saint John to have been understood at all of Sacramental
manducation; I answer, that their number is not great, and their authority of
no weight at all against a numberless multitude of ancient Fathers and modern
Doctors of better note contrarily understanding them; yielding better reasons
for that their literal true explication, and easily soluing all heretical
Objections gathered from the literal sense of our Saviors words in that
Chapter against our communion under one kind and other points of Catholic
doctrine. And sithence my Aduersaerie will not stick to contemn these very
Authors in their other known Catholic doctrines, why does he so highly value
and mainely urge them in this opinion, wherein without any heretical intention
or obstinacy of Judgment they differ from us?

6. AT length he comes to refute mine Arguments; T. G.
which he says are topicall, and prove nothing.

My first Argument is this:

None are saved but such as so feed on Christ, as is there spoken of. But many
are saved that never fed on Christ in the Eucharist; as the Fathers before
Christ; the children of the faithful that die infants, etc. Ergo it is not
spoken of the Eucharist.

To this he answers.

1. That I barely affirm that the Jews before Christ did sacramentally
receive Christ as well as we, but I prove it not. It is true; I say obiter
that they fed on Christ's flesh spiritually as well as we now do: though that
be no part of mine Argument. And I add a place or two of Augustine for the
proof of it grounded on the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 10. 3, 4. Which seeing
that this shifter ouerslippeth, let him hear Bishop Iansenius himself (not to
go any further) relate a little more at large, to wit, that Iansen. ibid. Boni
manna manducando viuificati sunt: eo quod sub visibi^^ illo cibo etiam
spiritualiter manducauerunt ve^um panem vitae per manna significa^um quem and
nos ede^do viuificamur.
the good Jews in the old Testament were quickened by eating of Manna, because
under that visible food they also spiritually did eat the true Bread of Life
by Manna signified. Or if Iansenius will not serve, let him hear their great
Albert; Albert. Magn. de Sacram. Euchar. sermon, 17 Modus manducationis triplex,
Sacramentalis tantum, spiritualis tantum, sacramentalis and spiritualis simul.
There is (says he) a threefold eating of Christ; sacramentally only,
spiritually only, or sacramentally and spiritually both. In the first sort
Omnes saluandi ab origin mundi.
all that ever were saved did eat: in the second sort evil Christians eat
him in the Sacrament: in the third sort, good communicants only. And again,
alleging those words of the Apostle; Idem ibid. se^m. 18 omnes ^oni veteres
in Manna cibum inuisibile. n. s^. Christum spiritu^ter in^exerunt, crediderunt,
gustauerunt, etc.
All those good Ancients in the Manna understood believed and tasted Christ
himself, and were thereby saved. And this no Papist (I suppose) will be so
absurd as to deny. But this is but a by-matter, no part of the maine Argument;
and therefore I forbear here to insist further on it.

2. That is as impossible for children to eat Christ by faith spiritually, as
to receive him sacramentally in the Eucharist.

Not to run out into more Questions then needs must at the present, I answer:

1. Many young ones die, though at years of discretion, when in ordinary course
they may well have faith, and believe actually, yet ere they be admitted to the
Eucharist: and yet is not their salvation at all thereby preindiced.

2. By the doctrine of their Church even B^llarm. de Bapt. l. 1. c. 11. ex
Council. Tr^dent. sess. 7. can. 13. Et Biel. in Can Miss lect 36. De pueris
eti^m quod spiritualiter manducant corpus Christi in susceptione baptismatis,
patet de consecr. did. 2. Quia passus
Infants have an habit of faith infused into them in Baptism.

3. Neither is it a thing impossible for the Spirit of God by an extraordinary
manner to work faith in such infants as are to be saved dying before years of
discretion; no more then it was to regenerate John Baptist Luke 1. 15.
in his mothers womb: of whom Gregory therefore says that he was Prius quam
nasceretur renatus Gr^g. mor. lib. 3. cap. 4.
new bred yet unborn.

4. The speech is of the same latitude and extent at least with those other;
Ioh. 6. 47. and 3. 18.
whosoever believes in me, has life eternal: And, John 3. verse. 36
Whosoever believes not in the Son of God. shall never ^tam, pro viuere; vti
videre mortem pro mori. Psalm. 89. verse. 48. and John 8. 51.
live, but Ioh. 3. verse. 18. Mark. 16. verse. 16.
shall be damned: and the like; which comprehend those only, to whom it
appertains actually to come unto Christ, and to believe in him, Iansen. vbi
sup.
says Iansenius. And that is enough for my purpose.

7. My second Argument was thus framed.

All that so feed on Christ, are eternally saved: our Savior so Ioh. 6. 50,
51, 58.
says.

But many feed on the Eucharist that are eternally damned.

Ergo Christ speaks not there of orall eating in the Eucharist.

Now this Argument (says he) if I had wit to discern the force of it, makes
more against us then against them. And why so? Forsooth, because all are not
saved that spiritually and by faith feed on Christ. This is like B^llarmines
bold assertion, that Aliquos credentes in Christum in aeternum perire, quod
ante moriantur, quam a Sacerdote absolui potuerint. Bellarm. de poenit. l 3. c.
2.
some that believe in Christ perish eternally, because they die before they can
have a Priest to assoile them. And what is this but to say that all that do
truly believe in Christ are not saved? Yea what is this (not to repeat all the
allegations both of Scripture and Fathers produced for the proof of the
Proposition, which he purposely passes over, not being able to answer) but to
give our Savior himself and the holy Ghost the lie, who so often say; Ioh. 3.
14, 15, 16, 18, 36. and 6. 47. and 7. 39. Romans 10. 11. etc.
Whosoever believes in him shall be saved.

Nor is it sufficient (as he adds) for to verify our Saviors speeches that
the Sacrament is ordained to produce such effects in the Souls of such as
worthily receive it, though the contrary befall those that do unworthily
re^ceiue it. For (to answer them again in the words of one of their own
Authors) our Saviors words imply manifestly Manducationis and potus certum
effectum. Iansen. concord. c. 59.
a certain effect (as he speaks) not a matter that may be: (as Augustine and
Cyril also in the places cited by me there show,) whereupon also he concludes
that Hinc manife stum euadit, non omnes. etc. Idem ibid.
it is apparent thence that all are not there said to eat the flesh of Christ
and drink his blood, that receive the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood.

8. To their own Authors, Cardinals, Schoelemen, Canonists, public
Professors, or Readers of Divinity in their Universities, ( Feius in Joan. 6.
and Mathias Doring in replic. super. Lyr. in Psalm. 110.
Friars I might have said too,) and in steed of Jesuits (being better informed
by him) I now say, Bishops, which will not much mend the matter.

1. He answers that they be but few in number, and their authority of no
great weight, in regard of those that hold the contrary. Yet one of their own
Bishops (though of an other mind himself) confesses, that there are Ex ipsis
Catholicis perm^lti ^unt, qui totum is^um sermonem ad spiritualem manducationem
referunt: Sebastian Oxoniens. Epi^c. ad part. 3. Thom. q. 76. nu. 28.
very many of them that are of this judgment. But had there been but one or
two of them (especially of note, as some of them were) of some one sort, it
might well have weighed much on our side. For (...). Isidor. Pesus. ep. 228. l.
2.
the witness of an adversary is of no small weight. How much more, when so
many of all sorts, of so special repute, shall so uniformly speak for us,
and herein accord with us?

2. He demands of his Adversary, why he does so highly value them and
mainely urge them herein, when in other points he will not stick to contemn
them. Had he any wit in his adle brain, he would never have asked this idle
Question It is as if in a Law-suite, because a man takes hold (as he may well
do) of somewhat that falls from his Adversaries, or is granted him and
confessed by them, because it furthereth his own cause, he were therefore
bound to believe or admit all that ever they say to the prejudice of his right.
The greater differences are between them and us, yea in the present
controversy concerning the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, the
less cause there is to suspect that they should speak partially for us; and
the greater cause to suppose they were by evidence of truth enforced to
confess that, that should take away some of those grounds, whereby the cause
that themselves stiffely maintained, is ordinarily vpheld.

3. He adds in the end: These men herein without heretical intention, or
obstin^cie of judgment differed from us. Whom he means by that, Us, I leave
to himself to explain: And the less heretical their intention was (as he
understands heretical) the less suspicion there is of collusion or any
purpose therein to gratify us; and so much the stronger therefore is their
testimony for us. Confessio propria testimo^is quibusnis; ^estesque non
familiares domesticis praeferuntur. Menoch. lib. 2. a^b. cas. ^26. and Althus.
dicaeolog. l. 3. c. 45.
The testimony of a mere stranger, or no well-willer to the cause makes it
to be of more moment. But when he speaks of obstinacy of judgment, he
glaunceth at a secret in their Church, which I shall in a word or two take
occasion hereby to discover. It is no matter what a man hold or maintain among
them, so long as he acknowledges the Popes Supremacy, the maine pillar of
their faith, and submit himself and his works wholly to his censure, and so
be ready to unsay what he says, when he will have him so to do. For his
censure indeed alone is that which they call commonly the censure of the
Church. And to this purpose they confess that many of their writers have held
the very same points, for which they condemn us now as Heretics, of whom yet
they say that they were not Heretics, because they submitted themselves to
this Censure. I will add an instance or two hereof out of Bellarmine.

1. In this very particular; he confesses that Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 1.
cap. 5.
many of the Authors before mentioned expound that 6. Chap. of John as the
Heretics do: but they submit themselves (says he) and their writings to the
Censure of the Councels and Popes; which the Heretics do not.

2. In the present controversy, Durandus held not a Transubstantiation, but a
transformation in the Sacrament: Idem ibid. lib. 3. cap. 13.
which opinion (says he) is heretical; and yet was he no Heretic; because
he was ready to yield to the judgment of the Church.

3. Ambrose Catharines opinion of the Ministers intention in the Sacrament,
differs not ( Idem de Sacram. in Genesis lib. 1. cap. 27.
says he) for ought I see, from the opinion of Chemnicius and other Heretics,
save that he in the end of his book submits himself to the Apostolic Sea
and Council.

4. Durandus in the point concerning merit of works Idem de iustific. lib. 3.
cap. 16.
held as we now do, that no reward was due to them but out of Gods mere
liberality, and that it were temerarious and blasphemous to say, that God were
unjust, if he should not so reward them: And yet was he also no Heretic for
the cause beforementioned.

And thus are we at length arrived (after much winding to and fro, while we
follow a shifting wind) at the end of the former part of my Discourse: wherein
has been showed, beside other Arguments, confirming the same, by the
confession of their own Authors, that those places of Scripture do not
enforce any such corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament as Papists
maintain, which they commonly produce to prove it.

Division 7.
Page 9. My Adversary becomes a more formal N. P.
Disputant then before: and against our Doctrines of Transubstantiation and
real presence of our Savior in the Sacrament ignorantly by him in many places
confounded he frames this wise Argument; Look what our Savior took, that he
blessed: what he blessed that he brake; what he brake that he delivered to his
Disciples; what he delivered, of that he said, This is my Body:

But it was bread that he took:

And bread therefore that he blessed; bread that he brake; and bread that he
delivered; and bread consequently of which he said, This is my Body.



Which is a formel^sse and fallacious kind of arguing, wholly forcelesse, if
we suppose the former doctrine of the holy Fathers to be true, that Christ's
words have force now as then they had, when himself vttred them, to change the
substance of Bread and Wine into his Body and Blood: As if after the like
manner of the water converted by Christ into wine, I should make this
deduction: The Ministers drew water out of the well; carried what they drew:
therefore that which they drew and carried was water. If the Minister shall
tell me, that they drew water; but carried it made wine by our Saviors
omnipotent operation: so I will tell him, that Christ took bread and wine, and
converted them by his miraculous and omnipotent benediction into his own body
and blood before he distributed them, as he by his plain words pronounced of
them, saying, This is my Body, etc.

HItherto, if you will believe this worthy Doctor, his Adversary has disputed
without form or figure, T. G.
that you may not marvel why his Answer is so diffused, deformed and
mis-figured; for the fault (it seems) was in his Adversaries misshapen
Syllogismes; which made him also so loath to meddle with any of them. Here (he
confesses) he becomes a more formal Dissutant; and I hope therefore we
shall find him a more formal Defendant.

Yet ere he come to my first Argument he must needs have a fling at me for
confounding their doctrine of Transsubstantiation and the real presence
(corporal, he should have said for more perspicuitie; for so I speak)
ignorantly the one with the other. I perceive well what his drift herein is; to
make some believe that howsoever Transubstantiation was not generally held till
of late times; yet a real, that is a corporal presence was ever acknowledged.
But if we will believe Bellarmine, Aquinas, and the Council of Trent, the one
of them is every jot as ancient as the other, yea the one cannot possibly be
without the other. Council. Trident. sess. 13. cap. 4. Et idem Bellarm, de
Euchar. l. 3. c. 11.
This, (the Council of Trent tells us,) was always the faith of the Church,
that by the consecration of Bread and Wine, the whole Substance of the Bread
was turned into the Substance of Christ's body, and the whole Substance of wine
into his Blood. And, Thom. Aq. sum part 3. q. 75. art. 3.
A body, (says Aquinas) cannot be, where it was not before, but either by
local motion, or by the conversion of some other thing into it. But it is
manifest that Christ's body begins not to be in the Sacrament by any local
motion: And therefore it must needs come there by the conversion of the bread
into it. Yea, Idem ibid. art. 4.
by local motion it cannot be there, nor by any means but by this. And
Bellarm. clean contrary to himself elsewhere, Bellar. in Apolog. contr.
Praefat. monitor. Reg. Jacob. c 1.
It cannot be, that the words of Christ should be true, but by such a
conversion and transmutation as the Catholic Church calls
Transubstantiation. It is no matter of ignorance therefore in this Controversy
to confound those things, which those we deal with conioyne, yea which they
tell us cannot be dis-ioyned.

To overthrow this their opinion then of Transubstantiation and Christ's
corporal presence in the Eucharist; I first reason from the Context, Mat 26
26. Mark. 14. 22.
Christ took bread, and blessed it, and gave it, and said; This is my body.
Whence I thus argued: What Christ took, he blessed; what he blessed, he
brake; what he brake, he delivered; what he delivered, of that he said, This is
my body.



But it was bread that he took, blessed, brake and delivered; ( Steph Durant.
de ritib. Eccles. l. 2. c. 38.
It is bread, says Durant a Popish writer, that all those verbes are referred
to.)

It was bread therefore of which he said, This is my body.

Now this (says mine Adversary forgetting, it seems, what he had said but
even now, that here I began to dispute formally) is a formlesse, fallacious
and wholly forcelesse kind of arguing, if we suppose with the holy Fathers
(who belike held Transubstantiation then as well as a real and corporal
presence, if this worthy man upon his bare word may be believed) that the
substances of bread and wine were by the force of Christ's words turned into
Christ's body and blood. That is, as if he should say, this Argument is of no
force at all, if the point in Question be granted, or if that be yielded, that
is not at all in the Text. Yea but this is as if a man should make the like
deduction of Ioh. 2^
the water that Christ turned into wine; The Ministers drew water out of the
well; carried what they drew:
Therefore that which they drew and carried was water.


How formal a Disputant soever this man's Adversary is; sure I am he disputes
neither in form nor figure. But let us help him a little to bring his
Argument into form; and then he shall have an Answer. Thus, it seems, he
would argue, if he could hit on it:

What the Ministers drew out of the well, they carried:

But they drew water: Therefore they carried water.

And now I deny his Proposition: The Ministers carried not that that they drew:
They drew water; they carried not water but wine.

And for his addition hereunto, that Christ after he took the bread and wine,
and before he distributed them, by his miraculous and omnipotent benediction
converted them into his own body and blood, as he shows by his words
plainly pronounced of them, This is my body. Though it be nothing to the
Argument, and a mere begging of the point in Question, yet let us consider a
little of it, where in the Text he finds that Christ thus converted them:
for the words, This is my body (as was formerly showed) do not euince it. But
he finds it (it seems) in the benediction or the blessing of the bread;
which is yet against the common conceit of his Associates, that say there was
no conversion at all till Christ uttered those words, This is my body. Hear we
Bellarmine a little Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 19.
arguing this point against Luther. Having acknowledged (as was said formerly)
that Christ's words, This is my body, may bear either the sense that we give
them, or the sense that they give them, but not that sense, that the Lutherans
give: For (says he) the Lord took bread, and blessed it, and gave it his
Disciples, saying, This is my body. Bread therefore he took; bread he
blessed, and of bread of he said, This is my body. Either therefore Christ by
blessing changed the bread into his body truly and properly, or he changed it
improperly and figuratively, by adding signification (or as Theodoret rather,
(...).
by adding to nature that grace) which before it had not. If he changed it
truly and properly, then gave he bread changed, and of that bread so changed
he truly said, This is my body, that is, that which is contained under the
shape of bread is no more bread, but my body: and this we say, If it be said
that he changed the bread figuratively, then shall there be that bread given
the Apostles, that is siguratiuely Christ's body, and those words, This is my
body have this sense, This is the figure of my body: and so the Protestants
hold. Yea so indeed (as you have heard before) did Augustine in precise
terms after Tertullian expound them, who belike then by Bellarmines ground
was in this point a Protestant. Now let either Bellarmine, or this Answerer
prove that our Savior by his blessing wrought any other conversion, and we
will yield unto them. But they will as soon prove that Christ turned the
children that Mar. 10. 16.
he blessed into bread, as that he turned the bread by blessing it into his
natural body. Yea run over all the whole Chapter in Bellarmine De Euchar.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
wherein he propounds to himself to prove Transubstantiation out of Gods
word, in the entrance whereunto he confesses that the words of Christ may be
taken as well our way as their way, but not Luthers way; and you shall find
that there is never a word in it, much less any sound proof, either to prove
that Christ's words are so to be understood as they say, or that they are not
to be understood as we say; but it is wholly spent in confuting of Luthers
opinion, to wit, that bread remains together with Christ's body in the
Sacrament. Which opinion also I indan. in di^og. quam Ruew rd sieve pacificum
ins^psit.
themselves confess that Luther admonished by Melancthon renounced before he
died. He begins with Primum autem argumentum ducitur ex illis Domini
verbis, etc.
a first Argument, without any second, the sum and substance whereof was
before related: Either his second (he saw) was unsound, and it seemed best
therefore to suppress and conceal it, or else he wanted a second, and thought
to let the first though without a fellow, stand still as first by the rule of
the Ciuilians, who say, Primus est, quem nemo praecedit, e^ia^si nullus
sequatur. Reg. Iur.
That is first, that has none before it, though no other come after it: or,
that is first that has none before it, that is last that has none after it.
And so is this Bellarmines both first and last Argument there. And e Primus
est, quem nemo praecedit: vltimus, quem nemo sequitur. Ibid.
in Conclusion he is feign to fly to the Councels and pretended Fachers.
Bellar. vbi sup. in fine cap.
Though there were some ambiguity (says he) in our Savior Christ's words, yet
it is taken away by Councels; (what Councels think we? Surely none but such as
themselves held within these 300. years as himself afterward shows) and the
consent of Fathers: which remains yet to be showed. As for the benediction,
the best, nay the sole Argument, whereby he can prove such (...) conversion
wrought there is this; Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Christ is not wont to give thanks but when he is about to work some great
and marvelous thing: For he is read only to have given thanks, Ioh. 6. 11. 23.
when he would multiply the five loaves; and again Mat. 18. 26.
when the seven: Ioh. 11 41.
and when he was to raise Lazarus from the dead; and lastly, Mat. 26. 27. Mar.
24 23. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
in the institution of this Sacrament. And in like manner he is not wont to
bless insensible things, but when he was to work some admirable thing with
them: For he is never read so to have done, but Luh. 9. 16. Mark. 6 7.
when he blessed the bread to be multiplied; and Mat. 26. 26. Mat. 14. 22.
in the Encharist. As on the contrary Mat. 21. 19.
when he cursed the figtree: for it withered away instantly. For Gods blessing
is a well-doing; not a praying, as ours; but an effecting, as appears, when
Genesis 1. 22.
he blessed the beasts: for by that blessing he bestowed fruitfulness upon
them. Nor do we read that Christ ever blessed the water in Baptism. And what
of all this? Therefore (forsooth) it must needs follow that Christ by that
blessing turned the bread into his own natural body.

Where to omit that it is not true, that Christ is never read to have given
thanks oftener then is here said: for at Mat. 11 25. Luke 10. 21.
other times also he is reported to have (...). Chrysostom. in Mat. hom 38.
Confiteor hic gratiarum actionem significat. Ex Beda Thom. in Luc. 10.
given thanks, and that when he was not about to work any miracle neither:
Nor is it truly said, that Christ's blessing was not a prayer, (which that it
was, not Dei beneficentiam and potentiam super panem invocauit, etc. Iansen.
concord. c. 131. Galat. 4. 3.
Iansenius only, but Sanctumque precatus. Iunenc. l. 4. i. prece Sanctificans.
Maldon. in Mat. 26.
Maldonat the Jesuit from some of the Ancients also confesses) being
conceived by him as man, but effected by him as God: and beside, that it is
absurd to reason a non scripto ad non factum, he is not read oft^er to have
blessed or given thanks, therefore he never oftener did either: yea it is
impious to imagine that Christ, who for our sakes made himself subject to the
Law, did not ordinarily 1 Timothy 4. 4.
bless and sanctify the food, that he took commonly, by thanksgiving and
prayer: who denies but that Christ went about a marvelous work, when he was
to institute this Sacrament? or who doubts but that Christ's benediction was a
most effectual benediction, and as effectual as that of Gods was in the
Creation, whereby Genesis 1. 22, 28.
he blessed the creatures? by virtue whereof yet the creatures so blessed were
not transformed into new shapes, but had a natural faculty only conferred
upon them which before they had not, nor of themselves could have; and so have
the elements a spiritual and supernatural (by our acknowledgement) in the
Sacrament. But who sees not what a silly and senseless consequence this is?
Bellarmine could not be so silly and sottish as not to see it himself. Christ
gave thanks and blessed the bread ere he gave it: therefore he wrought such
a miracle on it as we would have; or, therefore (if you will) he turned it
into the very substance of his body. It may as well be said that Samuel
wrought some miracle by 1 Samuel 9. 13*
blessing the sacrifice, as our Savior here by blessing the bread.

For the water in Baptism it is easy to answer, though it be little to the
purpose: It is not to be marvelled if he be not read to have blessed it: for
we are told expressly that Ioh. 4. 2.
he never baptized, save as he does. Ioh. 1. 33.
spiritually baptize to this day. But dare any say that his Disciples were so
profane as to baptize without blessing? or must a bald, yea a Baals Priests
blessing of bread at this day be needs more effectual then their blessing of
water then was? Or do not Tertul. de bapt. H^eron. ad Ocean. de bapt. Episc.
Ambrosium quem volunt esse de initiat. c. 3.
the ancient Fathers compare the blessing of the water and the effect thereof
in Baptism with the blessing of the waters and Genesis 1. (...)*
the moving of the Spirit upon them in the Creation? And why must the blessing
then of necessity import such a change more in the one Sacrament then in the
other?

Division 8.
AS for the names of bread and wine after given by Saint Paul and the holy
Fathers to the consecrated parts of N. P.
the Sacrament; which with this Minister is a great argument tediously urged,
page 10. he cannot be ignorant (I suppose) as not to conceive the little sorce
of the Argument. For if Aarons red after it was converted into a Serpent, and
retained not the essence or figure of a rod, be notwithstanding called so;
with much more reason may the Accidents of bread and wine still remaining and
containing in them Christ's body and blood, retain their old names: especially
with articles superadded, importing the singular and divine excellency of them,
still used by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10, 11. as this bread, this Chalice; the bread
which we break, etc. willing them to prove themselves, etc. before they come
to eat of this bread; least eating it unworthily, they eat their own
damnation, not discerning the body of Christ; or (which is all one) not
distinguishing it from other common bread, it being indeed bread blessed and
converted into the very body of Christ, and therefore not irreuerently and
unworthily to be received by any Christian under pain of damnation; as the
ancient Doctor and holy Mariyr of Christ's Church S. Cyprian sermon. 5.
S. Cyprian affirms: S. Basil. l. 2. de bapt. c. 3.
S. Basil also, S. Chrysostom. hom 24. in 1. ad Corinth. and hom. 83. in Mat. and
hom. 45. in Joan.
S. Chrysostom, S. Ierom. in (...). cap. Malac.
S. Jerome, Origin in Psalm. 37.
Origin, and S. Aug. l. 5. de bapt. c. 8. and l, 8. contr. Crescon. c. 25.
S. Augustine, with other Fathers express^ly teach the sin of such as come
unworthily to the Sacrament to be heinous, and equal even to the sin of such
as betrayed and killed Christ, because they presume unworthily to eat that
bread wherein the Son of God himself is contained.

MY second Argument was taken from the express T. G.
words of Scripture, wherein after Consecration there is said to be bread and
wine in the Sacrament.

1. The little force of this Argument (he says) I cannot be so ignorant as
not to conceive: because Aarons rod after it was converted into a Serpent, and
retained not the essence or figure of a rod, yet was notwithstanding so called,
etc. And he cannot be so ignorant as not to conceive that this very Objection
is there by me propounded and answered: yea, and that Bellarmine himself
rejects it as Haec solutio non videtur solidissima. Bellar. de Euchar. l. 1.
c. 14.
not very sound, but such as just exception may be taken unto. Did he think
that any one not void of common sense would not soon see this?

2. He says that the accidents of bread and wine remaining retain still their
old names. To what purpose? For who doubts but that the accidents, that is,
the color, savor, shape, sise, etc. of the elements, remain still in the
Eucharist, not without a subject, as they say, (for how can accidents so do,
when the very Accidentis esse est mess.
essence of an accident, as it is an accident, is to be in some subject?) but
in the self same subject, wherein formerly they were? And what should hinder
but that remaining so, they should retain still their old names? But neither
are the accidents of bread and wine, bread and wine: and it is absurd to say
either that the Apostle by bread meant the accidents of bread only; when he
said 1 Cor. 10. 16.
The bread which we break, etc. and, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man eat of that bread, etc. Or that by the fruit of the vine our
Savior meant nothing but the acci dents of wine, when he said, Mat. 26, 29,
I will drink henceforth no more of this fruit of the vine, etc. So that his
reason is ^idiculous, The accidents remaining retain still their old names;
therefore the substance that is gone retains it own name still: or, the
color, savor shape and sise retain their old names, and that which is in the
Eucharist what ever it be, is said still to be white, round, thin well tasted,
etc. and that with good reason, since it is so still as it was; therefore
though it be no more bread now, yet is it said to be so still. Sure reason and
this man's brain were far asunder, when he writ this.

3. He adds that the Apostle when he calls it bread, (for so I suppose he
would say, and not when he speaks of the accidents of bread only) speaks
with such articles superadded, as may note the singular and divine excellency
of it, This bread, and so This Chalice, and The bread which we break: and
requires men to examine themselves before they come there: least they sin in
not distinguishing it from other common bread, etc. And that the ancient
Fathers show what an horrible sin it is to come irreverently to it, etc.
because they presume to eat that bread, wherein the Son of God himself is
contained.

And is not this a most silly Argument to prove that that he should prove,
unless you take in withal his ly at the last, where he says that the Son
of God himself is contained in the bread, which he falsely also fathereth
upon those Fathers, as would have appeared, had he cited their words; and
which being the point in Question (had it been propounded as it should have
been) unless you grant him he sticks fast still and cannot go forward?
For may not a man say as much of Baptism, that the holy Ghost speaks of it
with such Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12. Tit. 3. 5. Gal. 3. 27.
elogies superadded, as may note the singular and divine excellency of it; that
those therefore that are of years See Bellar. de bapt. l. 1. c. 25.
ought with great care to address and prepare themselves unto it, when they
are to be baptized, and that those that distinguish it not from ordinary water,
or use it irreuerently, commit an heinous sin even against Christ himself?
And yet who ever dreamed therefore of any such Transubstantiation in Baptism?
yea the very same Authors here produced by him so plentifully (though by their
bare names only out of Bellarmine) in a point for the general not at all
denied, to wit the heinousness of their sin that abuse this Sacrament: yet
distinguish expressly some of them (as in mine allegations I have noted)
between the bread of the Lord, (as 1. Cor. 11. 27.
the Apostle terms it) and the Bread the Lord; of which Ioh. 6. 32, 33.
our Savior in the Gospel; between the body that was on the Cross, and the
bread that is on the board: Which he takes no notice of.

4. And yet neither is it true that so confidently here he affirms, that all
those Fathers in all those places, yea or that any one of them, in any one of
those places that he quoteth, (nor as I verily believe, in any place of their
writings elsewhere) do (as he says) expressly and purposely teach that the
sin of unworthy receivers is equal (for the heinousness of it) with the
sin of those that betrayed and killed Christ. Which no sober Divine will say;
nor can it be justified, unless the Stoicall paritie of sins (charged Aug.
de haeres. c. 82.
upon Iouinian by some, Nihil enim eiusmodi I^^uiniano Hieronymus obiicit.
how truly I know not, Campia^ rat. 8. Sed and ^occius idem fere, These. Cathol.
tom. 1. l. 8. art. 3.
upon us by some of their side, falsely I am sure, Lutherani non dicunt paria
esse peccata. Bellarm. de Iustif. l. 3. c. 16.
Bellarmine himself therein acquitting us) be in Theology admitted.
Bellarmine indeed De Euchar. l. 1. c. 13.
in the Chapter, whence he took all these quotations as he found them there
mustered together, has somewhat out of Oecumenius that may seem to look that
way, ( Oecum. co^parat indigne communicantes cum eis qui Christum crucifixerunt.
He compares unworthy communicants, says he, with those that killed Christ)
which this man having strained more then an inch further, ascribes unadvisedly
and untruly to them all. Whereas only Basil (if those ascetica at least be
his) and Chrysostom, (who is wont to press far in reproouing of sin) the
one of them wills us to repair holily to Gods board, least we incur the
judgment of them that killed Christ: the other of them in one of the places
there quoted says, that as those that defile the princes robe are (...), etc.
Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. Grae. 46. Lat. 45. (...) vel vt alii, (...);
punished in like manner, as those also that rend it; so it is u not unlikely
or unequal that those that with an unholy heart receive the Lords body,
undergo (...).
the same punishment with those that tore it with nails; that is, that the one
be damned for so doing as well as the other; which may well (...). Basil de
bapt. l. 2. c. 3.
be, albeit their sins be not equal. The rest of them, to wit, Origin,
Hierome and Augustine have not any one word at all in any of all those places
of the sin of those that killed Christ; yea the places well weighed utterly
overthrow the ground of that Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 13.
Argument, which from the words of the Apostle, and their application of it,
they would frame to prove a real and essential presence of Christ's natural
body and blood in the Eucharist, because such unworthy receivers are said to be
1. Cor. 11. 27.
guilty of wronging Christ's body and blood, and thereby Ibid. ^9.
to acquire iudgemen^ c De baptism. l. 5 c. 8. Vide and eundem contra Faust. l.
19. c. 11, 12.
or condemnation to themselves. For beside that in the one place Augustine
says nothing but this, that the Sacrament of Baptism, as well as that other
of the Eucharist, is a true Sacrament even to those that use it otherwise then
they ought: which is nothing at all to that for which here it is alleged. In
Contra Crescon. l. 1. c. 25, 26.
the other place he says nothing of the Eucharist, but what he says also both
of Romans 7. 7. 13. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
the Word of God, or the Law, and Baptism expressly in the same place; to
wit, that even Obsunt sancta and diuina male vtentibus.
holy and divine things hurt those that use them otherwise then they ought. Yea
Hierome goes further in the place alleged, and g In Malac. 1.
applies what he speaks not to the Sacraments only of the New Testament,
but to the Sacrifices also (which were Sacraments too) of the old. For
commenting on those words, Malac. 1. 7.
Wherein do we pollute thee? Dum Sacramenta violantur, ipse cuius sunt
Sacramenta violatur.
When the Sacraments (says he) are violated, he is violated whose Sacraments
they are. And that is all he says there. Now were not the Colos. 2. 17. Heb.
10. 1, (...)* 10. and 13. 11, 12. Talium figurarum obseruatio, Christi fuit
praefiguratio. Aug. ad Faust. l. 19. c. 11.
Sacrifices and the Sacraments of the old Testament (as the l Paschall Lamb at
least) Sacraments of Christ, yea Heb. 10. 10. and 9. 7, 11, 12.
and of his body and blood too? If they were, as no doubt can be but they were,
then by Hieromes Rule was Christ and his body and blood wronged in them, when
any wrong was done to them, albeit it were not essentially or corporally
present in them: nor does such wrong therefore or guilt acquired by evil usage
of the Eucharist imply any such corporal presence thereof in it.

5. Let me add only, that this Defendant tells us, that the Son of God is
contained in that bread that is eaten ^n the Eucharist: and yet by their
doctrine there is no bread at all there. How is he in bread where no bread is?
Or how is there no bread there, where in bread the Son of God is (as he
tells us) contained? What is this but that which Bellarmine condemns in the
Lutherans, to forge us Christum impanatum. Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 11.
a Christ impanated, or enclosed in bread? Nor does their own doctrine any
whit mend the matter. For as Bellarmine says of Rupert us and some others that
they make Christ have Corpus panaceum, non carneum. Ibid
a breaden body: so may we as truly say the same of them. For what is a body
made of bread but a breaden Body? But that (you see) this Doctor here swarueth
from and says, that Christ's body is but couched in Bread.

ANd I marvel not to find this Minister to corrupt the sayings of the holy
Fathers to his heretical purpose, sithence N. P.
he makes Bellarmine himself page 10. to speak like a Protestant, and seem
to say against his own express doctrine, that the bread blessed and
consecrated on the Altar is not, nor cannot be called Christ's body: Whereas
Bellarmine only disputes against Luther teaching natural bread to remain
still in the Sacrament, and making the sense of Christ's words, This is my body,
to be the same as if he had said, This bread is my body; says this and no
more, that Natural bread cannot be otherwise then figuratively and
significantly affirmed to be Christ's body: Speaking not at all of bread
consecrated, and by consecration converted into the true body of Christ, yet
still retaining the name of bread for the Accidents of bread still remaining,
as this false fellow would have; frequently citing Authors which he
understands not.

2. ANd here again, as one running the wild goose T. G.
race, he windeth back to a passage in the former Argument: and says, he
marueileth not to find me corrupt the sayings of the Fathers (he thought sure
every one would believe whatsoever he said, though he never assaied to show it)
since I make Bellarmine himself speak like a Protestant. No: I make him
speak nothing but what De Euchar. lib. 1. cap. 1.
he says of himself: and by his own graunts prove that either the ancient
Fathers spoke very absurdly, or else they meant as we mean. The Argument is
this: The ancients Fathers say often, that the Bread in the Eucharist is Christ's
body.

But this saying (says Bellarmine,) This bread is my body, must either be
taken figuratively, or else it is absurd and impossible.

The Fathers therefore when they used such speeches, showed evidently thereby
that they meant as we mean, (that is, they understood Christ's words
figuratively) or else (by Bellarmines confession) they spoke very absurdly.



Nor is it enough to prove that I corrupt Bellarmine, to say that he disputes
in that place against Luther, who taught that bread remained still in the
Sacrament: For what is that to the purpose? much less to say untruly, that he
spoke not of bread consecrated; when the very Question is there concerning the
consecrated bread.

But I cite Authors (he says) that I understand not. It is true indeed; In
this very place I cite some sayings of Bellarmine, that neither I, nor any such
dull-heads as I am (I think) can easily understand; as for example, where De
Euchar. l 3. c. 24.
he says, as I here cite him, that The Priest makes Christ's body of bread;
and yet Christ's body is not made by the Priest: And again, Ibid.
that the body of Christ that was crucified, was truly or verily made of Bread:
And yet confuting Rupertus he says elsewhere, that De Euchar. l. 3. c. 11.
it was not a breaden body that was crucified for us; as Tertullian inferred
from the doctrine of the Marci^nites; and as we may well infer from theirs.
He waiueth De Euchar. l. 3. c. 9.
elsewhere Metaphysicall subtilties in disputing of this Sacrament. And Inepta
Caluini Metaphysica. Idem de Euchar. l. 1. c. 10.
taxes Calvin for his fond and foolish Metaphysics. But these are such
transcendent subtilties, if not absurdities, as any Metaphysics will afford.
And this deep Metaphysicall Doctor, that has no want of wit, and
understands him so well, should have done well to unfold to us these
mysteries, and arreade us these riddles: whereas he very uncharitably passes
them by, and only controlling us for our ignorance, leaves us sticking still
in the briars with them, not vouchsafing to help us out.

Page 12. He affirms it to be most absurd to affirm, as N. P.
we do, that a thing is made of that in the room whereof it only succeeds,
or is turned into that which succeeds only in the room thereof; Whereas in
every substantial conversion one substance is destroyed and another succeeds
in the place thereof by the same action: as where wood is converted into fire,
etc. The difference betwixt Transsubstantiation in the Sacrament, and other
substantial natural conuersions chiefly consisting in this, that the whole
substance of bread passes into another praeexisting substance, Christ's body,
to wit, introduced in place thereof, so as nothing thereof remains; whereas
in them the same matter, albeit receiving a new form and so made a distinct
substance from what it was before, still remains: which is to the Ministers
purpose wholly impertinent, unless he will falsely and foolishly withal
affirm that God can destroy no substance entirely leaving the Accidents
thereof still remaining, to introduce an other substance in place thereof.

And albeit we cannot say of Christ's body, that it was bread, (which is another
Argument of the Minister, ibidem) yet may it be said to have been of bread, as
being by the same miraculous and omnipotent power of Christ's words, whereby
bread loses natural being in place thereof Sacramentally produced and made
present. And this is without any difficulty affirmed by us, who know the same
in a propertionable manner to be found in all other substantial and accident
all conuersions, howsoever his poor Judgment will not serve to consider it:
heat (for example) was never cold, albeit in place thereof produced; fire was
never wood, but as a substance (as natural understanding might teach him)
essentially different, and produced by the others destruction.

* 3. AFter he has thus recoiled back a little, now he T. G.
begins to make again forward. And 1. whereas they not knowing well how to
salu or shift of such absurdities as follow necessarily upon this their
senseless conceit of the conversion of bread into Christ's body, affirm that
Christ's body is therefore said to be made of bread, and the bread said to be
turned into Christ's body, because the bread ceasing to be there, Christ's body
(as they say) does only come in the room of it: For they dare not say that
Christ's body is produced of it, or that the Substance of the bread is that
whereof as the material cause Christ's body is framed, as ashes are made of
wood, or glass of some ashes: And I thereupon reply, that it is absurd to say
that a thing is made of that in the room whereof it only succeeds, or is
turned into that that succeeds only in the room thereof. (That which Suarez
in Thom. part. 3. quaest. 75. disp. 50. sect 5. Per ^olam actionem adductivam.
non explicatur vera conuersio substantialis, sed solum translocatio quaedam.
Quando vna substantia solum succedit loco alterius, non potest dici vna
conuerti in aliam, Ibid.
Suarez himself also confesses to be rather a translocation, then a
transubstantiation, or a true and substantial conversion. He tells me, that,
if my poor judgment would serve to consider it, such a succession is to be
found in every subst^ntiall conversion, whereby one substance is destroyed, and
another succeeds in the room of it.) And consequently (for that or nothing
must follow) that it is not absurd so to say. Did ever man (think we) either
sober or in his right wits thus reason? In every substantial conversion one
thing succeeds in the room of another, and is turned into it. Therefore
whatsoever thing does succeed only in the room or place of another, is
converted into it. Suppose a puppy should get up into the Chair that this
Disputant had sat in when he writ this discourse, after he quitted it: would he
not take it evil, if a man should say therefore that he were turned into a
puppy, because the puppy were got into his place. Or suppose some light-fingred
person having picked his purse and taken a piece of gold or two out of it,
should put in a copper counter or two in the room of it; would it follow that
his gold were really turned into copper, because the one is gone, and the other
is come in the room of it? Or suppose an old house pulled or burnt down, and
an other raised up again in the room of it, and that just of the same
proportion with it: would any man say, that the one were turned into the other,
because the one succeeded in the room of the other being destroyed? But idle
and absurd consequences are no strange matters with this Disputant for all his
great learning, that which a little learning will serve to discover.

2. Whereas answering that silly shift of theirs, that Christ's body is called
bread still after Consecration, as Aarons rod is called a rod after it was
turned into a Serpent, because it had sometime so been; I say (among many
other things, which he here ouerslippeth) that the case, by their own
confession, is not alike: for that, of the rod it may be said that it was once
a Serpent, but of Christ's body it cannot be said that ever it was bread; he
replieth; that albeit we cannot say of Christ's body that ever it was bread, no
more then of heat that ever it was cold, nor of fire we can say that ever it
was wood, though by the others destruction it be in place thereof produced, Yet
it may be said to have bin of bread; because in this their prodigious
Transformatio.
Metamorphosis or Transmateriatio.
methyleosis, or what ever you will term it; (for new inventions require new
names) the whole substance (to use his own terms; that is both the matter
and form) of bread passes into a praeexistent substance, to wit, Christ's
body, in the room of it introduced, so as nothing thereof remains, whereas
in other natural conuersions the matter remains still, though receiving
another form. In which few lines it is not easy to tell how many
contradictions are implied both to his master Bellarmines doctrine, and to his
own assertions.

For first, If it cannot be said of Christ's body that ever it was Bread; here
is it affirmed by them, as Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 1. c 14.
Bellarmine himself also acknowledges, that Vocari panem, quia autea suit
panis.
Christ's body is therefore called Bread, because it was bread before. Neither
does Bellarmine at all control them therein: yea De Euchar. l. 3. c. 18.
he confesses, In Thom. p. 3 q. 75. a. 4.
with Caietan, that it may truly be said, Quod fuit panis, nunc est corpus
Christi.
That is now Christ's body, that once was bread.

2. If it may be said to have been of bread, why may it not be said that once
it was bread? as of Adam because he was Genesis 2. 7. 1. Cor. 15. 47.
of the earth, it may truly be said that once Genesis 3. 19.
he was earth. As for his instances, they are idle: the one is of an accident
not made of, but succeeding only in the room of another, or in the same
subject whence it has expelled the other; and for the other we may say truly
that a fire made of wood, not only was wood once, but is wood still, till the
form of the wood be utterly destroyed, and the wood turned into coals, or
dissolved into ashes; whereof we may also truly then say, that those coals or
those ashes were once wood; in such sense as they say, that the rod was
sometime a snake.

3. If it may at any time be said, Christ's body has been of bread, it might
at sometime be said, Christ's body is of bread: and if of bread, why not Corpus
panaceum.
a breaden body? which yet Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 3. c. 15.
Bellarmine will by no means admit. For what is a body of bread (as was said
before) but a breaden body, as a pot of earth, an earthen pot, a dish of wood,
a wooddendish? etc.

4. Not to demand if nothing remain of the bread, what figure, and color, and
weight, and taste it is that we discern in the Eucharist, whither the breads
or Christ's body; because for those things they tell us that they hang, I know
not how nor where, neither in the bread that now is not, nor in Christ's body
neither, Neque enim potest vere dici, hoc album and rotundum est corpus
Christi. Bellarm. de Euch. l. 3. c 19.
the accidents whereof they are not: and in that answer we must rest (though it
be hard for any man endued with reason so to do) for them; since no other from
them can be had: I ask, if the whole substance of the bread be utterly
abandoned, so as nothing thereof remains; how says Panis in Eucharistia vere
non annihilatur. Bellarm. ibid.
Bellarmine, and Quod panis substantia in nihilum vertatur, nemo dicit.
Roffens. contr. Occolamp. lib. 2. c. 14.
other of them, that the bread is not annihilated, or We do not say that the
substance of bread is clearly consumed to nothing; as many have dreamed,
Harding ag. Apolog. part. 2.
is not clearly brought to nothing? and check us for Idem ibid.
belying them when we say that any such thing is maintained by them? albeit
their great Vel in praeiacentem materiam solui, vel in nihilum redigi. Lombard.
sent. l. 4. d. 11. D.
Master of the Sentences say as much. For how is it not annihilated, if nothing
remain of it?

5. If no bread be left in the Eucharist, how said he before, that Christ is
there contained in bread; and that the ancient Fathers so affirm? For how can
he be contained in that that is not?

6. If the whole substance of it be destroyed so that nothing remains of it,
how does the whole substance of it pass (as he says) into Christ's body? For
how can that pass into it, that is not at all? Or how can that substance pass
into the substance of some other thing, that utterly perishes and cease to
be, so soon as ever that other substance approaches?

7. If the very substance of bread passes into the substance of Christ's body,
then Christ's body (belike) does not barely succeed in the room of it, (as
before was affirmed) but is produced therefore and consists of it, which yet
Non est producti^a, sed adducti^a co^-uersio. Bellar. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 18.
they usually deny. Else how does the substance of the one pass into the
substance of the other?

8. If the whole substance of bread (that is, both matter and form) passes
into Christ's body, why may it not as well be said of Christ's body, that that
body was once bread; as of Exodus 4. 3.
Moses his rod it might well be said, that that rod was once a Snake; or of
Ioh. 2. 9.
the wine that our Savior so miraculously produced, that that wine was
sometime water? the rather since that but part of the substance, to wit, the
matter only of the Snake and the water passed into the substance of the rod
and the wine there, whereas the whole substance (as this fellow bears us in
hand) that is, both matter and form of bread, passes into Christ's body here.

9. To say that one substance passes into another substance preexisting; is to
say, that that is made, that already is, or that is produced and has being
given it, that is in being already, when as a thing cannot be in making and
being at once; nor can being be given to that, that already is; or to say,
that a creature is now Actum agere. Cic. de amic.
made, that was fully made before, or that a creature that was before is new
made of that that before was not it: Yea (to speak more plainly) it is all
one to as say, that a man is (...). Sophocl. Antig.
killed, when he was dead before; or is quickened when (...). Chrysostom. in
Mat. hom. 83. An ignoras nudum nec a december palaestritis despoliari posse? Apul.
metam. l. 1. Itaque maximas nugas agit, Nudo detrahere vestime^ta qui iubet.
Plaut. Asin. 1. 1.
he was alive before; or is now stripped, when he was stark naked before, or
is now bred or begotten, when he was borne before.

Lastly, to say that Christ's body long before preexisting is now made of bread
that some two or three days past had no existence it self, is all one as to
say, that wine of a twelue-month old is made of grapes that were but yesterday
gathered and pressed, and were yet growing the day before; or that an Oak
having stood upward of an hundred years, and yet standing in the Forest is
sprung up this year of an acorne of the last years growth. And consider we
now how well these things agree together: The body of Christ is contained in
the bread; and yet there is no bread at all in the Eucharist: The body of
Christ succeeds only in the room of bread; and yet the substance of the
bread passes into the substance of Christ's body: The whole substance of bread
is so abolished that nothing remains of it, and yet the whole substance of
the same bread passes into the substance of Christ's body: Christ's body was in
being before: and yet it is now made of another substance that before it was
not: yea Christ's body that was bread and borne above a thousand years since,
is now made of a wafercake of yesterdayes baking: The whole essence of that
wafer cake passes into Christ's body; and yet we cannot say of Christ's body,
that ever it was that wafer-cake. But like (...). v^l. ar^a fine calce.
ropes of sand (as we are wont to say) do these things hang together: and to
spend much time in refuting them may be deemed (I fear) as (...). Dionys de
divine nomin. c. 8.
ridiculous, (to use their Dennis his terms) as to stand seriously and
curiously pulling down by piece-meale such castles as little children have in
sport built up of sand.

NEither is it a good or Christian kind of Argument N. P.
which my Adversary in the end of the same 12. page to this purpose makes;
Other substantial conversions are sensible and easily discerned, albeit
miraculous, as when Aarons rod was made a Serpent, etc. Whereas in the Sacrament
we see wholly the contrary: therefore we are not to believe therein any such
conversion; citing thus for proof thereof a place of S. Augustine in his
margent, which directly if he had marked it, overthrows his own doctrine,
and purpose of citing it: That which you see (says this Father) is bread and a
Cup: but that which your faith requires you to be informed of, is, that the
bread is Christ's body, and the Cup his blood. Could he affirm any thing more
plainly against this Ministers sensual and absurd Argument; which were it
good, would lead us to believe nothing; Ad Heb. 11.
faith being only of things which appear not to our understanding or senses.
How far is this carnal, poor, unlearned man from the holy Fathers spirit
and doctrine, as I have formerly cited their assertions? wherein they teach us
to renounce the natural judgment of our understanding and senses, and with
the Apostle to captivate our understandings to the obedience of faith in this
and many other mysteries of faith, humbly to be upon the warrant of Gods word
assented unto, and not ouer-curiously searched after by us. Lib. 8. Trin.
We are (says S. Hillarie, that great Doctor of Christ's Church, and victorious
Champion of his deity) not to dispute (as my Adversary does) in a secular and
sensual manner of divine things. For of this natural verity of Christ in us
(speaking of the Sacrament) unless we learn of Christ himself, we speak
foolishly and impiously. Wherefore sithence he says, Ioh. 6. 55, 56.
My flesh is truly food, and my blood is truly drink: He that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, remains in me and I in him: there is no place
of doubting left concerning the verity of Christ's body and blood. For now by
the profession of our Lord and faithful belief which we have thereof, it is
his true flesh and blood: and these being received by us do make us to be in
Christ and Christ in us. Is not this truth? Surely it is; but to those that
deny Jesus Christ to be true God, etc. With a cloud of such ancient and
uncontrollable Testimonies of the holy Fathers formerly touched could I
confound my sensual Adversary, and teach him a new manner of disputing of
these heavenly and divine Mysteries instituted by the Son of God with equal
wisdom power and goodness for us; wherein the omnipotency of him that
chiefly does them is to be assigned for a sufficient reason of them.

4. NOw further, whereas I allege among other things that in every miraculous
conversion of bodies T. G.
there is a sensible change; whereas no such thing at all is found in the
Sacrament: Our eyes, says Augustine, inform us that it is bread that is
there. He tells me, this is no good, nor Christian, but an absurd, secular,
and senseless arguing, and such as would lead us to believe nothing but what
we see: and that Augustine, if I had marked him, whom I cite in the margent,
(as if his very words were not in the text) utterly overthrows it: as also
Hillarie and other Fathers, when they teach us in divine mysteries to renounce
the natural judgment of our understanding and senses, which this poor,
carnal, unlearned man his Adversary is so far from, etc. And withal as
commiserating and bewailing my simplicity, (Oh how far is this poor etc.) He
tells his Reader, that he could with a cloud of such ancient and
vncontrolleable testimonies of the holy Fathers confound this his sensual
Adversary, and teach him a new manner of disputing of these heavenly and
divine mysteries. Well, when he does this, you may believe that he can do it:
and his poor puny Adversary shall be eternally obliged to him for it. But
mean while let us see what Pyrgopolinices here says.

1. Augustine tells us that something is seen in the Sacrament, and
something else is to be believed. But does Augustine tell us that we must not
believe that there is bread there, though our eyes inform us, that there is?
No: He tells us expressly, that there is bread there, as our eyes do
inform us. And what can be more evidently or plainly spoken? Yea but he
adds withal, that our faith informs us that the bread is Christ's body. Yea
but, says Bellarmine, that sentence is most absurd and impossible, if it be
not meant figuratively. In which manner Augustine (as before was showed)
expounds himself elsewhere.

2. Do the Fathers tell us that in this holy Mystery we must not so much
regard what our sense informs us, as what our faith apprehends? And do
they not say the same of Baptism, and of all mysteries or Sacraments in
general? Hear we one or two of them speak for all. The Fathers of the Nicene
Council, whom before he alleged: (...). Gelas. Cyzic. act. Conc. Nic. diatyp.
4.
Our Baptism (say they) must not with bodily eyes be considered, but with
spiritual. See thou water? understand the power of God hidden in it:
conceive it full of the holy Ghost, (...). Ibid.
and divine fire. And then will they the same regard to be had also at the Lords
Table. That Ambrose that this Author and his Associates so often cite, as making
so much for them: Ambrosii nomine de sacram. l. 1. c. 2, 3. and de initiand. c.
3.
You are come (says he) to the Font: consider what you there saw; consider
what you said, etc. You saw the Font; you saw water, etc. you saw all that you
could see with your bodily eyes and humane aspect. You saw not those things
that work and are not seen. The Apostle has taught us that we are to behold
not the things that are seen, but the things that are not seen. For far
greater are the things that are not seen, then those that are seen. Believe
not thy bodily eyes alone. That is better seen that is not seen. So Gregory
Nyssene: Greg. Nyss. de sacr. bapt.
Both the spirit and water concur in Baptism. And as man consists of two
parts, so are there medicines of like like appointed for either: for the body
water that appears and is subject to sense; for the soul the spirit that
cannot be seen, nor does appear, but is called by faith, and comes in an
ineffable manner. Yet the water that is used in Baptism, adds a blessing to
the Body baptized. Wherefore do not contemn the divine Laver: neither make
little account of it as common, because of the water that is used in it. For it
is a greater matter that it works: and marvelous effects proceed from it.
And a little after of the Eucharist: y The bread also is at first common bread:
but Idem ibid.
when the Mystery has sanctified it, it is called Christ's body. And in like
manner the wine, though it be a thing of small price before the blessing, yet
after the sanctification which proceeds from the Spirit, both of them work
excellently. And so in many other things, if you regard it, you shall see the
things that appear to be, contemptible; but the things wrought by them, to be
great and admirable. And so Chrysostom speaking of those words of our
Savior, Ioh. 6. 63.
The words I speak are spirit and life. Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 46. Lat. 47.
Graec.
To understand (says he) things carnally, is to consider the things simply as
they are spoken, and no otherwise. Where as (...), etc.
all mysteries (and then not the Eucharist only) are to be judged not by the
external things that are visible, but are to be considered with the inward
eyes, that is, spiritually. And in particular of Baptism Idem in 1. Cor. hom.
7.
elsewhere: The Gospel is called a mystery, because we believe not in it what
we see; but we see somethings, and believe other things. (...).
For that is the nature of our mysteries: which my self therefore and an
Infidel are diversely affected with, etc. He when he hears of a Laver,
thinks it but bare water: but I consider not the thing seen simply, but the
purging of the soul by the Spirit, etc. For I judge not the things that
appear by my bodily sight, but with the eyes of my mind. Again, I hear
Christ's body. I understand the thing spoken one way, and the Infidel another.
And as children or unlettered persons, when they look on books, know not the
power of the letter, nor know what they see: but a skillful man can find
matter in those letters contained, lives, or stories and the like, etc. (...).
So it is in this mystery: the Infidels, though hearing, seem not to hear;
but the faithful having spiritual skill, see the force of the things therein
contained. Nothing then in this kind is said of the Eucharist, but what is
said of all Sacraments, and of Baptism by name. Nothing therefore that argues
any miraculous change more in the one then in the other.

Nor does it follow that we would have men to believe nothing but what they
see, because we refuse to believe that that we see is not so. Tertul. de anima.
cap. 7. Non licet nobis in dubium sensus revocare: ne and Christo de fide eorum
deliberetur. etc.
We may not (says Tertullian) call in question our senses; lest in so doing we
detract credit from Christ himself, as if he might be mistaken when Luke 10.
18.
he saw Satan fall down, or Mat. 3. 17. and 17. 5.
heard his Fathers voice from heaven, or Mat. 26. 27, 28, 29.
mistook the smell of the ointment that was poured upon him, or the Vini
sapore^ quod in sanguinis sui memoriam consecrauit.
taste of the wine that he consecrated for a memorial of his blood. Neither was
nature deluded in the Apostles. Faithful was 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18
their sight, and their hearing on the mount: Faithful was their taste of the
Ioh. 2. 9.
wine that had been water: Faithful was Ioh. 20. 27.
the touch of incredulous Thomas. (And yet, as Aug. in Joan. tract. 79.
Augustine well observes; Non hoc credidit quod vidit: Sed aliud vidit aliud
credidit. Vidit enim homine^ credidit Deum.
Thomas saw one thing, and believed another thing: He saw Christ the man, and
believed him to be God: He believed with his mind that which he saw not, by
that which appeared to his bodily senses. And when we are said to believe our
eyes, Idem. ibid:
says he, by those things that we do see, we are induced to believe those
things that we do not see.) In a word, Tertul. ibid.
Rehearse me (says Tertullian) John's testimony: 1 Ioh. 1. 1.
That which we have heard and seen with our eyes, and felt with our hands,
that declare we unto you: Falsa vtique testatio, si oculorum, and aurium, and
manuum sensus natura mentitur.
A false testimony (says he, an uncertain at least) if the nature of our
senses in our eyes, ears, and hands be such. But these men would have us as
Number. 16. 14.
the sons of Eliah speak, to thrust out our eyes, and as the Jewish Rabbines
say (abusing Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
a place of Scripture to that purpose) that a man must believe the High Priest
in all things, yea Talmudici Glossatores in eum locum. test Lyra in Deuteronomy. and
Hieron. a S. Fide Hebraeomastig. l 2, c. 2.
though he shall tell him that his left hand is his right, and his right hand
the left: so they would have us to believe whatsoever the Pope or they say,
though they tell us that, that both our sight and sense informs us to be most
false.

5. But to make good in part yet his former glorious flourish; he cites a
place of Hilarie, where he affirms, that concerning the verity of Christ in
us (not speaking, as he here says specially of the Eucharist, but of our
union and conjunction with him in general) unless we speak as Christ has
taught us, we speak foolishly and impiously: that there is no place left to
doubt of the verity of Christ's body and blood; that the Sacraments being
received cause that Christ is in us, and we in him.

Now who (I pray you) doubts of, or denies ought that is here said? who
teaches men to speak otherwise then Christ ever taught, but they that tell us
of bread transubstantiated, and of a body of Christ made of bread, of Christ's
flesh contained in bread, or under the accidents of bread, and of his blood in
the bread, and his body by a concomitancie in the Cup, etc? Who doubts with
us of the truth of Christ's body and blood? For of the corporal presence of
either in the Sacrament, Hilarie has not here a word. Or who denies but that
by the receiving of those venerable mysteries, Christ is (spiritually) in us
and we in him; Does not the Apostle say of Baptism that by it (...). Romans 6.
5. and Pachymer. in Dionys. hier eccles. c. 4.
we are ingraffed into Christ? and Chrysostom, that Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom.
20.
by it we become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone? Hilaries scope is to
show that Ioh. 10. 30.
Christ is one with God and his Father, and Ioh. 17. 21. 23.
we one with him, not by consent of will only, (as some Heretics said) but by
a true and real union, yet 1 Cor. 6. 17.
spiritual; as his words implie when he says, Ioh. 6. 56.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him.
Upon whinch words their own Bishop Iansenius. Iansen. concord. Euag. cap. 59.
They (says he) that thus eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood either by
such faith alone, or in the Eucharist, are said to have Christ abiding in them,
and to abide themselves in him, in regard of the true union of our nature with
the divine nature by the spirit of Christ, whereby we are made 2 Pet. 1. 4.
partakers of the divine nature. Yea those words of our Savior cannot be meant
of Christ corporally received in the Eucharist, nor could Hilarie so mean, if
he were otherwise of their mind, appears. For Christ's body so taken as they
imagine, does not abide long in those that so receive it, but by their own
doctrine goes away again, I know not whither, a while after. Whereas by
virtue of such receiving Christ as our Savior there speaks of, We do abide
in him, and he in us; that is, we are most inwardly and inseparably knit unto
Christ, and he unto us (they are still Iansen. ibid.
Iansenius his terms, and Per honorem nobis datum (...) Dei, and Permanentem
in nobis carnaliter filium, and in co nobis corporaliter and inseparabiliter
vnitis, mysterium verae and naturalis vnitatis est praedieandu^. Hilar. de
Trin. l. 8. Et Ibid. Vt nos quoque in eo naturaliter inessemus, ipso in nobis
naturaliter per manente.
Hilarie also says the same,) and obtain therefore thereby not a transitory
life, as we do by the eating of corporal meat, that passes est-soones away
and abides not in him that eats it, but life permanent and eternal. Idem
ibid.
Whence it is manifest also (says the same Author) that all are not in this
place said to eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood that receive the
Sacraments of his body and blood, since that all such have not Christ abiding
in them. But they eat his flesh and drink his blood, as he there speaks,
who believing that his flesh and blood were given on the Cross for the
Salvation of mankind, and that by virtue of the hypostaticall union they have
a power to give life, do either by such faith alone, or in the holy Eucharist
also, receive the Lord himself within themselves, and embrace him, and by
faith fast clasping him so keep him within them, as one by whom whatsoever we
desire, comes to us, and is conferred on us. Thus he; by whose words it
plainly appears, that our abiding in Christ and Christ in us, which Hilarie
from our Savior speaks of, depends not upon any such corporal presence of
his body and blood in the Sacrament, nor does necessarily require the same:
which Ideirco voluit Christus a nobis manducari, vt nos sibi incorporaret, quod
non intelligitur nisi de spirituali manducatione; quia in sacramentali tantum
non fit haec incorporatio. Biel in Can. Miss. lect 36.
by their own doctrine also it does not effect.

Division 9.
HIS next Argument drawn from the Nature of Signs N. P.
and Sacraments is idle and forcelesse. For we deny not (as there he
supposes) the Sacramental Signs containing the body of Christ under them to
signify somewhat distinct from themselves, to wit, the spiritual nutrition of
souls living by grace that worthily receive them. They signify likewise
Christ's body and blood dolorously severed in his passion. And so a thing
considered in one manner may be a sign of it self in another manner
considered, as Christ transfigured represented his own body as now it is in
heaven glorified: his triumphant entrance into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday
figured his own entrance into heaven afterward, as Eusebius Emissenus and
other Fathers teach: and as an Emperor in his triumph may represent his own
victories, etc.

MY third Argument was taken from the Nature of Signs and Sacraments: whose
nature is to signify T. G.
one thing, and to be another. The Argument is this:

No Signs or Sacraments are the same with that that they signify:

But the bread and wine signify Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist:

They are not therefore essentially either.

To this idle and forcelesse Argument (as he pleases to style it) he thus
answers:

1. That the Sacrament all Signs signify the spiritual nutrition of souls
living by grace; as also Christ's body and blood dolorously severed in his
Passion.

Now 1. what is this to mine Argument? was this man (think we) ever a
disputant, that answers Arguments on this wise? which part of my Syllogism
(I pray you) is this Answer applied to? I had thought that a Syllogism being
propounded, the Answerer should either have denied or distinguished of one of
the former Propositions.

2. It is not true, that the bread and wine in the Sacrament are signs of
these things. Some affections of them and Actions used about them indeed are.
The bread and wine themselves are signs of spiritual nutriment, not
nutrition. The eating and drinking is a sign of it. Signs they are of Christ's
body and blood; not of the dolorous seuering of them in the passion, though
their being apart is a sign of it also.

3. He says that a thing in one manner considered may be a Sign of it self
in another manner considered: as Christ transfigured of himself now in heaven
glorified; his triumphant entrance into Jerusalem of his triumphant entrance
into heaven; and an Emperor in his triumph may represent his own victory.

But 1. If signum and res signata, the Sign and the thing signified by it be
relatiues (as without all Question they are) a Father may as well be a father
to himself, as a sign may be the sign of it self. Not to add that the
Ancients (as has formerly been shown) are wont to call the Sacraments
pictures, and pledges: and it is against common sense to say that ought is
either a picture, or a pledge of it self.

2. I might well put this Defendant to prove that Christ's transfiguration was
a representation of his present a Math. 17. 24
glorification, or that Math. 21. 7-10.
his entrance into Jerusalem was a type of his glorious entrance into heaven,
whatsoever his bastardly Eusebius Emissenus say of it; whose authority is no
better then his own.

3. Let him have what he would; that the one was a type of the other: Does it
follow; Christ's transfiguration was a type of his glorification: therefore
Christ was a type or a sign of himself?

4. An Emperor and his victory (I suppose) are not all one; no more then
Christ's body and the glorification of it; nor again the transfiguration, and
the present glorification.

The Argument therefore is neither idle nor forceless^ for ought that he has
yet showed.

Division 10.
HIs next Argument page 13. is grossly carnal and unfit N. P.
indeed to be answered. For who but a babbling ignorant Person would as he
does there, make such an inference? Christ's hands and feet were visible and
palpable after his passion (which tediously and needelesly he proves,) But
they are not so in the Eucharist: Ergo, the natural parts of Christ's body are
not at all in it. For if the Argument were good, we might rightly infer that
Christ had no body at all when in Emaus (for example) after he had blessed and
brake bread, he vanished out of the Disciples sight; when he hid himself from
the Jews, who would have stoned him, in the Temple, not by running into a
corner (as this gross fellow peradventure may of Christ basely and unworthily
imagine) but by becoming indiscernable by them; as he became also invisible
and impalpable to the Nazarites holding and drawing him toward the hill on
which there City was built, whence they meant to tumble him. As if local
extension, visibilitie, palpabilitie and other natural Accidents and sensible
properties could not by Gods omnipotency be severed from his own body without
the total destruction thereof. This is a gross kind of Philosophy and
Divinity fit for such a stupide Professor.

MY fourth Argument was taken from the Nature of T. G.
Christ's Body, which has slesh, blood and bones, is an organicall body, endued
with limbs and lineaments, yea and life too. Whereas that which is given and
received in the Eucharist, is (as Epiphanius well observes) liuelesse and
limmelesse, etc. Now here, (according to his usual manner) he lets the
Argument go, and falls to rail down right; that it is an argument grossly
carnal, and unfit indeed to be answered, of a babbling and ignorant person,
and a stupide professor. He shows where his shoe wringeth him. Yet that he
may not seem to say nothing to it; he frames me an Argument of his own on
this wise: Christ's hands and feet were visible and palpable after his Passion:

But they are not so in the Eucharist: ergo

Whereas I tell him that Christ's body has flesh, blood and bones, and sense
and life, and limbs and lineaments of a body organicall. But their silly sorry
wafer-cake has none of all these. And then he tells us that I might as well
affirm that Christ had no body when Luke 24. 31. No more was done with Christ
here, then with Philip. Act. 8. 39.
at Emaus he vanished out of the sight of his Disciples; when Ioh. 8. 59.
he hid himself from the Jews that would have stoned him in the Temple; when
Luke 4. 30.
he passed through the midst of them that would have thrown him down
headlong, etc.

1. Let him prove unto us that at any of these times those that had Christ's
body in their hands to feel at their pleasure, as his Disciples had, Luke 24.
39.
when he appeared unto them after his passion and resurrection, (which in
prosecution of mine Argument I produce also and press) did find it and feel
it to have neither hands, nor feet, flesh blood, nor bone, life nor limme; and
the consequence shall then be granted him; but never till then. And look what
limbs and lineaments our Savior then had, when he was here on earth, the
same he retains still. Augustine demanded whether Christ's body had bones and
blood still, and other bodily limbs and lineaments; Aug. epist. 149. Ego
Domini corpus ita in coelo esse credo, vt erat in terra, etc.
I believe (says he) that Christ's body is now in heaven as it was on earth,
when he went up into heaven. For so ^uk. 24. 38, 39.
when the Disciples doubted, whether it were a body or a spirit that they saw,
he had them see and feel his hands and feet: for that a spirit had not flesh
and bones, as they saw that he had. So he was on earth; so he was seen to be
when he went to heaven; and so shall he, as Act. 1. 11.
the Angel told, come again from thence. But such (we are sure) their little
breaden God is not. It is none of Christ therefore.

2. Look how this man argues, so did the Heret^kes of old, to prove our
Savior Christ to have an aerie, spiritual, aad fantastical body. Joan.
Hieroscl. Ep in Fpist Hieren. contr. ^rror. (...).
Let it not deceive you, you simple sots, (says John of Jerusalem) when you
read that Ioh. 20. 27.
Christ showed Thomas his hands and his side, or when you hear him say, that
he has L^k. 24. 3^.
flesh and bones: These things he made some show of indeed to strenghthen the
says of his doubting Disciples. But he showed that he had an ai^ry and
spiritual body in truth, when Ioh. 2. 19.
he came to his Disciples while the doors were shut, and Luke 24. 31.
he vanished out of their sight. And to the like purpose did Tertul. contr.
Mare. l. 4 and Hieron. ad Pa^machi.
the Marci^nites urge his Luke 4. ^0.
escape from those of Nazareth. Now what do the ancient Fathers hereunto
answer? Tertul, co^tr. Marc lib. 4.
That Christ's body (says Tertullian) is no fancy ever, hereby appears, in
that it end^red violent handling, when he was taken and held, and haled to the
hill-brow. For Etsi per medios euasit, sed ante iam vim expertus, and post a
dimissus scil. soluto, vti assolet, tumultu, vel etiam irrupto, non tamen per
caliginem eluso etc.
albeit he made an escape through the midst of them, being first forcibly
held, and after let go, either the throng being dissolved, or forcibly broken
through; yet was it not by any fantastical delusion. For he had a true body
still, and hands that he touched others still with, and were by them felt;
(and then his body belike was not impalpable as this fellow says it was.) And
again, Idem contr. eund. lib. 5.
when Christ shows his Disciples his hands and his feet, without doubt he
has hands, and feet, and bones, which a spirit has not. And Jerome refuting
John of Jerusalem; Hieron. ad Pa^mach. contra error. Joan. Hieros.
As Christ showed his Disciples true hands and a true side; so he ate truly
with them, spoke with his tongue truly to them, and with his hands truly
brake, and reached them out bread. For that he suddenly vanished out of their
sight; as before his passion also at Nazareth he passed through the midst of
them, that is, he made an escape out of their hands, Virtus Dei est, non vmbtae
aut phantasmatis.
it was done by his divine power, not by any fantastical delusion. Quod Magis
licet, hoc Domino non licet? Apollonius, etc. repent non comparuit. Noli
potentiam Domini Magoru^ praestigiis coaequa re, vt videatur fuisse quod no^
suit, comedisse sine dentibus, fregisse panem sine manibus, ambulasse sine
pedibus, locutus sine lingua, latus ^stendisse sine costis.
Could not Christ do as much as some Magitians have done? Apollonius, as he
stood in the Court before Domitian, vanished suddenly out of sight. Yet do you
not therefore match Christ's power with Magicians iuglings in making him seem
to be that that he was not, to eat without teeth, break bread without
hands, walk without feet, speak without tongue, show a side without ribs. And
whereas it might be demanded how it came to pass that Luke 24. 16.
those two Disciples did not know him, till a little before he left them;
Hieron. ibid.
Jerome makes answer out of the Text it self, that it was not because his
body was not the same it had been, but because their eyes were held that they
might not know him. And the same Jerome elsewhere dealing against the same
dotages, Idem in Epitaph. Paulae.
Christ (says he) had hands and sides, had breast and belly too: he that had
hands and feet, had arms and thighs too. And seeing he had all the members
of the body, he must needs have a whole body that consists of those members.
Let us reason backward, as well we may. If Christ have an entire body
consisting of those limbs, then he has all those limbs, whereof such a body
consists. And then let us say to these, as he then to them, Idem. ibid.
You hear of flesh, and feet, and hands, and other limbs. And Sticorum globos
and a^ria quaedam deliramenta.
do you forge us some Globosam sieve rotunda^ formam Diis dabant Stoici. Ex Sen
ep. 94. Lips. physiol. Stoic. l. 1. c. 8.
Stoicall round bals, and aerie dotages. (As these do little round
wafer-cakes, which they bear us down to be Christ's body.) He alludeth to the
Stoics, who held that the Gods had some shape; and Nec tamen ea species corpus
est sed quasi corpus; nec habet sanguinem, sed quasi sanguinem. C^c. de not.
Deor. l. 1.
that shape was as a body, but yet no body; and had as it were blood and yet no
blood. Wherein the Marcionites also in a manner agreed with them, (and our
Romanists at this day with either) imagining our Savior ( Tertul. de carne
Christi and contr. Marc.
says Tertullian) to have Vt carnem gestaret sine ossibus dura^, sine mus.
ulis solidam, sine sanguine cruen^, sine tunica vestitam, sine same esurientem,
sine dentibus edentem, sine lin^ ^^quer te^.
flesh hard without bones, solid without muscles, bloody without blood, clad
without coat, speaking without tongue, eating without teeth, etc. Whereupon
Tertullian concludes, that since Christ had all his limbs when he showed
them to his Descipl^s, they that imagined such a Christ as this, Ecce (...),
decipit, circumuenit omnium o^ulos, sensus, access^s, contactus. Ergo Christum
non de coelo defer debueras, sed de caetu aliquo circul^torio, spectaculi
artificem, non salutis Pontificem,
that deceives, beguileth, and deludeth all men's eyes, and senses and
touchings, (and taste too he might have said, we at least may say) should not
bring him from heaven (from whence the Marcionites said their Christ had his
body, though the Papists dare not say, they have theirs from thence) but fetch
him rather out of some So translate I him, aliuding to our Enlish phrase. His
sense is apparent.
iuglers box (the Popish pyx, or the like) not to work salvation, but to make
sport with. This I have the rather insisted upon to show how the Papists iump
in their conceits about this their breaden God; and strange fantastical body,
that has all parts of a man's body, and yet none at all to be seen, felt,
heard, yea or understood, with the Heretics of old time; and to confirm these
their dotages use and urge the very same Arguments that they then did, by the
ancient Fathers long since answered: As also that the ancient Fathers used then
the very same Arguments against them, that we do now against these; which yet
it pleases this vain trifler to term grossly carnal and unworthy to be
answered.

2. Oh but (says he) it is a gross kind both of divinity and philosophy
fit for such a stupide Professor, to hold that local extention, visiblitie,
palpability, and other natural accidents and sensible proprieties cannot by
Gods omnipotency be severed from his own body without the destruction of it.

1. Yea and to omit that it is a very sorry shift to have recourse to Gods
omnipotency for the justifying of such monstrous fictions and forged miracles
as either in this their prodigious dotage, or in their lying Legends they have
endeavored to obtrude upon the world: To say that God can make Christ's body to
remain still in his full stature, and yet at the same time to be no bigger
then to enter in at a man's mouth, or go down a child's throat, or to make Ex
vi Sacramenti sub specie panis continentur, non solum caro, sed totum corpus
Christi, soil. osla and nerui, and alia huiusmodi; non enim dicitur, Haec est
caro mea, sed, Hoc est corpus meum. Thom. Aq sum. part 3. q. 76. a. 1. ad 2.
a man's body consisting of flesh, blood and bone to have no dimensions or
extention at all, not other accidents and properties of a natural body; is
manifestly to say that God can make a thing at the same time to be and not to
be, to be a body and no body; which implies contradiction. And Quae
contradictionem implicant, sub divina omnipotentia non continentur. Idem ibid.
part. 1. q. 25. a 3.
those things that imply contradiction, they themselves grant that God cannot
do. For it were to make falsehood truth; which he that is Elohim emeth Deus
veri^as. Ier. 10. 10. Ioh. 14. 6.
Truth it self can never do.

2. In this very manner also did the Heretics reason as appears by
Theodoret, to maintain their absurd dotages against the Orthodox Christians,
who likewise answered them then, as we do these now. (...). Eranista apud
Theod. dial 1. and 3.
There is nothing (says the Heretic) that God cannot do. We say, that Mar.
10. 27.
all things are possible with God. And Job says, that Job. 42. 2.
God can do all things, and there is nothing impossible with him. There is
nothing therefore but he can do, that is able to do all things. Now how does
the Orthodoxe disputer answer this? Theodoret. ibid 3.
God (says he) can do Psalm. 115. 3. and 135. 6.
whatsoever he will: But (...).
God neither can do, nor will any thing which is not agreeable to his own
nature. As for example Iam. 1. (...).
he cannot sin; Tit. 1. 13.
he cannot ly, Psalm. 92. 15.
nor do any unjust thing, being justice and truth it self. (...).
Many things there are therefore that God, that can do all things, yet cannot
do. Yea it is a part of his power that he cannot do them, no argument at all
of any impotency in him. This was deemed a sufficient answer to those
Heretics then; and may as well now be returned our Popish Adversaries,
fighting with the same weapons that they then did, for points as absurd as ever
any of them held.

Division 11.
ANother Argument is by my Adversary tediously prosecuted N. P.
page 12. wherein from Christ's local being still in heaven, he argues and
endeavors to prove an utter impossibility of his bodily being in the
Sacrament. Of which kind of disputing I may fitly say with Saint Augustine,
Aug. lib 2^. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 51.
Behold with what manner of Arguments humane infi^mity possessed with vanity,
contradicts Gods omnipotency. As if natural under standing were able to
comprehend the utmost limit and extention of Gods power, which is in it self
infinite and inforutably manifested in many of his wonderful miracles: of
which (as I have said) no other reason can be given, but that he is omnipotent
that did them, and cannot deceive us when he is pleased to testify them. Can
we conceive (for example) the creation of the world of nothing at all
preexisting; the resurrection and repair which God will make of all bodies so
utterly by frequent and successiue conuersions into other things altered and
consumed; the personal union of man with God; the torment of souls and devils
wholly spiritual by corporal fire; the consubstantiall subsisting of the
divine nature simply one of it self in three distinct persons; and other like
mysteries of faith not conceiuable more then the bodily being of our Savior in
the Sacrament; yet upon the warrant of Scripture and doctrine of Christ's Church
faithfully by us believed? Can this Minister tell me (to come more nearly to
our purpose) how our Savior appeared visibly to S. Paul on earth (as diverse
plain texts import, particularly by Bellarmine Lib. de Euchar.
produced and discussed) and yet (as himself will not deny) still remaining in
heaven? Or can he tell me, how our Saviors body went out of his Sepulcher,
without remoouing that huge stone, rolled afterward by the Angel from it? Or
how he entered the house, the doors being and remaining still shut upon his
disciples; as for a great miracle the Evangelist recounted? Or how he pierced
the solid and huge Orbs of heaven in his ascension without making any hole in
them? Sithence it is equally above nature for many bodies to possess one
place, as for one body to be in many places. And if according to Christian
true Philosophy, the soul of man being a spiritual and indivisible substance
can at one be entirely in distant parts of man's body exercising all distinct
operations in them, why is it impossible for God to give his humane body
distant presences and a spiritual manner of being in the Sacrament? when as by
personal union with himself, he gives to the same body a far higher and more
inconceiuable manner of being.

MY fifth Argum^nt is from the nature of a true body which cannot possibly be
the same whole and entire T. G.
in many places at once, much less in places as far distant, as East and
West, Heaven and Earth.

Now here again is he feign to fly (as before) to Gods omnipotency. That is
their (...). Quem aduocabant Comici, vbires haerere videbatur.
Deus e machina; as they had wont to speak; that is the knife still at hand to
help to cut all those knots that by their wanton wits and absurd fantasies
they have snarled themselves in. And the better to enforce this Catholicon
Medicorum, sieve Panacaeu Papisticum.
Catholic Answer, that se^ueth them for the saluing of all sores, he
reckons up a long bead roll of wonderful works; as the Creation, the
Resurrection, the Hypostaticall union, the Trinity in Unity, the torment of
Spirits by corporal fire, Christ coming out of the Sepulcher without
remooving the huge stone, his entering into the house while the doors were
still shut, his appearing to Paul on earth while he was still in heaven,
(which he tells us Bellarmine has plainly proved) his piercing of the
solid Orbs of heaven in his Ascension, the soul being at once entirely in
distant parts of man's body, etc. And then demands why God cannot cause
Christ's body to be as well one and the same, whole and entire in so many
several distant places at once; the rather since that it is equal above
nature for many bodies to possess one place, as for one body to be in many
places.

1. Here are diverse things that are questionable both in Divinity and
Philosophy: which albeit he take pro concessis, will not so easily be granted
him, till they be better proved then as yet they are, howsoever we exclude not
diverse of them out of the reach of Gods omnipotency, even as he understands
them; as

1. The manner of the Vise Iul. Scalig. de subtle. exercit. 307. Sect. 29.
Aegidium in l. 2. de anima. c. 2. q. 6. and Hospinian. de sede anim.
souls being in distant parts of the body is disputable: nor is there the same
reason of bodies and of spirits.

2. The torment of spirits whether it be by corporal fire or no, is not agreed
on as a matter of faith; De purgat. l. 2. c. 11.
Bellarmine himself so confesses.

3. The manner of Act. 9. 17.
Christ's apparition to S. Paul is not certain. Neither does Bellarmine prove
that Christ was below on earth, or near the earth in his humanity; nor is it
to the purpose whether he were or no. Act. 7. 56.
Steven saw him in heaven, the heavens opened: 2 Cor. 12, 2, 3, 4.
Paul was rapt up himself into heaven. Yea Apparuit illi primum in coelo.
Ambr. hom. in 1. Cor. 15.
in heaven, and Superna ei pietas coelos aperuit, seseque illi Jesus de
sublim^bus ostendit. Greg. mor. l. 19. c. 5.
from heaven it was that Christ appeared to him; if we may believe Pope Gregory
and one that goes ordinarily for Ambrose. Nor can Bellar. de Euch. l. 3. c. 3.
Bellarmine produce any one of the Ancients that says otherwise. Howbeit
neither do we so pen up Christ in heaven, but that he may at his pleasure
(though ordinarily he does not) descend.

4. For Ioh. 20. 19.
Christ's coming in to his Disciples when the doors were shut. Why might not
(as Jerome speaks) Creaturam cedere creatori. Hieron. ad Pa^mach. contr.
error. Joan. Hieros.
the creature give way to the Creator; as Act. 12. 10.
the iron gate did to Peter? Durand. in senten. l. 4. d. 44. q. 6. ad. 3.
It is said, says Durand, one of their Schoolmen, that Christ came when the
doors were shut: but it is not said, that he came in through the doors so
shut: he might enter in by some other place; or cause the doors to open
suddenly, and shut instantly again.

5. For Christ's resurrection; Let him hear the same Durand. Idem ibid. ad 2.
It cannot (says he) be proved by any Text of Scripture, that Christ rose
again while the Tomb was so shut: and so consequently that his body passed
through the stone. Or if Durands authority will not serve; let them hear Pope
Leo in one of his decretall Epistles: Reuoluto monumenti lapide caro surrexit.
Leo Pp. epist. 83.
Christ's body (says he) rose again the stone being rolled away.

6. For his Ascension; to omit, that this Vid: Zanc de operibus creat part. 2.
l. 2. c. 3. Th. 3 Et Keckerm. system. physic. l. 2 c. 2.
solidity of the Orbs is in Philosophy a thing questionable; and such a point,
as if it be denied, this great Doctor will hardly be ever able to make good: I
answer with Durand; that Durand. vbi sup. ad 1.
Whether the heavens be divisible in their own nature, or by divine virtue,
(as the one they well may be, and the other certainly they are) there is no
necessity that Christ's body in his Ascension should be together in the same
place with the bodies of the Orbs.

So that in none of these Examples there is any necessity of two bodies being
in one place at once. Which yet if it were proved (if they will believe their
own Schoolmen) were not suffiicient. For howsoever this great Doctor tell us,
that it is equally above nature for many bodies to be in one place, and for one
body to be in many places: yet they say, that it is not so. Tho. Aqui.
quodlib. 1. art. 22.
Though two bodies (says Aquinas) may be in one places at once; yet it
follows not that one body may be in two places at once. The former is not
possible but by miracle; the latter not at all. Durand. in 4. d. 4. q. 6. ad 1.
It is not alike (says Durand) for two bodies to be at once in one place; and
for one body to be at once in more places then one. For the one implies a
contradiction; the other does not, (the former he means) though it may seem
so to do.

2. And so he has a direct answer, why we deny that a body can be in diverse
places at once; notwithstanding we believe and acknowledge Gods wonderful
works of Creation, Resurrection, Christ's Incarnation, and those unsearchable
mysteries of the Trinity, and Hypostaticall union, etc. because the one
implies a contradiction, those other do not.

And here let me entreat the Reader (since that these men so much press us
with Gods omnipotency) to cast his eye back with me to those manifold Diuis.
2. sect. 4. number. 3.
impossibilities before mentioned, and by themselves acknowledged, even in this
very business concerning the Sacrament. Whereby it may appear, that they make
use of it only to serve their own turns, urging it then when it may stead
them, and denying it then when it does not. To recite again some one or two of
them only, adding one or two more to them Bellarm, de Euchar. (...). 3. c. 19.
Luthers opinion (says Bellarmine) cannot be true: because Nullo modo fierr
potest vt vna res non mutetur, and ta^en (...) alia.
it is no way possible that one thing should not be changed, and yet should
become another. And Impossible rem vna^ converti in aliam, nec tamen in ea
part desinere esse quod erat. Lanfranc. contr. Bereng.
It is impossible (says Lanfranck) that one thing should be turned into
another, and not cease to be, so far forth as it is converted. Supra Diui^. 2.
It is impossible (says this Defendant, that cannot endure here to hear of
any impossibility) That a man should be a Rock, or a Uine. And Fieri non
potest vt pauis sit corpus Christi. Bellar. de Euch. l. 1. (...). 1^.
It is impossible (says Bellarmine) that bread should be Christ's body. Non
potest esse aliquis simul in diuersis temporibus. Fr. Mairon, in sent, l. 4. d.
11. q. 1.
It is not possible (says Maironis) that one should be in two times at once.
(And is it not as impossible then, for one to be in two places at once?) And
Idem effectus non potest habere plures causas totales. Ibid.
it is impossible that one single effect should have diverse total causes: and
Ideo idem a^^idens non potest esse in diuersis subiectis. Ibid.
impossible therefore that one and the same accident should be in diverse
subjects. (And why not as impossible for one subject to have diverse accidents,
as diverse seats, sites, qualities, and quantities at once? which Christsbody
must needs have, i^ it be with us in the Eucharist.) Vnde and ide^ non potest
simul moueri motibus oppositis. Durand. in sent. l. 4. d. 10. q. 3.
It is impossible (says Durand) that one and the same thing should move two
contrary ways at once. And Impossible est quod vnus motus eiusde^ corporis
localiter moti terminetur simul ad diuersa ^oca. Thom sum. p. 3. q 75. a. 2.
It is impossible (says Aquinas) that the same body should by local motion
arrive in diverse several places at once. And Impossible est idem esse motum
and quietum. Ibid. q 76. a. 6.
It is impossible that one and the self same thing should both rest and stir
at once. And yet should Christ's body, if it were in the Host, or if it were the
very Host rather, do all this, when at the same time it both rests in the
Pyx in one place, and goes in Procession in another place, and is in diverse
processions, or on sundry several occasions carried contrary ways to several
persons and places at the same instant. No more therefore do we curb or
restrain Gods ^mnip^tency, when we deny that a body can be by any means in
two distant places at once, then they do, when they deny a possibility of the
things before spoken. And for the reason of our denial, let them hear be side
Durands, Aquinas his confession. V^um corpus non potest esse in lu^bus locis.
V^ enim corpus esse localiter in duobus locis implicat contradictionem. Thom.
Aq. quodlib. 1. art. 22.
For one body (says he) to be locally in two places at once, it implies a
contradiction: and therefore cannot a body be in two places at once; no not by
miracle neither: For those things that imply contradiction God cannot do. Deus
non potest sacere, vt vnum corpus localiter sit simul in duobus locis. Idem
quodli I. 3. art. 2.
God therefore cannot make a body to be locally in two places at once. The
very self same says Aegid. Romans quodlib 1. q. 1.
Aegidius too: and Amolynus on him; that Si essent mill miracula, non
adaequarent potentiam ad id quod implicat contradictione. Laurent. Amolyn. in
eund. ibid.
although a thousand miracles were wrought, nothing could be effected that
implies a contradiction; as this does.

Certainly the holy Fathers doubted not to affirm that N. P.
Christ left his body here on earth, and yet assumed with him the same body
into heaven; he held his body in his own hands at his last Supper, and
distributed it severally to his Apostles; as has been already out of S.
Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and other holy Fathers formerly by me alle^dged.
Insomuch as Melancthon one of the maine pillars of Protestant Religion,
understood the opinion of the holy Fathers so well in this point, and
attributed so much withal to Gods omnipotency, as he writes thus of this
very Argument. Epist. ad Martinum Ge^ob.
I had rather offer my self to death then to affirm as Zwinglians do, that
Christ's body cannot be but in one place at once. And S. Augustine (as
Bellarmine proves) was so far from denying this to the body of Christ, as
he doubted whether the holy Martyrs may not be at the self same time in
several Churches and Memories erected of them; albeit naturally no spirit nor
body can be more then in one place, or remain without some certain place of
being: which latter is in the places ciced by this Minister out of him only
affirmed. And if a perfect substance or nature (as was the humanity of Christ)
could want the natural personality and subsistence thereof, supplied by the
divine person and hypostasis of the Son of God (as our Christian faith
teaches us) why cannot in like manner by Gods omnipotency the accidents of
bread and wine remain without actual inhering and being in their natural
subject?

His other Arguments page 15. are drops of an afterstorme, and objections
gathered out of S. Augustine, which do only prove that Christ is not visibly
but in heaven; not denying his sacramental being in many places; as this
Minister would have him. And surely our Savior himself in the 6. Chapter of
S. John, verse 61. solueth this very objection (as S. Chrysostom understands
him) when perceiving that his Disciples murmared at his promise of giving his
flesh for meat, etc. he said to them, Does this scandalize you? If then you
shall see the Son of Man ascending where he was before, etc. As if he had
said; Are you scandalized that I said being now present with you, I will give
my flesh for food? what then will you do, or how far will* you be from
believing that I canso give you my flesh, when I ^ll ascend to heaven and be
absent so sarre from you?

2. THe places of the Fathers here pointed at, were before answered, where by
him they were a^ T. G.
large alleged. And howsoever Augustine Aug. de cura pro mort. ger. c. 16.
spoke modestly (after his manner) of a difficult Question, not daring
peremptorily to determine by what means that was effected, that by diverse
other means might be: yet in his books against Fa^stus the Manichie he says
expressly and peremptorily, that Secundum presentia^ corporalem simul and in
Sole, and in Luna, and in Cruce esse no^ potest. Aug. contr. Faust. l. 20. c.
11.
Christ in regard of his bodily presence could not be at once in the Sun and
in the Moon, and upon the Cross also: as they absurdly imagined and
maintained that he was. And again in his Comment aries on the Gospel of S.
John; not (as Bellarmine corruptly cites him, as he does also many others)
that Corp. Christi, in quo resurr. vno in loco esse potest. Bellar. de Euthar.
l. 2. c. 24.
Christ's body in which he rose again, M AY be; but (as Vno in loco esse
oportet. Aug. in Joan. tr. 30.
Peter Lombard, Petr. Lomb. sen. l. 4. d. 10. A
and other of their own Authors acknowledge him to say) that Grar. de consecr.
d. z. c. 1. Thom. in 4. d. 10. a. 1. Scot. in 4. q. 3. and alii. ibid.
it MVST be in one place; howsoever his verity (that is, his Deity) be every
where. Yea discusing the question at large in one of his Epistles, and having
concluded the Negative, he says that Cauendum ne veritatem corporis
auferamus, August. Epist. 17.
they take away the truth of his body, that maintain it to be in many places
at once: Whereas though Immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulit. Ibid.
immortality be conferred on it, yet nature is not taken from it. To which
purpose he disputes much of the nature of a true body, and delivers those
things, which I press out of him: all which together with the testimonies of
other of the Ancients this superficial Answerer passes over with sad silence;
only boldly and b^asen facedly auouching that all that is alleged out of
Augustine proves nothing but this, that Christ is not visibly but in Heaven.
Did he think that his Reader would not cast an eye on them, whem they were
verbatim set down before him?

3. Yea but our Savior himself (he says) solveth this Objection, John 6. 61.
as Chrysostom understands him, when he says, Does this scandalize you?
What if you shall see the Son of Man ascending where he was before, etc? as
if he had said; Are you scandalized because I said being now, present with
you, I will give my flesh for food? What then will you do, or how far will
you be from believing that I can so give you my flesh when I shall ascend to
heaven, and be so far above from you?

1. Where Chrysostom thus expounds the place, I know not. Upon the place (I
am sure) he has nothing but this, that Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 47.
Christ by these words did intimate to them his Deity. Yea so Iansen.
concord. Euang. cap. 59.
Iansenius also says, that Chrysostom understands these words as spoken to
assure them that he came down from heaven. The truth is; this exposition it
not Chrysostomes, but Bellarmines, (from whom this Collector has filched it)
who yet to add some grace and procure some weight to an invention of his own,
says that c Chrysostom to him seems to point at some such thing. Indicare
mihi videtur Chrysostom. Bellar. de Euch. l, 1. c. 6.
And what Bellarmine says cautelously, and timorously, Chrysostom to him
seems to point at; that this blind bayard says boldly and confidently, that
Chrysostom says; and upon the Exposition as backed now sufficiently with
Chrysostom, he builds a peremptory answer to all mine Objections, that will
easily remove them all. Did this man think that these things would ever be
examined? Or is his credit so mean already that he need not fear to be
discredited, that he dare use such sorry shifts as these are?

2. Grant all to be Chrysostomes, and all to be as true, as if not
Chrysostom, but Christ himself had said it: what will thence be concluded to
prove that Christ's body may be in many places at once? But since he has
cited this place, though to small purpose; let him hear Augustines words on
it, going directly agaiust them, and these absurd fantasies of theirs. August.
in Joan. tr. 27.
Christ (says he) does in* these words Hie so ^uit, quod eos mouerat, etc.
solue that that moved them: and opens that whereas they were jcandalized.
For they thought that he would give them out his body: but he told them that
be should g^e up whole into heaven. As if he had said, Aug ibid.
When you shall see the Son of Man ascend where he was before* certainly
then you shall see, that he does not give out his body in such a manner as you
imagine: Certainly even then you shall understand, that his grace is not
consumed by bits. And to Augustine addewe Athanasius one as ancient as the
Nicene Council and a principal person in it Athanas. in illud Euang.
Quicunque dixerit, etc.
Christ disputing (says he) of the eating of his body, and seeing many
thereupon scandalized, thus spoke; Does this scandalize you? What then if you
shall see the Son of Man ascend where before he was? It is the spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak are spinit and
life. For here he spoke of both, both his flesh and his spirit, and
distinguished the spirit from the flesh, that believing not only that that
appeared to the eyes, but that also that was invisible, they might learn that
those things also that he spoke were (...).
not carnal, but spiritual. (...).
For to how many men could his body have sufficed to eat of? that it might be
the foodalso of the whole world. But therefore made he* mention of his
ascension into heaven, that he might withdraw them form the corporal
understanding; and that then they might understand that his flesh which he
spoke of was heavenly meat from above, and spiritual food to be given by him.
For, says he, Those things which I have spoken to you are spirit and life.
Which is even all one as if he had said; My body that is showed and given,
shall be given to be meat for the whole world, (...).
that it may spiritually be distributed to each one, and become to each one a
safeguard and preservative for resurrection to life eternal. So little does
this place avail for this purpose, as the Ancients both Latin and Greek
expound it: making much rather against them and this popish doctrine of a
carnal feeding on Christ's flesh; which those Fathers gather and prove thence
to be wholly spiritual. But thus judicious is he in the choice of his
allegations; and so sincere in his citations of the Ancients, putting down
their names only, but pointing to no place, that his fraud and forgeries may
not be discovered; and fastening upon them his own, or his own associates
expositions, wholly differing and dissenting from that that themselves say.

Moreover it is a wild kind of arguing from the natural N. P.
and local extension of bodies to infer (as my Adversary does page 16.) that
by no possible power of God any body can want this local extension; this being
a secondary effect of quantity, and an accidental propriety, which God may
therefore easily hinder, and conserve without it bodily substance; as our
Savior himself insinuates in the Gospel; affirming for a thing possible
with God, to make a great Camel to pass through the eye of a needle; by
taking (to wit) from it exterior bigness and local extension. Of which Camel
so extenuated and straightened in place all the very same may be proportionably
affirmed, which this Minister accounts so absurd, by us held of Christ's body
in the Sacrament. And supposing truly that the body of Christ has no
extension in place, it is ridiculous for this ignorant Minister to make such
inferences; as that any part of Christ's body must be as great and greater then
his whole body; and his whole body less then any part of it. For if neither
the whole nor any part thereof, as it is in the Sacrament has any exterior
bigness at all, how can one part be said to be bigger then the whole? as of
two black things a man should say, one was whiter then the other, when neither
had any whiteness at all in them.

4. TO the recit^ll of their absurd assertions, that T. G.
there is Omnes parts integrales Corporis Christi, caput, pectus, manus,
pedes, etc. Gabr. Biel. in Can. Miss. lect. 42. Qui and asserit lect. 80. Non
esse inconueniens, si ponantur infinitae parts substantiae pu^ctualis paris
ante co^ecratio e^quod infinities corpus Christi est sub speciebus panis post
consecratione^. That Christ's body may be ten thousand thousand times (and why
not ten thousand thousand bodies of Christ then?) with head, feet, hands, legs,
back, breast, and belly, in one wafer if there be but so many crumbs as big a
needles point in it. Vide and Fr. Maironis in 4. ^ist* 10. quest. a.
a whole Christ, flesh, blood, and bone, head, hands and feet, belly, breast
and back, in every little wafercake, and every least crumme of each; and
consequently, the whole body of Christ on earth less then the least limme or
fingers end of it in heaven: as also to the allegations out of Augustine that
this cannot be; for that in every true body, the parts cannot be altogether,
but must have their due distance, and each of them his space or place according
to his bigness; and none of them can be bigger then the whole: He makes
answer, that this is but a wild kind of reasoning: (and yet it is Augustine
that so reasons, whom he might have been pleased to use with better
terms:) tells us what our Savior says of a Camel passing through a
needles ey: as if what were spoken there by our Savior of the one did relieve
the absurdity of the other: (which no whit it does, being only Hyperbole, qua
nihil aliud quam hoc difficillimum esse intelligi voluit. Erasm. de rat. ver.
Theolog.
an hyperbolicall speech, used to set forth the impossibility Mat. 19. 26. Mar.
10. 27.
with man, of Mar. 10. 24.
such a rich man's salvation as he there speaks of:) and informs this
ignorant Minister, that neither the whole body of Christ nor any part of it, as
it is in the Sacrament, has any exterior bigness at all.

1. Did any man ever before hear of a body without bigness? or a co^pus non
quantum, without those dimensions that are so inseperable from a body, that the
very same (...). Corpus A^st. categor. quantit.
name is given unto either, and we have no particular name either in Greek or
Latin to express the one by, but that which is the usual appellation of the
other? But a number of such absurd dreams and dotages does this prodigious
doctrine produce. Monstra quis tanta explicet? Sen. Theb. 1*
Accidents without subjects: Bodies without bigness: Parts bigger then the
whole: The whole less then the least part: A grown man's entire body with all
limbs and toynts of it, couched and cooped up in a thin wafer-cake and in
every crum of it. The same body that is entire in heaven still, in a thousand
places entire too at the same time here on earth; and yet never stir an inch
from the place that in heaven it still holds. These are (...). Theod.
Rhaetens. de haeres.
magical mysteries indeed, which it is no marvel if this ignorant Minister
cannot conceive.

2 Yea but our Saviors words of Mat. 19. 24.
a Camel passing through a needles eye, shows that a body may be freed from
it exterior bigness and local extension: that is as much as if he had said,
they show that a body may become no body, and yet be a body still. The speech
is hyperbolicall: and no more proves a possibility of the thing therein
spoken, (as Piscat. in Math. 19.
Piscator well observes answering De Euchar. l 1. c 14.
Bellarmine, from whom he here has it) then of many Sic (...). Et ex En^io
Vairo, Prius pariet Locusta Luca^ Bouem, i. Elephantem.
other things, spoken commonly in speeches of the like kind. Quantitas est de
veritate corporis. Bonauent. in sen. l. 4. d. 10. q. 2.
Quantity (says Bonaventure) is of the verity of a body: and a true body
consequently cannot be without it. And Quamuis substantia possit abstrahi a
qua^^itate: tamen quod corpus viuat and sit organicum, and non sit quantum, hoc
nec esse nec intelligi potest. Ibid.
though it were granted that some substance might be without quantity, yet it
cannot be that any quick or organicall body (such as a Camels is, and such as
he grants Christ's to be) should be without it. Yea and therefore also In
altari no^ tantum est corporis Chri sti veritas, into etiam quantitas. Bonauen.
ibid.
not the verity only (as this fellow would have it) but the quantity also (as
Bonauenture auoweth, and this fellow denies) that is, the exterior bigness of
Christ's body must needs be with it in the Sacrament, if it be at all there.

3. To conclude this wild discourse indeed, because we are in it compelled to
follow one that turns round till he be giddy again: when we reason thus
from the nature and property of a true body to be but in one place; we reason
no otherwise (howsoever he esteem it a wild kind of reasoning) then wise
and learned men, yea Angels too, have taught us to reason. For as the Angel
reasons with the nomen that came to seek Christ in the Sepulcher; Mat. 28. 6.
He is not here; for he is risen again: which were no good Argument, if his
body might have been in two places at once: So the ancient Fathers also
reason in their disputes against Heretics, where it stood them upon to speak
warily, and not to argue wildly, as this giddy brains terms it. Theodo^et.
dialog. 2.
Christ's body (says Theodoret) albeit it be now glorified, yet is a body
still, and has the same circumscriptio^ that before it had Which (as the Act.
1. 11.
Angels teach) shall come in the same manner as it was seen go to heaven. But
they saw it then circumscribed. Yea our Lord himself says, Mat. 24. 30.
You shall see the Son of Man come in the clouds. But that nature cannot be
seen, that is not circumscribed. He shows then that his body is
circumscribed. It is not therefore changed into another nature, but it
remains still a true body, though filled with divine glory. So Fulgentius,
Fulgent. ad Thrasimund. sib. 2.
One and the same Christ (says he) is both local man of man, and God
infinite of his Father. One and the same according to his humane nature Absens
coelo cum esset in terra; and derelinquens terram, cum ascendisset in coelum.
absent from heaven, when he was here upon earth, and leaving the earth when he
went up into heaven: but according to his divine and infinite nature, neither
leaving heaven, when he came down from heaven; nor forsaking the earth, when
he went up into heaven. Which may most certainly be gathered from his own
words, who to show that his humanity was local, said, Ioh. 20. 27. and 16. 28.
I go up to my Father, etc. Now how went he up into heaven, but because he
was local and true man? Or how is he Mat. 28. 20.
yet present with his faithful ones, but that he is infinite and true God?
And Uigilius most evidently against Eutyches (to pass by all other places,
which are more then one in him) Vigil. contr. Eutych. lib. 4.
If the Word (says he) and the Flesh were both of one nature, how should not
the flesh be every where as well as the word? For Quando in terra fuit, non
erat in coelo.
when it (to wit, Christ's flesh, or his body, his humanity) was on earth, it
was not in heaven; Et nunc quia in coelo est, non est vtique in terra.
and now because it is in heaven, it is not on earth: for that according to it
Phil. 3. 20.
we expect Christ to come from heaven, whom according to the Word (that is, his
Deity) we believe to be with us on earth. It is apparent therefore that the
same Christ is of a twofold nature, and is every where indeed according to the
nature of his diviniti^; but is contained in a place according to the nature of
his humanity. And he concludes his discourse thus; Haec est fides and
confessio Catholica, quam A. postoli tradideru^t, Martyrs roborauerunt, and
fideles nunc vsque custodiunt.
This is the Catholic Faith and Confession, which the Apostles have delivered,
Martyrs have confirmed, and the faithful keep to this day. And if this be so,
then sure the Popish doctrine that affirms the clean contrary to it, is not.

Division 12.
PAge 16. and 17. My Adversary wisely after his accustomed N. P.
manner undertakes by comparisons to declare the true manner of Christ's body
and blood being conveyed unto us in the Sacrament: and that so easily as if
there were no difficulty at all in the explication thereof; whereas Lib. 4.
instit. c. 17. sect. 7. 10. and 32.
Calvin himself accounts it an inconceiuable and inexplicable mystery,
worthy with wonder and astonishment to be by us believed, how (to wit) Christ's
body so remotely distant as heaven is from the earth, can be eaten and received
by us. Beza de re Sacram. q. 9.
We confess it (says Beza) to be an incomprehensible mystery, wherein it
comes to pass that the same body which is and still remains in heaven, and
is no where but there, should be truly communicated to us who are now on earth
and no where else. This indeed is a mystery and true Jewel of Protestanticall
doctrine harder to be conceived, as Calvin, Beza, and other chief Calvinists
seem sometime to mean it, then to conceive all those true miracles, which we
teach to be wrought by God in the consecration and use of this wonderful
Sacrament. Yea surely it implies an evident contradiction that Christ's body
should be truly given together with the sacramental signs, as Calvin
expressly affirms, and so by vt eaten, that is no nearer then the top of
heaven is to the mouth of such as receive him. If by faith only and a
grateful memory of his passion we eat Christ in the Sacrament, as this
Minister solueth the former riddle; no more present therein, nor in any other
manner conjoined with the sacramental signs, then the land conveyed by an
Indenture sealed is present or conveyed with the seal thereof, or then he is
present in the water of Baptism: (they are his own comparisons) then is their
Sacrament a bare sign and figure of Christ's body, having no mystery at all
worthy of admiration in it. For what wonder is it for a man to eat one thing
thinking upon another; bread (for example) remembering our Saviors passion? And
then are Calvin, Beza and many more of their learnedest companions mere Iuglers
and Impostors, who seek to plaster rotten walls, and mask with great words
the naked breadinesse of their Protestanticall Sacrament.

AT the end of this Argument I answer an Objection, T. G.
how Christ's body and blood can be conveyed unto us, or eaten and drunk of
us in the Eucharist, if he be not there present. Which Question from the
Fathers (as you heard before) may in a word be soon answered. Because our
Savior showed it by those words of his concerning his ascension, and his
speech thereunto annexed, to be a spiritual not a corporal kind of
communication. And if they will hear one of their own Bishops, Iansenius; he
will tell them, that Iansen. in concold. Euang. c. 59.
to eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood is to believe in his Incarnation
and in his passion and blood, sheading; and that so by faith either of them are
both present with us, and conueighed to us as well in the Sacrament, as out of
it. But hereupon this mine Adversary befooling me for my labor, for taking
such a task upon me, to answer such a Question; says, I undertake to declare
that by comparisons, as if there were no difficulty at all in it, All this of
Calvin and Beza he borrows from Bellarmine de Euch. l. 1. c. 1.
which Calvin and Beza confess to be a mystery, inconceivable,
incomprehensible, inexplicable, yea which (as we hold it) implies an evident
contradiction: affirming that Christ is no more present therein, nor in any
manner conjoined with the sacramental signs, then the land conveyed by an
Indenture sealed is present with the same, or then he is present with the
water in Baptism. Whereupon he worthily infers; that this our Sacrament
then is but a bare sign or figure of Christ's body having no mystery at all
worthy of admiration; and Calvin and Beza, etc. are but Iuglers and Impostors.

It might well have been one of Hercules his labors to purge this man's
writings. Augaeus his stable was not fuller of dirt and dung, then they are of
foul and filthy corrupt matter, and of loud and lewd lies.

1. Where do I affirm it to be a matter without all difficulty fully to
explicate the admirable efficacy and operation of divine mysteries, or the
manner how the same is effected? I show only by some comparisons (and those
such as the Apostle warranteth the use of) how Christ may being absent, be
truly and effectually conueighed and assured unto us. But follows it thence
that I hold the thing it self for the manner of effecting it to have no
difficulty at all in it? Do not the ancient Fathers hold the Trinity an
unsearchable mystery? And yet what is more common among them then See Greg.
Naz. ad Nectar. and Aug. de Trinit l. 10, 11, 12, 13. and de verb. Ap hom 1.
etc.
by Comparisons and similitudes to show how in one nature there may be a
plurality of persons? This Disputant himself among other wondrous works
reckons the resurrection of men's bodies for one: will he say that the
Fathers therefore deem that there is no difficulty in it, because See Tertull.
de resurr. carn. Athenag. de resurr. etc yea the Apostle himself 1Cor. 15. 35,
36. 37.
by sundry similitudes they endeavor to prove a possibility of it;
notwithstanding the frequent and successiue conuersions of them into other
things altered and consumed, as he speaks?

2. Let him show how it implies an evident contradiction, to say that Christ's
body is truly given with the sacramental signs, though it be no nearer
then heauen-top is to the mouths of the receivers. How this may be, without
color of contradiction, not in the Sacrament only, but out of it also, when
as the thing is done spiritually, beside the comparisons that I express it by,
his own Iansen. vbi sup.
Iansenius will show; yea or his own Albert will inform him, where he says,
that Manducantes non mandu^a^^, and non manducantes manducant. A^bert* de
Sacram. Euchar. sermon. 27.
Some eat and yet eat not; and some eat not, and yet eat. The former he
means of those that eat unprofitably in the Sacrament; the latter of those
that eat spiritually out of it. If out of the Sacrament men may truly receive
Christ's body, though it be no nearer then heaven top to their mouths; then is
it no such strange paradox as should imply contradiction, to say that the self
same is done in the Sacrament also. I will tell him of a stranger matter. Many
thousands thus did eat Christ's flesh a thousand years before he was in the
flesh. For howsoever he required before to have it proved; and Bellarmine
Paulus nusque dicit escam vel potu^ illum fuisse Christum: non aquam, sed
Petram. Bellar. de Euch. l. 1. c. 4.
in diverse places would feign deny it, and in Non sumebant reipsa carnem
Christi, sed effectu^ eius. Ibid. l. 1. c. 13. Esca and potus ille non propter
effectum spirituales dicuntur. Idem de sacr. effect. lib. 2. c. 17. Nec fuerunt
Sacramenta. Ibid.
effect sometime does, though directly and absolutely he dare not: yet it was
showed before out of Augustine: to whom I now add Gregory Nyssene: who in his
tenth Sermon on the Canticles, speaking of those words, Cant. 5. 1.
Eat and drink my friends, Ei qui mysticas illas Euangelii voces intelligit,
nullum apparebit discrimen inter hoc loco posita verba, and institutam ibid
mysterii celebratione^ etc. Greg. Nyss. in Cant. Ser. 10.
There is no difference (says he) between the words here used, and the
words used in the Institution of the Eucharist. For that which he exhorts us
to do in the one, Idem Hic and id temporis sac^um est.
was then also done in that divine meat and drink. And very many, yea the
most of their own writers uniformly confess it. Thomas Aquinas on 1 Cor. 10.
1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
They did eat all the same spiritual meat: that is, Id est, corpus Christi
in signo spiritualiter intellecto.
Christ's body in a sign spiritually understood: and drank all the same
spiritual drink: to wit, Christ's blood in a sign. Manducabant Christum
spiritualiter.
They did eat Christ spiritually; according to that, Creed and manducasti Aug
in Joan. tr. 25.
Believe and thou have eaten. Anselmi nomine prostant, sed Har^aei sunt
commentarii illi. Vise Fontanum in praefat. and Posseuin. in Appar.
Anselm, or Hervae^s rather that goes under his name, Eandem escam corporis
Christi, quam nos in pane manducamus, ipsi manducauerunt in Manna: and eundem
potum sanguinis Christi, quem nos ex calice bibimus, ipsi biberunt ex petra.
They did eat in the Manna the same food of Christ's body that we eat in
Bread; and the same drink of Christ's blood that we drink out of the Chalice,
did they drink from the Rock. Hugh of S. Uictors; The same (says he) Idem
significantem, and idem efficientem.
that is, signifying the same, and having the same effect. And Hugh the
Cardinal; Eundem cibum spiritualem, in Manna significatum, i. corpus Christi:
eundem potum spiritualem, sanguinem Christi biberunt.
They did eat signified in the Manna the same spiritual meat, that is, the
body of Christ; and drank the same spiritual drink, the blood of Christ: and
this did they by faith according to that of Augustine; Believe and thou have
eaten. If Christ's flesh then might be spiritually eaten by faith so long before
it was; and it implies no contradiction f Scilicet, Christi sanguinem in signo.
n Aug in Joan. tract. 25.
to say that Christ's flesh was so eaten even before his Incarnation; much less
does it to say, that it is now spiritually eaten, though locally and corporally
it be no nearer then heauen-top is to the mouth or lips of him that so eats
it. Faith like Absentes prosentes facit. Turpilius. Quid enim tam presens est
inter absentes quam per epistolas and alloqui and audire quos diligas? Hier. ad
Nitiam.
an Epistle, makes things and persons Nam reru^ absentium presens est fides.
Aug. de Trinit. l. 13. c. 1. Quem and vide sup. ex tr. 50. in Joan. and epist.
89.
absent present. Nor does a spiritual feeding necessarily require a corporal
presence of that that is fed on.

3. Where say I, that Christ is no otherwise conioynrd with the Sacrament, then
the land with the Indenture and seal of it? I say only Quo modo etiam
Caluinum hoc explicasse docet Bellar. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 10. Sed and long
ante Caluinum Bern. de temp. 54. Datur annulus ad investiendum de haereditate
aliqua. etc.
that Christ's body maybe and is as effectually conveyed unto us by the one,
as land is co^veighed to us by the other, though neither of them be locally or
materially present. And if no more then so were done in the Sacrament, yet were
there much more done thereby, then by their own confession is done by their
orall and corporal manducation; in which manner they grant themselves that
many so eat Christ, as yet he is never effectually conueighed or assured
unto, to be theirs.

4. I say indeed that Christ is as truly present in the Word (which he slyly
passes by, and makes not a word of) and in Baptism as in the Eucharist; and
we receive him as really and as effectually in the one as in the other. Nor
does he answer one word to the allegations of the Fathers to that purpose
produced: To which may be added that of Tertullian, which shall hereafter be
recited: And this of Augustine, which he says of Mary, that Audeo dicere;
ipsum manducabat, quem audiebat. Aug. de diueri. sermon. 27.
she did eat him whom she heard: and proves what he says by that place of
John, Ioh. 6. 51.
I am the living bread, which whosoever eats shall live for ever. As that
also of Ambrose; Panem illum manducat, qui ea quae scripta ^t seruat. Ambros.
in Luc. 7.
He eats that bread, that observes Gods word. And further also that De
Euchar. l. 1. c. 7.
Bellarmine acknowledges that Clem Alex. paedag. l. (...). (...). 6.
Clemens of Alexandria, Basil. Caes. epist. 141.
Basil of Caesarea, (he might have added r Tertul. de resur. carn. See Diuis.
14. Sect. 7. number. 2.
Origin. in Gen hom. 10. and in Numb. hom. 17. and 32.
Origin also, and Chrysostom. in Joan hom. 46.
Chrysostom) Hieron in Psalm. 147.
and Hierome apply those words of our Savior, Ioh. 6. 54, 56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, etc. to the word: which
howsoever indeed they be not directly spoken of there, yet certain it is that
both in the judgment of those Ancients, (who else would not so have applied
it) and in truth it self also (for neither dare Bellarmine himself therein
control them) the thing there spoken of is in and by it also effectually
performed. But to pass by the Word, and the unutterable effects of it,
together with the inconceivable manner, whereby it either works upon our
souls, or conueigheth Christ into our souls: for in receiving of it we Ioh.
1. 11, 12. and 12. 48.
receive Christ in it: Do not the ancient Fathers call the Sacrament of
Baptism an ineffable mystery, as was cited out of Gregory Nyssene a little
before? Yea do they not speak as much of the dignity and excellency, and of
the inconceivable and unutterable efficacy of it, as either Calvin or Beza do
of the Eucharist? And yet this shameless and blasphemous beast sticks not to
say, if Christ be no otherwise present in the Eucharist then he is in
Baptism, it is but a bare sign or figure, having no mystery at all worthy of
admiration. And so by necessary consequence he taxes those Worthies (to speak
in his fribald In part borrowed also from Bellarmine ^e Euch. l. c. 1.
language) as mere Iuglers and Impostors, that (in speaking so honorably of
it, and ascribing such admirable power and efficacy unto it) seek to plaster
rotten walls, and mask with great words the naked watrinesse of their
Baptism, by them so much admired. Let him show how with any color at all, he
can here clear himself of impiety and blasphemy. And let him (if he dare)
deny that Christ is effectually received both in the Word and in Nulli est
aliquatenus ambigendum tunc vnu^que^que fidelium corporis and sanguinis Christi
participem fieri quando in baptismate membrum Christi corporis efficitur
etiamsi antequam illum panem comedat, etc. de hoc seculo abscedat. Gratian. ex
August, de consecr, did. 4. and Biel in Can. Miss. lect. 36.
Baptism: in neither whereof yet there is any such real transmutation, or
corporal presence, as they necessarily require unto the receiving of Christ in
the Eucharist.

Division 13.
MY Adversaries next Argument from the quality of N. P.
the Communicants, page 18. is this; If Christ's body be really and corporally
present in the Eucharist, then all that eat thereof must of necessity eat
Christ in it. But many eat of the Eucharist, that yet eat not Christ in it:
for none but faithful and lively members of Christ eat him in this Sacrament.
In which Argument he endeavors to prove one falsehood by another, equally
by us denied; because the holy Fathers expressly affirm that Judas and the
Corinthians blamed by Saint Paul received, albeit unworthily, and to damnation,
the body of Christ, as the Apostles words 1 Cor. 11. evidently import; and when
S. Augustine and others seemed to deny them to receive Christ in the Sacrament,
they speak not of bare sacramental, but of profitable and fruitful receiving
of him.

MY sixth Reason is taken from the quality of the Communicants. T. G.


The Argument is briefly this;

Many eat of the Eucharist, that eat not Christ in it:

Ergo Christ is not corporally in it:

The Antecedent is thus proved:

None feed on Christ but the faithful; such as be in Christ, and live by
Christ:

But many eat of the Eucharist that are unfaithful, and are out of Christ:
Ergo, etc.

The Proposition of this latter Syllogism he denies, and says it is a mere
falsehood: and why so? forsooth they deny it themselves. And why do they so?
because the holy Fathers say that Judas and the Corinthians blamed by S. Paul,
did receive Christ's body, as the Apostles words evidently import.

1. For the Apostle, he says expressly, 1 Cor. 11. 27.
He that eats this bread: as plainly as can be telling us more then once or
twice, that it was bread that they did eat, though termed also Christ's body
(as has often been said, and as Augustine shows) because a Sacrament of it.

2. Is not this shameless dealing to say the Fathers affirm that Judas
received Christ's natural body (for of that is the question) yet not alleging
any one tittle out of any of them for the proof of it? and that when the
saying of one them is produced directly to the contrary, that Judas ate Christ's
bread, but not the bread Christ; which he answers not a word to. If they say
that Judas ate with the rest Christ's body; they expound themselves what thereby
they mean, to wit, Panis Christi datus est Iudae. Aug. in Joan. tr. 62.
Christ's bread, Tunc Judas Christi corpus accepit, quando omnibus eis
distribuit Sacramentum corporis and sanguinissui, vbi and ipse Judas erat Ibid.
the Sacrament of his body.

2. Yea but the Fathers, when they deny wicked men to rece^^ Christ in the
Sacrament, they speak not of bare sacramental, but of profitable and
fruitful receiving of him.

1. It is true indeed, they speak not of bare sacramental eating. And who
says they do? Or what is this tothe purpose? what is it but that I say? They
speak not of bare sacrametall eating, when they say, wickedmen eat not Christ
in the Eucharist, but they speak of it, when they say they do eat yet of the
Eucharist; wherein they should eat Christ, were Christ corporally in it, which
they say they do not.

2. They say (you have their own words) that it is not possible for any
wicked man to eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood, albeit they do gnaw or
chew the Sacrament with their teeth: because our Savior says; Ioh. 6 56.
Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me; and Ioh. 6.
51.
whosoever eats of this bread shall live for ever.

3. This Answer implies that Christ's body it self may unfruitfully and
unprofitably be eaten: as if the ancient Fathers had dreamed of a twofold
eating of it, a worthy and profitable, and an unworthy and unprofitable
eating. To which I might answer with his own Bishop I ansenius, his words;
Iansen. concord. cap. 59.
He that unworthily eats the bread of life in the Sacrament, does not truly
eat of that bread of which it is said, Ioh. 6. 48.
I am the bread of life; and Ioh 6. 55.
My flesh is meat in deed. And he adds, that it were an absurd thing to
expound our Savior where he says, Ioh. 6. 51.
If a man eat of this r Ioh. 6. 49.
bread he shall live for ever; as if he should mean; If a man eat worthily of
this bread, he shall live for ever: as if any man could eat unworthily of it,
as some did of the Manna, and eternally died. But hear we Augustine in a word
what he says hereof, and so learn we to expound Augustine and other the
Ancients, not by this idle fellows frivolous conceits, but by Augustine
himself: Huius rei sacramentum de mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam,
quibusdam ad exitiu^. Res vero ipsa cuius Sacramentum est, omni homini ad
vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque eius particeps su^ erit. August, (...) an.
tract. 26.
The Sacrament hereof (says he) to wit, of Christ's body and blood and our
union with either) is taken at the Lords table, by some to life, by some to
death: But the thing it self whereof it is a Sacrament, is taken by every one
that partaketh thereof to life; by none to death. And if of all to life, by
none to death, then undoubtedly not unworthily or unprofitably of any.

Division 14.
LAstly, when page 19, 20, 21, 22, and 23. he argues that Christ's body cannot
be in the Eucharist: first, because N. P.
then it should be broken as the bread is broken. Secondly, it should be
subject to many vndecencies, as corruption, putrefaction, mice-eating and other
foul abuses apt to happen to the bread and wine of the Sacrament. I answer him
that Christ's body being in it self now glorious and impossible, and after a
spiritual and indivisible manner present in the Sacrament, cannot be in it
self broken or otherwise abused then Angels in assumped bodies can be
wounded, or then the Majesty of the divine person in Christ was by thorns
torn, nails pierced, or other torments defaced: for all such indignities and
painful alterations, were immediately only inflicted on the corporal nature
of our Savior defaced utterly by them, and touched not immediately the divine
person, albeit personally therein subsisting: So all indignities and
alterations happening to the sacramental signs touch not at all the body it
self of our Savior impassibly and iudiuisibly under them, more then the
majesty it self of the divine nature-present in all creatures is defiled in
fonle places, etc.

Such Arguments as these made against our Saviors real true presence in the
Sacrament by our inconsiderate Adversaries, are like to those other Arguments
wont to be made by the Eutycheans, Nestorians, Arians, and other ancient
Heretics, against the divinity of our Savior, and personal union of two
natures in him; as that it was not fit or reasonable to be conceived, that
either God so united with man, or man deified by personal assumption should be
torn with whips, thorns, and nails, spet upon, buffeted, and finally die in
agonies and torments; that fleas and flies should suck the blood of God, bite
his flesh, etc. which indeed is more then can be done unto the same, as it is
here in the Sacrament, even when mice eat the sacramental signs, or when in
our stomachs we receive them, or by fire we consume them, or ^wise abuse
the^, Christ being not quantitatiuely and corporally with them extended, and
so, not to be touched or altered by any corporal action done about them. And
holy souls considering with what humility and effusion of his bounty the Son
of God was pleased to institute this great Sacrament, affording therein for his
glory and our great good his own comfortable presence unto us, have just
reason to cry out his mercy, and to admire his wisdom, power and goodness
wonderfully manifested in this second exhiminition of himself, as I may justly
call this Sacramental presence, or hiding of himself in this Sacrament, to
become thereby an heavenly food and divine refection of souls deuontly
receiving him; as also a loving spouse visiting, embracing, delighting,
adorning and enriching them with his presence, daily triumphing himself in his
victory over Satan, and our redemption solely and abundantly purchased by his
passion; and making us also to triumph with him: And whereas the Devil once by
his ministers Jews and Gentiles, caused his blood to be separated from his
body, he devised to have that real separation mysteriously continued and daily
exhibited to the f^ce of his eternal Father for us, which is 1 Cor. 11.
the declaring of the Lords death till he come, mentioned by the Apostle.

MY last Argument is taken from those things that T. G.
are done abo^, or may befall the consecrated creatures, which if they be
Christ's body and blood must needs befall Christ, as fraction, corruption,
putrefaction, mitebreeding, mice, eating, etc.

To this he answers;

1. That though these things be done to or befall the Sacrament, yet Christ's
body being now glorious and impassible, and after a spiritual and indivisible
manner present, it can no more thereby be broken and abused then Angels in
assumpted bodies can be wounded, or Christ's Deity was wounded or pierced on the
Cross.

1. We take what he grants. Christ's body is now glorious and impassible: and
therefore not subject unto such indignities, as these creatures are: and the
one consequently is not the other. Yea, is Christ's body it self impassible?
What is it then, that (as Origin speaks) goes into the draught? etc. which
this Defendant takes no notice of, because he knows not what to say to it.
Or let him resolve what those ashes, that they will to be reserved for relics
or what those mites are made of, that breed in the consecrated bread, when
either they burn it, and so deal with it as they do with Heretics, or
reserve it over long.

2. It is present in a spiritual manner, Had he but added, only, he had
marred all: he had been a foul Heretic, and perchance might fare no
better, if he would stand to his words, then this their little God almighty
does, when he grows hoary. But is he come to that now, Christ is spiritually
in the Sacrament? What is become (I marvel) of that carnal and corporal
presence then, that they prate so much of? and for want whereof they so much
vilify the Protestantical Communion? Or what is the reason why he could not
endure to hear, that those words of our Savior, of eating his flesh, John 6.
should be spiritually understood?

3. If these things cannot befall Christ's body, because it is after a
spiritual manner present; then belike these things may befall it, yea must
needs befall it when they do fall out, if it be present in a carnal or
corporal manner; which Carnaliter. Bellar. de Euchar. l. 2. c. 12.
Corporaliter. Idem ibid. l. 1. c. 12.
Bellarmine grants it is, and they stick not usually to afifrme.

4. If Christ's body be in an indivisible manner there, what is it that is
there broken? Or what did our Savior break at his last Supper? at which time
also his body was not indivisible, or As themselves grant. Duran. ration.
divine. l. 4. p. 4 and 6. part. Can. and Tho^. sum. p. 3. q. 81. a. 3. ex
Innocent. 3. de sacr. altar. l. 4. c. 12.
impassible. Or how does Pope Nicholas tell us that Christ's Corpus ipsum.
body it self is sensually broken? Where mark (I pray you) how the Arguments
and Allegations produced to prove the thing broken in the Sacrament to be
bread, and to show the absurdity of their doctrine in this point, as well of
Pope Nicholas that says that Christ's very body it self is broken and torn in
pieces, as also of others that say, that Quidam dicunt quia nihil ^bi frantur.
Lombard. sent. l. 4. d. 12. C.
nothing is broken at all, or nothing but accidents only, here is not a word
answered. The host (they say) is Christ's body, and Durand rational divine. l 4.
p. 4. c. 3. Et Biel in Can. Miss. lect 80. Frangit sacerdotes hostiam.
the Priest breaks the host: and yet he breaks not Christ's body. For
Christ's body neither is nor can be broken. We may reason well backward: Christ's
body is not broken: But the host is broken: The host therefore is not Christ's
body. Or Christ is not divided: But the host is divided: The host therefore
is not Christ.

5. Christ's body, though it be there, yet it cannot be abused. No? Is it not
abused when the drunken Priest speweth it up again? which their Church Canons
therefore make provision for. Or is it not abused, when it is burnt by them and
used like an Heretic? Or when it is devoured and swallowed down by mice and
rats? as their own Schoolmen confess. How is it then that their S. Clement
gives S. James such charge as you heard before of it, least some foul abuse
befall Christ's body?

6. Yea but, though it be so, yet is it no more abused, then an Angel in an
assumpted body, can be wounded, or Corpus spiritale, non spiritus sicut
animale corpus non est anima sed corpus: ita and spiritale corpus non spiritum
debemus putare sed corpus. Aug. ep. 146.
Christ's Deity was on the Cross. Is Christ's humanity then turned into his
Deity? Or has c Christ now assumed the nature of Angels, and so is now become
a Spirit? It is a spiritual body (says Augustine) yet not a Spirit: As an
animal body is not a soul, but a body; so such a spiritual body as the
Apostle speaks of, is not a spirit but a body. But Quis audeat opinari vel
Christi corpus spiritale non resurrexisse, vel si spiritale surrexit, iam non
corpus fuisse sed spiritum?
who dare say either that Christ's body rose not again a spiritual body: or if
it did rise again a spiritual body, that it was no more a body now but a
Spirit? When he himself refuteth this opinion in his Disciples; who when they
took him for a d 1 Cor. 15. 44.
Spirit, Luke 24. 39.
he bad them, Feel, and see; for a spirit had not flesh and bones, as they saw
he had. Iam igitur illa caro spiritale erat corpus, n^c tamen spiritus erat,
sed corpus.
Even then therefore was that flesh of his a spiritual body, and yet was it a
body and not a Spirit. And Bellarmine himself, Corp. Christi, vt est in
Bucharistia, est verum, reale, natural, animatum, quantum, coloratu^, etc. and
caro corporalis, no^ spiritualis, nisi vt obediens spiritui in omnibus Bellarm.
de Euchar. liq. 1. cap. 2.
Christ's body, as it is in the Eucharist, is a true, real, natural, living,
big, colored body: and the flesh of Christ is corporal, not spiritual,
unless we take spiritual as the Apostle does, for obedient to the spirit. It
is absurd then to reason from Christ's Godhead to his manhood; or from an
Angel in an assumpted body to Christ's pretended body in the Eucharist; or in
things concerning the true nature of a body, from a Spirit to a body. An
Angel could not be hurt, though the body assumed by him should be hacked or
hewed asunder: but Gabr. Biel in Can. Miss. sect. 80. Corpus Christi cum sit
animatum and organicum, si frangeretur and diuideretur, corrumperetur.
Christ's body (says Biel, one of their Schoolmen) being a living and
organicall body, if it should be broken and divided, would be destroyed.

2. Such Arguments (he says) as these were made by the ancient Heretics, to
wit, the Eutychians, Nestorians, Arrians, etc. against our Saviors divinity
and the personal union of two natures in him, viz. that it was unfit to
conceive that God to be man so united, or man Deified should be beaten,
buffetted, whipped, torn with nails and thorns, etc.

1. It is true that some Heretics; yet not the Eutychians (how should they
argue against Christ's Deity, that held his humanity wholly turned into it?) no
nor the Arrians; but the Nestorians, and long before them the Marcionites
(whose absurd dotages these men revive again) made objection of the things
here spoken of. But he knows well enough, what was then answered them (if he
know ought at least in the Fathers, whom he would seem to have at his fingers
ends) by those that refuted them; to wit, that our Savior was then in a state
of humiliation; whereas now he is in a state of glorification; and freed
consequently from all those infirmities and indignities that he was then
content to expose and subject himself unto, to bring us unto glory.

2. They objected these things truly; but without just cause then: We object
them, though not supposing them to be true, yet finding them to follow
necessarily from their carnal conceits, upon just ground against them. And
belike he finds himself and his, guilty of exposing and subiecting Christ
glorious body (a thing most impious) to such indignities a new.

3. Yea but (says this Fantastic) there is a second exhiminition of Christ in
this sacramental presence, or hiding of himself in this Sacrament.

1. In the beginning of his Discourse he came over me for writing a bad band. I
know not whether the fair band be his own or no that his own Discourse is
written in. If it be (sure I am) his Schollarship is very small, that puts
exhiminition for exinanition: for so I suppose his meaning is; because I find
it so in Turrian. de Euchar. tract. 1. cap. 11.
Turrian; from whom it is like enough he had it, fathered upon one Methodius,
whom Bellarmine was much to blame that he ouerslipt, when he mustered his
Fathers for Christ's corporal presence in the Sacrament. But here is a new
doctrine indeed, and yet most true, if all be as they say, that our blessed
Savior is returned to a state of exinanition, that is, humiliation, deiection,
infirmity, indignity, pain and infamy again: for all this the word of
Philip. 2. 7.
exinanition imports. Belike they think he suffered not enough, or was not
thoroughly enough exinanited while he was here on earth, that they must needs
bring him back again, to snffer such ignominious things, out of heaven, as to
be chewed, to be burnt, to grow moldy, to putrefie, to turn into mites and
maggots, to pass into the bellies of mice and rats, etc. to undergo those
things in his second exinanition, that in the first he never did.

2. He thought it before Diuis. 10. ad Arg. 4.
a most base and unworthy thing, to imagine that Christ should have hid
himself in a corner from the Jews, when they would have stoned him in the
Temple: (as if he must of necessity either so do, or else make his body to be
for the present as they say it is now in the Eucharist) yet here he tells
us, that he hides himself in the Sacrament; not in a corner of the Temple,
but in a little round wafer-cake, or in the Pyx (at least) that reserueth it,
so long now and then, for want of good looking to, that it breeds pretty
little quick creatures, as good a God every one of them, as any crumme of the
host was, of which they were bred. But as Mat. 24. 26. See Dr. Sheldens Sermon
on it.
our Savior forewarned us; though they tell us that Christ is hid in the Pyx,
or in some other secret place, yet we little believe them. We may rather
believe that the wiser and learneder sort among them, hardly believe themselves
herein.

3. He tells us here that Christ hides himself in the Sacrament, and a
little before that being not quantitatiuely and corporally extended therein, he
is not touched nor altered with any corporal action done about it. If he be
hid there, how says Bellarmine, that Super mensam visibiliter adest Bellar. de
misla. l. 1. c. 12.
he is there visibly upon the board? Or if he be neither seen nor touched
there, why would he make us believe that Chrysostom says, that we do see
him, and touch him, and handle him there? Or how says he a little after that
Christ, as a loving Spouse, does there visitt and embrace us? It is true indeed
that their Priests use much wanton dalliance with their breaden God, while they
make the poor people like silly idiots, adore him, and like Ixion for a
substance embrace a mere shadow.

THis is that clean host, as S. Irenaeus affirms, which N. P.
the Gentiles were by Malachy foretold to offer unto God in all places; and the
only sacrifice of Christians, as S. Augustine calls it; figured by
Melchisedechs oblation of bread and wine, as the holy Fathers jointly teach us,
and represented by the Jewish as well bloody as unbloody sacrifices: not
distinct from the sacrifice of the Cross, by which alone our redemption was
consummated, as Ad Heb. 5.
S. Paul teaches us, but the same in the host and chief offerer thereof,
daily repeated now in an other unbloody and mysterious manner by the Ministry
of Christ's consecrated servants. So as all Christian Nations of the world,
Grecians (for example) Rutenians, Armenians, Mozaribites, Cataians, Ethiopians,
and other Christians in India, near mount Libanus and in other the remotest
places in the world, such as have not ever heard peradventure of the Roman
Church since their first Apostolical conuersions, or had any commerce between
themselves, are known to conspire (not withstanding their other late errors)
with us in the celebration and true belief of this great sacrifice and
Sacrament, as Dr. Philippus Nicolai a chief Protestant Divine in his
Commentary of Christ's Kingdom, and Sir Edwin Sands in his Relation of
Religion, etc. with other adversaries of our Church plainly acknowledge. Which
may be to any wise and well minded man an evident argument, that they received
this common belief and celebration of this divine sacrifice, from no other
fountain but the instruction and example of their first Apostolical
conuerters.

And when Luther taught by the Devil (as he plainly confesses) upon plain
sophismes and doceitfull arguments by himself particularly related (as I have
seen in Tom. 6. Germ. Ienensi. sol. 28. in lib. de Missa angulari. To^. 7.
Wittenberg. anno Dom. 1588, in lib. de Miss. priuata, and unction sacerdot.
fol. 413. and fol. 228.
his works first printed at Iene and now extant in the great Library at Oxford)
began to impugn that holy sacrifice which he had formerly offered, and
presented that his heretical doctrine and whole confession of Augusta to be
accepted, as he hoped by, the Grecian Churches, Ieremias their Patriarch in his
Censure (as he calls his book) of the East Church, yet extant in Greek and
Latin, plainly condemns amongst their other heretical doctrines, this very
denial of Christ's sacrifice, transubstantiation, etc. urging (as we do)
invincible arguments, and the universal ever continued practice of Christ's
Church to prove them; using (as I my self have seen in their Churches) alike
form to ours for the mysterious and decent celebration thereof, causesly wont
by our Adversaries to be derided: whereas their own Liturgy or form of
divine service is as a shadow chosen in place of the substance, having nothing
decent therein but what they have stolen from us and picked here and there out
of our Missals, gracing all with a riming Psalm, sung to a liggish tune, with
iarring and for the most part untunable voices, never used before in any
Christian Churches.

The first Authors of this new Sect, were Aposta^aes of our Church for their
confessed disorders of life, and miserable ends plainly discovered to have
been no Apostolical persons: whose endeauours have never tended at any time to
convert Pagans to Christ, as his true Church shall ever do, but to corrupt
Christians truly already converted: And they have seldom planted themselves in
any Country, but upon very carnal, gross occasions, as here in England, or
with open rebellion, and tragical acts against lawful Princes and
Magistrates, namely in Scotland, France, Flanders, Swisserland Sueuia, Polonia,
several Provinces of Germany, Geneua it self and other Protestant
territories.

The pretense of a Church and Religion like to theirs in former ages cannot
colourably be defended without many shifts and contradictory devices: Some will
have it to have been latent and invisible for 800. others 900 other 1000 or
1200. years: Others contrarily teach it to have been ever visible and
conspicuously dilated into many Christian Countries, as the Oraculous
predictions of the Prophets and express promises of God himself describe it:
Others say that our Church was ever the true Church of Christ; only in some
parts of faith not fundamental erring, and by them since Luther reformed:
Others deny that ever our Church was the true Church of Christ, or other than a
prevailing faction in the true Church professing at all times visibly and in
all Christian countries their present doctrine. But no one of these dreamers
and Church-deuisers (as I may term them) is able before Luther to assign in
any age since Christ or Country of the world one Parish of Protestant true
prosessors, or single person iumping in all points with any one sect of them:
their religion indeed being like a beggars cloak patched together out of old
condemned Heresies and vnsutably composed. Their marks of a Church, to wit,
preaching of true doctrine and a rightful administration of Sacraments are
such as any heretical sect past or to come may equally peetend according to
the maine grounds of Protestant doctrine; which are to admit no common
translation or interpretation of Scripture, but what themselves list for
discerning of true doctrine and rightly administering Sacraments.

4. HE magnifieth their Mass, by telling us that T. G.
this is that clean host, that Irenaeus says Malachie foretold; the
Christians only sacrifice figured by that of Melchisedeck; and represented by
the Jewish as well bloody as unbloody Sacrifices; not distinct from the
Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, but the same repeated in another unbloody
manner.

1. It is true indeed that Iren. adu. Valent. l. 4. c. 32, 33.
Irenaeus understands by that Mal. 1. 11.
pure Offering in Malachie the Eucharist now in use: and that the Cypr. ep. 3.
lib. 2. Eusebius. praepar. Euan. lib. 5. cap. 3. Hieron. ad Marcell. Aug epist 95.
and alii.
Avncients many of them suppose it resembled in Genesis 14. 18.
that action of Melchisedeck: And they call it the Christians (yet Heb. 13. 16
and 1 Pet. 2. 5. Vide and quot Sacrificiorum Christianorum mentionem ^aciant,
Lactant instit. l. 6. c. 24. and ^5. Te^tull contr. Marc. l. 3. and 4.
Chrysostom. contr. lud orat. (...). Eiusdem nomine in Psalm. 95. Cyrill. contr.
Julian. l. 10. Aug. de Ciuit. l. 10. c. 4. etc.
not the only Christian) Sacrifice, succeeding in the room of the Jewish
Sacrifices; the Sacrament, I say, of the Eucharist, not their Sacrifice of the
Mass. In what sense Augustine will tell us: Sacrificium laudis, etc. Aug.
contr. ^ust. l. 20. c. 21.
A Sacrifice of praise (says he out of the Psalmist) shall glorify me; and
there is the way that I will show him my Salvation. Huius sacrificii caro and
sanguis ante aduentum Christi per victimas similitudinum promittebatur: in
passione Christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur: post ascensu^ Christum per
Sacramentum memoriae celebratur.
The flesh and blood of this Sacrifice before Christ's coming was promised by
Sacrifices resembling it: in Christ's passion it was exhibited in the truth it
self: since his ascension it is celebrated in a Sacrament of remembrance. And
again: Aug ibid. cap. 18.
The Hebrews in their Sacrifices of beasts, which they offered unto God,
Christiani peracti eiusdem sacrificii memoriam celebrant, etc.
did celebrate a prophecy of the Sacrifice to come that Christ offered: And
Christians now celebrate the memory of the same Sacrifice past in an holy
oblation and participation of Christ's body and blood. And Procopius upon
Genesit; Procop. in Gen c. 49.
Christ drank to his Disciples in mystical Wine, saying, This is my Blood:
and gave them withal Typum, effigiem, vel imagine^ corporis sui.
a type, figure, or image of his Body, no more admitting or accepting the
bloody Sacrifices of the Law.

2. Is this their Sacrifice the very same with Christ's on the Cross. Then
belike Christ is anew crucified again. The Apostle indeed tells us of some
Heb. 6 6.
that crucify Christ again: and it is to be feared that to many of them are
indeed guilty of that sin. But if this their Sacrifice be, as he says, not
Gal. 3. 1.
a resemblance, or 1. Cor 11. 25, 26.
commemoration, as we say in the Eucharist, of Christ's passion, but the very
same with that of Christ on the Cross, how can it be but a new crucifying of
him indeed? Yea then Christ must needs die and suffer again in it. For
Bellarm. de missa lib. 1. c. 27.
a true and a real Sacrifice (says Bellarmine) requires a true and real
death or destruction of the thing sacrificed. And again, Ibid. l 1. c. 2.
A sacrifice besides the oblation requires a mutation and consumption of the
thing offered; yea and Ibid. l. 1. c. 25.
the slaying of it, if it be a living thing: And, Ibid. l. 1. c. 2.
unto a true sacrifice is required, that that is offered unto God in Sacrifice
be utterly destroyed. Yea even the Apostle himself says, that Heb. 9. 26, 27,
28.
If Christ he often sacrificed, then he must die and suffer ost. But Romans 6. 9.
Christ being once dead, he dies no more. Yea and Bellarmine himself grants
that Bellarm. de missa l. 1. c. 25.
Christ does not truly die in the sacrifice of the Mass: and that Christum non
mori nisi in Sacramento seu signo repraesenta^te vnicam illam morte^, quam
aliquando obiit.
he dies not there but in a Sacrament or a Sign representing that one only
death that once he died. He is not therefore really, properly, or verily there
sacrificed: Nor is this their Sacrifice of the Mass therefore the self same
with that of Christ's on the Cross.

3. Is this Sacrifice of theirs a repetition of Christ's sacrifice? then belike
Christ's Sacrifice was imperfect. For the Apostle evidently makes Heb. 10. 1,
2, 3, 11
the reiteration of Offerings an Argument of imperfection. And if Christ's
Sacrifice then be (as this blasphemous wretch says) repeated, it must needs be
(by the Apostles Argument) defective and imperfect. But Christ's Sacrifice was
most absolutely perfect, consummate and all-sufficient. For Heb. 10. 10, 12,
14. (...). Athanas. Sermon. contr. Arian. 3.
by one oblation of himself once offered has he obtained eternal redemption,
and for ever consecrated them that are sanctified. Christ's Sacrifice therefore
needs no reiteration. Nay, it is an impious wrong to it to say it is
reiterated: and such as some of their own writers themselves either are
ashamed of, or at least dare not a^ow. Peter Lombard the grand Master of the
Sentences (as they term him) and Quanquam Petro Abeilardo honore^ hunc
deferat Beat. Rhenan. not. ad Tertull.
the first Father of their Schoole-Diuinity; Petr. Lombard. sentent. l 4. d.
12. G.
moves this Question among others, Whither that which the Priest does be
properly termed an immolation or a Sacrifice: and whither Christ be daily
sacrificed, or was once only sacrificed. Now to this Question, (says he) we
may briefly say, Vocati Sacrificium, quia memoria est and repraesentatio v^ri
Sacrificii and sanctae immolationis factae in ara crucis.
that that which is offered and consecrated by the Priest is called a Sacrifice
and an oblation, because it is a memorial and representation of the true
Sacrifice and the holy immolation made upon the Altar of the Cross. Semel
Christus mortuus in cruce est, ibique immolatus est in seipso: quotidie autem
immolatur in Sacramento, quia in Sacramento record ^io fit illius, quod factum
est semel.
For once Christ died upon the Cross, and was there sacrificed in himself:
but he is daily sacrificed in the Sacrament, because in the Sacrament is there
a remembrance of that that was once done. Whereupon says Augustine; Aug.
prefat. in 2. expos. Psalm. 21. and apud Great. de consecr. d. 2. c. Semel.
Sure we are that Christ risen again from the dead dies no more, etc. But yet
least we should forget the same, that that was once done, is in our remembrance
done every year, to wit, when the Passover is celebrated. ( Aug. epist. 23.
And we often therefore so speak as to say, when the Pasch is at hand, Tomorrow
or the next day will be the Lords Passover; whereas he suffered so many
years agone; and his passion was but once in all performed: and yet Dicitur
illo die fieri, propter Sacramenti celebrationem, quod non illo die, sed olim
factum est.
in regard of the celebration of the Sacrament, is that said to be done that
day, which not that day, but long since was done; Ex similitudine sacrame^ta
nomina rerum ipsarum accipiunt.
the Sacrament bearing the name of the thing thereby represented.) Lomb. ibid.
But is Christ then so often slain? No: but Sed tantum anniuersaria recordatio
repraesentat quod olim factum est, etc.
only an anniuersarie memorial does represent that that was once, and makes
us so to be affected, as if we saw Christ on the Cross. And what is this more
then we also say? or how is it the very same with Christ's sacrifice on the
Cross, if it be not it, but a memorial of it only?

4. He says, Christ's sacrifice on the Cross is repeated there in an other
unbloody manner: and yet the one is not so much as distinct from the other.
What not mystical, but mistie riddles are these? For 1. what is the sacrifice
of Christ but his bloody passion, but the shedding of his blood, and the
pouring out of his soul unto death, as Esa. 53. 10, 12.
the Prophet Esaias expounds it? And how is this then the very same with that,
when it is in an unbloody manner performed?

2. If this be (as they say) an unbloody sacrifice, and Christ be therein
vnbloodily sacrificed: how is it that they affirm that Vera and realis effusio
sanguinis Christi.
Christ's blood is verily shed in it, and was therein really shed before it was
shed upon the Cross: which to prove also Bellar. de sacrif. miss. l. 1. c.
12. etc. 25. and l. 2. c. 2.
Bellarmine in expounding the words of Christ's Institution (contrary to the
express Decret. de Sacr. Script. Council Trident. sess. 4. Vt Latina vetus and
vulgata editio pro authentica habeatur, and nullo praetex^ reiiciatur.
Canon of the Council of Trent) leaves their own vulgar translation, which
they count autenticall; as also the Canon of their Mass, the principal part
of their service; which both have, Qui pro vobis effundetur, That shall be (or,
is to be) shed for you; because they fitted not his turn so well; and presses
the words according to the Greek, (...). Luke 22. 10.
Qui pro vobis effunditur; That is poured out for you. If Christ's very blood
be poured out in it, how is it an unbloody offering? Or how is not this a
riddle? There is blood there, but not as blood: And it is the very same with
Christ's bloody passion, and yet celebrated in an unbloody manner.

3. Is it be an unbloody offering, how is it (as they use to say) a sin
sacrifice; when Heb. 9. 22.
without sheading of blood (as the Apostle tells us) there is no remission of
sins, Bellar de miss. l. 1. c. ^5.
Nor was there ever any sin sacrisice without blood-shead, says Bellarmine.
The truth is, that Heb 9. 12.
Christ once for all went into the holy place with blood, and thereby obtained
eternal redemption. As for their unbloody blood, it is but a mere
counterfaite. And in this case with their own Gloss may we soon stop their
mouths, which expounds (contrary to Bellarmine) those words in the Canon,
Christ's blood is shead, or poured out; Effunditur, i. significatur effundi.
Gloss. ad Great. de consecr. d. 2. Si quotiescunque.
that is the sheading of it is signified, in the Eucharist.

4. How do these two stand together: The one is bloody, and the other
unbloody: and yet the one is not so much as distinct from the other. Here is
not a distinction (as they say) without a difference; but a difference (which
is more strange) without a distinction. Did this fellow (think we) understand
what he said? But if the sacrifice of the Mass be not so much as distinct from
the sacrifice of the Cross, how does Bellarmine tell us that Bellarm de Miss.
l. 1. c. 6.
the sacrifice of the Cross is of greater value then the sacrifice of the
Mass; the one of infinite, the other but of finite worth.

Whereof Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 4.
he rendereth a twofold reason:

1. In regard of the host that is offered: because Christ's natural being was
destroyed in the one: whereas his sacramental being only is destroyed in the
other.

2. In regard of the person offering, or the offerer; because he was offered
immediately in the one, whereas he is offered by a Minister or Priest in the
other. And yet this fellow tells us, that the sacrifice of the Mass is not
distinct from he sacrifice of the Cross, but is the same both in the host,
and the chief offerer thereof. These things hang together like harp and
harrow, as they say. But our great Doctor (it seems) for all his bragging and
blustering, is but a Nouice; and is not yet thoroughly acquainted with his
Master Bellarmines doctrine in all points, though he make use of him otherwise.

5. He tells us that all Christian Nations in the world, Grecians,
Rutenians, Armenians, Mozaribites, Catayans, Ethiopians, Indians, etc. conspire
with them in the celebration and true belief of this Sacrifice, and Sacrament.

1. This is like their Jesuits tricks to tell us of many strange miracles
wrought by their Fathers in the Indies, in Goa, in America, in Iapan, in China,
whither they know before hand, that Quod Cardano ^ul. Scal. de ^ubtil. exerc.
177. Sect. 5. Ceda^ potius quam credam, credam citius quam sciam.
no man will go to disprooue them: and whence Popish writers yet say Miracula
and signa nulla audio. Fr. Victor. relect. 5.
they can hear no such matter: yea some of their own coat Signa non edimus.
Ios. Acost de procur. Ind. sal. l 4 c. 4. Prodigia nulla producimus. Ibid c. 12.
sometime confess it is not so.

2. This fellow is either extremely impudent, or grossly ignorant, that dare
so boldly and confidently avouch that all these Nations conspire with them in
the celebration and belief of Sacrifice and Sacrament: Whereas it is commonly
known that the most of these have their Litur gies in their own languages,
which they have not; communicate the people in both kinds, which they do not;
consecrate, not wafers, as they do, but whole loaves: and many of them, the
Greeks especially, not unleavened but leauened; hold the consecration to be
effected, not by the repetition of those words, This is my body, but by prayer
and supplication; mingle no water with their wine; use no elevation for the
worshipping of the Sacrament; nor admit the Popish Transubstantiation: as out
of good Historiographers, their several Liturgies, and some of their own
writers, both M. Breerwood in his book of Religions and Languages, and Th. A.
in his Discourse of Catholic Traditions, at large show. Jeremy the Greek
Patriarcke, whom he afterward cites, affirms expressly, that Jeremy
Patriarch. in his Answer chap. 10 alleged by Th. A. of Cathol. Tradit.
at our Saviors last Supper that flesh of our Lord which he carried about him
was not given the Apostles to eat, nor his blood to drink; nor are they now
given in the holy mysteries, etc. And again, that this bread, when it is
offered, is common bread offered only to God; but afterward is made
extraordinary bread. And in the Council of Florence (as appears in the last
Session) some controversy there was between the Greek Church and theirs
about the De Panis transmutatione.
transmutation of the Elements in the Eucharist; nor do we find that they ever
came therein to any general accord or agreement unto this day. Now where
(think you) is this man's face or his forehead, that dare so confidently auerre
that both these and all the Christian world but we conspire with them herein,
both for opinion and in practice? Yea when he tells us (to let us understand
that he has been a Traveler; and it may be brought as little wit or honesty
with him home, as he carried out) that he has seen their celebrations the
same with theirs: he shows therein, (if he say true, that he has seen
their celebrations) that against his own knowledge, when he thus writ, he told
us a gross untruth; and we need return him for the rest of them no further
answer, save that which is commonly said, that Quod de Vlysse Homer. Odyss
(...). Et quod Aristot. metaph. l. I c. 2. (...). Ita etiam and (...). Quibus
atque Poetis Quidlibet audendi (ac fingendi) semper fuit aequa potestas.
far Travelers may lie by authority, or (as it may be he hops) rather, that
they may tell lies without control. Yet when we find him false in things
nearer home, and by name here in his assertion concerning the Greek Churches,
he must not blame us, if we suspect him in his report of of Mozaribites,
Cathaians, Indians, Ethiopians, and others more remote; the rather, having as
good cards to show as any he can produce, to the contrary.

6. In the next place he runs out in an idle discourse of Martin Luther, as
if he had learned the doctrine he taught in this point, of the Devil, (a
frivolous fable refuted long since by Answer to the Censure, etc.
M. Charke, Defense of that Answer.
Dr. Fulke and others:) by the way glancing at our manner of celebration of the
Sacrament; and an inuectiue against the first Authors (as he falsely terms
them) of our Religion; with an apendix concerning the marks of a Church, and
of the Church before Luther. Concerning all which for the present I say nothing
but that of Jerome, Hieron. ad Laetam.
Asellus lassus in via quaerit diuerticula. He is a weary (it seems) of the
work he has in hand, and would feign slip aside therefore into some other
debate, that it might not so well appear how he sticks in the mire here.
One thing (they say) at once does well: and I suppose this will find him work
enough for a while; if he have any stomach to reioyne. Let him (if he can)
first maintain their prodigious doctrine in the point present; and then (if he
desire it) he shall further be dealt with, either in these, or in any other
Controversy between them and us.

Only for what he says of our Liturgy as pieced (I know not how) together
out of their Missals, and graced with aryming Psalm sung to a liggish tune.
Not to put him in mind of those apish gesticulations, and histrionicall firks,
that their Mass almost wholly consists of, and of their Hymns running in
rhyme indeed, but full often without reason, fraught with gross Barbarismes and
Soloecismes; yea stuffed with They profess to place their whole hope in the
wooden Cross: and so worship it (as Aquinas confesses) with divine worship.
They pray to be saved by Thomas Becker a traitors blood: they entreat the
Virgin Mary to command her Son Christ: and pray to her, that being redeemed
by her, they may be able to climb to heaven, etc.
not a few impious blasphemies; which their Collects also are not free from.
Let the ancient manner of Church-seruice and celebration of this Sacrament
related before out of Iustine Martyr be considered; and then see what is
wanting in ours that was then in theirs, and whether is liker to that, ours or
theirs. Their Missall indeed is a mere patchery of old and new together, so
evil contrived (whatsoever Id est maxim admirandum and commend indum quod
Canon Missae sit multorum aut^rum, and tamen ita apt parts omnes in^er se
iungantur, and cohaereant, vt vnius autoris videatur. Bellar. de Miss. l 2. c 19
Bellarmine prate to the contrary) and so handsomely agreeing the one with the
other, that from those very fragments of antiquity, that remain yet in their
Mass, this very doctrine of theirs may very evidently be confuted. For
therein after consecration they pray unto God, to accept that holy sacrifice,
which of his gifts they offer, and vouchsafe to look propitiously upon those
his gifts, and to accept them as he did Abels offering and Abraham's sacrifice:
and, that he will command them to be carried up by the hands of his Angel, to
be presented on the high Altar in the sight of his Majesty; and that through
Jesus Christ, by whom he continually creates, quickens, and blesses all
these good things: And again, that that which they have taken may of a
temporal gift become an eternal remedy. How stand now these speeches and
prayers with their Transubstantiation? Are Christ's body and blood those
temporal gifts and good things, that God by Christ daily creates and
quickens? Or needs Christ the Priest to entreat his Father to look
propitiously upon him? Or any Angel to carry him up and present him before his
Father in heaven, in whose presence and sight he is continually there? Or is it
not absurd to place Genesis 4. 4.
Abels fatlings and Genesis 22. 13.
Abraham's Ram in equipage with the body and blood of Christ Jesus? But these
things (it seems) were in their ancient Liturgies, before ever this new
monster was hatched, and to their own shame and confusion are yet unwisely
still retained. And if you will see, how handsomely things therein hang
together, observe but this one passage: The Priest prays to God to send an
Angel to fetch the holy Housell up into heaven: (and yet they tell us withal,
the most of them, that Nos vt descensu^ negamus, ita nec ascensum statuimus.
Petr. Scarga de Euchar. art. 5. Non descendit de coelo corpus Christi: Ex
Damasc. orthod. fid. l. 4. c. 14. Biel in Can. lect 54. But Pope Innocens would
not have us ouer-curious in this point. Non oportet in talibus curiosos
existere. Innocent. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 16.
it never came from thence, nor never returns again thither; wherein we
better believe them then we do some other of their fellows that say
otherwise) and within a while after, he swalloweth it down himself; and then
prays God (as if he repented him of his former prayer) Corpus tuum, Domine,
quod sumpsi, and sanguis quem potaui, adhaereat visceribus meis. In post commun.
that that which he has eaten may stick fast to his guts. Let him show any
such absurdities as these (if he can) in our Service. If some pieces of
Antiquity found in theirs be retained still in ours; that is neither derogation
to ours, nor commendation to theirs. We embrace true and sound Antiquity,
wheresoever we find it: their corrupt novelties, which it suteth so
euillfauouredly withal, we deservedly reject.

THey pretend clear places of Scripture for each point of N. P.
their doctrines wherein they differ from us. But when they come to be duly
discussed, they either make against themselves, or prove nothing at all
against us; as I will briefly declare in this very controversy, for a
Corollarium of my whole doctrine. For whereas S. Vide Bellar. lib. 1. de
Euchar. cap. 5.
Cyprian, S. Hilarie, Saint Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, Cyrill,
Hesychius, Theodoret, and universally all the ancient Fathers commenting the 6.
Chapter of S. John's Gospel have literally understood Christ's promise of giving
his flesh to eat and his blood to drink in the Sacrament, these men restrain
them to a metaphorical and spiritual eating by faith only; and for this
their interpretation quite contrary to the judgment of the ancient Church,
they only cite those words of Christ, It is the spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing, etc. and affirm them to import that Christ's words
are figuratively to be understood, and not at all according to the literal
signification of them, to wit, of Christ's body and blood received in the
Sacrament. Whereas at most they can import, that Christ promised not to give
his flesh and blood cannally, as the Capharnaits understood him, cut (to wit)
in pieces, and by bits eaten, as S. Augustine explicateth them; but that
Christ's body and blood were to be after a spiritual manner present, and
received in the Sacrament, which we deny not: And great Authors (as Tolet
notes) so expound them, as to make this sense, It is the deity or divine
spirit which is united with my flesh, that viuificateth by grace souls
worthily receiving it, and not by flesh alone barely of it self eaten. Neither
of which explications prove a figurative understanding of Christ's words: this
being a Gloss of their own besides the text, never before them taught by any
Catholic Doctor: and so it can be no solid sufficient ground sor them to rely
upon for their heretical denial of Christ's true body and blood really present
and received in the Sacrament. For Scripture ill understood is no Scripture,
but Gods word abused.

7. YEt in conclu^ion to say somewhat again of the T. G.
present point, he tells us that S. Cyprian, Hilarie, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Augustine, Cyrill, Hesychius, Theodoret, and all the ancient Fathers
universally understood that place of John concerning the eating of Christ's
flesh not figuratively, but literally; whereas we contrary to the judgment of
the whole ancient Church, understand them of spiritual eating by faith;
alleging only for this our exposition those words of our Savior, It is the
spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: which words as Tolet
shows, may bear another sense.

1. How proves he that these Fathers so expound that place? Forsooth, he
sends us to seek the proof of it in Bellarmine. It is enough that he says
it; let Bellarmine (if he can) prooe it. But is not this impudent outfacing, to
say that these Fathers all literally understand it, when out of diverse of them
the contrary has been evidently showed? Yea when Augustine (one of them)
giving rules to expound Scripture, does expressly affirm that the place is to
be taken figuratively, and that it were Facinus and flagitium.
an heinous and flagitious thing otherwise to understand it?

2. It is another untruth as gross as the former, to say we ground our
exposition on those words only. We urge indeed the words following Ioh. 6.
63.
The words that I speak are spirit and life. And we urge and expound them no
otherwise then diverse of the Ancients have done before us. To omit Athanasius
formerly alleged: Augustine besides that that is in the self same place
cited; August. in Joan. tr. 27.
What mean those words, (says he) They are spirit and life, but Spiritaliter
intelligenda sunt.
that they are to be understood spiritually? And again, Idem tr. 11.
He spoke this that he might Ne carnaliter intelligerent.
not be understood carnally; as Ioh 3. 4.
Nicodemus before had done. Yea and of those former words Thomas Aquinas out
of Chrysostom, Ex Chrysostomo Aquin. in Joan. 6.
When Christ says; It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits
nothing: his meaning is, that Spiritualiter oportet ea quae de me sunt audire.
we ought spiritually to understand those things that we hear of him: and
that Qui carnalites audit, nihil proficit.
whosoever hears carnally, gets thereby no good. Now to understand them
carnally, is to look on the outward things only, and to imagine no more then
we see. To understand them spiritually is not so to judge of them, but also
with the inward eyes to look on them. Omnia mysteria interioribus oculis
aspicere.
Which in all mysteries ought always to be done. And Tertullian, Tertul. de
resurr. carnis.
When Christ says that The flesh profits nothing; His meaning must be drawn
from the matter of his speech. For because they thought his speech hard and
intolerable, Quasi vere carnem suam illis edenda^ determinasset.
as if he determined to give them his very flesh to be eaten; (or, his flesh
verily to be eaten) to place the state of salvation in the spirit, he
premiseth; It is the spirit that quickens: and then adioyneth; the flesh
profits nothing, to wit, to quicken. And withal he shows what he means
by the spirit: The words that I have spoken are spirit and life. As he said
before; Ioh. 5. 14.
He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has life
eternal. So that he makes the word the quickner; because the word is spirit
and life; and he called it also his flesh; because the Ioh. 1 14.
Word also became flesh; and is therefore Se^o caro factus, in causam vitae
appetendus, deuorandus auditu, ^ummand^s intellectu, ^de digerendus.
to be longed after for life, to be devoured by the hearing, chewed by the
understanding, and digested by faith. Here is the eating that our Savior
spoke of in that place, not carnal but spiritual; which our Adversary also
earstwhiles confessed. Neither urge we this alone, (as he untruly here
affirms;) But we urge diverse other passages also (as before has been
showed) wherein our Savior expounds himself; observed by Augustine long
since, and by their Flaunders Bishop Iansenius of late, beside diverse others
of their own. And if he had had any thing of moment to say against this our
exposition, why did he not then produce it, where the place was discussed? But
he thought it better and safer (it seems) to let all this alone there, lest
the allegations to the contrary being then in the eye, might easily convince
him of gross and palpable falsehood.

3. Do we alone thus expound that place? Do not very many of their own
writers herein agree with us? Or do those of theirs build only upon the clause
he here mentions? To which purpose, howsoever enough has already been said,
yet for his better information concerning both the soundnes of our exposition
of that place, and the reasons thereof drawn from our Saviors own words,
let him hear one, though not then Pope, yet that afterward came to be Pope,
and was as learned a Pope as any of late times. Aeneas Syluius writing against
the Bohemians; Aeneas Syl. aepist. 130. co^tra Bohem.
It is not (says he) any sacramental drinking, but a spiritual that our
Savior speaks of in that 6. of John. For there is, as Albertus Magnus she
weth, a threefold drinking of Christ: a sacramental, that the Priests only
receive; an intellectual, that the people take in the species of bread; and a
spiritual, which all use that are to be saved, by daily devout meditation
ruminating on Christ's incarnation and his passion: And of this drinking our
Savior speaks in John 6. as the very series of the Evangelists words
clearly shows. For when some of them that heard it, murmured, our Savior
said, Ioh. 6. 61. 62, 63.
Does this scandalize you? What if you should see the Son of Man ascend where
before he was? It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing.
In which words he declares that he speaks not there of any carnal eating
or drinking: But would you plainly see that he speaks of spiritual eating,
that is, by faith? Mark what he says: Ioh. 6. 54.
He that eats and drinks. He speaks in the present tense, not in the
future. There were even then those that so ate him and drank him, when as the
Sacrament was not yet instituted. And how did they then eat and drink Christ,
but spiritually by faith, and love, and doing his words? For he said also
before, Ioh. 6. 35.
I am the bread of life; he that comes unto me, shall not hunger; and he
that believes in me shall not thirst. For Christ's speech was figurative. So
also the Glosser understands this Gospel: and so does that great Augustine,
noble both for doctrine and modesty, whose glory is so great, that no man's
commendation can add to his credit, no man's dispraise can disparage him. And
yet dare this shameless outfacer confidently affirm that none of the Fathers
ever so expounded the place: and that the Heretics (as he esteems them, as
if none but they so expounded it) had no other inducement so to expound it, but
those words only; And yet those words also does Durand use to prove that
Christ's words John 6. 54, 55. are meant of eating spiritually, not corporally.
In rational, divine, p. 2. l. 4. ad 6. p. Can.
It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: all which you
see are nothing but gross untruths.

SEcondly, whereas we prove that Christ's words, This is N. P.
my body, etc. as being uttered to the Apostles, to whom it was given to
understand the mysteries of Christ's Church plainly, and without parable, and
containing in them the institution of a Sacrament, fit in plain words to be
delivered and understood by all Christians bound to receive it, are as we say
literally to be understood, and not in tropicall and figurative senses, as our
Adversaries expound them; producing for our opinion all the Fathers
successively in all ages since Christ so understanding them: Protestant Divines
slenderly object, first that of the sacramental Chalice Christ affirmed, that
he would no more drink of the fruit of the vine, until after his passion:
ergo it was wine contained in the Chalice: we answer that S. Luke expressly
mentions two Chalices, one drunk after the Paschall Lamb eaten, and the
other afterward blessed by Christ and distributed to his Apostles, and that
Christ only called the first the fruit of the vine, etc. So S. Jerome, S.
Bid, and other great Authors explicate and solue this difficulty with us.
Secondly, they object those words of Christ, Do this in memory of me: ergo the
Sacrament is a bare memory of Christ's body and blood, etc. We answer and make
S. Paul to interpret these words of our Savior for us, 1 Cor. 11. saying. As
often as you shall do this, you shall represent or declare Christ's death till he
come. Which is best declared and represented by the parts of the Sacrifice and
Sacrament, as they contain the very body and blood of our Savior in them. For
so himself present seems to triumph more gloriously, and exhibit unto us a
more lively memory of his passion, then if the Sacrament were no more then a
bare sign thereof.

8. Having affirmed that all the holy Fathers in all T. G.
ages from Christ have expounded the words of our Savior, (This is my body,
literally and not tropically, as they also do. The contrary whereunto has as
clearly been showed, as that the Sun is up at noonday: nor had this
trifler ought of moment to except thereunto, where the same is showed; and yet
now craketh (as their manner is) of all the Fathers, when indeed they cannot
bring any one undoubted testimony to confirm what they so confidently
affirm.) He will at length forsooth for fashion sake undertake to answer two
slender objections of ours to the contrary.

1. Christ (say we) calls that in the Cup or Chalice, the fruit of the vine.

He answers that S. Luke mentions two Chalices, the Paschall, and the
Evangelical, or Eucharisticall; and so S. Jerome, and S. Bid solue this
difficulty.

1. He spoke of slender objections. And so it seems indeed he esteems
them: for he returns very slender answers to them. For who would be so
senseless as to reason on this manner, S. Luke mentions two Chalices: ergo
our Savior did not speak any such thing of the Eucharisticall Cup, as yet
both Mat. 26. 29.
Matthew and Mat. 14 25.
Mark say expressly he did.

2. Jerome and Bid (says he) so solue the difficulty. He would make his
Reader believe that Jerome and Bid had long since propounded this objection,
and so assoiled it as he does. Whereas the truth is; they take no notice,
either of them of the two Cups, but allegorising the words (as their manner is
to do many times, letting the literal sense alone) expound the vine to be
Esa. 5. 1, 7. Psalm. 80. 8, 14.
the people of the Jews, and so the fruit of the vine, the legal obseruances,
etc. And what is all this to the literal sense of the words, that this trifler
is troubled with, and cannot tell how to avoid? Let him produce (if he can) any
one Father, who denies that Christ spoke those words of the Eucharisticall
Cup, and of the liquor therein contained. I alleged Clem paedag l. 2. c. 2.
Clemens of Alexandria, Cypr. ep. 3. l. 2.
Cyprian, Chrysostom. in Mat hom. 83.
Chrysostom, Aug. de dogmat. Eccles. c. 75.
Augustine, and might add many others that affirm it. Yea not only Iansenius
ingenuously acknowledges that it can be meant of Nullus alius calix intelligi
potest Iansen. concord. c. 131.
no other then the Eucharisticall Cup, which only Matthew and Mark mention:
But Maldonate the Jesuit also freely confesses that Orig. in Mat. tr. 30.
Origin, Cypr. ep 68.
Cyprian, Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 83.
Chrysostom, Epiph. haer. 47.
Epiphanius, Hie. on. in Mat. 26.
Jerome, Aug. quaest. Euang. l. 1. q. 42.
Augustine, Beda in Mat. 26.
Bid, Futhy. ib.
Euthymius, and Theoph. ib.
Theophylact, do all expound those words of it: howbeit himself says that
Non de sanguine suo, sed de vino dixit. Maldon. in Mat. 26.
Christ spoke there not of his blood, but of wine. Where first observe we that
Jerome and Bid (clean contrary to this fablers assertion, by the Jesuits
confession) expound it of the Eucharist. And secondly, conclude we from the
Jesuits own grants: It was of that that was in the Eucharisticall Cup that
our Savior spoke those words, as the ancient Fathers generally and jointly
affirm: But our Savior spoke them not of his blood, but of wine; says the
Jesuit: It was not his blood therefore, but wine that was drunk in the
Eucharist.

2. We object the words of our Savior, Luke 22. 19.
Do this in remembrance of me: not as this shameless liar says, thereby to
prove the Sacrament to be a bare memory of Christ's body and blood: somewhat
like the lie he told before, that his Adversary should affirm it to be
nothing but bare bread and wine: but to prove that Christ is not there
corporally present: For what needs a memorial of him, when we have him in
our eye? when (if we may believe Bellarmine) he is visibly present with us?
When we see him, and touch him, as this fellow tells us elsewhere? Or who
would be so absurd as to say, I give you my self to be a memorial of my
self? Primas. in 1 Cor. 11. Vt siquis moriens relinquat ei quem diligit,
pignus aliquod, etc. Idem habet and Herueus, and Haimo.
It is as if a man when he dies (says Primasius) or, Peregre proficiscens.
Hieron. nomine in 1 cor. 11. and Sedul. ibid. (...). Basil. Caes. hom. de
charit.
when he goes to travel, (says one that goes for Jerome) should leave a
pledge or a token with one that he loves, to put him in mind of him in his
absence, and of the good turns he has done him; which the party if he love
him entirely, cannot look on without tears. And who would be so senseless,
as delivering his friend a ring on his death bed, to say, I deliver you this
ring to be a pledge of this ringe, or to be a pledge of it self?

But let us hear (I pray you) his Answer. Saint Paul (says he) interprets
these words of our Savior, when he says; 1 Cor. 11. 26.
So often as you do this, you represent Christ's death, till he come. Would any
man that had either brains in his head, or wit in his brain, answer in this
manner, or reason on this wise? Christ's death is represented in the Lords
Supper. Ergo Christ's very body and blood must needs be there present. Yea or
thus either? In the Lords Supper is a representation of Christ's death: Ergo it
is not a memorial of it. As if representation were not ordinarily of things
absent; or memorials represented not the things that they commemorate. He
wanted his Bellarmine here to help him out; who where Tertullian says, that
Tertul. contra Marc l. 1. Panem, in quo ipsum corpus suum repraesentat.
Christ represented his body in bread: Bellar. de Euch l. 2. c. 7.
says that to represent there signifies Praesentem rem facere and reipsa
exhibere.
to make a thing really present. But it is well that (...).
the word used by the Apostle here, will not bear any such sense: else (it may
be) we might have had it.

Mean while he should have done well (as his usual manner is elsewhere) to
have snipt off or concealed at least, the last clause, Till I come. Etenim post
eius adventum non amplius erit opus symbolis seu signis corporis, cum ipsum
corpus apparebit. Theodoret. in 1 Cor. 11.
For after he is come (says Theodoret) we shall have no need of signs or
symbols of his body any more, when his body it self shall appear. He were
scarce in his wits (I think) that would leave a thing with his Friends at his
departure from them to be remembered by in his absence till he returned again
to them, that should lie locked up and kept out of their sight, and should never
come in their view, but when himself should come personally in presence to
show it them: or should bid them by such a thing remember him, till he came
again to them a twelue-moneth after, when as every week or month in the
mean space he meant to return to them, as often as ever they desired to
remember him in it. But mine Adversary thought belike that none but such silly
sots should read what he writ, as would mark nothing but what he would have
them.

LAstly S. Paul literally declaring the institution of the Sacrament, N. P.
1 Cor. 11. to the end that the Corinthians might understand the excellency
thereof, makes the sin of such as unworthily receive it to consist in this,
that they discern not that bread to be the body of Christ: and his words read
alone without heretical glosses express plainly Catholic doctrine. And in
the Chapter before he mentions benediction or consecration of the Chalice
then used, saying, Calix benedictionis, The Chalice of benediction which we
bless, is it not the communication of Christ's blood? and the bread which we
break, is it not the communication of Christ's body? etc. Of which words says
S. Chrysostom, this is the meaning; That which is in the Chalice, is that
which flows out of Christ's side, and we are made partakers thereof. Which is
out of the Greek text of S. Luke plainly to be gathered: And the very manner
of Christ's speeches, Quod pro vobis datur, quod pro vobis effundetur; Which is
given for you, which shall be effused for you; import plainly a Sacrifice of
his body and blood, wherein the one is offered not to us, but for us; the other
was to be not infused as wine, but effused as blood for us, etc.

9. AT last remembering himself, wherein he failed T. G.
at the first, he will prove out of S. Paul (he says) that Christ's words
are literally to be understood. This had been more seasonable, where it was
questioned at first. But better at last (we say) then never.

1. The Apostle makes (says he) this the sin of those that unworthily
received the Sacrament, that 1 Cor. 11. 29.
they discerned not the Lords body.

2. He, says, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
the bread broken is the communication of the body of Christ; and the blessed
Chalice of his blood.

Stout Arguments, and fit for such a Champion as he is.

For the former: how follows it, Men sin in not discerning the Lords body,
when they come irreverently to the Lords board: Ergo our Saviors words, This
is my body, are to be understood properly. Let him hear Augustine expounding
the words of the Apostle, what it is not to discern the Lords body, to wit,
Aug. epist. 118. c. 3. Qui hoc non discernebant a caeteris cibis veneratione
singulariter debita.
not to discern that from other meats by a reverence singularly due unto it;
which is as he speaks elsewhere, Idem ep. 23.
in some sort Christ's body, because a Sign and a Sacrament of it. Yea let him
hear himself where he says, Diuis. 8. Sect. 1.
The sin of such persons is made this by the Apostle, that they distinguish
not this bread from other common bread. And then see how well they serve to
prove that that here they are alleged for.

For the latter: Not to demand of them, how chance they often celebrate (contrary
to both our Saviors, and the Apostles practice) without any breaking of bread
at all; if their paper wafer-cake at least deserve that name. Who denied ever a
communication of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament? But must it needs
be corporal; or else it is none at all? (...).
The tongue tripping now and then tells truth. And the truth start out of his
mouth before unawares, where he said, that Christ is present there in a
spiritual manner. And in a spiritual manner (as out of Athanasius and
Augustine, yea and their own Iansenius I have showed) do we participate of,
and communicate with the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament; Quomodo
mittam manuum in coelum? Fidem mitte; tenuisti. Aug. in loan. tr 50.
sending the hand of our faith (as Augustine speaks) up into heaven; yea
reaching it (as I may well say) to Christ's Cross. I will add to the former
only one observation of Bernard, who in many places speaks of this our
communication with Christ: Alluding to those words of our Savior, Ioh. 6. 56.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him:
Bernar. in Cant. sermon. 71. Et manducat nos, and ma^ducatur a nobis; quo arctius
illi astringamur.
Christ (says he) both eats us, and is eaten of us; that we may the more
firmly and strictly be fastened unto him. Otherwise should we not be
perfectly united to him. For if I eat and be not eaten, he may seem to be in
me, but not I yet in him. Again, if I be eaten, but eat not; he may seem to
have me in him, but not to be yet in me. For there is no absolute unition in
either of these alone. But when Si manducat me, vt habeat me in se, and a me
vicissim manducatur, vt sit in me, quatenus integra firmaque sit connexio, etc.
both he eats me, that I may be in him; and is eaten of me, that he may be in
me; then is there indeed a firm and an entire connection, I being in him and he
in me. But Christ's eating of us is not orall or corporal, but mental and
spiritual: of the like kind therefore is our eating of him, and our mutual
participation alike in either: Which in these words also most sweetly does
Iansenius express: Per fidem panis iste non simpliciter sumitur, sed veluti
dentibus quibusda^ masticatur, etc. Iansen. concord. c. 59.
By faith this bread is not simply taken, but being chewed as it were with
teeth, while it is well considered what and what manner of food it is, and
Frangitur, and in animae viscera traiicitur.
so broken, it is conueighed with a kind of delight and spiritual taste into
the bowels of the soul, and Nobis incorporatur.
is incorporated into us, that so Christ being in an hidden and secret manner
by faith united unto us, may Ephesians. 3 17.
dwell (as the Apostle speaks) in our hearts, by his presence there
quickening and nourishing them, and so expel all hunger and thirstinesse out
of them, while he remooueth both the want of things needful to true life, and
the desire of other transitory things. And it is the same in effect that
Calvin means when he says, Amplius quiddam esse Christum manducare, quam in
Christum credere Vide Calvin. Institut. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 5, 6, 7.
To feed on Christ is somewhat more then barely to believe in him, and that it
is Non tam ipsum credere, quam effectum eius. Ex Caiuini sent. Bellar. de Euch.
l. 1. c1.
not so much belief u Viuificet, alat, esuriem pellat, etc.
it self, as an effect and fruit of it. That which Bonauenture the Schooleman
also not unfitly thus expresses: Bonauent. in sent. l. 4. did. 9. quae. z.
Eating (says he) is properly spoken of the body, and is by way of similitude
applied to the soul. That therefore we may know what is meant by spiritual
eating, we must have an eye unto corporal feeding. Now in corporal
manducation there are these two things, Masticatio and incorporatio.
mastication and incorporation, or a chewing of the meat in the mouth, and an
incorporating of it into the body. In like manner in spiritual eating there is
first Spiritualis masticatio est recogitatio cibi i. carnis Christi pro nobis
expositae in pretium ad redimendu^ and in cibum ad reficiendum.
a spiritual chewing, that is, a recogitation or a serious consideration and
faithful meditation of the spiritual meat, that is, of Christ's flesh exposed
for us, both as a ransom to redeem us, and as food also to feed us; and
secondly, Incorporatio dum recogitans charitatis amore ei quod cogitatur
iungitur, and sic incorporatur, and dum incorporatur reficitur, eique
assimilatur.
a spiritual incorporation, when upon such recogitation or consideration the
soul is by a loving affection united and incorporated to the thing considered,
and is thereby refreshed or nourished, and so made in grace more and more like
unto it. So that unto spiritual manducation are two things required,
Recogitatio fidei, and affectio charitatis.
a faithful recogitation, and a loving affection. Whence it follows that Non
sufficit qualiscunque fides.
neither is every kind of faith sufficient to effect this spiritual feeding
on Christ, but such Gal. 5. 6.
faith only as works by love: Non quilibet actus credendi manducare facit,
etc.
nor is every effect of faith a feeding on Christ's flesh, but that only
whereby Christ's flesh, that was boiled (as it were) to make food for us, on the
Cross, is so considered, and in a spiritual manner digested and con^^cted (as
was before said) for the feeding and refreshing of our souls. So that Caluines
doctrine and ours concerning this spiritual feeding on Christ, and so
communicating with his body and blood, is no other then the Ancients long since
taught, and their own writers themselves acknowledge: Which in one word I shut
and seal up with that short saying of Chrysostom, tha tboth in Baptism and
the Eucharist, (...) Chrysostom in 2 Timothy hom. 2.
It is faith that does all.

Yea but Chrysostom. says that that that is in the Chalice, is that which flowed
out of Christ's side, and we are made thereof partakers: And out of S. Lukes
Greek Text it is plainly gathered.

What out of S. Luke he alleadegth we shall see anon. Only mark how he
flees from their only authentical Latin here to the Greek Text, which at
other times they Vide Linda^. de opt Genesis interp. l. 1 c. 11 Canum. loc. com.
l. 2. c 13. and Analys. fid. l. 8. c. (...).
say is so corrupted, that there is little certainety of ought from it, further
then their Latin and it concur.

Chrysostom says indeed as he is here cited. But it must be remembered what
both their Sixtus Senensis, and Bellar. also say of him; to wit, that
Chrysostom is wont to speak many things Per hyperbolen enunciare. Sixth. Sen.
biblioth. lib. 6. annot. 152.
hyperbolically or Per excessum Bellarm. de Missa l. 2. c 10.
excessiuely, in his sermons especially. To pass by other places, where he
says, that the Church is (...) Chrylost. in Mat. hom 82.
that very Chamber where Christ celebrated his last Supper; that (...). Idem in
encoen sieve de poenit. tom. 6. orat.
we touch his side with our lips; that (...). Idem in Joan. hom. 46. and ad
pop. Ant. 62.
we set our teeth in his flesh; that (...). In Mat. hom 82.
we cut his flesh assunder; that our (...). Ibid.
tongue is died with blood; and our (...). Ibid.
mouth is filled with fire; while (...). In encaen.
no man, but an Angel with tongs reaches a coal of fire to us; that Christ
does (...). In Math. hum: 82.
^neade as dough, and (...) Ibid (...) in Ioh 46
mingleth himself together with us; and that (...). In Math. 46.
we are likewise knod as dough and (...). In (...) 46.
mixed or tempored together with him into his flesh. To let these pass, I say;
in the very Sermon here cited he has diverse passages, which themselves will
not deny, must needs be figuratively meant; as where he says, that (...). In
1 Cor. hom. 24.
Christ suffers that in the Sacrament, that he did not suffer upon the
Cross; to wit, the (...).
breaking, even of his bones, which there he did not; that (...) Ibid.
the altar is bloodied with Christ's blood, (as he says elsewhere that the
people are (...). Dr sacerd lib. 3.
all died red with it:) that (...) In 1 Cor. hom 24.
the bread is Christ's body: (which in propriety of sense, says De Euc ar lib
1. c. 11.
Bellarmine, is impossible) and that by taking it we are not only (...).
vni^ed to Christ's body, and become (...).
one body with Christ; or (...).
Christ's body; and all c (...) Joan. 19. 36
of us one body: but that (...).
we our selves are that self same body that we take: Not unlike that which
Haimo has, that Ilia caro quam assumpsit, and iste panis, omnisque ecclesia,
non faciunt tria corpora, sed vnum corpus. Haimo in 1 Cor. 10.
Christ's natural body, and the Eucharisticallbread, and the Communicants
themselves are all but one and the same body. Yea that he is to be understood
figuratively, appears, as by that that he adds there, that (...).
like Eagles we must so^re aloft up to heaven, and (...).
not flagge downward, nor creep below upon the ground, if we will come at
Christ's body; so by that which he says elsewhere, that it was (...) Chrysostom. in
Mat. hom 82.
wine that Christ delivered, when he delivered this mystery; that which he
proves also by the words of our Savior himself in the place before
discussed, Mat. 2. 6. 29.
I will drink no more of this fruit of the vine. Chrysostom says that the
Altar is bloodied with Christ's blood; and his body suffers that there, which
really it does not: as the Apostle faith, that Galat. 3. 1.
Christ was crucified in the sight of the Galatians, who in likely hood many of
them never saw piece of his Cross: and as August. says, Aug. epist. 23.
he lies not, that says that Christ is immolated on Easterday, in regard of
the similitude that that Sacrament has of his passion, that that day is
celebrated: and in like manner may it very well be understood, when he says
that Christ's blood is in the Cup. Nor hinders it, but that this speech of
Chrysostom may be taken tropically, because he says, (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
hom 24.
That that flowed out of Christ's side: (as In sacrame^to spei consociatur
Ecclesia quamdiu bibirur, quod de Christi latere manauit. Aug. contr. Faust.
Beda in 1 Cor. 11. Hoc accipite in Calice quod manauit de Christi latere. Ex
Aug. sermon. ad Neophyt. I^^ ad Haimer. de corp. Dom.
Augustine also, though no friend to Transubst antiation, is reported to say
the same) no more then it would have hindered, but that the Apostles words
might have bin taken figuratively (as Caietan also well observes) hough of the
Rock he should have said, That Rock was that Christ, that was crucified, and
died, and rose again from the dead.

. 10. In the next words he comes to prove a Sacrifice there, The very
manner (says he of Christ's speeches, Quod pro vobis datur, quod pro vobis
effundetur; which x 1 Cor. 10. 4.
y Caietan. in Thom. part. 3. quaest. 75. art. 1.
is given for you, which shall be shed for you; import plainly a Sacrifice:
which he has (as all that ever he has almost) out of Bellarm. de miss l. 1 c.
12.
Bellarmine.

As if those words had not a manifest relation to his passion; (which is Esai
53. 10, 12 Ephesians. 5. 2. Heb. 8. 3. and 9. 12, 14.
a true Sacrifice indeed, and Heb. 10. 1, 10, 12, 14.
a most perfect yea Heb. 10. 8, 9. De qua Chrysostom. nomine in Psalm. 95. (...).
the full complement of all other:) that which their own vulgar Translation
also plainly imports, yielding the words (as they are also in the very
Canon of the Mass) by the future tense, Tradetur, effundetur; shall be given,
shall be shed: as having an eye to the passion then lo. 13. 1.
near at hand, wherein his body was to be given, and his blood to be shed. So
Gregory of Ualence; Quod tradetur sieve datur, sieve frangitur. 1. quod
offeretur a me pro vobis in cruce mactatum. Greg de Valent. de miss. sacr. l.
1. c. 3.
That is or shall be given, or broken; that is, that shall be offered by me
for you being slain or sacrificed on the Cross: Tradetur. i. dabitur atque
offer^etur in cruce in odorem suauitatis vt Apostolus interpretatus est. Ibid.
c. 4.
as (says he) the Apostle himself also expounds it. So Cardinal Hugh; h
He took bread, and brake it, thereby signifying that his body should be broken
on the Cross, and that he did himself expose it to be so broken and
crucified: And when he said Accepit and fregit 1. frangendum in cruce signauit.
Hugo in Math. 26. i Sponte sua frangendum and crucifigendum exposuit. Idem in
Marc. 14.
that shall be shed, he foretold them of his passion then shortly to ensue.
Yea so Caietan. in Math. 26.
Card. Caietan; who adds also not unfitly, that Christ's body is said then to
be given, and his blood to be shed. because his passion was then in a manner
begun, l a plot being now laid for his life, and Ioh. 10. 15.
his body and blood already bought and sold by them. And to omit that Christ's
words concerning his body do no more intimate a present act of delivering it,
then those words of his the like elsewhere, n I lay down my life for my
sheep: Let him but show us how Christ's blood is shed in this Sacrifice. For as
for Bellarmines bold assertion that Bellarm. de miss. lib. 1. cap. 25.
bread is said to be broken, when it is Integri panes dentur.
given by whole loaves; and wine is said to be poured out, when it is given by
Plenae amphorae donentur.
whole hogs-heads, or rundlets at least, not by pots or pitchers full only; it
is most senseless and abfurd. But why does k Effundetur: de passione
praedixit. Idem in Luc. 22.
not this eager disputer urge rather that which many of them do, that Christ
bad them, r Do this, that is, as they senselesly expound it, Sacrifice this.
For that is a Hoc facite, Luke 22. 19.
maine pillar, that they pitch much upon. Which exposition yet, as Bellarmine
is almost ashamed of, and Bellarm. de miss. l. 1. c. 12. Fingit Catholico^ ita
probare, etc. Non tam inepte argumentantur.
blames Calvin wrongfully as if he had wronged them therein, by charging them
with such expositions and arguments as they make not, nor allege: so Iansen.
concord. cap. 131. Sunt qui Sacramentum istud esse Sacrificium ostendere
conantur ex verbo facere, quod aliquando per sacrificare accipitur, etc.
Iansenius acknowledging ingenuously that some did so argue, (as indeed Inter
caeteros Sanderus nostras de Coena Dom. l. 3. c 9. circumst. 19. Item Gregor.
de Valent. de Miss. Sacrif. l. 1. c. 4.
not a few do) yet confesses that that is but a weak argument: and grants
in effect, that it cannot either out of that or any other place of the Gospel
be proved, that the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is a Sacrifice: And is
feign therefore to run to tradition for it: and yet there also finds he
little footing for such a Sacrifice as they would have it to be. For Irenaeus (
Iansen. ibid.
says he) that lived near the Apostles times, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 31.
calls the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood a Sacrifice in regard of the
bread and wine therein offered (as types of Christ's body and blood:) as also in
regard of the thanksgiving therein offered, as well for the work of our
Creation, as for the work also of our redemption. And howsoever this doughty
Doctor say that our Saviors words so plainly import it, yet is their graund
Champion Bellarmine, where at large he debateth this business, evil troubled
to find it out either in Christ's Institution, or in their own Mass book, or
to show wherein it consists. Where it is not, indeed he can easily tell us:
but he cannot so easily tell us where it is. Bellarm. de miss. l. 1. c. 27.
It is not he (says he) In oblatione panis and vini non consistit.
in the oblation that goes before Consecration: for then not Christ's body, but
bare bread should be sacrificed. It is not in the Consecration: for In
consecratione non apparet vlla oblatio, nec sensibili^ vlla immutario, etc.
therein appears no oblation, nor no sensible immutation, which is needful
in an external sacrifice. It is not in the Oblation that* comes after
Consecration: for Oblationem i^^am n^c Christus nec Apostoli faci^bant, quam
nos post co^ationem fac^.
that oblation neither Christ; nor his Apostles at first used. It is not in the
breaking: for Non solet frangi quandoque.
that is sometime ^mitted: Fractio nostra Christum autorem non habet.
nor do we (says) use such breaking as Christ did now adays. It is
Manducatio and consumptio non sit a Solo Sacerdote.
not in the peoples communication: for then the people should be Priests. But
where is it then? Surely it is partly in the Consecration: and yet it is not
there neither: because there is Consecratio non veram and realem mortem, sed
mysticam tantum efficit.
no true or real, but a mystical death only there; and partly in the Priests
manducation, or eating of it. And why there? forsooth, because it is no where
else, and somewhere it must needs be: For In tota action Missae nulla est alia
realis destruction victimae preter istam.
in the whole action of the Mass there is no real destruction of an Host but
there only. Thus you see how they delude the people, telling them of a true,
proper, real Sacrifice, wherein they offer Christ again for the poor souls
in Purgatory, to pick their purses: And yet cannot tell themselves what or
where it is, or wherein it consists. But if Christ (as they say) be the thing
sacrificed or the Host: and not bread, but this Host is really destroyed,
when the Priest eats it: then how scapeth Christ from being then destroyed?
or how scapeth the Priest from being a destroier of Christ? Yea at the first
Institution either Christ did eat the consecrated Host or bread, or he did
not. If he did, ( Vide Bonauent. in sent. l. 4. d. 9. q. 4. a Iansen. concord.
cap. 131.
which yet indeed is not so easily proved) then by Bellarmines doctrine he
did therein really destroy himself; and the rather, for that his body was not
as yet then impassible. If he did not, then belike there was no sacrific^
there. For the Apostles (they say) were not made Priests till Christ bad them,
Hoc facite, do this; and Council. Trident. seff. 6. de Sacrif. Mis^. cap. 1.
and can. 2.
thereby made them such; which might well be not till after they had eaten. Or
if they were Priests when they did eat, then belike they destroyed Christ
before the Jews did him to death. But it is not to be marueiled, if they
cannot find it in Christ's Institution when they know not where to find it in
their own Missall. In which kind it is not unworthy the observation, that
Corn. Iansenius having sifted over and ransackt the whole story of the
Institution, conioyning all the three Euangel^st^, that report it, together,
yet can find no Sacrifice there expressed save in the Gratiarum eu^im actio
est quoddam Sacrificium. Idem ibid.
thanksgiving, which is (says he) a spiritual ^inde of Sacrifice, and of
which the Lords Supper is called the Eucharist, and may therefore well be
^earmed a Sacrifice. Which we deny not; but expressly say the same. Only he
says, Probabile est quod oblatio sui Deo sit facta. Ibid.
it is probable too, that Christ then offered himself to his Father. But at
last he is feign to fly to this, that though it be granted that Christ offered
not himself in the Supper, yet it follows net that the Priests should not
therein now offer him. For they * Vt demus Christum non obtulisse, etc. non
consequitur sacerdotes non offerre debere.
are bidden by Christ to do something that Christ did not, to wit, to do it
in remembrance of him, which could not be done then, when he was present, (nor
is he present then belike now when it is done) Cum memoria tantum sit rei
absentis.
since that remembrance is of a thing absent only: and that therefore it may
well be called a Sacrifice, because it is done in memory of Christ's Passion.
This is the very same that Peter Lombard before said: and to the same purpose
Gabriel Biel (applying that out of Augustine to the Sacrifice, which we did
formerly to the Sacrament, whereupon mine Adversary took occasion to keep
such a coile, as if I made the Sacrament nothing but a bare Sign, like
Alexanders picture, etc.) Gabr. Biel in Can. Miss. lect 85.
Augustine (says he) says that Aug. ad Simply lib. 2. quaest. 3.
Images or Pictures are went to be called by the Names of these things whereof
they they are Pictures or Images, as when looking on a Table or a painted Wall,
we say; that is Cicero, that is Salust: Now the celebration of this Sacrament
is a kind of Image or representation of Christ's Passion; which is the true
immolation or sacrificing of him: And therefore is it also called an immolation,
or an oblation and a Sacrifice, because it is a representation and a memorial
of that true Sacrifice and holy oblation made on the Cross. And this also we
all willingly and generally grant. But such a Sacrifice will not serve their
turn. They must have a Real and a proper Sacrifice, the very self same with
Christ's on the Cross, though they know not whence to fetch, nor where to find
it. Nor is it to be (...) (as I said before, if in Christ's Institution there be
Nec vola, nec vestigium.
(...) ^ing (...) all found of this their Sacrifice: since they confess that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the Sacrifice of the Mass are two several
things; which both the Council of Trent therefore deals with severally, and
Bellarmine handles under several heds: as also M. Harding derideth Bishop
Jewel for confounding the Communion and the Mass together. We find in the
Gospel Christ's Institution of the one, and therefore willingly embrace it: but
we find there not so much as any mention at all of the other; and therefore
justly we reject it.

THE Protestant Writers of Magdeburgh in their N. P.
fourth Century Dedicated unto our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth undertaking
to declare the Primative estate of the Church, which in Constantines time
illustrated the whole world, blame almost universally all the ancient Fathers
for teaching free will, Justification by works, merit of works done by the
assistance of grace, confession of sins to a Priest, and enjoined Penance,
absolution of such as had confessed given with Imposition of hands, Invocation
of Saints, Purgatory, Altars called the seat of the body and blood of Christ
offered on them, the real Presence, Transubstantiation, with care, more then
was had of the water of Baptism, that no part of the Sacrament should fall to
the ground, reservation of the Sacrament, worshipping of it, receiueing it
fasting and chaste, offering it in Sacrifice to God as being propitiator^e not
only for the living, but for the dead, afferming it to be a Sacrisice
according to the order of Melchisedeck, liberty for Deacon^ to distribute it
but not to offer it, tearming it Viaticum for sick persons, Im^ges in the
Church sumptuously built for celebration of Masses in them, holy vestments used
by the Priest in time of the Sacrifice, Corporals and Couerings of the Altar,
Lights by day burning on them, placing of Saints Relics under them, the care
of d^ceased persons, praying before them, and making pilgrimages unto them, and
other like confessed points and practices of Catholic Doctrine.

11. TO make us believe that this their doctrine of T. G.
Transubstantiation is of great antiquity, he tells us that the Centurists
blame almost all the Fathers universally of Constantines time, among other
things, for teaching the doctrine of Transubstantiation, and adoration of the
Sacrament.

This is all most false, as much is also of the rest by him here affirmed. They
allege only some passages out of counterfeit works, Centur. 4. cap 6. p.
430.
some going under Ambrose his name, as the prayers preparing to the Mass,
censured by In Censur. ad Ambros. Non esse Ambrosii.
Erasmus for such, wherein mention is made of Adoration of the bread in the
Sacrament; which they note also not to be found in any of Ambrose his own
works; Centur. 4. c. 4. page 294.
some going under Athanasius his name, as an idle Legend of an Image of Christ;
which Baron. in Martyrolog. Nouembr. 9. Plane constat Autorem illius historiae
non esse Athanasium Alex.
Baronius himself disauoweth; wherein mention is made of no flesh of Christ
left in the world, but what is made upon the Altar: (and how have they Calvin.
de reliq. Charrouienses Monachi iactant se praeputium habere.
his foreskin among their holy relics then?) Centur. 4. cap. 10. page 985.
some under the name of Eusebius Emissemus, confessed by Bellarm. de Euchar. l.
2. c. 30. de confir. lib 2. cap 6. de script. Eccles. ann. 430. and in
recognit. Reuera Eusebius Emissenus non potuit esse.
Bellarmine in diverse places to be mere counterfeits; as an Homely, wherein
the bread and wine are said to be turned into the substance of Christ's body and
blood: (words not found once in the writings of any one of the Ancients: We
produce express places, where the Substance of bread is said to remain still
in the Sacrament; they not one where the bread is said to be turned into the
substance of Christ's body. But a number of such counterfeits do they daily
coin and forge, and then cry out that men condemn antiquity, when they
censure them, and such gross errors as they meet withal in them:) And
withal Centur. 4. cap. 4. page 294.
they observe that two or three of the Fathers that were, not in Constantines
time, but somewhat after, used some new terms and phrases in their discourses
of these Mysteries, that were not usual in auncienter times. But that they
condemn any one Father that lived in Constantine, (...) Rob. Coqui Censur.
Patrum quorundam; and Andr. Riuetti Specimen Criticum.
time or within that age, much less all of them almost universally for
teaching Transubstantiation and adoration of the Eucharist, is most untrue. He
should have done well to have added, what indeed they observe, and therein he
should not have lied, Centur. 4. cap. 6 p. 428.
that they did in those times deliver the Sacrament entire to all, and not
mangle it, as their Church does now adays, bereauing the people of one
principal part of it: as also Ibid. p. 429.
that they delivered them the bread into their hands, and not popped it into
their mouths, as their manner now is.

AND of Constantine that renowned first Christian N. P.
Emperor they confess from the testimony of Eusebius living with him and
writing his life, of S. Jerome likewise and other certain Authors, that he
erected Temples in memory of Martyrs, dedicated a most sumptuous Church in
honor of the Apostles, provided his sepulcher there, to the end that after his
death he might be made partaker of the prayers there offered; he dedicated his
Church with great solemnity, and celebrated the dedication thereof with a
yearly festival day; he carried about with him a portable Church or
tabernacle, and Priests and Deacons attending it for the celebration of the
divine mysteries; he had lights by day burning therein; he translated to
Constantinople the holy relics of S. Andrew, S. Luke, and Timothy, at which
devils did roar, and certain relics of the Cross, found by his Mother for
conservation of the City built by him; he honored sacred Virgins professing
perpetual chastity; Under him were Monks throughout all Syria, Palestine,
Bithynia, and other places of Asia and Afric; he greatly reverenced Anthony
the Monk; he went to embrace the sepulcher of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul,
humbly praying to their Saints that they would be intercessours to God for him;
he much honored the Cross and signed his face with it; Under him in that age
were Pilgrimages made to Jerusalem: he reproved Acesius the Nouatian for
denying the power given unto Priests to remit sins, under pretense that God
only remitteth sins: of his Clergy, Priests and Bishops assembled by him
to the dedication of his Church some of them did did preach and interpret holy
Scriptures, others of them, who could not do so, appeased the Deity with
unbloody Sacrifices and mystical consecrations, praying for the health of the
Emperor: At the time of his death he intended to expiate his sins by
efficacy of the holy Mysteries, and confessed his sins in the house of
Martyrs: After his death prayer was made for his soul, and the mystical
Sacrifice offered. So evident was he and the Primative flourishing Church of
Christ in his days, in these and all other points Catholic, and continued so
in our Country and other Christian parts of the world until Luthers foul
Apostasy and revolt from it.

The British ancient Inhabitantt of this I Will converted in or near the time
of the Apostles, agreed in all other points of faith with S. Austin our first
Apostle, excepting some different Ceremonies of Baptism, and the Jewish
observation of Easter, as S. Bid testifies: whose religion is evidently
known and confessed by our chief Adversaries to have been Roman and
Catholic. And never any country was in any age converted from Paganism to
Christ, but it received our doctrine, namely, the practice of the Mass and
belief of the Sacrament.

12. TO pass by his impertinent Catalogue of bymatters T. G.
in Constantines time; (whereof some also are untrue, and some uncertain;)
which he is very forward to run out into, willing to be dealing with any thing,
though never so impertinent, then the point that against his will he must be
held to: Whereunto I answer no more for the present, but this; Let him first
quit himself of the task that he has already undertaken, to wit, to
maintain this their Metaphysicall Transmutation in the Eucharist; and when he
has so done let him then produce, if he can, any one Article of Faith, that
was held generally as such in Constantines time by us now rejected, and he
shall not want an Answer. But to pass by this (I say) he would make us
believe (if we will take it on his word) that the British ancient inhabitants
of this I Will held the same belief concerning this Sacrament, that the Romanists
do at this day. All the reason he produces for it is this, that they differed
from Augustine that was sent by Pope Gregory into England only in some
ceremonies about Baptism, and the observation of Easter.

Surely this man has a notable vain in disputing and arguing: he can prove
any thing, if you do but grant him all that he says. The British Inhabitants
(says he) here presently after the Apostles time held Transubstantiation then,
as we do now at Rome. Whereas he well knows that Doctrinam hanc de
conuersione hac, seu de Transsubstantiatione non admodum antiquam esse dicunt
Scholastici, inter quos lo, Scotus did. 4. q. 1. and d. 11. q 3. and Gabr.
Biel in Can. lect. 41. Suarez. Tom. 3. disp. 5. quaest. 75. art. 5. Ait Scotus
ante Lateranense Concilium (quod fuit Anno Domini 1215.) Transsubstantionem non
fuisse dogma fidei. Bellarm. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 22. In Synaxi
Transubstantiationem sero definiuit Ecclesia. Erasm in 1 Cor. 7.
for above 1000. years after Christ their Transubstantiation was not generally
held; scarce heard of for far more then half that time. Neither is he able
to produce any title of true Antiquity to show, that it was then held here.

Yea but (says he) there was no difference here about it, when Austin came
into these parts, between him and them that he found here. But I demand how
it appears that Gregory that sent Austin, held Transubstantiation? or that
in the Church of Rome it was then held? Till he can prove this to us, not out
of lying Legends or bastard writings, but out of some authentic Story, or
Gregory's own undoubted works, we have little reason to believe him. Bellarm.
de Euchar. l. 2. c. 32.
Bellarmine (I am sure) can fish very little out of him, nothing at all, that
proves ought.

Sure we are that our Countryman venerable Bede, whom he here cites as the
reporter of Augustines arrival here, was of an other judgment, as by his
writings appears. For Commenting on the story of the Institution of this
Sacrament; Beda in Marc. 14. and in Luke 22. Nam in Math. non habeo.
The old Paschall solemnity (says he) being ended, which was celebrated in
memory of the deliverance out of Egypt, Christ passes to a new one, which he
would have the Church use in memory of redemption by him, Pro carne agni and
sanguine sui corporis and sanguinis sacramentum in panis and vini figura
substitutens.
instead of the flesh and blood of a Lamb substituting a Sacrament of his body
and blood, in a figure of bread and wine, etc. And Frangit ipse panem quem
porrigit.
he breaks himself the bread that he delivers, to show that the breaking
of his body to come was by his own will and procurement. And again, Quia
panis corpus confirmat, vinum vero sanguinem operatur in carne, hic ad corpus
Christi mystice, illud refertur ad sanguinem.
because bread strengthens the flesh, and wine breeds blood, the one is
mystically referred to Christ's body, and the wine unto his blood. Where is any
tittle here that may stand well with their Transubstantiation? much less that
sounds ought that way? A Sacrament of his body and blood: a memorial of his
redemption: bread broken and given: and both bread and wine having a mystical
reference to the body and blood of Christ. It was well and advisedly therefore
done by Bellarmine, Lib. 2. de Eucharist.
to leave Bid clean out of the Catalogue of his Authors, though a writer of
the greatest note in those times, because he could find nothing in him, that
might seem but to look that way; which if he could, we should be sure to have
heard of.

Yea that long after Augustines time the same belief of the Sacrament, that we
at this day hold, was commonly taught and professed publicly in this Island,
notwithstanding the manifold monuments by that Popish faction suppressed,
appears by some of them in ancient Manuscripts yet extant, and of late
published also in print. Among others of this kind are the They are of late
reprinted and set forth by M. William Lisle.
Epistles and Sermons written in the Saxon tongue, of one Aelfricke a man of
great note for learning, that lived about the year 990. wherein the same
doctrine is taught concerning the Sacrament that we hold at this day, and the
contrary Popish doctrine is impugned.

In an Epistle of his written for Wulfsine then Bishop of Shyrburn to his
Clerks bearing title of a Sacerdotall Synod, he says, that The holy Housell
is Christ's body, not bodily, but ghostly: Not the body that he suffered in,
but the body of which he spoke, when he blessed bread and wine to housell, and
said by the blessed bread, This is my body; and by the holy wine, This is my
blood. And that the Lord that then turned that bread to his body, does still by
the Priests hands bless bread and wine to his ghostly body and his ghostly
blood. And in another Epistle to Wulstane Archbishop of York; that The Lord
halloweth daily by the hands of the Priest, bread to his body, and wine to his
blood in ghostly mystery. And yet notwithstanding that lively bread is not
bodily so, nor the self same body that Christ suffered in: nor that holy wine
is the Saviors blood, which was shed for us in bodily thing, but in ghostly
understanding. And that that bread is his body, and that wine his blood, as the
heavenly bread, which we call Manna, was his body, and the clear water which
did then run from the stone in the wilderness was truly his blood; as S. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
And that stone was Christ.

And in the Paschall Homily by him translated out of Latin, and read commonly
then on Easter Day; Men (says he) have often searched, and do as yet search
how bread that is gathered of corn, and through fires heat baked, may be
turned to Christ's body; or how wine that is pressed out of many grapes is
turned through one blessing to the Lords blood. To which he there answers,
that it is so by signification, as Christ is said to be Bread, a Rock, a Lamb,
a Lion, not after truth of nature. And again having demanded, Why is that holy
housell then called Christ's body and his blood, if it be not truly that that
it is called? He answers, It is so truly in a ghostly mystery. And then
explicating further the manner of this change; As (says he) an heathen child
when he is Christened, yet he alters not his shape without, though he be
changed within: and as the holy water in Baptism after true nature is
corruptible water, but after ghostly mystery has spiritual virtue. And so
says he; The holy Housell is naturally corruptible bread and corruptible wine,
but is by might of Gods word truly Christ's body and blood, yet not bodily, but
ghostly. And afterward he sets down diverse differences between Christ's
natural body and it. Much is betwixt the body that Christ suffered in, and the
body that he hallowed to housell: 1. The body that he suffered in was bred of
the flesh of Mary, with blood, and bone, and skin, and sinews, in humane
limbs, and a living Soul. His ghostly body which we call the housell, is
gathered of many corns without blood and bone, limme and soul. And it is
therefore called a mystery, because therein is one thing seen, and another
thing understood.

2. Christ's body that he suffered in and rose from death, never dies
henceforth, but is eternal and impassible: That housel is temporal, not
eternal, corruptible, and dealed into sundry parts, chewed between the teeth,
and sent into the belly.

3. This mystery is a pledge and figure. Christ's body is truth it self. This
pledge do we keep mystically, until we come unto the truth it self, and
then is this pledge ended. Truly it is, as we said Christ's body and blood, not
bodily, but ghostly. And yet further he adds that, As the Stone in the
wilderness, from whence the water ran, was not bodily Christ, but did signify
Christ, though the Apostle say, 1. Cor. 10. 4
That stone was Christ: so that heavenly meat that fed them 40. years, and
that water that gushed from the Stone, had signification of Christ's body and
blood, and was the same that we now offer, not bodily, but ghostly. And that,
As Christ turned by invisible might the bread to his body and the wine to his
blood before he suffered; so he did in the wilderness turn the heavenly meat
to his flesh, and the flowing water to his own blood, before he was borne.
That, when our Savior said, Ioh. 6. 54.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting life; He bad
them not eat the body wherewith he was enclosed, nor to drink that blood
which he shed for us: but he meant that holy housel, which is ghostly his body
and his blood; and he that tastes it with believing heart, has everlasting
life. That, As the sacrifices had a sore-signification of Christ's body which he
offered to his Father in Sacrifice: So the housell that we hallaw at Gods
Altar is a remembrance of Christ's body which he offered for us, and of his
blood which he shed for us: which suffering once done by him is daily renewed
in a mystery of holy housell. Lastly, that This holy housell is both Christ's
body, and the body of all faithful men after ghostly mystery: and so when we
receive it, we receive our selves too. For, 1 Cor. 12. 27.
You are Christ's body says the Apostle; and, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
We many be one bread, and one body.

Whence it is apparent that the same Faith that we hold concerning the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, and Christ's presence in it was publicly taught and
ordinarily professed in this Island even for a long time also after Austins
access into these parts. So far is it from that which this flourisher
affirms, that the ancient Brittons near the Apostles times were of the same
Faith and judgment in that point with our Romanists. But lost labor it is,
and (as Optatus speaks) Quae est ista noua and stulta sapientia, nouitatem
quaerere in visceribus vetustatis? Optat. adv. l'armen. lib. 4.
a mere folly to seek for any such novelty in the bowels of true antiquity.
Neither is this Defendant, or any other of that faction, able to produce any
one sentence or syllable, whereby that which he so confidently here avouches,
may be proved, out of any grave and approved Author, that lived near those
times, or that has written of the same. Let him but make this his assertion
good (that shall be our last issue) and he shall have me a Proselyte, at least,
in that point.

FINIS.

