The Droomme of Doomes day.

Wherein the frailties and miseries of man's life, are lively portrayed, and
learnedly set forth.

Divided, as appears in the Page next following.

Translated and collected by George Gascoigne Esquyer.

Tam Marti, quam Mercurio. Imprinted at London, for Gabriell Cawood: dwelling
in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the holy Ghost. 1576.

THis work is divided into three parts, the first whereof is entitled,

The view of worldly Vanities. Exhorting us to contempne, all pompes,
pleasures, delights, and vanities, of this life. And the second part is
named, The shame of sin. Displaying and laying open the huge greatness and
enormities of the same, by sundry good examples and comparisons. And the third
part is called. The Needels Eye. Wherein we are taught the right rules of a
true Christian life, and the straight passage unto everlasting felicity.
Hereunto is added a private Letter, the which does teach remedies against the
bitterness of Death.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, his singular good Lord and Master, the Earl of
Bedforde: Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of her majesty's
most honorable privy counsel. George Gascoigne wishes much increase, and
long continuance, of Gods favor, according to ^is bounden duty.
RIght noble and my singular good lord: if I should presume (in this epistle
dedicatorie) to blasonne and set forth either your just deserts in
generality, or your exceeding favor and bounty toward me in
perticularitie, I might both offend your honorable ears (which are seldom
seen willing to harken unto your own praises) and much dygresse from mine
own former course in writing, since I have hitherto (in all my life) attained
small skill or grace in the art of adulation. Let it then please your honor to
rest thoroughly satisfied with this my simple acknowledging of your great
goodness, so much surpassing my small deserts, that I find none other mean of
discharge but only to continue your faithful servant and follower. The which
I protest to accomplish unto my lives end, as well toward your own person and
my good Lady, as to all your posterity in every duetifull respect. And (my
good Lord) I must needs confess both unto your honor and to the whole
world, that amongst a number of imperfectio^s I find my self guilty of much
time misspent, and of greater curiosity the^ was convenient, in penning and
endightyng sundry toys and trifles. So that lookyng back (with inward
grief) toward the beginning of my recklesse race. I find that both the
time, and my duty do challenge in me the fruits of repentance. To be
showed in some seryous travail which might both perticulerly bear witness of
my reformation, and generally become profitable unto others. Whereunto I was
(now almost twelve months past) pricked and much moved, by the grave and
discreet words of one right worshipful and mine approved friend, who (in my
presence) hearing my thryftlesse book of Poesyes undeservedly commended, did
say: That he lyked the smell of those Poesies pretely well, but he would like
the Gardyner much better if he would employe his spade in no worse ground, then
either Deuinitie or moral Philosophy. Unto which words I thought not meet
to reply much at that time, having learned that a rash answer should not be
given unto a grave advise. But finding my self therewith thoroughly tickl^d,
and thereby also finding the great difference between that friend and many
other, who had su^drie times served me as an (...) with praises and common
suffrages, affirming that I deserved a Laurel Garland, with sundry other
plausible speeches not here to be rehearsed: I began straight way to
consider that it is not suffycient ^or a man to have a high ^ying Hawke,
unless he do also accustom her to stoop such Quar^ies as are both pleasant
and profitable. For i^ the best Faulkener with his best flying ^aulcon, should
yet continually beat the flocks of simple shiftlesse Doves, o^ suffer his
Hawk to check always at the caryon Crow, the pleasure might perhaps content
a vain desire, but the profit or commoditi^ would skarcely quyte his cost.
And in like manner whosoever is (by the highest God) endued with any haughty
gift, he ought also to bestow and employe the same in some worthy and
profitable subject or travail. Least in his default, he deserve the name of
an unprofitable and careless Steward when his accoumpt is strictly cast. So
then (to return to my purpose my singular good Lord:) I have of long time
thought my self bounden by some seryous travail to declare that those grave
and friendly words did not march altogether unmarked, through m^ mind. And
thereupon (not many months since) tossyng and retossyng in my small
Lybrarie, amongst some books which had not often felt my fyngers ends in
XV. years before, I chanced to light upon a small volumne skarce comely
covered, and well wor^e handled. For to tell a truth unto your honor, it was
written in an old kind of Caracters, and so torn as it neither had the
beginning perspycuous, nor the end perfect. So that I can not certainly say who
should be the Author of the same. But as things of mean s^we (outvvardely,) are
not always to be re^ected, even so in this old torn Paumphlette I found
sundry thing^s (as me thought) written with such zeal and affection, and
tendinge so dyrectly unto the reformacion of manners, that I did not only (my
self) take great pleasure in per^culer ^eading ^ereof, but thought them
profitable to be p^blished for a general commodity. And thereupon have
translated and collected into some order these sundry parcells of the same. ^he
which (as well because the aucthor is to me unknown, (...) also because the
oryginal copies had no (...) title, but chiefly because they do all tend
zealously to an admonicion whereby we may every man walk warely and dece^tly
in his vocacion) I have thought mee^e to entytle The Droomme of Doomes day.
Thinking my self assured that any Soldier which means to march under the
slagge of gods favor, may by sound of this droomme be awaked, and called to
his watch and ward with right sufficient summons. For more particular proof
whereof let it please my good. Lord to understand, that I have divided this
work into three parts. Whereof the first I have named The view of worldly
vanities. Because it does very eloquently (and pythily) persuade all men to
contempne the pompes, excessive pleasures, and delights of this life. A
treatise which though at the first it seem very hard and unpleasant, yet
whosoever will vouchsafe the dyligent reading thereof shall reap thereout no
less commodity then a body repleate with hewmours receives by the
medicinable purgacion. The second part I have termed the Shame of s^e.
Because in deed it displayeth and blasoneth the detestable enormities thereof,
and helps to cure the soul by remembrance and consideracion of the very
lothesoomnesse, which sin does continually carry in it self. This part
needs not so much demonstracion, as it deserves commendacion. And whosoever
does most beasty wallow and delight in sin and wickedness, if he bestow but
one hour in a day to read and record the lessonnes therein contained, I
doubt not but he shall reap much profit, and I some thanks for my travail.
The third and last division is called The Needl^s Eye. And teaches as well the
right rewles of chrystian life, as also the means how to avoid the crooked by
paths which lead unto destruction. So that the offenses ones avoided, and the
mind fully bent to go forthwardes in godliness, it shall be hard to withdraw
us from performance of our possible duties. Unto these three parts thus
collected and ordered, I have thought good to add an old letter which teaches
Remedies against the bitterness of Death. Being perticulerly and yet (in mine
opinion) ^loquently and well written by the original aucthour. Yea and very
meet to be red as the present time requires. All which to gether drawing to
a reasonable vollume, I have now finished and publyshed in print. And as well
because I thought the light of the aucthors over bright a Candle to be hydden
under a busshell, as also for that I would make the world witness how deep
my grave friends advise did sink into my memory, but especially to leave
some pawn of thankfulness in your honorable hands, until I may with greater
deserte dyscharge some part of such infinite duties as I owe unto your
Lordshippe: I presume right humbly to dedicate my travail herein unto your
patronage and noble name. Even so beseching the same to pardone mine
imperfections, if any (through ignorance and not for lack of zeal) have
passed my pen throughout this work. And much the rather for that in deed I
have both used the conference, and abyd the correction of learned Deuines, to
make it the more worthy of so honorable a patron. How so ever it be, my will
and desire are very earnest to please and profyt all true christians in
generallitie, and to purchase the continuance of your comfortable favor in
perticularitie. In full hope whereof I seace any further to trouble your good
^ordshippe, but shall never cease to beseech the almighty that he vouchsafe
long to uphold the prosperous pyllers of your estate to his pleasure. From my
lodging where I finished this travail in weak plight for health as your good
L: well knows this second day of May, 1576.

Your Lordshippes right humble and faithful servant. George Gascoigne.

An advertisement of the Prynter to the Reader.
Understand (gentle Reader) that whiles this work was in the press, it
pleased God to visit the translatour thereof with sickness. So that being
unable himself to attend the daily proofs, he appointed a servant of his to
ouersee the same. Who (being not so well acquainted with the matter as his
master was) there have passed some faults much contrary unto both our
meanings and desires. The which I have therefore collected into this Table.
Desiring every Reader that will vo^hsafe to peruse this book, that he will
first correct those faults and then judge acordingly.

Leaf. Line. Fault. Correction. B. 1. b. 1. man men B. 2. a. 17. 18. pay:
pay pain: pray D. 2. b. 3. reuolueth reuolueth not D. 8. b. 10. ever fail
never fail E. 1. b. 16. shall be they shall be Eodem. 23. temparalty temporally E.
3. a. 15. many might E. 6. a. 5. Chaos Chaos. And yet after this frail and
transitory life we do not Eodem. 17. degre^s decrees E. 7. a. 1. that
despises, that he despyseth E. 7. b. 16. 17. then: with thou: without F. 1. a.
last. sower sowrce Eodem. b. 17. co^mittedagainst as the sin is more grievous
which is done against a F. 2. b. 4. mind created, mind, to a goodness
created, And then put out all the fyfth line to the next point. Eodem. 23. fact
face F. 3. b. 14. God goodness. Eodem. 23. momentarious momentarie F. 6. a. 1.
and to be and be Eodem. 3. this dishonor his dishonor F 7. a. 24. mynisterie
mysterye F. 8. a. 14. becomme be common Eodem. b. 14. dispose despise G. 1. a.
8. takers takers gratitude Eodem. 25. ungrateful ungrateful unto him Eodem.
b. 24. wyttinesse witness G. 2. a. 10 it is not is not G. 3. a. 13. that which
is with God that with God G. 4. a. 26. such is accounted in is accoumpted in
such G. 5. a. 2. sinners the sins G. 7. b. 11. this one is this one
(wherefore) is H. 5. b. 1. 2. in an hillate adnychilate H. 8. b. 8. sins
sinners I. 1. b. 1. which holy which is to come, it is but a m^ment. As holy
Eodem. 9. and they and as they I. 2. a. 29. foul four Eodem. b. 3. but that
he the which he I. 3. a. 14. of conference is often conference Eodem. 16.
passed does passed, which does K. 4. b. 20. me such the such K. 8. b. 24. void
open wide open L, 1. a. 20. carfulness carelessenesse M. 3. b. 24 intrusecall
intrynsicall M. 4. a. 8. it be able yet be able P. 2. b. last. torments of
torments of hell fire? Q. 4. b. 32 for it is not for is not R. 1. a. 30
convicted connected R. 6. b. 35. afflictions affections S. 3. b. 23. conceived
conveyed T. 1. b. 34. light they light, for that which they

The first Book of the vewe o^ worldly van^ties.
WHerefore came I out of my mothers womb, ^ier. 20.
that I might behold sorrow and pain? and that my days might be consumed in
confusion. If he whom our Lord God did sanctify in his mothers womb, did
speak thus of him self, what shall I then say of my self whom my mother
has begotten in sin? Ah las for me, O mother (may I well say) wherefore
have thou begotten or conceived me the son of bitter sorrow and pain?
Wherefore dyed I not in my mothers womb? Or wherefore did I not perrish, even
as soon as I came forth of the same: Wherefore was I received between her knees,
suckled with her teats, and yet borne to become meat for worms, and fuel for
Fire? Oh that I had been slain in her entrales, and that she had become my
Sepulcre, and her womb^ had been my last conception. Then had I been as if I
were not, transferred from the Womb to the Tomb. Who therefore will give me a
Fountain of tears to myn^ eyes, that I may be wayle the miserable entry of
man's condition, the culpable proceeding of man's conversation, and the damnable
ending of man's dissolucion. Let man then (with tears) consider whereof he is
made, what he does, and what h^ means to do. Suerly he shall fi^de that he
was formed and facioned of the Earth, conceived in sin, borne unto misery,
and that he does lewd things which are not lawful, filthy things which are
not comely, and vain things which are not expedient. He shall be made fuel for
Fire, meat for worms, and matter for corruption. But let m^ expound these
words more plainly: I should better hau^ said, Man is formed and made of
Dust, Clay, Ashes, and a matter much vyler, which for modesty I do not name,
co^^eiued in concupisence of the flesh, in the fervent heat o^ lust in the
loathsome stinck of desire, (and that worse is) in the blot and blemish of
sin, borne unto pain, sorrow, and fear^, yea and (that which is most
miserable) unto death. He does lewd things whereby he offends God, his
neighbor, and him self. He does filthy facts, whereby he defiles his good
name, his conscience and his person, and he does vain things, whereby he
neglects serious, profitable and necessary things. He shall become the fuel
for fire, which always burns and can not be quenched, the food of worms,
which ever gnaw and feed upon him, and the continewall mass of corruption
which always stincketh, and is filthy, odious, and horrible.

Then our Lord God has formed man of the ^ime of the Of the vilene^ of man's
substance.
Earth, which is more vile then the rest of the Elements, as it appears in
the second of Genesis, He made the Planets and Stars of the Fire, the blastes
and wyndes of the Air, the Fisshes and Fowls of the Water, and Man and beast
he made of Earth: Then if he consider of the creatures created in the water, he
shall perceive him self to be vile. Considering the creatures made of Air, he
shall find himself more vile, and considering the creatures of fire, he shall
find himself most vile: Neither shall he make him self equal with ye heavenly
creatures, nor dares prefer himself before the creatures of the Earth, for he
shall find him self equal unto beasts, and shall acknowledge himself like
unto cattle, sithence thend of man and cattle of the field is all one, and
their condition and estate are equal, neither can man do any more then a
beast. From the Earth they sprang and rose, and to the Earth they shall return
together. These are Eccle. 3.
not the words of any worldly man, but of the wysest even Solomon. What is man
then but slyme and dust? and thereupon he says unto God: Remember (I beseech
thee) that thou have made me like unto Earth, and shall bring me into Job. 10.
dust again, and thereupon also God says unto man. Thou art dust, and shall
return into dust. I am compared (says Gene. 3.
Job) unto Clay, and am lykened unto Imbers and Ashes. Clay is made of Water
and dust, and both the substaunces do remain therein, and Ashes are made of
Fire and wood, and both the substances do fail. An express mystery, but to
be expounded in an other place. Then what is Clay to be proud on? or whereof
do thou extol thy self, O dust? O Ashes, whereof do thou glory?

Peradventure thou wylt answer, that Adam him self Of the vice of Conception.
was fashioned and formed of clay, and that thou art procreate of the seed of
man. But he was formed out of virgin Job. 14.
clay, and thou art procreate of seed, which is vncleaue, for who can make
that clean which is conceived of unclean seed? What is man that he may seem
undefiled? or that which is borne of man may seem just? For behold, I was
Psalm. 50.
begotten in iniquity, and my mother conceived me in sin. Not only in one
iniquity, nor in one only transgression, but in many iniquities, and in many
transgressions, yea, even in strange iniquities and transgressions, for there
are two kind of conceptions, one of seed, an other of nature. The first is
made in such factes as are committed. The second, in such things as are
purchased and gotten, for the parents commit in the first, and their issue do
purchase in the second. For who is ignorant that the act of generation (yea
even between married folks) is never committed without provocation of the
flesh, without heat of l^st, or of concupisence, whereupon the seeds which
are conceived be unclean, be blotted, and made corrupt, and the soul being
therewith over flowed does purchase the spot of sin, the blot of gilt, and
transgression, and the blemish of iniquity, even as liquor is corrupted being
thrust into an v^cleane vessel, and being once poluted, is defiled, even by
ye first touch thereof. For ye soul has three natural powers, or three natural
forces, that is to say, a reasonable power to deserne between good and evil, a
passionate power to reject the evil, and a power of appetite to desire that
which is good. These three powers are originally corrupted with three opposite
and contrary vices, the reasonable power ^y ignorance that it may not deserne
between good and evil, the passionat power by wrath and anger, that it may
reject the good, and the power of appetite by the concupisence that it may
desire that which is evil. The first of these vices begets transgression,
the last brings forth sin, and the midlemost inge^dereth both sin and
tra^sgression, for it is tra^sgression to do that which is not to be done, and
it is sin to endeavor that which is not to be endeavored. These three vi ^es
are purchased and gotten out of corrupted flesh, by three allurements, for in
carnal copulation the understanding is lulled on sleep, to the end that
ignorance may be sowed, the provocation of lust is styrred up, to the end that
anger and motion of mind may be spread a broad, and the affection of
voluptuousness is satisfied, to thend that concupicence may be obtained. This
is that Tyran flesh, the law and ruler of the members of man, the norishment
of sin, the languishment of nature, and the fodder of death, without the
which no man is borne, and without the which no man dies, the which although
it pass over at any time in state of accusation, yet it remains always in
act. For if we say that we have no sin, we beguyle our selves, and the
truth is not in us. Oh grievous misery and unhappy estate and condition, (...).
Io. 1
before we sin we are bound and wrapped in sin, and before we transgress,
we are caught in transgression. By one man sin entered into the world, and
by sin death Romans 5.
took hold of all men, for did not the forefathers eat a sower Grape, and
their childrens teeth are set on edge.

Wherefore the^ was light given to him that is in wretched Of the weakness of
the (...).
nesse and life lent to such as are in bitterness of ye soul? Oh happy they
are, which dye before they are borne, which taste of death, before they know
what life is, for sour are borne so deformed and prodigious, that they seem
not men, but rather abominations, unto whom nature (perhaps) should much
better have foresene, if she had never suffered them to be seen, for they are
demonstrate and set to show as monsters and shows, and some again lacking
some of their members and senses, are borne imperfect, to the grefe of their
freindes, the infamy of their parents, and the abashinge of their neighbors.
But what need I speak perticularly of these imperfections, sithence all men
generally are borne, without knowledge, without speech, without virtue, without
power? weeping, wayling, weak, feeble, and but little de^eringe from brute
beasts, or rather having less perfect^o^ in many things then they have, for
they go as soon as they be borne, but we can neither go straight upon our
feet, no nor crepe upon our hands if need were.

We are all borne crying, that we may thereby express our Of the pai^e of
child berth and the crying out of the Infan^.
misery, for a male child lately borne, pronounces A. and a woman child
pronounces E: So that they say either E. or A: as many as descend from Eua.
And what is Eua, but Heu, Ha? each of these soundes is the voice of a sorrowful
creature, expressing the greatness of his grefe, and here upon before Eua
sinned, she was called Virago, and after she sinned she deserved to be called
Eua, when she hard said unto her, Thou shall bring forth in sorrow and pain,
for there is Genesis (...).
no pain to be compared to that which a woman abides in her labor. Whereupon
Rachel with over great grefe of Cen. 35
laboring, dyed, and at her death she called the name of her son Benony,
which betokens the son of sorrow or pain. The wife of Phinees: faling
suddenly in labor, brought 1. Reg. 4.
forth a child, and dyed withal, and even at the instant of death, she called
her son Icabod. But a woman (lick unto one Joan. 16.
that has escaped shipwreck) is sorrowful and sad, whiles she laboreth, but
when she has brought forth a child, then remembereth she not her pains, for
joy because a man child is borne into the world. Then she conceiueth with
filth and uncleanness, she brings forth and is delivered with pain and
heaviness, brings it up and nowresheth it with toil and carfulness, and
keeps and preserves it with dread and fearfulness.

Man comes forth naked, and shall return naked, he Of the naked nesse of
man. Job. 1.
comes poor, and he goes poor. Naked (says Job) I came out of my mothers
womb, and naked shall I return thither, we brought nothing into this world,
and doubtless^ we can carry away nothing. But if any man depart out of 1. Tim.
6.
this world clothed, let him mark well what kind of clothing he brings,
filthy to be spoken, more filthy to be heard, and most filthy to be seen.

O vile unworthiness of man's estate and condition, and O What fruits a man
brings forth.
unworthy estate of man's vileness. Search the trees and the herbs of the
Earth, they bring forth boughs, leaves, flowers, and fruits. A man brings
forth nitts, lyse and worms. They distill and power out, Oil, Wine, and
Balmes, and a man makes excrements of spettle, piss, and ordure. They smell
and breathe all sweetness of smell and pleasantness, whereas man belcheth,
breaks wind and stincketh, for such as the tree is, such fruits it brings
forth, and an evil tree can not bring out good fruit. Then what is man
(according to his shape and proporcion) but a tree turned topsie turuey? whose
roots are his hears, the stub of the root is his head and his neck, the body
of the tree, is his breast, belly, and bulk, the boughs are his arms and
legs, and the little branches and leaves, are his fingers and toes. This is
the leaf which is tossed with the wind, and the stuble which is dried up with
the Sun.

In the first age of Man, it is read, that he lived nine Of the discomodities
of age, and the shortness of life.
hundredth years and more, but when man's life began by little and little to
declyne, then our Lord GOD said to Noe: My Spirit shall not remain with man
for ever, because he is flesh, and his days shall be one hundredth Sapi. 9.
and twenty years, the which may be understood as well Eccle. 1.
by the term of man's life, as by the space to repent him, for from that time
forthwardes few are read of which lived any longer. But when man's life was
daily more and more P^alm. 89.
shortened, then was it said by the Psalmest, The days of his time are
seauentie years, or if it be a strong body^, four skore years, and then
their pain and sorrow increases. For shall not the small number of my days
be finished in small time? Our days do pass away more swiftly then the web,
is cut from the weyuers hand.

A man borne of a woman, lyuinge short time, replenished Job. 10.
with many miseries, comes forth like a flower, and is plucked up, and flies
away like a shadow, and never contineweth in one estate. For now a days, men
do live forty years, and very few do reach sixty years. But if man do
attain unto age, immediately his heart is afflicted, his head is troubled, his
spirits languishe, his breath stincketh, his face is wrinckled, his body is
bowed, his eyes are daseled, his feelinge faylleth, and his quickenesse
quayleth, his teeth become rotten, and his ears are closed up.

An old man is soon provoked, but hardly revoked, beleauing quickly, and
mistrustinge laysurely: co^etous, and greedy, heavy, and needy. Swyft to
speak, and s^owe to hear, praising things of antiquity, and dispysinge what
is used presently, blaminge the time present, and allowing the time past, he
sigheth and is vexed, he waxes weak and is aston^ed, as Horace says. Multa
senem circum (...) in comod^. To conclude, neither let old men glory against
young men, nor yet let young men wax insolent and disdain old men, for they
have been as we are, and we shall one day be as they now are.

The Bird is created to fly a lofte, and Man is borne Of the pains and
labors of men.
to be weryed with toil and labor. All his days are full of labors and
pains, neither can his mind be quiet in the scilent night, and what is this
but vanity, there is no man without labor under the Sun, nor without
defectes and imperfections under the Moon, nor without vanity under time.
Time is the delay of things subject unto change, the vanity of vanities (as
the Preacher says) and all is vanity. O how variable are men's studies, and
how diverse be their exercises, and yet they have all o^e end, and one self
same effect, even labor, pain, and vexacion of the mind. There is much
business created for all men, and a great yoke is laid upon the sons of
Adam, from the day that they come forth of their mothers womb, until the day
of their Sepulture, in the earth, which is mother to all living creatures. Let
wise men search narrowly, Of the study of wise men.
let them heedely consider the height of the heavens, the breadth of the
earth, and the depth of the Sea, let them argue and dispute every one of this,
let them handle them all over, and let them always either learn or teach, and
in so doing what shall they find out of this busy toil of our life, but
traueyle and pain? that knew he by experience, which said: I inclyned my
heart to know lear^nge, and prud^ce, error, and folishnesse, and I perceived
that all was labor and affliction of the spyrite. For as much as in great
wisdom and knowledge there is great disdain, and be which increases
knowledge increases also pain and travail, for although whilst that he
sercheth it out, he must sweat many times, and watch many nights with sweat
and labor, yet is there scarcely any thing so vile, or any thing so easy, that
man can fully and thoroughly understand it, nor that he can clearly comprehend
it, unless perchance that is perfectly known, that nothing is perfectly
known. Although even thereby also does rise an indissoluble argument. But
surely the body that is corrupted does aggreuate and ouercharge the Soul and
mind, and this earthly habitacion does oppress a thought that pondereth many
things. Harken what Salomons opinion was upon that point. All things (says
he) are ^ard and difficult. No man can express them by words. Some man does
neither give rest unto his eyes by day nor by night, and yet can he neither
find the caus^ nor the reason of Gods works, yea the more he laboreth to
seek it, so much the less shall he find it, therefore they fail in the
searching, how narrowly so ever they search, because man may wax proud, but
God shall be exalted. For be which searches the Majesty of God, shall be
oppressed with his glory, and the more he understands, yt more he doubts,
yea, and he seems to know most, which in deed know eth least. Therefore it
is one part of knowledge and wisdom to know that he is ignorant, sithence God
first made man, and he has wrapped him self in sundry and infinite questions.

Men roue and roame about, by high ways, and by paths, Of the sundry studies
of m^.
they clyme the hills, and pass over the mountains, they fly over the
rocks, and cowrce over the Alps, go thorough caves, and enter into dreadful
dens. They rifle up the bowels of the earth, and the bottom of the sea. They
mark the tides of the floodes, and wander in the woods and wilderness. They
put their bodies to the wyndes and tempests, thunders, lightenings, raynes,
waters, waves, seas, fluds, and whirlpooles. They melt and sta^pe mettalls,
they grave and pol lish stones, cut and carue woods, weaue and warpe webbs,
make and wear garments, buyld houses, plant orchardes, till feildes, dress
viniards, heat fornaces, and set milles on work. They hunt, they fyshe, and
they foul. They thinck, and m^se, they council and ordain, they strive and
complain, they take away and steal, they buy and beguyle, they frown and
smyle. With innumerable other such things, to heap up riches, and multiply
gaynes. To get estimacion, to extol their dignity, and to enlarge their
authority: and behold all these are but labor and vexacion of the mind. If
you believe not me, yet believe Solomon. I have (said Eccle. 2.
he) magnified my works, I have builded houses, planted viniardes, made
gardeyns and orchardes, replenished them with all manner of fruits and trees,
I made sumptuous fishepondes, from whence I might water the beds of my sweet
blossoms, I kept servants and handmaydes, and had a great household, with
great heardes of cattle, and flocks of sheep, above all others that had been
before me in Jerusalem, I heaped up gold and silver, and the substaunces of
kingdoms and provinces. I had singing men and musitio^nes, and the delights
of the sons of men, I had great pottes and pichers to power out wine
abundantly at the table, and I exceeded all man in wealth which had been before
in Jerusalem. And when I turned unto all that my hands had made, and unto the
labors and pains where in I had toyled and sweat in vain, I saw in all
things vanity and vexsation of the mind, and ye nothing was permane^t under
ye Sun.

What and how many are the cares which torment men, ye thoughts which afflict
the^, the greefes which molest Of s^ndrie gree^es.
them, ye dreads which afflight them, the tremblinge which tosseth them, the
horror which amaseth them, the sorrow Iobe. 19.
which consumes them, the heaviness which ouerchargeth the^, and the troubles
which vex them? poor and rich, master and servant, wedded man and bachelor,
(to conclude) good and badd, all of them are disquieted with worldly
tribulations, and troubled with worldly disquietnesse. Believe him that has had
experyence. For if I be (says he) wicked, then of right may I say: woe be
unto me, yea though I be just, yet will I not hold up my head, being
continually toyled with affliction and misery.

The poor are pressed with penury, tormented with The misery of the poor and
rich man.
trouble, thyrst, honger, cold, and nakedness. They seem vile, they are
despised they crowch, and are overthrown. (O miserable estate of the beggar.)
If they crave, they are confounded with shame, but if the crave not, they are
consumed with need. And are compelled by necessity to beg. The worst sort
of them accuse God as unequal, because he has not rightly divided the wealth
of the world, they blame their neighbor as unequal also, because he does not
minister unto them lardgly, they disdayn, murmur and curse. Compare and mark
the sentence of ye wise man upon this. It were better (says he) to die then to
need. Yea the poor shall be also odious unto his neighbor. All the days of
the poor are evil, for his own brethren hate him. Furthermore his friends
went far from him. As is said Cum fueris felix, multos numerabis amicos
Tempora si fuerint nubila solus eris.
Fie for shame, the person is esteemed according to his fortune, whereas
fortune should rather be esteemed according to the person. A man is reputed as
good as he is rich, and as evil as he is poor. Whereas he rather ought to be
reputed, as rich as he is good, and as poor as he is wicked. But the rich
man becomes dissolute by superfluity, and is unbridled through boast and
vain glory. He runs unto all that is delightful, and falls into all
that is unlawful, yea those things that were the attonements of faults, are
become instruments of more punishment and correction. Since labor in getting,
fear in possessing, and grief in losing thereof do always afflict and werie
the mind of man, For where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also, but hereof
Mat. 6.
we will entreat and speak more at lardge hereafter. The servant wayteth, is
wearied with charge and office, is afflicted with stripes, and despoyled of his
riches. For if he have nothing he is compelled to have, and if he have any
thing he is then constrained not to have. The masters fault is the servant
pay, but the servants fault is the masters pay. Quicquid delira^t Rege^,
plectuntur Achiui.
The wild Ass is feign to be the Lions chase in the d^rt. So the poor are the
pastures of the rich men. O extreme bondage, nature made us free, but fortune
appoynteth ser^tude, the servant is constrained to suffer and no man is
suffered to have compassion, he is compelled unto lamentation, and no man is
suffered to take any (...) on him. So that neither is he his own, neither has
any other pertayninge unto him. They are in a (...) case which follow cowrts,
for it is miserable to live upon an other man's pray and spoil. If the Lord or
master be crewill he must he feared. For the wickedness of his subjects and
vassalls. If he be meek, it happens often that he is contempned through the
insolence and pride of his (...). So that dread afflicts him that is severe,
and vyle^sse sets light by him that is meek and gentle, for cruelty
breadeth hatred, and famyliaritie breeds contempt, famyliar care wearyeth,
and domestycall carfulness molesteth. For a man must always be ready armed
on all sides, that he may foresee the sub^ilties of the malicious, propulse
injuries, terrefye enemies, and defend his subjects. Neither is the malice of
one day sufficient for the same, but day unto day vtterith pain and labor,
and one night shows and teaches carfulness to another, so that the days
of man are called laboursome, and the nights are spent without sleep or quiet.

If it be possible that fire might be kept from burning, Of the misery of
married and unmarried folks
then may flesh also be kept from co^cupisence, for how much soever it be
punished, yet can that Iebuseus be never expelled. Natural expellas furca,
licet vsque recurret.
I will not (says he) that all men understand this word, Mat. 19.
but he which can understand it, let him understand it. Whereupon Exodus 28.
when God him self had commanded that Moses and Aron should cloth them
selves, with all the rest of the apparel perteyning to the high Priests
only, he gave no commandment of the women's garments, but said, that they
(them selves) should use the woomens garments, when they went into the
Tabernacle of witness. The Apostle says also: Deceue not one an other,
unless it be by consent (...). Cor. 7.
for a time, that you have leisure to pray, and then again return unto the
same, least Satan tempt you for your incontinence. For it is better to marry
then to burn. So that the Angels of Satan do fight against continence,
which carnally prycketh and provoke, kyndling the fire of nature, with the
blastes of suggestion, putt fuel thereunto, give leave, and minister
opportunity. Yea the Angel of Satan does fight by help of bewty, which
suddenly se^e is easily desired. Whereupon when David walked in the (...). Reg.
12.
Tarrase of the Kings palace after noone, and beheld Bersabee washing her
over against him, he sent for her, and had her, and lay with her, for she was
an exceeding fair woman. Likewise, he which has a wife, is careful for
worldly riches, 1. Cor. 7.
and is troubled. For he is vexed and tossed, by many cares, and is divided and
torn in pieces with sundry doubts, that he may get and administer things
necessary for his wife, his children, his servants, and his handmaydes: So
that the tribulacious of the flesh have such thoughts. The wife does strive to
have precious Jewels, and change of apparel, so that her ornaments are often
times more worth then her husbands substance. For otherwise by night and day
she will morn, sighe, tattle, and murmr. There are three things that suffer
not a man to abide in his own house. Smooke, Rain, and an evil wife. She:
says she (meaning by some of her neighbors wives) goes better apparreled, and
is better esteemed of all men. But I am most miserable in all places where I
come, and therefore am despised and contempned of all men. She will only be
loved and lawded. Affirming the love of an other to be the hatred of her: And
the praise of another, she suspecteth to be her disprayse. You must love all
that she loves, and hate all that she hatethe. She will have the upper hand
and overcome, but she cannot abide to be ouercomen. She will not be maystred,
but she aspyreth to master. She would have power to do all things and would
want nothing.

If she be fair, she will easily be loved. If she be foul, then is she not
easily liked. But it is hardly kept which of many is desired. And it is grievous
to possess that which no man will vouchsafe to have. One soliciteth the fair
with liberal gifts and rewards, an other wooeth her by bravery. Another by
wit and policy, a another with merry conceyts, and one way or other she is
caught, which is so on all sides beseadged. An Ass, an Horse, a^ bed, a
garment, a cup and a glass, are prouid first and then bought. But the wife
is scarcely seen so soon, but that she does some ways offend before she be
married. And yet howsoever it happen, they must be had. Whether she be foul,
filthy, sick, folish, proud, wilful, or what fault soever she have, (but
only for fornication) a wiefe may not be put away from her husband. Yea
though he do put her away, he can not marry another. Mat. 5.
Neither she being put away, may be married to any other. (...). Cor. 7.
For whosoever do put away his wief, but only for fornication, he makes her
become an adultresse, and he which marries her lives in adultry. Wherefore
if a wiefe depart from her husband, she ought to remain unmarried. Or else to
be reconsiled to her husband. In like manner, the husband if he depart from his
wiefe. So that the burden of marrying is over weighty, for as Solomon says.
He is a Pro. 8.
fool and a wicked man which holds an adultresse. And he is the patron of
uncleanness which covers the co^ereth of his wiefe. But if he put away his
wiefe without cause he is punyshed, because he is compelled (whiles she lives)
to live sole and contynent. Whereupon the dissiples of Christ did say. If such
be the cause between man and wiefe, it is Mat. 19.
not conuenyent to marry. Who could ever abide a companion in his cowch. For
only suspicion does (...) afflict a gellious man. For though it be written:
they shall be two in one flesh. Yet the gellowsy of the husband su^ereth not ^en.
2.
patiently any other in his flesh.

Let not the wicked rejoice (says the Lord) for by what Of the misery both of
good and bad.
soever he sins, by the same he is tormented. For the worm of conscience
shall never dye, and the fire of reason shall never be put out. I have seen
those which work iniquities, and sow sorrows and mow them again, (by the
breath of God) have peryshed, and with the spirit of his wrath they have been
consumed. Pride puffs up, Envy fretteth, covetousness prycketh, wrath
kyndleth, ye throat vexes, lechery and ryott dissolueth, lyinge shameth, and
murder defiles and defameth, even so the rest of the tokens of vices, and
such as are helpers and prompters of men unto sin, are instruments of
correccion and punishment unto god. Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis
Inuidia Siculi non inuenere Tiranni
Tormentum maius.


Uice does also corrupt nature as the appostle witnesses. Which says, they
vanished in their thoughts and their folishe heart was darkened. Wherefore God
gave them over to the desiers of their hearts, and unto uncleanness, that they
might defile their own bodies with reproaches, and they Timo. 3.
thought scorn to have god in their knowledge. So god has delivered them into
a reprobate sense, to do those things Heb. 11.
which are not conuenyent. But they which would live godly in Christ Jesus, do
suffer persecution. For the blessed did try by experience, both strypes and
scornful words, yea, Cor. 11.
fetters and imprisonment. Were stoned, poursewed, t^mpted and dyed upon the
edge of the sword for the lord. They went about in sheep felles, in goats
skynnes, needy, afflicted, and miserable. For whom the world was not yet
worthy. Straying in solitary places, in mountains, and in dens, and in
caves of the carth, in danger of floods, in danger of thieves, in danger of
the Jews, in (...) of the Gentylles, and in danger of faulse brethren. In
labor and calamity, in much watching, in hunger and thirst, in many
necessities, and in cold, and nakedness. For the (...) does deny himself, and
(...) his members, together with all (...). (...).
vices and co^pisences, that the world may be (...) (...). (...).
unto him. And he to the world. He has here no place of H^b. (...).
aboade, but seeks diligently for the heavenly habitation to come. He
susteyneth the world as an exile, being (...) up in his body, as in a prison,
saying: I am an inhabitour Psalm. 118.
and a stranger in the earth, as all my forefathers have been. Forgive me that
I may be cooled before I depart Psalm. 98.
and I will abide no longer. Alas yt my dwelling place is prolonged. I have
ever dwelled with the inahbitants of cedar and my Psalm. 119.
soul has remained with them. Who is weakened and I am not weak? Who is
weakened, and I am not vexed. (...). Cor. (...).
For the sins of the neighbors are the refreshinges of the (...). 13.
just. This is that watering place which Caleph gave unto his daughter Axa in
dowry.

The life of man upon earth, is a warfare. Yea is it not (...) Of the enemies
to man. Job. 7.
right warfare, when manyfold enemies do on every side assail it? that they
may take man and persecute him, and kill him? the devil and man, the world and
the flesh. The devil with vices and concupisences, man with beasts, the world
with Elements, and the flesh with the senses. For the flesh does covet against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. But we must not wrestle against
flesh and blood, Gal^. 4.
but against the lively breathinges of wickedness in heavenly Ephe. 5.
(...). Pet. 5.
things, and against the captains of these darcknesses. Hier. 9.
Gene. 3.
For your adversary the devil, goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may deuow^r. The fyry Sapi. 5.
darts of the most wicked, are kindled, Death comes in Luc. 21.
by the wyndowes, the eye does rob the Soul, the whole world does fight
against the senses, (that is) nation against Genesis (...).
nation, kingedome against kingdom, great Earthquakes in many places,
pestilences, and hongers, tempests, and terrors from heaven. The Earth
brings forth thorns and thissells, the water, flooddes and raging tempests,
the Air, thunder and great wyndes, the Fire, lightninges and flash^nges.
Saying, cursed be the Earth in thy works, it shall bring forth thorns and
thissells unto thee. With the sweat of thy brows, thou shall eat thy bread,
until thou return to the Earth. For Earth thou art, and to the Earth thou
shall go. The Bore out of the wood does lie in weight, and the best fruits
are destroyed. The Woulfe (...). 76.
(...). (...).
and the Bear, the Leopard and the Lion, the Tiger and the wild Ass, the
Crocodyle and the Gryffen, the Serpent and the Snake, the Adder and the
Bass^liske, the Dragon and the Ceracte, the Scorpion, the Uyper, yea, Nittes,
Genesis (...).
Lyse, Fleas and Ants, Flies and Gnats, Waspes and Hornets, Fyshe and Fowls.
For whereas we are created to bear rule over ye Fyshes of the Sea, and the
fowls of the Air, and all living creatures, which move upon the Earth. Now we
are given as a pray for them, and are made food for their mouths. For it is
written, I will Deuteronomy. (...).
send the teeth of wild beasts against them, with the fury of Serpents, and
things which glyde upon the Earth.

Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me out of Of the prison of the Sowl^.
the body of this death? Surely man would be brought out of prison, and would
depart out of his body. For the body Romans 7.
is the prison of the Soul. Whereupon the Psalmist says. Psalm. 114.
Bring my soul out of prison. No rest nor quietness, no peace nor security,
at any time. On all sides fear and trembling, and on all sides labor and
pain. Flesh shall be sorrowful, even whylest it lives, and the soul shall
morn and lament over it self.

Who had ever yet a whole day pleasant in his delight, Of the shortness of
mirth and joy.
who in some part thereof the guiltiness of consience, the fear of anger and
fierceness, or the motion of concupisence has not troubled? whom the
swelling of envy, the earnest desyer of covetousness, or the puffing up of
pride has not vexed? Whom some loss or offense, or passion, has not
disquieted? and to conclude, whom neither sight, nor hearing, or some thing
that touched, did not offend. Rara auis in terris, (...) simillima Signo.
Harken hereupon, unto the saying of the wise man: Between Eccle. 18.
morning (says he) and night, the time shall be changed. Uayne thoughts and
cogitacions do one succeed another, and the mind is wrapped into sundry
conceytes. They houlde the Tymbrell and Lute in their hands, and they Job. 21.
rejoice at the sound of the Organnes, they lead their life in iollytie, and
at the twincke of an eye, they go down into hell. Always some sodeyne
sorrows do succeed and f^low after worldly joy: And he which begins in
joy, ends in grief. For the worldly felicity is mingled with many sorrows
and sharp mishappes, as he well knew^ which said. They laughter shall be
mingled with sorrow, and Job. 1.
lame^tacio^ comes in thend of rejoicing. This did the sonns and children of
Iobe well try, who whiles they did eat and dra^k Pro. 14.
wine in the house of their eldest brother, suddenly a vehement wind brake in
from the desert country, and struck the four corners of the house, which fell
down and oppressed the^ all. Whereby their father said, not without just
cause: My harp is turned into lamentacion, and mine organe pyp^ Job. 30.
into the voice of weepers and mourners. But it is better to Eccle. 7.
go unto the house of weping and lamentacion, then to ye houses of banqueting.
Give ear and mark a wholesome admonicio^. In ye day of rejoicing and good
fortune, be not vnmidfull Eccle. 1.
Ibidem. 2.
of mishaps. Rem^ber ye latter days and thou shall never sin.

Always the last day is the first, and yet the first day is Of the
neighborhood of death.
never reputed for the last, and yet we should so live, as though we were ever
ready to dye. For it is written. Be myndeful Eccle. 14.
and remember, that death will not long tarry from thee, time passes away, and
death approaches. A thousand years before ye eyes of him ye dies, are as
yesterday, which passed away. For all things to come do grow and renew, and
always things present do dye and fade. And whatsoever is past is altogether
dead. Then we dye always, as long as we live, and then (at length) we leave
dying, when we leave to live any longer. Therefore it is better to dye unto
life, then to live unto death. Whereupon Solomon said. I Eccle. 4.
have more praised the dead then the living, and have accounted him more then
both; which was never borne. Life flies swiftly away, and cannot be held
back, and death follows instantly, and will not be stopped. This is then that
wonderful thing: that the more it grows, the more it decreaseth, and the
further that life proceeds, so much the nearer it draws unto an end.

The time which is granted and lent, for quiet and rest, Of the terror of
dreams.
is not suffered to be quiet. For dreams (...) us, and visions do vex and
trouble us. And though they be not in deed sorrowful or terrible, or
laboursome, which dreamers do dream, yet are they in deed, made sorrowful,
affrighted, and w^ried thereby. In so much, yt some times men weep in their
sleep and dreams, yea, and being awaked, are yet exceedi^gly vexed. Mark what
Elephas Thematices says, upon this point: In the horrible dread of a vision by
night, (says he) fear and tre^bling came upon me, and al my bones quaked for
dread, and when ye spyrit passed over in my presence, the here of my flesh
stood right up for fear. Consider upon ye words of Iobe, which says If I say
that my bed shall yield me quiet and comfort, and that I shall be releued whilst
I talk with my self in my couch, the^ will thou terrify me in dreams, and wilt
strik me with horror in visions. Nabuchodonosor saw a dream or vision, which
troubled Da^. (...).
and terrefied him maruelously. And the vision of his head did amaze and vex
him. Many cares do follow dreams, and where many dreams be, there are also many
vanities. Dreams have caused many men to do amiss, and they have been
overthrown whilst they trusted in the^. For often times filthy Images do
appear in dreams, by the which, not only the flesh is polluted by nightly
illusio^s, but also the sowl is there with blotted and defiled. Whereupon our
Lord God speaks in the Leuiticall laws, saying: If there be amongst Leuit.
15.
you any man which is polluted in his nightly sleep, let him go forth of the
tents, and let him not return until he be washed with water in the evening. And
after the Sun set, let him return into the tents.

With how great sorrow are we troubled, and with how Of compassi^
great trembling are we stricken when we feel or understand the losses or
damages of any our friends, or dread the perils of our kinsfolk and par^ts?
many times a whole man is more troubled with fear then a sick man is with his
infirmity. Some one man is of a voluntary will more afflicted with the affliction
of sorrow, the^ some ^ther unwilling is through ye force and effect of the
la^gnishing pain: that saying of ye poet is true. Res est soliciti, plena
timoris Amor.
Whose breast is so brazen, or whose heart so stony hard, bat he will sigh and
groan, and shed trickling tears, when he beholds the death or grievous hurt
or sickness of his neighbor or friend? who can refrain from having
compassion on the passionate, or from lamentinge with him that lamenteh? Jesus
him self when he saw Mary and the Jews that came with her unto the Sepulcher
weping, became vexed in his spirit, and troubled with in his mind, and wept.
Percase not because he was dead, but rather, because (being dead) they revoked
him to behold the miseries of liefe. But let him acknowledge himself
blamefully hard hearted, and hardhartedly to be blamed which bewayleth the
corporal death of his friend and never lamenteth for ye spiritual death of
his soul.

Mishapes fall suddenly when they are least suspected or Of sodeyne mishappes.
looked for. Suddenly calamytie rusheth in at doors, sickness inuadeth a man,
and death steps in, whom no man can eskape. Therefore boast not of to
morrow, since thou know Pro. 27.
not to what thend of the present day may bring thee to. A man knows not his
end, but even as fishes are caught Eccle. 3.
with the hook and birds with snares and gynnes, so are men caught and
snatched up in the evil time. When they are come to that whereof they might
long before have bewared.

The Industry of the Phisicons coold never yet since ye Of the innumerable
kinds of diseases.
beginning of the world, search out so many kinds of diseases, nor so many
sundry sorts of passions, as the frailty of man could sustain and endure.
Shall I term it a tolerable intollerablenesse, or an intolerable tolleracion?
or shall better put them both togethers? For I must call it intolerable, having
regard to the bitterness of diseas. And tolerable I must term it, since it
is of necessity to be suffered. So from day to day, more and more, the nature
of man is corrupted and made weaker. In such sort, as many medecyens which in
times paste were wholesome, are now (throw the desceyt of man's nature) deadly
and dangerous to b^ received. For both these kinds of worlds do now wax
^ld. That is to say. Macrocosmus, and Microcosmus, which is to say, the greater
world, and the lesser world. And the longer that life does linger in either of
them, so much the worse is nature in each of them, troubled and vexed.

What should I say of the wretched offenders, which are Of sundry kinds of
torments.
punished with innumerable kinds of torments? They are beaten to death with
malles, they are thrust through with swords, burned with flames of fire,
overwhelmed with stones, they are twytched in pieces with tongues, and hanged
upon gibbettes, wrung with mannacles, and scourged with whyppes, bound in
cheynes, fastened in snares, thrust down into dark dungeons. Starued with
fastinges, thrown down hedlonges, drowned, flayed, and pulled in pieces,
quartered, and some times smothered. Those which Hier. (...).
are condemned to death, dye, those that are put to the sword must suffer there
with, those which are judged to famishe, must sterue, and those which are put
into captivity must endure it. Crewel judgment, outrageous punishment, and
sorrowful sight to be hold. They are made a pray for the Birds of the Air,
the beasts of the field, and fishes of the sea. Alas, alas, and alas. O
miserable mothers, which brought forth such miserable and unhappy children.
Therefore I have thought good to repete that horrible fact which Josephus does
discribe in the seige of Jerusalem.

A certain woman, being both for blood and wealth honorable, Of a horrible
fact that a woman did to eat her own child.
did patiently bear and abide the misery of the seige, with the rest that were
fled into the city of Jerusalem, and the tyrants did straightwayes invade
the remnaunt of her substance which she brought with her from her house into
the City. Yea, if any thing yet remained of her aboundau^t riches, whereby she
might poorly s^staine her with daily food, the Captains of the sedicious,
rushing in at times, did take it from her by force. Whereupon the wooman by
this outrageous dealing, was driven into a certain disdain, even as it were
into a fury. So that many times she provoked the sedicious spoylers with
reproachful words and curses to have killed her. But when as no man either of
pity or of furious fierceness would dispatch her, and yet as fast as she
sought, for any thing to comfort her, there came others which sought as fast
to take it from her, and her plenty began now to fail her. Honger which
stooke in her bowels, and the marrowe of her bones (being driven into fury,
by pinching of need and famyne) did drive most wicked council into her mind,
and armed her against the very enstinct of nature. For she had a young child
sucking at her pappes, whom beholding, she said: O son, thou art the
unhappy child of a more unhappy mother. For in war, famyne, and spoil, of
wicked robbers and thieves, for whom shall I reserve thee: since although thou
might hope for life, yet should thou be yoked in the bondage of the
Romans. Wherefore come: O my child, and become food for thy mother, fury
and rage for these spoylers and tyrants, and an history unto the posterity, of
such cruelty, as else only should have lacked in the overthrow of the Jews.
This said, she killed her child immediately, and laid it to the fire, and
roasted it, whereof she eat part, and part she reserved. But behold, straight
ways the sedicious spoilers rushed in, having smelt the smooke of the roasted
meat, and threatened her with death, unless she would bring forth the meat
which they smelt, and she said, I have reserved even the best part for you,
fetching out the rest of the childs members which she had set up in store. But
immediately, an horrible dread invaded them, to behold it, and their tongues
stooke fast in their mouths (as it were) with the soodaine consideracion of
her hard heart. Then she with a terrible countenance, becoming more terryble
and fierce then the spoylers erst were, said unto them: This is my son, my
burden, and my deed, eat you now of it, for I have first eat of him, which I
bare in my body. Be neither more pitiful then a mother, nor more tender hearted
then a woman. But if pity overcome you, and you detest the meat which I have
prepared for you, and which I have tasted before you, behold I will eat
thereof again in your presence. Herewith they being abashed and trembling,
departed, and left unto the miserable mother, this only dishe, of all that she
had left in Jerusalem.

Let no man trust or put confidence, that he is free from How some times the
innocent is punished and the gyltie is absol ued.
any punishment or pain, He that standith let him beware that he fall not. For
often times the innocent is condempued, and the nocent is absolved, the godly
is punished, and the ungodly is honored. Jesus was crucified, and Barrabas Romans
11.
was let loose. At these days a man of quiet is holden for an unprofitable
man, a religious man for an hipocrite, and a simple man for a fool. For the
simplicity of the just man is mocked and laughed to skorne, as a dym shining
lamp, in the opinion of the rich men.

THere are three things which do pryncipally, Of the blame full and culpable
procedings of lma^s conversation.
affect me^nes minds. Riches, delights, and honowres. Of riches lewdness,
of delights filthynesse, and of honor vainenesse, does proceed. And hereupon
ye apostle John says: Love neither the world nor those 1. John. 2.
things that are in it. For whatsoever is in the world, is the concupisence of
the flesh, and the concupisence of such things as we behold with our eyes,
and the pride of this life. The concupisence of the flesh pertayneth to
voluptuous desiers. Concupisence of that we see pertayneth unto the riches of
the world. And the pride of this life pertayneth unto honors. Riches
engender and breed covetousness and gready desire, together with aniggardly,
mind. Uoluptuous desires breed glottonie and lechery, and honors breed
pride.

Then is there nothing more wicked then a covetous Of covetousness.
man, nor any thing more unjust and mischeuous then to love money. These be the
words of the wise man, which the appostle confirms saying: What would these
rich men 1. Tim. 6.
bring to pass? they fall into temptation and into the snares of the Devil,
and into many desires which are both unprofitable and harmefull: The which do
ploonge and drown a man in hell, destruction, and perdition. For covetousness
is the root of all evils, it commytteth theftes, and sacrileges, it
exercises spoylinge and taking of prays, it makes wars and commits
murders, and manslaughters, it lies and sells with simony, it craves and
receives unjustly: it deuyseth crafts and uses subtilties, it fails
covenant and breaks oaths, corrupts witnesses, and peruerteth the Judge in
his Judgments. Of unjust rewards.


Look in that ^uangelical Prophet Esaias, where he says: All men love rewards,
and follow brybes. They give no sentence Esai. 1.
^or the Orphane, and the widows cause comes not Es^y. 1.
before them. They go not before their bribes, for they judge not for the love
of Justice and righteousenesse, but their bribes and rewards go before them,
because they i^dge for love of money. For always they follow promyses, hope and
lyberaltie. And therefore they give no sentence for the pupyll or Orphan, at
whose hands they hope neither for promise nor rewards. O unfaithful Princes,
and thieves fellows, whosoever you be, that love rewards, and follow brybes.
You shall never shake a brybe out of your hand, unless you shutt covetousness
out of your breast. It is of you, ^ze. 2^.
that the Prophet says: The Princes of that people are like unto woolues,
which greedely take their pray, and couetousely follow gaynes. Their Princes
did give judgment for rewards, and their Priests did teach for lucre, and
their Prophets did deuyue for money. Behold, our Lord god by Moses, did
command in the law, saying. Thou shall constitute and appoint Judges, and
masters in all thy gates, Deuteronomy. 16,
that they may rightfully judge the people, and neither declyne to the one
hand, nor to the other. Thou shall have no r^spect unto ye person, nor his
rewards. For rewards blind the eyes of the wise, and charge the words of the
just. But thou shall justly poursew that which is just, and thou shall live.
He terms here two things. Just: and justly. For some me^ po^rsew, things
which are just, justly: and some others poursew things which are unjust,
unjustly: again some pursew just things unjustly, and some pursew unjust things
justly

Woe be unto you, which be corrupted with rewards, Of the acceptance of
persons.
or fair words, and carried away either we love or hatred. Do pronounce good
for evil, and evil for good. Making light darkness and darkness light.
Killing and mortif^ing sowles which Esai. 1^.
dye not, and reviving souls which live not, for you never reg^rde the
worthynesse of the ^use, but the worthynesse of the person. Not the life but
the rewards, not justice, but ^ony. Not yt which reason persuades, but yt
whereunto will ^s affectionat. Not yt which ye law does determine, but yt which
your mind does desire. You do not inclyne your minds to righteousness, but
you bend righteousness according to your minds. Not to thend that you should
lust to do whatsoever is lawful, but that it may be lawful to do
whatsoever you lust. You have never so simple an eye in you, that all the body
may thereby shine and be bright. But (...). (...).
you always put to some leaven which marreth all your dowe. You neglect the
cause of the poor man, and the rich man's cause, you follow toeth and nail.
Toward the one, you extend rygor, and toward the other, you use gentill
dispensation. You respect the one with great difficulty, and the other you handle
with great favor. The one you harken unto but slightly, and neglygently, and
the other you bend ear unto willingly. The poor man cries out, and no man
hears him. (...). 13.
The rich man does but whisper, and cuery man harkeneth. Whiles the rich man
spoke all men kept filence, and his words were extolled up to the skies. The
poor man spoke and the people said, who is this? And if he tell them, they
will overthrow him. The patient man (...) out upon wrong and no man hears
him, he cries out alowde with his voice, and there is no man to give sentence.
Yea if at any time you undertake the poor man's cause, you delay them
lyngeringly. But when you have taken in hand the cause of the rich man, then
you further it with all expedicion. You despise ye poor, and honor the rich.
These you rise unto reverently, but those other, you sporne from you with
dyspight. If any man with a goulde^ ringe on his finger, and gallant garments
(...). 3.
do come into your cloisters, and a poor man also come in with a homely
garment, if you look upon him that is well clothed and say sit you here
alofte, and then say unto the poor stand you there or sit down under ye foot
stool of my feet: do you not now judge acording to your own affections? and
beco^e ye judges of wicked thoughts? for of you and against you ye Prophet
says. They are magnified, they are become rich, they are well fatted, Hier.
(...).
and become greasy, they have neither under taken the Orphans cause, nor given
sentence for the poor men. But it is commanded in the law. That there be no
respect Deuteronomy. 1.
of persons, but hear the small, as well as the great. You shall have no
respect to any man's person. For the (...) Acts. 10.
appertains to god. And there is no respect of persons with god.

But you neither give favor favorably and franckly, (...) Of the (...) of
(...).
do justice justly. For unless some what be felt, nothing is dealt. Neither
can you give well unless you sell. (...) you defer justice so long, that you
take more then the whole (...) them, which mayntained the contention. Because
the charge of expenses is gerater, then the worth of the sentence. But what
can you answer in the stryct day of judgment, unto him which commands you
saying. Freely you have taken: and freely give. Gaynes in the Math. 10.
coffer, bring loss and damage in the conscience. (...) catch after money
but you entangle your sowles. And (...) (...). (...).
does it profit a man if he gain all the whole (...), (...) purchase
dampnation for his soul? (...) what (...) shall man make for his soul? The
brother shall not redeem Psalm (...).
the brother, a man shall not appease god for himself, nor give him the price of
his redemption. He has (...) for ever and he shall (...) until the later end.
Give care (...) you (...) men, what the (...) says (...) you. Go to now, ye
ritche men. (...) and howl (...) (...). (...)*
your nuseries which shall happen unto you. Your riches are (...) Your gaye
garments are eaten with mothes. Your gold and (...) is become rust. And the
rust thereof shall be a witness against you, and shall fret and consume your
flesh like fire (...) have horded up unto your self wrath and anger in the
latter day. Behold and harken, the (...) of your workmen which wrought and
tylled your (...), that you planted does cry. And the noise thereof has (...)
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Therefore the truth (...). (...).
commands. Do not lay up for your selves (...) in earth, where rust eats,
and (...). And where Of (...)
thieves dig it up and steal it.

O vnqueachable (...), and insatiable (...). what covetous man was ever yet
contented with his (...) desire? when he obtayneth to that which he desired: he
desires more, he always sets his end in things which he must have. And
not in things which he has already. The eye of a covetous man is insatiable.
And he is not to be satissied (...). (...).
with his iniquities. A covetous niggard shall net be contented (...). 27.
with his money. And he which loves riches shall receive no fruit thereof.
Hell and destruction are never filled. No more are the insatiable eyes of men.
The bloodsucker has two daughters which say, Affer Nam. Bring, for. Crescit
amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia (...).


Will thou (O covetous wretch) know wherefore thou art always empty, and art
never filled? mark then. Thy (...) the covetous man can not be (...).
measure is never full. Which whatsoever it houldeth, yet is it capable of
more. But the humble mind is capable of good. Because he which cleaves fast
unto god, is one spirit with (...). Cor. 6.
god. So yt whatsoever then it houldeth, it is never full, unless it have god,
of whom it is always capable. Then if thou will be satisfied, leave to be
covetous. For as long as thou art covetous, thou can not be satisfied. For
there is no comparison of light unto darkness, nor of Christ unto Beliall.
Since no man can serve both God, and mamon.

O false felicity of riches, which does in deed make (...) the (...) of
riches.
the rich man an unhappy child. For what is more unhappy then the welthe
and abundaunce of this world, which is cauled riches? The ritche and the
poor are opposytes, and contraryes. But yet the welthe of the world does not
take away, but bring the (...). For (...). (...).
more suffiseth: says Solomon, A little unto a poor man, then much
abundance unto a rich man. For whereas much riches are, there are many also
to eat the same. How many and how great are the higher powers, which have
need? So as (by my self) I can often find experyence, that welthe makes not
a man ritche, but needy.

How many has covetousness seduced. And (...) (...). against (...). Number. 22.
10. 7.
many more has this miserable niggardlines over thrown, and cast away. The
Ass, condempneth Balame Because being over come, with the covetousness of
their fair promises, he undertook to curse. The people of Israel did stone
(...). (...).
Acham, because he took gold and silver for the offerings. Naboth 4. Reg. 5.
was slain, that (...) might possess his vyneard. Giezi was stryken with
leprosy because he asked and received silver and gold and garments, under the
name of (...). Judas did hang himself in a halter, because he sold and
betrayed Christ. Ananias and Saphira dyed suddenly because they went about to
beguyle ye Appostles of the price of their field. Tirus did buyld his treasury
and heaped up silver like earth, and gold like unto ye claye of ye streets.
But behold, the Zach. 9.
Lord shall possess it. And shall stryke the strength thereof in the Seas, and
it shall be devoured with fire.

Why should any man go about to heap to gether, when Of the superfluous
carefulnes of the^ which be covetous.
he which does heap together, can not long stand nor continewe: for like unto
a flower he comes forth and is shaken. And flies away like unto a shadow,
never continewinge in one estate. Wherefore should he desyer much Job. 14.
when as little may suffice him? If we have (says the Appostle) 1. Tim. 6.
meat, drynck, and cloth, let us there with be contented, wherefore should man
seek necessary things with great carfulness, when as they proffer
themselves without any great difficulty? harken what the truth says upon this
point: Be not careful, saying what shall we eat, or Math. 6.
what shall we drink? or where with shall we be covered? For your heavenly
father does know that you have need of Luke. 22.
all these things. But first seek you the kingedome of heaven, and then all
things shall be given unto you. For I never saw the just forsaken, nor his
seed begging his bread.

Tantalus is thrirsty in ye myddest of ye water, and the covetous Of (...).
man is needy in ye myddest of his wealth. Unto whom as much avails yt which he
has not, as yt which he has. Since he never takes ye youse of yt which he
has gotten. But still is greedily bent upon ye getting of more. Solomon says:
He is like unto a rich man when he has nothing, and he is like unto Pro. 13.
a poor man when he is over whelmed with much rytches. Both the sick man and
the covetous man eats and disgesteth not. Receives and restores ^ot. A
covetous man does neither take compassion on them that suffer, nor helps nor
pittieth them which are in misery. But offends God. Offends himself, and
offends his neighbor. For from god he withhouldeth that which is due. To his
neighbor he denies that which is necessary. And from himself he conueyeth
that which is most conuenyent. Unthanckfull to god, wicked to his neighbor,
and crewell unto himself. Substance is to no purpose for a covetous and
nigardly man. And to what end serves gold, in the hands of an envious man? he
which is evil unto himself, how shall he be good Eccle. 14.
unto others? and he shall not rejoice in his substance. He (...). John. 5.
which has the wealth of this world, and sees his brother in necessity, and
shuts up his store from him, how does the love and charytie of god dwell
in him? For he loves not his neighbor as himself. But lets him perish
for need and poverty. Neither does he love god above all things. But
prefers gold, and more esteems silver.

The Appostle does well defyne covetousness, saying: Why covetousness is the
servitude of Idolles.
Couetousuesse is the bondage or service of Idols. For as the Idolater does
serve the Immage or Idol: So does the covetous man serve and attend his gold.
For as the Idolatour Ephe. (...).
does diligently amplify the honor and ceremonies of Idolatry, even so does
the covetous man willingly increase the heaps of his money. That one with all
diligence decketh and worshipeth the Idol, and that other with all care and
need, does heap his treasure. That one puts his hope in Idolatry, and
that other puts his hope in his riches. That one is affeard to hurt the
Image or Idol, and that other is affeard to demynishe his treasury.

A covetous man is prompt to crave, slow to give, and Of the properties of a
covetous man
bold to deny. If he spend any thing, he thincks yt he loses all. He is
heavy, co^mplayning and wayward, being careful, he sigheth and is vexed. He is
doubtful when he has most, and he dispatcheth all things with an evil will,
He does ^agnifie and extol that which is already given. ^ut dispyteth and
vylefyeth that which must be given. He gives to gay^e but he gayneth not to
give. He is liberal upon anothermans pursse, and sparing of his own. He
pincheth his belly to fill his coffer, and punysheth his body to pamper his
pursse. His hand serves not to give that which is gathered, Eccle. 4^*
but to receive that which is reached unto him. To conclude, the substance of
the unjust man shall be dried up like unto a puddle. For he which does evil heap
together, will soon disperse it. A i^st judgment of god. That such things
as are evil gotten may be as evil spent. And that such things as preseed not
of goodness, should never clyme unto the name of goodness. So that the
covetous man has the condempnation of this life and of the life to come.

T^ we it is therefore, that the wise man protests s^ying: Of the wicked
possessings of riches.
gold and silver have undone many man. He which loves gold shall not be
justified. Woe be unto them which follow it. For behold the synuers themselves
are abundant in Eccle. 8. 31.
this world, and have obtained rytches. Hereupon the very Psalm. 71.
truth did command the Appostles saying: Possess you Math. 10.
neither gold nor silver nor money in your pursses. For even as a Cammell cannot
enter at the eye of a needle, so is it hard f^r a rytch man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, for the way is narrow, and the gate very straight, which
l^adeth unto life. The Appostle, therefore folowinng the Act. 3.
rule of truth says: I have neither gold, nor silver. Esai. 2. (...).
Woe be unto you then which join house to house and Ibidem. 25.
field to field, until you have altogether, the earth is replenished with
silver and gold. And there is no end of his treasures. For the iniquity of
his covetousness, I am angry and have strooken him.

But Abraham was rich, and Iobe had abundaunce. David Of unlawful wealth.
was also very rich and yet ye scripture says of Abraham, yt he Gen e. 1^.
believed in god and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. Job. (...).
and it is written of Job, that there was not his like in the land. A man
simple, right, fearinge god. And declyninge from evil. Of David it is written,
that god found a man according to his heart. But then these men were as though
they had nothing, and possessed all things. According to the saying of the
Prophet. If riches come upon you, set not your heart thereon. But we are like
unto men that possess all things, and yet have nothing. So says also the
Psalmist: Psalm. 3^.
The rich men did need, and were hungry. For with more ease shall you find a
man which lou^th riches, and has them not, then a man which has riches and
loves them not, for as it is hard to lie in the fire and not to burn, so is
it hard to possess riches and not to love them. Geu^ ear unto the Prophet
Jeremy: who says, that from the least to the greatest, all men apply their
minds unto covetousness. And from a Prophet to a priest, al me^ devise
subtilies.

Every coueto^s man does endeavor and strive, against nature. Of the
vnc^rtayntie of riches.
For nature brought man poor into the world. And nature takes the poor man
out of the world. For as the earth did receue him naked at his birth, so shall
it r^ceue Luke. 22.
him ^aked at his death.

But the covetous man desires and takes care to become rich in this world. I
will pull down my barnes, says he: and make them greater, and therein will I
heap up all mine increase, and all my goods. But it was said unto him. O
fool: this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. And then whose shall
those things be, which thou have prepared: Thou layest up treasure and thou
know not for whom thou Psalm. 38. 39.
gatherest it. For the ritche men have slept their sleep, and Job. 3.
found nothing of their riches remaining in their hands. Psalm. 48.
When the rich man has slept, he shall take up nothing. He shall open his
chests and find nothing in them. Be not a feared when thou see a man made
ritche, nor when the glory of his house is multiplied. For when he dies, he
shall carry none of them with him. Neither shall the glory of his house descend
with him into the pyt, but he shall leave his riches unto strangers, and his
sepulcher shall be his house for ever. Hereupon also the wise man does
witness, saying: He which heapeth up unjustly of that which is not his own,
shall gather for other men, and a stranger shall make hauoke and riot with his
goods. Out and alas, he shall make him his heir whom he held as his enemy.

The beginning of man's life was bread and water, clothing Of gluttony.
and house to cover his filthiness. But now the gluttone Eccle. 14.
Eccle. 1.
is not satisfied with fruits of trees, with the sundry sorts of pulse, the
roots of herbs, the fishes of the Sea, the beasts of the Earth, nor the
birds of the Air. But payntinges must be sought, Spices must be bought, and
deyntie small birds, must be nouryshed, they are taken with baytes of the
fowler, curiously dressed by the skilful Cook, and neately served by the
handsome wayters at the table. One breaks them up, another sawceth them, and
tourneth their substance into accident, and their nature into art. That
f^lnesse may pass over into hungry appetyte, and that over eating may procure
a good stomach. To stir up gluttony, and not to sustain nature. Not to
supply necessity: but to fulfill greediness. And yet is the pleasure of
gluttony so short, as having regard to the space of the place, it is scarce
four fingers in bigness, and measuring it by the space of the time, it is
scarce so many moments long. Mediocrytie is had in contempt. And superfluity
is desyered, both in varyetie of meats, and diversities of tastes.
Greedynesse knows no measure, and variety excedeth all the bounds thereof.

But the mind is ouercharged, and the stomach is troubled. So that the senses
are therein oppressed. Thereupon not health and lustiness, but death and
drowsinesse do proceed. Give ear unto the saying of the wise man, hereupon.
Be not greedy in feeding (says he) when thou come Eccle. 37.
to thy meat, neither hurt thy stomach, with all food that shall be set
before thee. For in many dyshes diseases 2. Cor. 6.
^oo lurcke, and through dronkendesse of wine, many men have been cast away.
The food for the belly, and the belly for the food. But God will destroy
both the one and the other.

Gluttony does raise a great trybute, but it renders a Examples against
Gluttony.
most vile reuenewe. For the more delicate that the meats be, so much the more
styncking are the excrements, and ordure made thereof. He shall do the more
beastly in all things, which does most greedely load and power in. He shall
break unsavory and loathsome wynd, both vpwardes and downwardes, and make an
abominable smell and noise therewith. Gluttony did shut up Paradyse, made
Esawe sell ^en, 3. 23. 40
his birth right, caused the baker to hang himself, procured John Baptist to
be headded. Nabuzardan, prince and Marc. 6.
4. Reg (...).
capteyne of Cooks, did set the Temple on fire, and overthrew Dan. 3.
the holy city. Balthazar whilst he sat at his bancket, Exodus 23.
espied a hand in the wall wrytinge. Mane Thetel Phares, Psalm. 77.
and the same night he was killed of the Caldyes. The people Ieremi. 4.
sat eating and drincking, and rose to play, yea the meat was yet in their
mouths, and the wrath of god came upon them. They which did feed voluptuously
were slain in Luc. 16.
their ways, and the rich man which fared deyntely every day was buried in
hell.

What is more filthy then a drunkard? whose breathe Of drunken nesse.
stincketh, and his body trembles. Promising many things, and bewraying all
things, his mind being altered, and his face transformed. For there is no
secret kept, where (...). 3^.
drunckennesse reigns. Faecundi calices, quem non fecere disertum?


Furthermore, neither ale, bear, nor wine, suffiseth. But bastard, clarret
wine, and sack, are curiously spysed, with much labor great carfulness, and
no small charge. Whereupon proceed contencions, and brawlings, strife and
chydinges. For wine being much drunken (as the wise man. says) does cause much
disdain, anger, and mischefe. From thence spring, fornicacions. Wine and
women over come Eccle. 31.
the heart. Therefore says the Apostle: be not drunken with Ose. 4.
wine, in the which lechery does lurk. And Solomon: (...) (...). (...).
is a lecherus and a ryotous thing. And drunckeunesse is a (...). 30.
tumultuous troublesome thing. The sons of Rachab, Hier. 35.
and Zachary, did drinck neither wine, ale, nor any thing Luc. 8.
that might make them become dronken.

Drunckennesse laid open the privy members. Committed Example against
drunckennesse.
incest, killed the kings daughter, stra^gled the chief of the army. True is
yt which Solomon says. They which Genesis 9. 10.
spend their time in bybbing, and shake hands over their 2. Reg. 13.
cups, shall be consumed. And Esai says. Woe be unto you Judith. 13.
that rise early to become drunken, and to bybbe until it be Pro. 25.
dark night, that you may burn and frye in wine. Which Esaias. 13.
have the Lute, the Harp, the Tymbrel, and the pype, and wine Esa. 22.
in your banquets. Woe be unto you that have mighty power to drinck much wine at
a banquet, and are strong men to mingle all kind of drunkenness together:
Behold, your mirth and joy is to kill calves, stick weathers and rams, and to
eat flesh and to drink wine. Let us eat and drink (say you) for to
morrow we shall dye. And the voice of the Lord of Hosts, was to me revealed,
saying: If this iniquity be forgiven you, dye. Woe be to the crown of pride in
drunckennesse. The Priest and the Prophet in Effraim, were Esa. 28.
ignorant through drunckennesse, and were swallowed up in wine. They knew not
him that sees all, and they were ignorant of his Judgment.

Furthermore a filthy mother begets amore filthy Of Lechery.
daughter, for it is m^ete that such as be in filthiness should Apo. 22.
Osee. 7.
still be filthy. For all men are adulterers, like unto an Duen heated by the
baker. The princes begin to be mad with wine. And their belly delicately fed,
does redely desyer to accomplish the worckes of Uenus. O extreme filthiness
and abhominacion, which does not only effeminate the mind, but also does
weaken the sinews of the body. Does not only blot the soul, but also beray
the person. For all sin that a man commits is without his body, but 1.
Cor. 6.
he which does sin in fornicacio^ does sin against his body. Heat and desyer
do always go before it, stynch and vncle^nnesse do always keep it
company, and sorrow with repentance do evermore follow it. For the lips of
an harlot says, Solomon: are like unto the drops of a honey Pro. 3.
comb, and her throat shines like oil. But the end of her is as bitter as
wormwood, and her tongue is as sharp as a two edged sword.

Lechery is a familiar enemy, which dwells not far Of the gene ralitie of
Lechery.
of, but near to you. Not outwardly, but inwardly. For all the virtue thereof
is in the loins, and the strength thereof Job. 40.
is in the nauel, and secret parts. It is never chased away, but when it is
eschewed, nor it is never killed, but when it is made lean and punished. Unto
the cause thereof, it requires liberty and abundance, but to do the effect
thereof, it must have power always in readiness. This marreth and corrupts
every age, it confounds every sect, it dissolueth and breaks every order,
and it overthrows every degree. For it inuadeth young and old, men and
women, wise and foolish, higher and lower, unto the last generation.

Who is able sufficiently to express the manyfoldsorts Of the sundry sorts of
lechery, and their pains.
hereof? For this is it which overthrew Pentapolis, with all ye Region
adioyninge. If you would have examples of the Sodomytes. It destroyed Sichem,
with the people thereof. If Genesis 10. 34. 38
you seek more rare examples. It struck the sons of saint Number. 25.
Hierom and Ouanus in Judah. If you enquire for them that Iudi. 19. 20.
were unclean, it thrust through the Jews and the Madiamite 1. Reg. 2. 4. 11
with a dagger. If you seek fornicators, it did extinguishe the trybe of
Benjamin, for the wife of the (...). If adulterers, Dan. 13.
it overthrew the sons of Hely in ba^tayle, and killed Amon at his banquet.
If you look for rauishers, church robbers, and committers of incest, then this
killed Vrias. stoned the Priests, cursed Ruben, seduced Sampson, and perverted
Gen 35. 49.
Solomon. Therefore is it true that is read: For the sundry Iud. 16.
sorts thereof, many have perished. For wine and women have caused many wise
men to fall from the faith. 3. Reg. 11.
^and have dulled the best and quickest wits. This vice has Eccle. 9. 1^.
thrown down many men sore wounded, and many strong men have been ^ayne
therewith. The house thereof is (...) Pro. 7.
way of hell, which pearseth into the intrayles of death. This vice does
weaken the sinews, deminish the senses, consume the days, and power out the
substance.

The punishment of this vice has taught, what the fault The punishment of this
vice.
thereof deserves. For the Lord rayned fire and brimstone upon Sodom and
Gomor, from the heavens, and would not Genesis 18.
commit thexecucio^ of this punishment, unto any man or Angel. But reserved
unto himself the revenge of this mys^heuous deed. According to that saying.
Revenge is mine and I will give it. And therefore the Lord God rayned from the
Lord, (even from him self) not shewers nor dew, but fire and brimstone, upon
the fervent heat of lust. That the punishment might be like the offense.
Neither is it said that he sent it, but that he rayned it, that by the
abundant greatness of the word, he might notify the abunda^t greatness of
the punishment. His eye spared no man, but did extinguish them all. Yea, even
the wife of Loath also, because she looked back, he turned her into a pyller of
sault. Neither did he only destroy the towns, but also did convert all the
regions thereabouts, into the dead vale and salt poole. For it is horrible to
light in the hands of the living GOD. Who the greater that he shows the
patience of his long suffering, the harder does he bring in the revenge of
his severity.

Then the covetous man does gather, and the niggarde Of the ambycious man.
heapeth up wealth and riches. The glutton does taste of voluptuous d^syres,
and the lecher dath exercise them. But the Ambitious man does affect honors,
and the proud man does extol him self. The ambitious man is ever fearful,
and ever more heedy and wary, what he should speak or do, which may be
unpleasant in the ears of men, he dissembleth humility, and counterfeyteth
honesty. She weth affa^ilitie, and profereth, follows, and poursueth
benignity. He honoreth all men, and boweth to all men. Frequenteth courts,
visits the chief persons, ryseth and imbraseth, flattereth, and sotheth, well
knows he this lesson of the Poet. Et si nullus erit puluis, tamen excutit
vllum.


He is prompt and earnest where he desierith to please, slow and backward,
where he dreadeth to offend. He reproves evil things, and detesteth wicked
things, proving and reproving, liking and disliking, one thing with another
that he may be judged fit, reputed welcome, praised of men, and allowed
genarally. And behold he mayntayneth a great comebat within him self, and a
hard conflict, whiles iniquity thrusts for ward the mind, and ambition
holds back the hand. That which the one does minister to be done, the other will
not suffer to be brought to pass. Yet the mother and the daughter, (I mean
Iniquity and Ambytion) do play and dally one with an other. For the mother
openly does stand still, and the daughter privily does not resist. That one
challenges unto her self the open show, and that other the secreat. Then the
ambytious manne does principally treat of the pryncipallytie, or office, or
authority which he goes about, and says: O when shall such bear rule as be
severe and upright in justice? godly in mercy? which will neither declyne for
love nor hatred? which will not be corrupted, either with penny, or Pater
noster? which will believe the faithful, and be attentyue unto the humble
besechers? which may be curt^ous and benign, lyberall and meek, constant,
wise, patient and subtyle.

If percase he prosit not by this mean before rehearsed, Of the over great
covetousness of Ambitions men.
the^ has he recourse unto an other. He calls Simon and comes unto Gi^zi.
By the one he goes about to buy of that other that which (by himself) he was
not able to obtey^e. He bes^heth and pro^iseth, he profer^th and gives, (O
shameful thing) even that favor which franckly and freely he could not
obtain. Yet does he not so stay, but lays on load and violently does invade
honor. Yea, he does impudently take dignity upon him, by the boyce of his
friends, and the help of his neighbors. And he is inflamed with such a
fervent heat of domination, and with such an exceeding lust to bear rule,
that he neither abhors schism, nor fears slander. But Biezi is stryken
with leprosy, and Simon perishes with money. Chore and his accomplices were put
into the fire. And Dathan, and Abyron, the ground did swallow up quick. Let no
man then take honor upon him but he which is called of God, as Aron was.

There is a plain example of ambytion repeated in the An example of ambition.
story of Absalon. Which, when he did aspyre unto ye kingdom and made him
charyots and furnished horsemen, and men of war which should go before him.
And rising betimes in ye morning, he stood at the entry of the gate, and all
men which had business to come unto the kings judgment, he called unto him,
and said. Of what city or country art thou? who answered, I am thy servant of
such a trybe in Israel. And Absolon said, thy request seems to me to be
good and just, but here is no man to give ear unto thee being appointed of the
king, and he said more over, who will make and constitute, me Judge over the
land, that all they which have business to do may come unto me, as unto a just
Judge? Yea when any man came unto him and saluted him, he reached him his hand
and embracing him kissed his cheek, and thus he did until all Israel which
came unto judgment to be hard of the king. And he did labor for the hearts of
the men of Israel. And when Absolon was gone into Ebron, he sent spies into
every trybe of Israel, saying, as soon as you shall hear the sound of the
Trampet, say you Absolon reigns in Ebron, and a great conspyracie was made
thereby, and the people coming together did increase greatly with Absolo^.

But put the case that the ambicious man be raised up on Of the short and
miserable life of them which be in authority
high, and be carried up a loft: immediately cares do grow privily, carefulnes
is accumulate, fasting are prolo^ged, watchigs are lengthened, whereby both
nature is corrupted, and the spirits are weakened. The sleeps are broken, ye
appetite is lost, the virtues are weakened, the body wareth lean, and so
failing in his own defect, he lives not half his days. But concludes a
miserable life, with a more miserable end. That saying of the Poet is true:
Great things are forbidden to stand long. They are raised up an high, that
they may fall the more grievously. But that saying of the Prophet is more true.
I saw (says he) the wicked man exalted Psalm. 3^.
and raised up on high, as the boughs of Lybanus. I went by, and be houlde,
there was none that knew him. I sought him, and his place was not to be
found. Before his days be fulfilled, he perishes, let him rejoice as a vine
when it first florisheth. And let his clusters be as the ollyfe, when it
buddeth. Mark the saying of the wise thereupon. All men in authority (says
he) are short lived. Eecle. 10.


As soon as the ambitious man is promoted to honor, Of the sundry properties
of proud men.
he is puffed up with pride, and becomes unbridled in boasting, neither does
he care to profit, but gloryeth to bear rule. He presumes himself to be the
better, because he is grown to be higher. But the virtue and not the degree,
the honesty and not the dignity, does make a good man. Men thus advanced,
do disdain their former friends, over see their known companions, contempn
their accustomed fellows, turn their countenaunces, hold up their heads,
set up their hear, show their pride, speak big, and muse upon deep
matters. They can not abide to be commanded, they seek to rule the roast.
Envious at all other that be preferred. And grenous unto such as are under
their subjection. They bear no grief, defer no conceypt, heady and bold,
glorious and ignorant, heavy and importunate.

O pride, hateful and unable to be bor^ of any man. Emongst Of pride and the
fall of Lucifer.
all vices, thou always art both first and last. For all kind of sin (if
thou come in the way) is committed. And all kind of sin (if thou step a side
out of the way) is omitted As it is written: the beginning of all sin is
pride. Sap. 3.
The first begotten death. For this in the beginning of all Eccle. 10.
things, did raise up the creature against his creator. An ^ngell against God.
But immediately and without delay, it threw him down again. Because he
continewed not in the truth, it threw him down again from innocence, into
sin, from delights, into miseries, and from the bright heaven, into a thick
mystie air. Harken unto the Prophet Esa. 14
saying: How dyddest thou fall Luryfer, which sprongest in the morning? Thou
fell^st down upon the ground, which did wound the nations, and saydest in
thine heart, I will go up into heaven, and will exalt the soll of my foot above
the Stars of God. I will sit in the mount of the testament (...). 2^*
in the sides of the Northwynde, and will clyme upon the height of the Clouds.
I will be like unto the highest. Thou were in the delights of Paradise of God,
and an Image and token of his likeness, full of wisdom and perfect in all
comlines, all kinds of precious stones were in thy besteme^ts. The Topase, the
Iaspis, the Chrystolite, the Onyxe the Berall, the Carbu^cle, the Saphir and
the Emerald. Gold was the workmanship of thy comeliness, and thy holes and
priuities were prepared in the day that thou werte made. Thou were that mighty
and great Cherub, and I put thee in the holy hill of God. Thou walkedst in the
midst of the fyery stones, (as perfect in thy ways) from the day of thy
creation, until iniquity was found in thee. Thou have sinned, and I cast thee
out of the mount of God. Mine heart was raised up in thy comeliness, and I
have cast thee out against the earth. The Cedar trees were no higher the^ he in
Paradise. The Fur trees were not equal unto his tops, and ye Palm trees
were not equal unto his boughs. No wood in Paradise, was like unto him, nor
unto his beauty, because I made him bewtiful, and without many thick boughs.
Job. 24.
He is king above all the sons of pride, he is that great red Apo. 1^.
dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads.
Whose tail drew the third part of the Stars of heaven, and threw them
down upon the earth. And that great dragon is thrown ^oorth, that old S^rpent
which is called the devil and Satana^. W^h (...) the whole world and was
thrown forth upon the earth, and his angels were sent with him. Of whom the
truth says: I saw Satanas as a lyghtenyng falling from heaven. Luk^. 10. 14.
For eueryone that exalts himself shall be humiliate, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

O proud presumption and presumptious pride, which Of the arogau^ce of me^.
would not only be equal unto the angels of god, but also did presume
to make men Gods. But those whom he raised up, he put down, and whom he
exalted, he brought low. Here upon the Lord says unto the Prophet, O son
of man say unto the Prince of Tire: thus says the Lord god. Because thine heart
is raised up as the heart of god and thou have said, I am a god (when thou art
but a man and no God) therefore I will bring the strongest people upon thee and
will kill thee. And Thou shall dye in the overthrow of them that be slain.
Nabuchodonozar, because he did proudely brag on his power and s^yd: is not
this Babylon, which I have ^ylded in the house of my kingdom, and in the
strength of my fortitude, and the glory of my co^lynesse? when the word was yet
in the kings mouth, a voice sell from heaven saying. To thee king Nab^chodonosar
is it Daniell. 4.
said, thy kingedome is gone from thee, and I will cast thee out from men, and
thy dwellinge shall be with cattle and wild beasts. Thou shall eat hay like
an Ox, and seven times shall be changed upon thee, until thou know that the
highest has dominion in the kingedomes of men. And he gives them unto whom
soever it pleases him. At the same instant, the word was fulfilled upon
Nabuchodonosar. Therefore it is true which is said in the Psalm. 48.
Psalm, Man did not understand when he was in honor. He was compared unto
the fond cattle, and was made like unto them. Pride overthrew the Tower, and
confounded the tongues, beat down Golias and hanged Aman, slew Nicanor, and
took away Antiochus. It drowned Pharao, Ge^. 11.
destroyed Senacherib, and cut of Holofernus head. 1. Reg. 7.
GOD has destroyed the seats of the proud Princes ^est 7.
and Captains, and has dried up the roots of the proud 2. Macch. 1^. 9*
people. Iudi. 6.


The Lord himself does witness by the Prophet how Of the abbomynation of
pride.
detestable pride is, saying: I detest the pride of Jacob: and the Lord has
sworn against the pride of Jacob. If I forget Exo. 14.
all their works unto the end. Whereupon amongst 4. Reg. 10.
those seven things which the Lord hates and his soul abhors Iud. 13.
the seventh, Solomon puts in the first place high ^ccle. 19.
Amos. 6. 8.
looks. And Esaias says: the day of the Lord of hosts upon Pro. 6.
all proud and high looks, and upon them that are arrogant. Esa. 2.


And they shall be bro^ght low. And upon all the Ceders of Lybanus, both high
and straight, and upon all the Oaks of Basan, and upon all mountaynas and all
hight hills, and all high Towers, and all walls of defense, and the height of
men shall be bended downwards, and the tallness of m^n shall be brought low.
Therefore hell has eularged and stresched Esa. 5. 2. 3^.
out his spirit, and has opened his mouth until there be no end, and the
high haughty and glorious thereof shall go down unto it. The Lord of hosts
has thought this that he might abate the pride of all their glory. Job also
says, If pride clyme up unto heaven, and his h^ade reach the Job. 20.
clouds, yet in thend it shall be destroyed and laid low as a dungehill.

In manner all things that be vycious, do love their Against the arrogance of
the proud.
lykes. But the proud does hate the high minded and arrogant man. Whereupon
Solomon said: amongst the proud Pro 11. 15.
there are always contentions, and where pride is there must needs be despyt
also. A proud man does go and gesture otherwise then he was wount, and
despyseth those things that he is accustomed unto. He accounts him a great
man whom he vouchesafeth to speak unto, and very great if he rise and
embrace him. He more esteems that the dygnitie proceeds from him, then
that he is made by the dygnytie.

He will never use the affection of fatherhoode, but he but he will always
use the imperiousness of giving. His pride, his arrogancy, and his
indignation are more than his might. He reuolueth in his mind that which is
read in the gospel. There became a contention amongst the disciples of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which of them should seem Luc, 20.
to be greatest. And Jesus said unto them. The Princes of the people do rule
over them, and those which have power amongst them are called liberal. But it
shall not be so with you, but he which is greatest shall be as the least
amongst you, and he which is foremost of you shall be as it were a servant,
and as Peter the prince of the Apostles 1. Pet. 3.
says, not as though you ruled over the Clergy. But as the rulers and
governors of the flock through good will. The Psalm. (...).
earth is the Lords and the plenty thereof, the whole world and all that dwell
therein. Then there is one God, and one Lord. The rest are not Lords but
ministers and servants, unto whom dominion is forbidden, and the ministry is
enjoined. Give ear unto the wise man hereupon saying. If they have made thee a
ruler be not extolled. But be amongst Eccle. 31.
them as thou wertone of them.

Behold the sons of Zebedy who by the intercession of An exa^le against the
frauds and deceiptes of ambitious men.
their mother did seek honor of Christ. Command (said she) that these my
two sons may sit one on thy right hand and that other on thy left hand in thy
kingdom. But they deserved to have this answer? you know not what you ask,
for you can not come into my kingdom by honor Math. 20.
and promotion. But heavy burdens of tribulation whereupon the Lord added
further, it is not mine to give you. As if he should have said it is mine but
not to give you, that is to say unto ambitious men such as you are. For
although power be of God, yet proud men do not reign as appointed by GOD,
according to the saying of the Prophette. They reigned but not as sent from
me, they becam^ Princes and I knew them not. The proud arrogaunt man loves
the highest seats in the Of the properties of arrogant men.
Synagoges, and the highest chair at table, to be saluted in markett, and to
be called Rabby, amongst men. He will not be called by the name of his parson,
but by the name of his fortune, and promotion. He will not be honored like a
man, but like a Lord. He sytteth highest, he goes stately, he would have all
men to rise when he passes by, and he will give a beck to every man.
Furthermore a certain Philosopher mocking the arogance of a certain King, when
he saw him sit stately in the regal throne, falling prostrat upon the ground
did worship him. And immediately therwithall being not bydden, he arose and sat
down by the King. The King maruayling greatly thereat, because he knew him to
be a Philosopher did ask him wherefore he did so? and the Philosopher
answered. Either thou art a God or a man. If thou be a God, then was it my
du^y to worship thee. If thou be a man, then may I sit by thee. But then ye
King turning his speech toward the Philosopher said. Yea but because I am a
man thou should not have worshipped me. And if I be a god, then should thou
not sytt by me. A question, both wisely answered: and wettily propounded. Of
superfluous apparel.


God made our first, parents cotes of beasts felles, and skinns after they had
sinned. And it is said by Christ: unto such Genesis 3
as profess the name of Christians, you shall not have two Math. 10.
cotes. But according to the council of John, he which has Luke. 3.
tw^ cotes, let him give one of them to him which has ^ne. But the proud man
to the end he may seem magnificent, Math. 23.
does love to be dooble clothed, and to have delycat garments, and precious
ornaments. And what is a man decked with precious things, but only a
Sepulehre painted and white lymed without, and full of filthiness wtin? purple
and crymsynne, Skarlett and silk, do putryfie in the flyme of the earth. And
gold and silver, perles and precious stones, b^come fo^le and filthy in clay.
Power and dygnitie, do lie vnco^ly i^ in ye dust. And glory and honor sit as
(...) in (...). The^ wherefore wear we these (...) and (...) (...),
pride, with broad and sumpteous borders: ye rich man which was clothed in
purple and silk was buried in hell. Dyna the daughter ^en. 33.
of ye Patriark Jacob (as Josephus rehearses) before she went out to buy such
ornaments as ye provincial women did were, remained a virgin. But as soon as
she came out, Sy^he^ yt son of ye king of ye Amorits, did violently ra^ish
her. Holofernus sitting in a canapy which was of purple ^lk and gold, set with
Emeraldes, and other precious stones, was beheaded by Judith. Who when she was
(a little before) wrapped in gar ments of hearecloth, did now take upon her
garmnts of rejoicing. Give ear unto the council of the wise man hereupon
which says: do never glory in garments, and the Appostle byddeth us? Glory
not (says he) in precious ornaments E^cle. 11.
neither lay out fair locks of hair. Nor border and 1. Tim. 2.
guard your garments with gold etc. 1. Pet. 3.


Mark what our Lord god does threaten against the superfluity Against super
fluous aparell Esa. (...).
of apparel by the Prophet Esaias saying: For as much as the daughters of Syon
are puffed up with pride, and walk with bare necks laid out, and bridling in
their gate, therefore the Lord will make bauld their bushy locks, and will take
of the hair from the daughters of Sion. In those days the Lord will take away
the ornaments of their shoes, and their hoope rings, chains, carkenets,
braselets, and Jewels. Their calls, and their frisled and curled perwyckes,
their small chains, their pomanders, their ear ringes, and the precious
stones, hanging upon their forheads, their short clokes and shift of garments,
their fine lynen and their needle works, their glasses, their lawne partlets,
their fillets, and their fine skarfes and vayls. And in steed of sweet smells,
they shall have stynch, in steed of their fair pursses and gyrdles, they shall
have a small cord to bind their coffyne, and in stead of frysled hair, they
shall have a bare and a balld skull. Behoulde, this pain and punishment is
given for their fault, that they may be corrected and punished even therein
wherein they offended. But furthermore har^en unto the Prophet Ezechiell,
hereupon saying. O Tire the ^undry sorts of silk in Egypt are wouen for thee.
Eze. ^7.
Trewly thy garments are made of sumpteous purple and curious works. They have
changed their Iuorye and Ebonye with thee, for money. They have brought into
the market places, purples and pearls, silks and tyns^lls, furs of Luzards
and Genetts, for the abundaunce of the wealth which they found in thee. They
have given the rulers Tapestryes to tread upon and to cover their tables. And
their glory is over greatly replenished thereby. But behold now thou art
contryt and sorrowful in the midst of the sea, and thy wealth is in the depth
of the waters. Thou art brought to nothing and shall not remain for ever.

When a certain Philosopher went (upon a time) unto That more is attributed
unto the garments, the^ unto the virtues or good conditions of a man.
a Princes Court homely cladde, and knocking at the gate was not let in, but as
often as he pressed to go in: so often was he repulsed and put back, he
changed his hahyte and put on coomely garments. The way was made for him at
the first word. He going on unto the Prince, began to kiss the cloak which he
ware. And the Prince maruayling thereat, demanded what he did? and wherefore
he did so? the Phylosopper answered: I honor my Habyte (quod he O Prince)
for that which my vert^e ne could not get, my garment has obtained. O
vanytie of all vanyties, more honor is given to the garment then to the
goodness, and more worship done for the outward aparaunce, then for the
inward perfection of a man.

An artya^ciall show is laid on, and a natural face and Of the paynting and
cou^t^rfayting of bewties, Mat. 16.
favor is hyd and taken away. As though the art of man created, were above
the excellent works of God the creator. Not so, not so, O men Consider you,
(says the Lord:) the lillyes of the fyeld how they gro^we. They do neither
labor nor spynne. But I say unto you: that Solomon in all his glory was not
clothed like unto one of them. God forbid yt a cou^terfayt color should be
to be compared unto a natural collor. For whylest the fac^ is painted with a
cou^terfait color the skine is marred with (...) filthyn^e. All men lyu^ng are
altogether vanity. What can be more vain, then to brayde the hair, to curle
the locks, to die the cheeks, to anoint the forheade, and to twytch away^ the
eye lyddes? in as much as glory is deceyptfull, and beauty is vain. And all
flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof like unto the flowers of the field.
For like unto heye they Pro. 30.
shall quickly wyther, and shall soon fall like unto potherbs. Susa. 40.
But to pass over the deckinge and apparel of the person, ^al. 30.
least I should seem to speak more of mallyce then of truth, what is more
vain then to deck and tryme the table with dyaper clothes? with dyaper
napkins, as white as ^uoryo? vessel of gold and silver? with small cups,
bowls, and stately standing cups? with plates and spones? with dyshes and
pottengers? with lyuery pottes and iugges? with spice boxes, and cha^ngdishes?
what preuayleth it to paint the roofes of the chambers, to furnish the halls,
to hang the porches and lobbetts, to paue the flowers, to make the beds,
well stuffed with down feathers, covered with silk quilts, drawn about with
curteynes, and shadowed with ranopeies? since it is written: Man shall take
none of these with him when he dies, neither shall his glory descend with him.

There is no man which may glory, that his heart is clean. Of the uncleanness
of the heart.
Since we all do offend in many things. And if we say that we sin not, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is Psalm. 48.
not in us. Who is able to say as the Apostle said? I am Jacob. 3.
gyltie in nothing to my knowledge, and yet thereby am I r. l^a. 1.
not justified. Show me such an one, and we will praise him. 1. Cor. 4.
Eccle. 31.
Behold even amongst the saints, no man is vnculpable, and Job. 4. 15. 2^.
the heavens are not clean in his sight, for in his angels he Genesis 6.
has found iniquity. How abominable and unprofitable is man, which
drincketh iniquity as it were water? and therefore GOD did repent him that he
had made manne upon the Earth, because the mallyce and wickedness of man
on Earth was exceeding great, and all his thoughts bent always upon evil.
And therefore being touched with sorrow of heart inwardly, he took away man
whom he had created. Furthermore iniquity Mat. 24.
abounds, and the charity of many is waxed cold. Psalm. 13. ^1.
All men have declyned and are become unprofitable altogether. There is no man
that does good, no not one. All the whole life (in manner) of mortal men, is
full of mortal and Romans 1. 10.
deadly sins, so that it is skarcely possible to find any one Tit. 9. (...).
which does not declyne on the left hand, which does not return unto his vomit,
and which does not putrify in ordure and uncleanness. Nay rather they glory
when they have done evil, and reioyc^ in most wicked things, being replenished
with all iniquity, malice, fornication, couetise, naughtines, envy, murder,
contention, craft, privy grudge, slander, and murmuring. Being hateful unto
God, contumelious, proud, high minded, deuisers of mischief, disobedient to
their parents, disorder^d, without love, without truth, and without mercy.
With such and much worse this world is replenished, as with heritikes and
scismatikes, periures, Tyrans, Symonsellers, hypocrytes, ambitious men, robbers
and spoylers, extorcioners and pollers, usurers and false witnesses, wicked
thieves, and church robbers, traitors, liars, flatterers, deceyuers, tale
tellers, wauerers, gluttons, dronkards, adulterers, incesteous men, tender
treaders and vayn vau^ters, slouens, sluggardes, and loyterers, prodigal
spenders and unthrifts, rash quarellers and hackers, impatient and unconstant
men, poysoners and witches, presumpteous and ^rogant wretches, deuilish minded
and desperate men. To conclude, with such as are packt full of all paltry of ye
earth, and farced with all kind of vile abomination. Yet even as the smoke
vanishes away, so shall they vanish: and as Psalm. 67.
wax melts before the fire, so shall sinners perysh before the face of God.
Of the sorows and pains which the evil and wicked men do suffer at their
death.


The wicked men do suffer four princypall pains at their death. The first is
the perpiexitie of the body, which is then greater and more grievous than ever
it was or is in this present life until that time of dissolution. For some Cap.
42.
think that even without motion, (such is their gree^ous pains) they tear
themselves in pieces For the violence of death is strong and incomparable.
Because the knyttinges and natural combyninges of the body with the spirit,
ar^ then broken insonder. And thereupon the Prophet (David) (...). 114.
says in the Psalm: the panges of death have compassed me. There is no
member, nor no part of the body, but is touched and twitched with that
intolerable pain. The second pain is when the body (being altogether weeryed
and overcome, the force and strength thereof clean vanquished) the Soul does
much more plainly perceive in one moment all the works which it has done good
and bad, and all those things are set before the inward eyes. This pain is so
great, and this torment and disquiet is so grievous, that the soul (being much
vexed and troubled) is constrained to confess and declare against it self. As
it is said in (...). (...).
the Psalms, the floodes of iniquity have troubled me. For as the floodes
come with great force and sway, and seem to bear down all things before
them, so in the hour of death the wicked man shall sodeinly see and behold all
the works that he has done or committed good or bad. The third pain is when
the soul now begins justly to judge, and sees all the pains and torments
of hell to hang worthily over it, for all the iniquities whereof it is guilty.
Whereupon it Psalm. 19.
is also said in the Psalm: the pains of hell came about me. The fourth
pain is when the soul (being yet in the body) does see the wicked spirits
ready to receive it. wherein the dread is such and so unspeakable pain,
that the miserable soul, (although it be now parted from the body,) does
run about as long as it may, to redeem the time of her captivity before
she forsake the body.

Also every man as well good as evil does see (before Of the coming of
Christ in the time of any ^ans death.
the soul depart from the body) Christ crucified. The wicked sees it to his
(...), when he may blushe and be ashamed that he is not redeemed through
the blood of Christ, and that his own giltynesse is the cause thereof.
Whereupon it is said unto the wicked in the gospel: They shall see against
whom they pricked and stoonge. John. 19.
The which is understood by the coming of Christ unto judgment, and of his
coming at the instant time of any man's death. But the good man shall see him
to his comfort and rejoicing, as we may perceive by the words of the Apostle
which says: until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ (that is to say) at
the day of death when Christ ^rucifyed shall appear as well unto the good as
unto the wicked. And Christ him self says of John the Evangelist: So will I
have him to abide until I come. That is to say, continuing in virginity
until I come unto his death. For we read of four manner of commings that
Christ shall come. Two of them are visible. The first in humility to redeem
the world. The second in majesty unto judgment. And the other two are
unvisible. The first whereof John. 14.
is in the mind of man by grace. Whereof it is said in the gospel: we shall
come unto him, and shall make our remaining place with him. The second is in
the death of every faithful man. And thereupon John in the revelation Apoc. 22.
says: come Lord Jesus.

HIs spirit shall depart, and he shall return Of the rotte^nesse of men's
carcasses.
into his earth. At y^ time all their thoughts shall perish. O how many
things and how Psalm. 145.
great things do mortal men consider and think upon, about the
vncerteyntie of their worldly provisions. But suddenly by the coming of death
all things which they thought Psalm. 108.
on and forecasted, do immediately vanish away. Like unto Job. 14.
a shadow when the sun declyneth, they are taken away. And like unto a Locust
they are smitten down. So yt the spirit of man shall go out of him not
willingly, but un willingly. He shall dismiss with doler, that which he did
profess with desire. and whether he will or nyll, there is a term appointed
the which he shall not pass over. In the which earth shall return unto earth.
For it is written. Thou art earth, and into earth Genesis 3.
thou shall go. For it is natural that the thing made of any substance should
be resolved into that substance again. He shall take away their spirit
therefore and they shall fail, Psalm. (...).
and shall return into their dust. And when man dies, he Eccle. (...).
shall enherite, beasts, cattle, Serpents, and worms. For all those shall
rest in dust, and worms shall consume them. The worm shall eat them like a
garment, and shall consume them as a moth consumes the woollen cloth. I am to
be consumed (says Job) like unto rottenness, and like Job. 21.
unto a garment that is fretted with mothes. I have said Esa. 31.
Job. (...). 17.
unto rottenness. My father, my mother, my sister, are gone unto worms meat.
Man is rottenness and putrefaction, and so are the sons of man. Filthy are
our forefathers, vile are our mothers, and how vile are our sisters? For man is
begotten and conceived of blood, putrifyed by the fervent heat of lust and
concupisence. And yet the worms do come about his carcass as mourners.
Whilst he lived he bredde nittes and lyse, and being dead he breeds worms
and magottes. Whilst he lived he made filthy ordures and excrements. And
being dead, he makes putrefaction and stink. One man defends another only.
But being dead he defends many worms. Oh what is more filthy than the
carcass of a man? or what more horrible than a dead man? he whose embrasing
had been most a^able meeting him on live, even his look will be most terrible
when he is dead. What prevail riches therefore? whatpreuayle banquetings?
what delights? they can not deliver man from death. They can not defend him
from the worm. Neither shall they preserve him from stinking. He which
earewhile sat glorious in his throne or chair, lies now despised in his
Toombe. He which but lately flourished in the Court, does now lie filthily in
his grave. He which but earewhiles did fare (...) in his parler, is now
consumed and t^re with worms in his Sepulcher.

The worm and the fire are the revenge of the flesh unto Of the sorrowful
remembrance of the which are damned.
the wicked man. And either of them is of two kinds. That is to say, the
inward and the outward worm and fire. The inward worm and fire gnaweth and
burns the heart, the outwa^d worm or fire does fret and burn Eccl. 71.
the body. Their worm (says he) shall never dye, and their Esa. (...).
^yre shall not be quenched. The Lord shall send worms and fire upon their
flesh, that they may be burned and feel Iud. (...)
it for ever. The worm of conscience shall temporally tear them, the memory
shall afflict them, repentance shall vex them, and perplexity shall torment
them. For they shall come into the thought of their sins fearfully, and
their Sap. (...)
iniquities on the other side shall dishonor them. Saying: what has the boast
of riches profited us? and what has pride prevailed for us? All those things
are passed over like unto a shadow, even like unto a ship which passes in
the flowing wa^es, whose stepp^s or pathe no man can find or percey^e when it
is paste. Even so we as soon as we be borne, begin to leave this life. For we
are able to show no token of virtue, but are consumed in our wickedness. They
shall record with exceeding great trouble, that which they did with over great
delight. That the goade of their memory may prick them unto punishment and
pain, whom the Sepulcher of wickedness did drive unto sin.

They which repent and do penance will say in themselves, Of the (...)
fitable repentance of them which are damned.
we have erred from the way of truth and the light ^f righteousness has not
shone upon us. Then shall they begin to say unto the hills and mounteynes: fall
upon us and cover us. They shall repent to their pain and punishment, Sap. 5.
but they shall not be converted unto remission and Luke 23.
Apoc. 6
forgiveness. For it is but meet and right that they which would not when
they might, should be barred to have power when they would. For the Lord has
given a time and place for repentance, and they have abused the same. Therefore
the rich man which was tormented in the flame did say unto Abraham, I beseech
thee father that thou will send Lazarus unto the house of my father. For I have
five Luc. 16.
brethren. That he may be a witness unto them, least they also do come into
this place of torment. Unto whom when Abraham had answered, they have Moses
and the Prophets. Let them hear those. He added No father Abraham, but if any
man should go fro the dead unto them, they will repent. So he also did now
repent in hell. But because he knew that it was unprofitable, he desired that
this might be declared unto his brethren. That they might do fruitful
pennaunce in this world. For repentance may then profitte a man, when it is
in his power to sin.

Men behold Angels and are troubled with horrible Of the unspeakable
perplexity of ^he damned. Sap. 5.
fear, mourning through perplexity of the spirit and saying: these be they
whom heretofore we had in derision, and lykened them unto mockyng stocks in
reproach and skorn. For we (being senseless) did esteem their life madness,
and their end without honor. But behold how they are compted amongst the
sons of God, and their lot is amongst the Saints. Again, it shall be a
punishment for the wicked, to behold the glory of the blessed, although
percase after the end of judgment. But the blessed shall see the reprobate in
torments, according to this text: the just man shall rejoice when he sees the
revenge of sinners. But the reprobate shall not see the blessed in glory
according to this text: let the wicked man be taken away, least he see the
glory of God. Such things do the wicked say in hell, because the hope of the
wicked is like unto thi^e down which is tossed with the wind. And like unto a
slender froth which is cast from the deep waters, and like unto smoke
scattered with the wynd, and like unto the remembrance of a gest which taryeth
but one day.

Of the unspeakable perplexity of the damned.


The ^yre of hell is neither nouryshed with fuel, Of hell (...). (...). 20.
nor kyndled with bellows, but was created by God, unquenchable from the
beginning of the world. For it is Job. 20.
written: the fire shall consume him which is not kindled. Esa. 14.
And it is thought to be under the earth according to that (...). (...).
saying of Esaias, hell under the earth is troubled against thy coming. But all
places are penal unto the reprobate. Which do always carry torments and
veration against themselves. I will bring forth (says he) fire from the
midst of thee which shall eat thee. And the fire of hell shall ever burn and
never shine, it shall ever skald, and never consume. And shall ever assail,
and ever fail. For in hell there is merueilous cloudy darken^sse, unmeasurable
bitterness of pain, and infinite euerlastingnesse of all mysery. Bind him
hand and foot (says he) and throw him into outward darkness. There shall be
weeping and g^ing of Math. 22.
teeth. Every member for his sins shall bear his proper punishment That it
may therewith be punished wherewith it has sinned. For it is written: by what
soever a man (...). 16.
sins, by the same shall he be punished. So that he which sinned with his
tongue, shall be tormented by the tongue. And therefore he cried: O father
Abraham have compassion on me, and send Lazarus that he may dippe the end of
his finger into the water, and cool my tongue. For I am tormented in this
flame.

The reprobate shall not only be wrapped in outward Of the darkness of hell.
darkness, but also in inward darkness. For they shall at one self time
lack both the spiritual light, and the corporal light. For it is written:
the wicked shall be taken away (...). 26.
least he should see the glory of God. Who only shall then be light
everlasting. And the reprobate shall bear so great perpleritie in their
punishment, that they shall skarcely be able to think upon any other thing than
their pains. And shall there apply the force of their thoughts.

Solomon says: there is neither working, nor account in hell. Nor wisdom,
nor knowledge, where thou make (...). 1.
such have to go. For oblivion shall be so great in the reprohate, so great
blyndnesse of mind, and so great confusion of reason that seld^me or never
they can rise to thinck upon P^al. 113.
god. Nor can breath one thought of repentance. For confession perishes from a
dead man, as from him which Esa. 38.
is not at all. As it is written: The dead shall not praise thee (O Lord) nor
they which go down into hell. Shall not confess thee. Nor death laud and
praise thee.

Let me go (says Job) that I may lament a while my Of the confusion of pains
Job. 10.
pains, before I go to the darkesome land, which is covered with the clouds
of death, the land of misery and darkness where the shadow of death, and no
order, but perpetual horror do inhabitt. Yet there shall be order in the Luke.
6.
quantity of pains. For with what meas^re you meat, Sap. 6.
it shall be measured to you again. That the^ which ^inned Job. 24.
most greeueously may be most grievously punnished. For they which are mighty
shall suffer torments mightilye. But there shall be no order in the quality of
things. For from the snow and water, they shall be put into ho^e skalding fire.
That the sodeyne change of the contraries may make their greefes the greater. I
have seen by experience, that if one which is burned, do straight ways put
his hurt into ye water, he shall feel afterward ye greater skalding.

Men are put into hell like sheep, and death shall feed upon them. This is
spoken by ye similytude of beasts and cattle, Of the ^euer failing of the
torments of hell.
which do not pluck up grass and herbs by ye roots, but crope of the tops
yt the grass may grow again for their food. So also ye wicked (as if they
were fedd upon by death) shall revive Psalm. 18.
unto death, yt we may dye euerla^ingly as Ovid says: Sic inconsumptum Titij
semperque (...)
sic perit vt possit sape perire Iecur.
The^ shall death be immortal, then shall ye dead live which be dead unto
life. They shall seek death and shall not find it, because they had lief and
lost it. Harken unto John in the revelation Apo. 9.
which says: In those days men shall seek death and shall not find it. They
shall des^or to dye and death shall fly from them. O death how sweet should
thou now seem unto them, which heretofore thought thee so bitter? they shall
desire thee and wish for thee only which did vehemently abhor thee only.
The^ let no man flatter himself, and say yt god will not be always angry, nor
be offended for ever, but The reprobat shall never be delivered from pains.
his mercyes are over all his works. Since when he is angrye he will not
forget to be merciful. Neither does he hate any of the things which he has
made. Taking as Psalm. 10^. and 144
an argument of error that which the Lord says by the Prophet: They shall be
gathered together into one bu^del into Sap. 11.
ye lake, and there they shall be shut up in priso^n. And after many Esa. 24
days they shall be visited. For man sinned but for a time, and then god will
not punish for ever. O vain hope. O false presumption. Let not man believe
(being vaynely deceived by error) that he is to be redeemed for any price. For
in hell there is no redemption. Therefore sinners shall be gathered together into
the lake and shall be shut into prison. But in hell. In ye which they shall be
tormented without bodies, until the day of judgment. And then after many
days (that is after they are risen again with their bodies at the latter day)
they shall be vysited. Not unto salvation but for revenge. Because after the day
of judgment, they shall be the more grievously pu^ished. But it is said in an
other text, I will Psalm. 88.
visit their iniquities with a rodd, and their sins with stripes. Therefore
God is offended with the predestinate tempoally because god does scourge every
son who^ he loves. By which words yt is gathered: he will not be angry
until the end. But with the reprobate god is offended eternally. By cause it
is meet and right yt as the wicked has used fraud and dissimulatio^ in his
everlasting, so god may use revenge and punishment in his everlasting also. For
although ye faculty and power to sin do leave him, yet does he not leave
will and desire to sin. For it is written the pride of them ye were Heb. 12.
hateful does always assende. The reprobate (which are Psalm. ^0.
already in despair of forgiveness) shall not be humbled, but their malice
and hatred shall be grown and increase as though they would have him not to be
at all, by whom they know that they be so unhappily. They will curse the
highest, and blaspheme the almighty. Complaning that he is wicked because he
has created them unto punish^nt, and is never inclined to forgiveness. Give
^are unto John in the revelation saying: A great hayle came down from Apo. 1^.
heaven upon men, and men blasphemed God For ye plague of hayle because it was
exceeding great. So that the will of the damned, although he have lost theffect
of his power, has always an intent and affection of malice and mischefe, and
that of it self shall be a punishment in hell, which was sin and offense in the
world. Although peradventure it is there also a sin, but not to the deserving
of punishment* Therefore the wicked because he shall always have in him self
the gyltinesse of his sin, he shall likewise feel in himself the torment of
his pain, for that which he himself did not take away by repentance. God did
not forgive by pard^ne. And so it serves as a great point of righteousness to
them which are to be judged, that they never lack punishment in hell, which
never wanted will to sin and offend in their life t^me. They would if they
could have lived without end, that they might also without end have sinned.
For they which never cease to sin whiles they live, do show that they desyer
always to live in sin.

Which of you (says Esaias) can dwell with the everlasting Testimonies of the
ete^nall ^unnishme^ts.
Priests? These men shall be a smoke in my fury, a burninge fire all the day, and
by night it shall not be quenched. But the Isa. 33. 6^.
smoke thereof shall ascend for ever. And Hieremy says: I Hier. 25.
will give you over unto everlasting shame and reproach, and unto perpetual
ignomynie, which shall never be taken away with oblivion. Then Daniell, they
which have slept (says he) in the dust of the earth, shall awake: some unto
eternal life, and some unto reproach which they shall always abide. Solomon:
the wicked man being once dead, there Da^. 1^*
shall be no hope of him, his destruction shall come upon Pro. 6.
him for an example. And suddenly he shall be stricken and shall have no medecyne
to cure it. John the Appostle says Apo. 4.
also: If any man worship the beast and his Image, He shall drinck of the
wine of gods wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, and the smoke
of his torments shall ascend for ever and ever. Neither shall he have rest day
nor night, which has worshipped ye beast and his image. The very truth it self
does co^^rme all these: which shall reprove the damned Mat. 2^.
sentencially in judgment. When he shall say, Go you cursed into everlasting
fire which is prepared for the de^ill and his angels. Now if according to the
divine opinion, all trial of Deuteronomy. 10.
truth does stand in the mouths of two or three witnesses, how much more
shall it stand by these testimonies of so many and so notable men.

Behold therefore the day of the Lord shall come cruel and Of the day of
judgment.
full of indignation, wrath and fury, to bring the earth into solitarines, and
to chase ye sinners thereof out of the same. For the Esa. (...).
stars of ye heavens and the brightness thereof will not give their light. The
Su^ne will be ouercast with darcknes at his rising, and the Moon shall not shine
in her cource. And I will visit evil upon thearth, and will set ye iniquity of
the wicked men against themselves. And I will make the pride of the unfaithful
to be still, and will bring down the arroga^ce of the mighty. Therefore all the
hands shall be weakened and all hearts of men shall be tamed and astonished. They
shall have panges and gripes, Sophon.
and shall feel pain like unto women with child. Every man shall look aghast
and a mased on his neighbor, and the countenaunces of their faces shall be
tanned and burnt. That day shall be the day of wrath, the day of trouble, the
day of perplexity, the day of calamity, and the day of miserys. The day of
mist and darkness, the day of the clang of ye Tro^pet, because the Lord shall
make an end with speed, of all the which dwell upon the earth. And that sodeyne
day shall creep like a snare upon all the^ which sit upon the face of the round
world. For as a lightning he comes out of the East, and is seen into the
west. Such shall be the coming of the son of man. For the day of the Lord is
like a thief, and shall come Luke. 21.
stealinge in the night. When they say peace and security Mat. 24.
These. (...).
then sodeyne destruction shall come upon them, like unto the pains of a woman
in her belly and they shall not eskape the^.

And there shall happen great tribulation before this day, Of the tribulation
that shall go before the day of judgment.
such as never was from the beginning of the world to this present nor ever
shall be. And but the days were shortened, no flesh could be saved. For nation
shall rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and great earthquakes
Mat. 24.
shall be in many places, pestilences and famynes, and terrors from heaven, and
many great tokens shall be seen. Then shall be tokenes in the Sun, and in the
Moon, and in the stars. Running togethers of people for the confusion of the
Sea and the floudes. Men wythering up for fear and expectation which shall
happen to the whole world. There shall rise false Christ's and false Prophets,
and they shall show great tokens and wonders. So that many shall be seduced
into erro^r (yea if it many be) even the elect. The appostle says. Then shall
man be revealed for the Son of perdition. Which is against all and is
extolled above all that is called or worshipped as god. So that he sits in
the Temple of god as if he were god. Whom our Lord Jesus shall kill with the
spirit of his mouth. And the Prophett Helie shall be sent before, that the great
day of the Lord shall come. Great and horrible shall he be, and shall convert
the Malec. 4.
hearts of the fatheres unto their children, and the hearts of the children
toward their fathers, with whom En^ch also shall come, and they shall
prophecy a thousand two hundred and sixty days, clothed in sackcloth. And
when they have finished their testymonie the beast which shall come up out Apo.
11.
of the depth, shall make war against them. And shall over come and kill
them, and their bodies shall lie in ye strets of the great City which is
called Sodom, and Egypt whereas our Lord was crucified. And after three days
and a half the spirit of lief shall enter into them.

Immediately after ye tribulation of those days, the su^ne shall be Of the
signs and tokens which shall go before.
darkened and the Moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of ye heavens shall be moved, and the^ shall appear ye
sign or toke^ of ye son of man in heaven. And then all the Trybes of the
earth shall bewail themselves as John says in the revelation: The Kings of
Apo. 4.
the earth, the Princes, and the rich men, the mighty and all both bond and
free, shall hyde themselves in Caves, and Dens in the mountains, and shall
say to the hills and to the rocks. Fall upon us and hyde us from the face of
him which sits upon the throne? and from the wrath of the Lamb. Because the
great day of their anger is come^. And who can abide it. And he shall send his
Angels with a Mat. 24.
troompe and a great voice and they shall gather to gether the chosen from the
four wyndes and from the height of the heavens unto thendes thereof? And the
Appostle says: 1. These. 4.
Then the Lord himself in the voice and commandment of an Archangell shall
come down from heaven. And the^ all they which are in their graves shall hear
the voice of the Son of God. And shall come forth. The good unto the
resurrection of lief, but the wicked unto the resurrection John. 5.
of judgment. Death and hell shall yield forth their dead which are in them.
Behold he shall come in the clouds Apo. 20
and every eye shall see him. Yea, they which kicked against him, and all the
Trybes of the earth shall be wail and mourn, and then they shall see the Son
of man coming in a cloud with great power and majesty. And the Lord shall
come to make revenge, not only with the Appestles but also with ye Luke. 21.
Elders of these people. Where upon Solomon does say: A Pro 31.
noble man is he in his gates when he shall sit with the Senators Mat. 10.
of the land. For they shall sit also upon the seats Daniell. 9.
of ye xii. Trybes of Isarel. I looked (says Daniel) until the Math. 49.
Thrones were placed, and ye eldest did sit down. Whose garment was as white as
snow. And the hears of his head as clean as wool. His Throne was the fire of
the flame, the wheles thereof were bright kindled fire. A flowing and a swyft
running fire did go forth from his face. Thowsa^ds and thowsands did administer
unto him. And ten times hu^dreths of thousa^ds did assist him. Our god shall
come openly and manifestly, our god shall come and shall not be sile^t. there
shall be bright burni^g fire in his and round about him a mighty tempest. He
called the heaven from on high and the earth to judge his people. Then al
nations Mat. (...).
shall be gathered together before him. He shall separate them one from an other
as the shepeheard does separate his sheep from the goats. And he shall place
them, the sheep on the right hand and the goats on the left hand.

O how great shall the dread and trembling then be? and Of the power wisdom
and righteousness of the Judge.
how great shall be the lame^tacions and wepings? For if the pillors do tremble
and dread his coming, and the angels of peace shall weep bitterly, what shall
sinners do? if the just Job. 26.
shall skarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and sinners appear? Esa. 33.
Therefore cries the Prophet? O Lord enter not into Psalm. 142.
judgment with thy servant, for no man living shall be iustifted Job. 9.
in thy sight. If thou O Lord do regard iniquities, O Lord who shall abide it.
For who would not fear a Judge ye is most mighty? Since no man can fly from
him or escape his hands. Most wise, because no man can hide himself from him or
deceive him. And most just, since no man can corrupt him. If you look for
might and strength? he is most strong and mighty. Wise in his heart, and
mighty in power. If you call for equity in judgment? no man dare give
testimony for me. If I would justify my self, mine own mouth would condemn me.
If I should say that I am innocent, he will prove me lewd and faltie, yea though
I were simple. He spoke the words and they were made, he did command and they
were created. Which calls the stars, and they say here we are. Which makes
his angels spirits, and his ministers, the flame of fire. Whose will nothing at
Luc. 1.
Phillip. 2.
al resists. Unto whom no word is impossible. Unto whom Psalm. 38.
all knees do bend, both heavenly and earthly, and they that are in Hier. 17.
hell. The^ him no man can fly from or eskape, as the Prophet Heb. 4.
says: If I ascend up into heaven thou art there. And if I go (...). (...).
down into hell thou art there also. He searches the heart and Psalm. 7.
ye raynes: unto whose eyes all things are made open, Which can number the
drops of the rain, and the sands of ye Sea. The God of knowledge, the Lord
which foreseeth al things and is pryuie to all things, the searcher of all
secrettes. From him no man can lurk as the Apostle says: there is no
creature unvisible in his sight. He is a just judge, mighty and long
sufferyng. Which neither by entreatie, nor by rewards, neither for love nor
for hatred, will declyne from the right way. But going evermore in the high way
does suffer none evil to escape unpunished. Nor leaves any goodness
unrewarded. Therefore no man can corrupt him. According to the saying of the
Psalmist: thou Psalm. 63.
shall give unto every one according to his deeds.

Then who would not fear that examination wherein Of the divine Judgment.
he shall be both the Accuser, the Advocate, and the Judge? Mat. 23.
For he shall accuse when he shall say: I was hungry, and you gave me not to
eat. I was thirsty, and you gave me not to drink. He shall plead like an
Advocate, when he shall add thereunto: as long as you did it not to one of
the least of these, you did it not unto me. He shall judge when he shall
conclude saying: go from me you accursed into everlasting fire. There shall
need no witnesses in that judgment, for then the hidden places of the dark
shall 1. Cor. 4.
Math. 10.
be made manifest. For nothing is hidden which shall not Dan. 7.
be revealed. Then the books of conscience shall be opened. Apoc. 14.
Then shall the dead be judged by those things which are written in ye book:
for their works do follow them. How greatly shall sinners be ashamed when their
most wicked and abho^inable faults shall be apparent and manifest unto all
men? Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. For he can never be revoked Psalm. 31.
or called back from that sentence. Since the father has given all judgment
unto the son. Which shuts and no man opens. Which opens, and no man
shuts. For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Then wealth shall not prevail, honors shall make That nothing shall prevail
for them that be damned.
no defense, nor friends can make any intercession. For it is written: their
gold and their silver shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the
Lords furye. All Job 5.
the Kings of the earth shall weep and lamente, when Apoc. 3. 8.
they shall see the smoke of the fire, through the heat of their Eze. 7. 8.
sorments. What then will you do in the day of the Lords Gala. 6.
fury, in the day of visitacion and calamity coming from far of? to whom
will you run for help? every man shall bear his own burden. The soul
which has sinned shall dye. O straight judgment. When men shall yeald
accoumpt, not only of their deeds, but of every idle word which they have
spoken in that day of judgment. The debt with the usury shall be demanded and
exacted unto the last farthing. Who then can fly from the wrath and anger to
come? then the son of of man shall send his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his kingedome all scandalles and offenses, and such as do wickedly. And
they shall make them as faggettes to burn, and cast them into the furnasse to
burn, and shall cast them into the furnasse of burninge Fire, whereas weepinge
and gnashinge of teethe, howling and complaining, lamentacions and torments,
crying and shryching, fear and trembling, shall be heard. Pain and labor, heat
and stinch, darkness and perplexity, bitterness, need, and calamity,
doubtfullnesse and heaviness, forgetfulness, and confusion grypes and panges,
sour sorrows and terrors, honger and thryst, cold and frost, fire and
brymestone, and burning fire for ever and ever, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Of the huge greatness and enormitie of sins. The second part.
GOd is peerless, and no man may alter his lob 23.
determination. Wherefore I hau^ been troubled in my mind to behold him, and
whilst I considered him I was perplexed with fear. The more diligently and
clearly that a man does weigh and ponder ye rigor of the divine justice,
together with the trespasses of his own co^uersatio^, so much the more fearful
he shall be on all sides, since he is not ignorant how terrible it is to fall
into ye hand of god, which speaking by Moses says: There is no man ye can
Hebr. 20.
take out of my hand or power. Whereupon it follows, Deuteronomy. 32.
that no man can alter his determination. For so much as lob. 23.
whatsoever he determined in him self, and decreed to be done from the
beginning, yt no man can let or hinder. Even as God him self being holy and
glorious does testify by the Prophet. Esa. 46.
My purpose shall stand, and all my will shall be fulfilled. And Hier. 49.
again: who is like unto me? or who is able to sustain Job. 36.
me? and what is he yt may resist my countenance? behold God is great, God is
high in his mighty strength, and none of the law giuers is like unto him, who
may search out narowly his ways? or who can say unto him: Thou haste done
iniquity? Here upon also God is called inflexible or immovable. Not for that
he can not be pleased or appeased, or for that by his providence he sets
necessity upon things. But because his foresights and ordinances are
unvariable, infallible, and most certain. Neither is there any thing
(comparing it to the eternal and provident regard of the divine understanding)
that can be thought casual, or that changes by hap. Wherefore the more
sharply that we behold the incomprehensible and vnseareheable depth of the
divine judgments, and the unspeakable frailty and defects of our own nature,
together with the greatness of our salvation: So much ye more humble and wary we
shall have just cause to be, and so much the more fearfully and heedefully we
shall walk before the majesty of the highest God. For behold, we are set in
the midst of the whole world. That is to say on this earth, between the
heavenly kingdom, and the confused hellish Chaos.

Certeynly know that at the length we shall be led either to the eternal
felicity of heaven, or else to the perpetual torments of hell. Oh that the
tongue of our hearts would taste this self same morsel as it deserves to be
tasted. For then I think we should never loosely be given over unto vain
pleasure and delights, we should not spend our time laughing, sporting, or
playing, but in weeping and repentance. So as we might truly confess with Job:
That Job. (...).
we have always feared God as the swelling waves which would over whelme us.
Being induced there unto by the deep contemplation of the Psalmist saying:
Come and behold Psalm. 65.
the works of God which is terrible in his degrees upon the sons of men. And
Paul says: O profound depth Romans 11.
of the treasure of Gods knowledge and wisdom, how incomprehensible are his
judgments? and how unsearchable are his ways? he is the Lord that almighty
King, in whose power and dominion all things are constituted. Who only is
peerless. So that his being does infinitely excel the being of any thing
that is created, as that (in respect thereof) all other things seem (as it
were) to have no being at all. Furthermore, since we are beset in so great
danger, what remains for us to do, or what remedy is proffered unto us, but
even that we eschew and avoid with a most vigilant mind those things whereby
God (so dreadful) is offended, and whereby such pains of infinite damnation
are procured? (which are sins) even as the scripture does admonish us
saying. Fly from sin as from the sight of a Serpent. For none adversity
shall be Eccle. 27.
hurtful unto thee, if none iniquity get the over hand of Gregor.
thee. Wherefore a young man of singular capacity, and my dearest (of all
dear) brother, to the end that we may more warely hereafter eschew and avoid
sin. I intend first (by Gods help) to wright for the stirring up and
inflaming of our soul. Of the enormities, great mischiefs and hurtes that
come by sin. That the vileness and filthiness of sin being perfectly
understood and perceived, you may at the length fly from vice with so great
diligence that you may as well deserve to be prevented and adorned by your
creator with gifts of grace, as you are already by him adorned and prevented
with gifts of nature.

That only sin causes a reasonable creature to be displeasaunt, dispisable
and odious unto God.

The first act.
EEuen as there is nothing more to be desired than to please God, and to be (of
him) beloved, esteemed, or honored: So is there nothing worse, more detestable
or more terrible, than to displease him, and to be (of him) despised and hated.
In like manner, as virtues and the actions of the same, do make us pleasing,
honorable, and well-beloved unto the true God: So vicious qualities and sins,
do make us unto God displeasing, contemptuous and hateful. For he the
almighty creator of the universal world, although he love all things as
touching that they have of him, that is to say, as touching their being which
he does vncefsantly conserve in his kind: according to the saying of the wise
man: Thou love (O Lord) all things (...). 2.
that are, and thou hate nothing of those which thou haste made: yet
nevertheless he hates sundry reasonable creatures, as touching that which
they reteyne and are of their own free will. That is to say, as touching
iniquity and their transgressions as the scripture says: The wicked and his
wickedness are hateful unto God. And again, thou haste Sap. 14. Psalm. 5.
hated all them that work iniquity, and thou shall distroy all them which
speak leasings, and that dispiseth them, he witnesses saying. Thou have
despised all them that went Psalm. (...).
a stray from thy righteousness, since their thoughts were wicked. And
again, he that dwells in the heavens shall laugh at them, and the Lord
shall laugh them to skorne. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and in
his fury shall he vex and trouble them: yea even this thing happens by the
most just judgment of God. That they which contempne and dishonor God, which
is above all things to be exalted, and to be thought worthiest of all worthies,
preferring their own will before his divine pleasure: should be despised and
overthrown, by him as he him self protests saying: whosoever glorifieth
me, I will glorify him. But they which despise me, shall be unable. Such are
all the wicked and perverse, which have no care to hear the word of God, or
do omit the fulfilling thereof, when they have heard it. Of whom the
everlasting and uncreated wisdom says: because I have called, and you have
held back, dispising all my councelles, and negl^cting my rebukes, I also will
laugh at your destruction, and will skorne you when that is happened unto you,
which you most feared. Behold (my well-beloved) by these words the madness of
them is reproved, which linger their conversion, and in the end of their life
(the very instant of death creeping now upon them) do determine to make
confession of their life, and to amend themselves. And yet never marking how
horrible the eternal God and most high Judge does threaten and affirm that
he will skorne and laugh at such men at the time of their death. Finally, as
Job Job. 22.
says: The wicked are preserved until the day of destruction, and they shall
be led unto the day of revenge, and shall drink of the fury of the
almighty. Wherefore if thou desire to please God, if thou fear to be (of him)
despised and hated, decline from evil, ^ye sin, dete^ vice, and incessantly
fear to displease the high Judge. Who has power to cast both body and soul
into hell fire. Consider how and how much the children of this world, and the
servants of Princes go about to please their masters. How they dread to be
despised. What great pains they take to obtain a voluble and worldly praise.
Wherefore if thou desire to be Math. 10.
accounted amongst the sons of God, blushe then and be ashamed that thou
should less endeavor to please God, and to be honored and beloved of him,
then they study to attein man's favor. And finally, like as of the humanity
and pleasantness wherewith thou art naturally endued, thou do decently and
mannerly behave thy self before men: So much the more behave thy self
reverently and orderly before god inwardly, or rather both inwardly and
outwardly. For if when thou have to speak with any worthy personage, thou
come reverently unto him: put of thy Cap and do keedely beware what
thou speak: and when thou should talk with God by prayer or by saying
Psalms, then come with reverence and begin pronounsing without any regard,
do thou not then over lightly esteem the majesty of the almight^e God, and
make him inferior unto a mortal man and a sinner? God forbid that thou
should use Eccle. (...).
such lewdness, so great iniquities, and so exceeding great Eccle. 7.
perverseness. Therefore henceforth before thou go to prayer and divine
lauds, prepare thy self unto devotion. Yea humble both thy body and thy soul
unto God on high which is most blessed and happy, also bridle thy outward
senses and especially thy sight, in the time of divine service. And show thy
self an example before others with inward humility, and without any manner of
hypocrisy or inconstancy, to the glorifying of God, and the edifying of thy
neighbor. Now furthermore, if any man would ask why sins do make a
reasonable cr^ture so displeasing unto God, yea so despised and odious? It is
to be answered: yt eue^ as si^litude and likeness is accounted the cause of
love, and the reason that moves unity, so dissimilitude or vnlykenesse is
affyrmed to be the cause of hate, separation and disdain. For every thing
that is created, has as much of the divine bounty and similitude as it has
of the essential cause or being. And therefore since that sin (as touching
his deriuation) is altogether nothing but ruin and defect of his essential
being, a deformity of action, and as the withdrawing of the mind created from
the true goodness of the creator, it shows that it does impart no manner of
similitude or lykelyhoode with God the creator, but a most apparent
vnlykelinesse. And therefore it makes the mind created to become odious
displeasing, and dispysed unto God, yea so much the more as it has been
polluted with sin.

That all the moral doctrine of the holy scriptures it ordained after a sort
for the avoiding of sin.

Acts second.
THe Apostle John in his first Epistle says, 1. Ioh. 2.
That I write unto you, that you do not sin. And Esaias says: this is all
o^r fruit Esa. 27.
that sin may be taken from us. Thereby it appears that the pureness and
freedom from sin is (as it were) the end and scope of all the documentes and
precepts in holy scriptures. Further in the holy scriptures are rehearsed
punishments to be executed upon the wicked, and joys prepared for the just.
That as well by the terror of punishment, as by the love of those joys we
might be induced to eschew and hate sin. Also there are set down two (as it
were) entyer parts of righteousness. That is to say, departure from sin, and
actual Psalm. 36*
coming or paynful entrance unto virtue, the psalmist says: Decline from evil
and do good. For first it is expedient to fly from sins and vices. And then
next to exercise works of virtue. But these two things do often times
include them selves one with an other, for there are two manner of precepts in
the diuy^e law. That is to say: affirmatyue, and negative. Now the affirmative
do bind always, but not at all times. As when it is sayds in Deutrenomie,
worship Deuteronomy. 6.
God only, and honor thy parents. For unto these things we are always
bounden. But we are not bound t^ accomplish them actually at all times. But the
negatyue precepts do bind us for ever and at all times. As when Exodus 20.
it is said in Exodus: thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, for these
precepts do command that we should not do evil, but to decline and fly
from sin. Where unto we are bounden at all time. And therefore since by the
negative kind of precepts we are commanded to avoid sin (and yet we can
not universally and continually avoid sin, unless we also in due time do
well according as we are commanded by the affirmative precepts) therefore in
the precepts of avoiding and eschuing sins, the precept of well doing is
also included. Unto which two points the whole doctrine of the holy scriptures
do tend. And yet to speak absolutely, the blessed vision of God in the
heavenly habitation is the full end of eschuing of sin and of doing well.
Furthermore, since we are prone and ready to evil things, and very backward
and frail, or rather ^ow and defective to goodness, according to that saying
in Genesis: Genesis 8.
the senses and thoughts of man's heart are prone unto evil even from their
youth, therefore we have no small need of daily and often warning to avoid
sins, least we fall thereinto by forgetfulness, lack of foresight, or by
false suggestion, or any other kind of mean. Wherefore the Apostle writes to
the Hebrews, saying: Exhort and encourage your selves every day, that none of
you be hardened by the deceiptfulnesse of sins. Yea and this kind of
exhortation is very necessary for beginners, and such as are imperfect. And
so much the fitter for every man, as he fyndeth the more occasions,
inclination, or (...) sin, whereupon I do affirm that it is most necessary
for thee (my most loving brother) because thou art daily conversant in the
midst of worldly personages amongst whom innumerable occasions and snares of
sins are offered thee. From the which only God is able to preserve thee.

That the greatness and enormitie of sin is comprehended (by general
speech) in six points.

Acts. 3.
IT is easy to be seen by six especial notes, Especially if it be that which
some call mortal sin.
how huge, how detestable, how filthy and vile sin is. First (and chiefly)
on Gods behalf, who by sin is dishonored and offended. For how much the
higher his majesty is, and how much the greater is his holiness, so much
greater enormitie it is to sin agay^st him, to disobey him, and to dishonor
him. Therefore the Psalmist says: Cursed be they which decli^e from thy Psalm.
118. 2^.
commandments. And again: those which ^range themselves from thee shall
perish. For thou half ouerthrown all which go a whoring from thee. Then since
God is eternal and only to be honored, of a wonderful great majesty, and an
infinite holiness, equity and perfection, therefore all sin which is
committed against him and his commandments does carry with it (by a
certain kind of mean) an infinite greeuousnesse and enormitie, whereupon our
Lord speaks unto the wicked saying, Woe be unto them because they have gone
from me. They shall be distroyed because they have used collusion against
me. And Jeremy says: know and see that it is bitter and evil for Ose. 7.
thee to have left the Lord thy God, and that his fear is not with thee. For
in deed since God is the sower and fountayn^ o^ all health, and the original
cause of all nobility and pleasant sweetness, it is certain that a mind
created (being once alyenated from him) is dispoyled of the true blessedness,
depryued of the lively and free nobility, and left naked from all sincere
sweetness. And therefore vecommeth ignoble, miserable, bitter, and
unpleasant, and in very deed most wretched and poor, as one that is
destitute of all abundance of the spiritual graces. Hereupon is said to the
impenitent sinner: do thou not know that thou art a miserable wretch, poor,
blind, and naked?

Secondarily, sin is noted by the quality of the sinner.

Thirdly it is weighed and noted in the quality of the

Fourthly, by means of the end which the sinner tends

Fifthly, by the circumstances, that is to say, of the tyn^e

Sixthly, of the very deformity of the sin it self, according tolerable
(says he) unto man's smell, than a sinful soul unto God* Go to then (my
dearly beloved) if we fear or be unwilling to be, and to appear, vile,
filthy, detestable, and ignoble before the holy and most worthy majesty of
God, If we abhor that the countenance of our creator should be turned from
us, let us then avoid sin with all carfulness and pure affection.
Forasmuch as no deformity, no hurt, no blot, can so much defyle, infect, or
disorder man's body, and make it seem so detestable and disfigured in men's
eyes, as the reasonable soul is with every mortal sin blemished, made
vile, infected, and made filthy and detestable before the sight of the divine
majesty and of his holy Angels. For it is made like to the very diuil
himself, and being turned from the fountain of light, it is filled with the
^arcke clouds of lothsomenesse and filthiness.

What sin is.

Art. 4.
BY ye witness of holy Ambrose, sin is a b^king or infringing of the di^yne
laws and a disobedience to the heavenly commandments. Likewise according to
Augustine, sin is (says he) to cleave unto changeable things, and to
dispyse the vnc^angeable goodness. And again: sin (says he) is a will
and desire to retain or to get that which righteousness does forbid. So that
sin is the transgression of the d^nc will, and commandments, as to do that
which (...) forbids, or to omit that which he commands. Where upon it
follows that it is siu to speak, to think, to desire, or to ^oe, against the
laws divine. Now there are two things to be considered in sin.

That one is (as it were) formal, yt is to say, the auertyng and turning of the
mind, from the high and unchangeable goodness, which is principal or
capital sin.

That other is (as it were) material. That is the conversion of the mind
created variable and ready to fall unto the steadfast consideration of the high
goodness. Hereupon two evil things there are also coriespondent unto sin.
For as touching the formal point, the pain of the loss or damage is
coriespondent unto it: which is extreme misery and lack of the heavenly
fruition. But as touching the material point of sin, the pain of the
senses does thereunto corresponde. That is to say, the sencible pains of hell
which are the punishments of eternal fire. Dionyce briefly de^neth ^nne, to
be a going back from order, that is to say, from that convenient and due
estat^ whereunto the mind created, ought to cleave fast and be subject unto
the creator. For that does right order require, that the inferiu^ ^ould be
subject to the superior: that the effect may be co^ed unto the cause thereof.
That the creature of understanding may bend it self unto his creator, as unto a
beginning that makes it blessed. And all this is subverted by sin: for by it
the mind created, rebelleth against his creator. And does (as it were) turn
his back against his creators fact: neither does it endeavor it self
according to his counsel, but trusts in his own strength. Furthermore, it
is sin to prefer a man's will before the will of God, and not to bridle and
restrain a man's own liberty according to the terror of the divine law.

Whereupon in all sin, the sinner does propounde unto him self an end in
some frail and created goodness: unto the which he is inordinately affected,
and does viciouslye cleave unto it: yea more than unto God, because it is
against his will and ordinance. This does truly and directly repugne unto
the divine charity, bycaus^ we ought to love GOD above all things, and to
be^ conformed and effected like unto him, and to cleave fa^ unto him. And
lyk^wyse unto righteousness: bycaus^ we are bounden above all things to obey
the deuyne precepts. And therefore according to the doctors, whatsoever ^oeth
directly repugne unto charity, (by the which God and our neighbor is loved,
yea or unto righteousness is in his kind mortal sin.

And so sin is a contempt ^f the deuyne bounty, an (...) to the divine
majesty, an offense to the divine hol^nesse, a r^bellion against the divine
will, a forsaking of the divine wysedom, an ingratitude for heavenly benefits.
A fulfilling of frowardness, and self will, a seducing of reason, an
infection of the soul, a woundyng of the forces thereof, a filthiness of
mind, a murdering of grace, a rauishing of charity, a snare of death, a way
to dampnation, a gate of hell, a net of the diuill, an imitation of wicked
spirits. Detesting of Angels, an exceeding malice, a right crookedness, a
wonderful deformity, a most filthy kind of monster, a most cruel wild
beast, and a lam^ntable perpetual loss of that true felicity.

To conclude, sin is that which most displeases God, most pleases the
diuil, and is most hurtful unto man's heart. Behold now thou see (my
well-beloved) how much sin is to be hated, eschued and detested. Yea more than
any of us can comprehend or express, it is to be hated and highly to be
avoided. Wherefore let us incessantly arm our selves st^utly to fight against
this evil: against this so mischee^ous an enemy, and so deadly and mortal foe
Our weapons are none other then the virtues them selves. And our combats are
even the actions of virtue, especially the laud and praising of God. And
prayer (as it is written) I will laud and call upon the Lord: and I shall be
safe from mine enimyes. Also the diligent watch and custody of the heart, is to
consider the continual divine presence. To humble our selves in all things,
and to hope in God with all our heart, and ever to fear him.

Of the enormitie of sin as touching the divine bounty before which the
sinner (by sinning) does preferte a frail and chaungeable good thing.

A^t. 5.
DIonisius does teach in the fourth Chapter of divine titles or names. God
his nature is goodness (doubtless) pure, perfect, and infinite. And
furthermore the nature of the first being can not in him be diminished, as
Thomas does eloquently bring in, in conclusion against* the Gentyles. And
therefore whatsoever perteyneth to the fullness worthiness most chiefly to be
wished after, desired, or the excelencie of goodness, the same agrees unto
the divine or uncreated bounty or virtue, with singular perfection and more
than most excelent excelencie. Whereupon it follows that the eternal and most
delightful God is the chief, most excelent, and incomparable God. In whom is
the most incomprehensible and unsearchable fullness not able to be discribed.
All good, all fair, and all desirable goodness, in comparison of whose
goodness, a^yablenesse, blessedness, and worthiness to be loved and desired,
all things that ever were created, do utterly fail by infinite ways or
means. Then since the goodness of God is such and so great, is it not a
most unreasonable thing, and a point of extreme folly and madness to
prefer before him any goodness or any thing created, being of it self both
variable, frail, and monientarious. (...) love, seek, desire, honor, or
worship it, more then that which is a creator, cause, and pattern of all
goodness? But as I have said in sin, this created goodness which is
chaungeable, dependyng of another, and needy, is preferred before the divine
unmeasurable goodness, which depends on nothing, and is simply perf^cte of
it self, by a final cleaving too, and a greater affection, and more stout
conversion of the mind which we bear unto this created goodness. Therefore
in this respect the enormitie of sin is great surely and almost unspeakable,
and the sinner him self does offer an inexplicable dishonor and injury to
the most good, most amyable, and most desirerable God. Whose goodness in the
mean while he sets light, dispiseth and abiecteth to the end he may
prefer before it most vain, earthly, frail, and worldly good things.

And therefore do now consider deeply and wisely (my well-beloved brother) and
regard how vain, how froward, filthy, vile, and foolish, their minds be
which do spend their time in vices, gluttony, and riot. Because they
prefer love more, and honor more, the carnal nourishementes, yea and this
flesh which ere long shall dye, putrifye, stincke, and be inwardly
replenished with ^lthinesse, before that most clean and most infinite
bounty and deuinitie of their Creator.

In like manner these covetous men are to be compted unhappy, vile, vain, and
most foolish. Who before God do prefer silver and gold (a white and
reddishe kind of earth) which are but certain deceiptfull mettalles. Other
do make like estimation, of houses, lands, and other earthly riches which do
rather hinder then further man's health and salvation before the most abundant
and plentiful fountain of all goodness: yea even before the highest first
true and only God: being that goodness only which is to be esteemed and
adored, who is always stored with infinite treasures and riches. In like manner
the proud men and such as are ambitious of worldly honor, and most desirous
of this transitory glory, are vain, se^celesse, and in most miserable
estate, who are not afraid to prefer their own praise, worship, and glory
before the honor, praise, and glory, of the high and blessed god. Who will
desire that which belongs and is due to ye only, holy, highest, and immortal
God, to be attributed unto themselves, being most vicious and ready to die
ths^elues they wot not how soon. Whereby they are thieves and robbers of the
heavenly honor. Yea spoylers and robbers of God his glory, and most worthi^
of confusion and eternal dampnation. Wherefore (my well-beloved) let thy heart be
hereby evermore converted toward that eternal divine and unmeasurable
goodness. Desire his honor and glory continually. Love, worship, and honor
him above all things. And vouchsafe not to regard, to love, or to enjoy any
earthly, frail or worldy thing, which is against his honor, love, or
reverence. That thou may truly and worthily sing with the Psalmist: Shall
^all (...).
not my soul be subject unto God? for my health and salvation comes from
him, he is my God, my health, and my defendor. So that from henceforth I will
not be moved. And as the Psalmist says again in ye sam^ place. In God is
(...). 17.
my glory and my salvation. He is the God of my help and my hope is in him.
In him thou may find all goodness most abundantly. If thou desire might
and power he is almighty. If thou seek wisdom, his wisdom is
unsearchable. If thou require beauty, his beauty is without peer. If thou
covet delights and pleasure, all delight and pleasure are in his right hand
until the latter day. If thou wish for either honor, praise, or glory, he
does glorify those which glorify him, for ever. To conclude, he loves those
that love him, he hears those that fear him, and he saves them that hope in
him. Briefly sin is altogether repugnant unto divine charity, and does
take away the fervent heat and perfection thereof. Therefore least the word of
God should be diminished or wax cold toward us: Let us (as much as we may)
eschew, be wail, and amend our sins, to the end that so we may be made the
more fervent daily in the holy love of the heavenly deuinitie. But even as by
the premises we see that sin is committed by cleaving more unto the
creature, than unto the Creator. So do we incur and light into sin by
inordinate affection unto the things created, yea although they be about God,
or pertaining unto him.

Of the enormytie of sin as toutching the divine majesty and authori^ie
which is dishonored by finne.

Act. 6.
THe more high in authority, great in dignity and prehemynent in majesty
that he is against whom we do sin: so much the more grievous and huge ye
sin is to be accosited, as if any man do offend a Prince, it is more
grievous then if he tresspassed against a poor pesant. Since God therefore
(against whose laws and against whom all deadly sin is committed) is
altogether of an infinite majesty, of an incomperable dignity and of most high
authority, it is euydent that sin being committed against such a person in
that respect is (by a certain kind of mean) of infinite enormytie, and be
yond all comparison more grievous then any offense committed against a simple
creature. Again the greater or the higher that the master or lawgeuer is, so
much the more enormyous or huger the fault is accounted, not to obey his
commandments, or to neglect his precepts. Since then our master and law
maker is the God of Gods, the Lord of Lords, the King of Kings, and the
Prince Job. 16.
of all Princes, unto whom (as it is written) there is none Esa. 23.
of the lawegeuers that may be compared, and of whom it is read: The Lord is
our Judge, the Lord is our lawmaker, and the Lord is our King: It is most
certain that as he is of an incomparable height, and of a majesty
vndisc^ibable, so not to obey his precepts, to set light by the^, to dissemble
them, or to neglect them, it is an incomparabl^ and (in a manuer) huge
frowardness and wickedness. For if it be grievous and thought to be wicked,
not to obey, reverence, and give honor unto a carnal, mortal, and sinful
father: is it not most wicked not to ^bey, to bowgh, to ^rouch, and to give
honor unto the spiritual father, the eternal creator, the holy, the
almighty, and immmortall god. For he is that great Lord above all things to
be praised. Psalm. 44.
Whose greatness that is to say: in perfection, dignity and glory, has none
end. Whom even Porpherye that great scoller of Plato, does call the King and
father of gods. Whom even the heavenly powers do dread, fear, and obey. The
which saying of Porpherye, Augustyne in his book de ciuitate dei does often
rehearse. To conclude, since ye law of the Gospel, is forthwith given us
propounded and commanded by the only begotten son of God himself, being in
all respects true god. It is most certain that the same is most diligently to
be observed. So that it is much more greeueous to alter or dissemble the same
then it had been in times past to transgress ye laws of Moses. Which were
propounded unto the people of God, by the mediation of Moses and the Angel.
Here upon the Appostle unto ye Hebrews says: whosoever transgressed Moses
law (being found guilty by two or three witnesses) dyed, without any pardon.
And how much greater punishment (says he) do you think that they deserve
which spurue against the Son of God, and holds the blood of his testement
to be defiled, and commits dispightfulnesse against the spirit of grace:
Furthermore after his holy supper, Christ (being now near unto his Passion)
even in the same night that he was betrayed said amongst other things unto
his Appostles. If I had not come nor spoken unto them they had not siuned.
Since then Christ our Lord, King, and Messiah (...). 14.
is come, and in his own proper person did speak unto Heb. 1.
our Fathers, and unto us by them, let us endeavor in all things to obey him,
for otherwyfe our sins will be wonderful great and huge. Out and alas
wherefore do we neglect them? wherefore are we oppressed in our sluggishe
bodies? or wherefore do we langwishe and pyne away in the dead sleep of
sins: These things (my welbelo^ed) consider deeply. Wey them dilligently.
Behold the^ narrowly. And to be astonyed at the displeasure of that most highly
exalted ruler of all things. Eschew and avoyde this dishonor, and keep his
commandments. For ^e it is unto whom (as the scriptures witness) the holy
Fsay. 4^.
army of ^eauen is assistant with reverent fear. Whose anger no man is able to
endure. By whom they bow which bear up the world. And at whose beck the
pillars of heaven do tremble and are affrayde. For behold the heaven and the
firmamentes of heavens, the deepes and all the earth with all that in them is,
shall be moved at the sight of God. And yet the madd senseless heart of man does
not fear nor dreadeth not his displeasure. Who leaves not sin unpunished.
And for the same does appoint pain and torment.

Of the enormitie of sin as touching, the (...) and rightcousnesse of the
divine mynd^ and thought.

Art. 7.
IT is certain that the iuster and holyer that any well disposed mind is, the
more the foul blot of sin does grieve and displease the same. And therefore
since ye divine mind highest, to be adored, is altogether, of an infinite
pureness, cquitie and holiness: yea rather the unmeasured, and
superessentiall pureness, the contemplatorie holiness, subsisting of it
self, the vndiscrybable equity and exemplare, (...), it is certain that the
same does detest and hate with an infinite abhominacion and hatred, the
deformity, blotte, and vnpureness^ of sin. Even as Moys^s speaks, saying:
God is against all wickedness. Then here upon ^nne has gotten his most
grievous and crooked enormytie, because it is against the most clean and pure
holiness of the dieuine mind. And against the vntermynable righteousness of
ye same. And the sinner himself which loves, chooses, embraseth, and houldeth,
that which god so much hates, reproves and puts from him (by a certain
kind of mean) does incur a wonderful displeasure, and purchase an infinite
deformity in the sight of God. To conclude: the holyr^ and more iuster god is,
so much the filthynesse and deformytie of sin is the more unlike him. And God
is (as has been said before) of a holiness and righteo^snesse perfectly
vnlimytable. And therefore sin is infinitely unlike the pureness of the
holiness, and the righteousness of the equity of the highest God. Hereupon
also sin is infinitely eloyned and se (...) far from god, for as Auguistn
says, in his ix book de ciuitate dei: There is none other eloyinge or distance
and separation from god, then his vnlyknesse or dissimilytude. And since
dissimilitude is the cause of displeasure, hatred and turning away, sin does
deserve the eternal and infinite displeasure which is a turnige away, and a
hatred to God, which deserves eternal dampnation. Whereupon it is said to be
infinitely grievous and horrible. Furthermore ye more natural, pleasant, and
conuenye^t, that any one thing is to another, so much the more contrary,
disconuenyent, and displeasing the opposite and contrariety thereof will be unto
it. Now the holiness is so natural to the glorious and highest God, that he
is substaincially holy, not by any addicion or puttinge to. So that it is
altogether one thing unto him, to be, and to be holy. Insomuche as his
holiness, is his essentyall beeinge. And his essential beeinge is holiness
most pure, most clean, and symply perfect. The most honorable prymordyall,
and fynall cause and reason of all virtue and pureness. Holiness is also
most conu^nyent and b^ste pleasinge unto GOD. For he loves and requires
holiness in conversation and does make those most dear, entyre, and
famyliare unto him, which are worthily and steadfastly bent unto holiness. Thus
it is most apparent how infinitely, contrary, displeasinge, and disc^uenyent
the vnpurenesse of sin is unto god. Therefore the Psalmist sings saying.
Early in the morninge I will present my self before thee, and I will behold
thee. For thou art no god that would have iniquity. Neither shall the
malycious dwell near unto thee. Nor the unjust shall not endure before thy
face. The like argument is of the enormytie of sin, by consideration of the
divine righteousness. Which is altogether unmeasureable, and inflexible
measure and the vnfallyble rule of all verteuous straightness. For god is
just, and has loved righteousness and his countenance has beheld equity.
Of whom it is red in an other place. Great and wonderful are thy works, O
Lord god almighty. Psalm. 10.
Just and true are all thy ways O King of the holy ones. Who shall not fear
thee, or who shall not magnify thy name? Apo. 15.
So yt the more we grow and increase in holiness and equity, so much the
more like, and the more beloved we are made unto our creator, Savior, and
Judge. And the more we are made filthy and over comm^n by vices: so much ye
more unlike and ye more hateful unto him, we are found. Who came to that Luke.
(...).
end (by the ministry of incarnation) into this world, that we should serve him
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lief. Who does
inuyte and stir us with an unspeakable love, and most godly vouchsa^ng, unto
ye imitation of his holiness. Saying: do not co^taminate, nor de^le your Leuit.
(...).
sowles. For I ye Lord your god am holy. Be holy. For I am holy. Behold (my
well-beloved) if thou ponder these things depely, often, and steadfastly, I
think that thou will on all sides hate and eschew, ye filthiness,
uncleanness, and huge enormitie of sin. Yea thou will more often make have unto
repentance. And examynation of thine own conscience in spending time in
deuyne service and receuing the holy communion. Wherein (according to the
Scriptures) all things are washed. And thou will furthermore indeu^r thy self
to be the more justly and wholly conversant in the presence of the most holy
God, and before the eyes of his unmeasurable righteousness.

Of the Enormitie of sin, by the consideracion of the divine charity, by the
which God did prevent. us, and greatly loved us.

Art. 8.
FUrthermore, the more liberally and abundantly that any man does prevent an
other in love, so much the more decent and just it is to love him again
heartily. And the more froward and perverse it is also to do any less then to
love him. But it is most ungrateful and untoward, even to hate him, abject
him, and despise him, and altogether to turn away from him: especially if the
beloved be suer that he is so beloved of the lover. Therefore to thend we may
the more effectually and sincerely know the abominable and accursed malice
of our iniquities, let us diligently behold how much, and in what manner our
sweet and just GOD did prevent us in love, yea, and not only in love, but in
a most liberal, merely, free, most pure, eternal and most worthy kind of
love. And first, this is certain, that no lover (being created) no not our
parents have loved or do love us so much as our ^eeke and sweet God does,
and has loved us. For of his eternal and pre^enting love toward us, he
created us when Genesis 1.
we were nothing, yea he formed us to his own Image Sap. 2.
and similitude. For the divine love did not leave god without branch or
spring^. Moreover, he has manyfoldly ^wtifyed our nature, not only with
natural gifts, but also with sundry supernatural graces. For he did set
(...) Genesis (...)
first formed fathers and parents in original righteousness, placing them in
Paradise, and preferring them before all the creatures that live in this
world, yea (and if they had not sinned) had transported them from Paradise
into the heavenly kingedome without death in the mean way. All which he meant
to have given to their posterity, if they had not done wickedly. Whereupon
although we he depryued of so many and so great commodities, yet ought we so ^o
love God, as if we were not thereof deprived, since that depriuacion came not
from God. Furthermore also because union is the proper effect of love, and
consequently therewithal mutual society and perticipacion. For love does
knyt the lover to the beloved, and makes all good things that the lover has
to become unto the beloved. If therefore we desyer rightly and worthily to know
how and in what manner our God has loved us, let us behold in what manner he
has conjoined himself to us and to our nature. For behold, did not the only
begotten son of God himself by the will of God the Father, and the
cooperacion of the holy ghost, unity our nature unto his divinity, by a
substanci a, immediate, high, and inward kind of union? yea by so great an
union as none could be more greater or more worthy? And therefore since he
conjoined himself unto our nature so highly, and so in wardly, it is apparaunt
also how highly he did love us before hand, especially since he vouchsafed and
deigned so long to be conversant we us in the nature which he did so assume and
take upon him, yea even the eternal Father himself did so love us that he
gave his only beegotten Son as the Evangelist John does say: Who exhorts
us again in his first epistle saying: ^earely beloved let us love god, for he
first loved us. Furthermore he joined our minds incessa^tly unto him and by
supernatural gifts, as by grace, doing ye which is acceptable, and by actual
motion of the holy ghost. By faith, hope, charity, and the other virtues powered
upon us and by their acts. Yea further, our god is ready to co^municat al yt he
has (yea himself also) unto us. For there is no eye that has seen, nor ear
that has hard, Esa64.
neither is man's heart able to comprehend what God has prepared for his elect.
For he has prepared himself as a reward for them. Since he created us to enjoy
the most sweet fruicion and happy vision of holiness. And this is the most
lyberal love of god that giving us his gyfts, he gives (even with the same
gifts) himself unto us. That we may truly, eternally, and happily behold,
have, possess, and enjoy him. Herewith he so much loved us, that by the mouth
of Solomon, Pro. 8.
he says unto us: My delights are to be with the sons of men. Now therefore
(my well-beloved) mark how perverse, how uncomely, and how great a fault it is,
not to requite with love, this, such, and so great a lover. Yea to neglect, to
offend, to fet light by, to dispose or to hate him. And he that sins,
wylleth in all things that which God will not, and that which god wylleth that
will not he accomplish. Therefore he does not truly love God, since it is
the property of friends to will and to nyll in all things alyke. Yea he
despises an^ (...) light by God, whose precepts he regards not. And so he
does altogether turn himself away from him, and yeldeth no turn unto this
so wonderful, meek, most bountiful and most excellent lover. But pays
evil for good, and hate for love. Yea he dispiseth God, who has showed
himself so famyliar unto him. Therefore let us (my well-beloved) heartely learn
to love God sincerely and inwardly. Let us be carried unto him with all
ferue^tuesse of mind. Let us conform our affectes always unto his most holy
will. Let us hate whatsoever he hates, and let us earnestly embrace all
goodness.

Of the enormitie of sin, considered by the benefits of God.

Act. 9.
IT (...) manifest that ingratitude, is much reproved both in man's opinion and
Gods judgment. And the more or greater benifits in any one man does bestow
upon an other, so much the more wickedness it is not to requite ye same, to be
(...) or unmindful. But it is, most wicked to pr^fer evil for good. Moreover,
ye longer ye benifits are continued, the oftener that they are renewed, the more
liberally that they are multiplied: yea the higher and more worthy that the
(...) lower or inferior yt he be which receives such (...), so much the
larger and greater ought ye takers to be. And the greater sin is committed if
ye receiver be found ungrateful or vnobedient unto the benefactor. Therefore to
the e^d that ye malice and ouerthwartnes of our ingratitude, disobedience, and
sin, may more plainly appear, may be the more heartily bewailed, and the more
carefully amended and avoided, let us peyze the benifits and bou^ties of God
toward us. And first to begin with this, how he made us and not we our selves,
whatsoever we have or be, it came from him, and of him we received the same:
our body, and all the members thereof: also a reasonable soul and all the
powers thereof. If any one member of our body, or any power of the mind or soul
were lacking, as a foot, a hand, an eye, or our will and desire: How sorry should
we he? yea how much would we love him, by whose help and goodness that might be
recovered and restored yt were wanting? Why then do we not love the most
liberal and the most (...) God? why do we not give him thanks? why fear w^ not
to be froward, disobedient, and ungrateful, which did (...) give unto us all
these things before rehearsed, even from the beginning of our governance, without
our motion or merits? is not eue^ the ess^tial being, amiable unto al me^
naturally? as Augustine does well dispute in his book de ciuitate dei. Further
our being, our liefe, our feeling, our moving, our talk, and reasoning, and our
freedo^ are imparted unto us by God from (...) beginning of our (...), v^til
this (...) time: he has preserved us from innumerable perils: he has apoin
ted unto every man his holy Angel to att^d him continually. He hat^ brought
(...) to holy (...) from all (...) has (...) us with (...) virtues: he has
spared us sinners by his abundant mercy: yea even until this instant he has
vouchsafed to await for our conversion. And doubtless has taken many out of
thy^ world who^ he has eternally damned, although they sinned not so much as
we do: and yet he does earnestly expect (through his incomprehensible
clemency) to see our ame^dment. Now (my beloved) are these (...) small or
smally to be esteemed? does not God incessantly heap benifits upon us and
succor us? does not he preserve us in being? and with us all yt we have? does
not he cloth us and feed us daily? quickly for gets the penitent, restores
the grace and virtues which he had lost, stirs and leads us daily unto
some good things, and instructs us at all times by his holy scripturs.
Furthermore he has promised and prepared for us, that eternal, supernatural,
and most plentiful blessedness. Behold (my best beloved) how froward an
ingratitude and hugeness of offense it is, to offend or not to regard or
consider, this highest, most flowing and never failing most excelent
benefactor. Herewithall it behooves thee diligently to ponder the singular
benifits given the^ by thy creator, which has beautified thee (not meanly) but
with great gifts of nature as well in thy body, as in thy mind and soul. For
since it is (according to Augustines saying in ciuitate dei.) A great
happiness to be borne witty and ingenious, and (by the same man's wittiness)
beutie, and eloquence are the gifts of God: although most men do abuse them:
then weigh wisely unto how great a thankfulness, and obedience thou art
bound, not by vayn glorying or preferring thy self before any man, nor by
dispising any man, but by conceyuing great grief in thy sins, by more bitter
bewayling of them, and last of all, by more careful foresight and anoyding of
them, and by vehement ^eare of the divine judgment. Because as Christ does
protest: unto whom so ever much is given, much shall be of him required. Yea
rather ye more benifits thou co^sideres^ to be given thee of God, so much the
more thou ought to be inflamed in love toward him, so much the more
perfectly ought you to subdue thine appetites, and so much ye more thankful
(...) humble should thou be found. Behold thou have at gods hand ye gifts of
nature, ye goods of fortune, and the fruits of the church. Are not then thy
sins great and grievous especially since they proceed not of man's infirmity or
of ignorance but are such as thou know to be unlawful? And mark therefore
what account thou must give unto God for these things. Last of all the
enormitie of our sins is vehemently agreuated by the benifits which we have
received by Christ, I mean those which he (for our salvation) did take upon
him, and suffered. For it is not our peruers^nesse, ingratitude, and wickedness
infinite, whilst we dishonor despise and forsake the only begotten son of
God? who for our deliverance did so unspeakably dispoile him self. Did most
mercifully incline his most high divinity, unto ye baseness or our nature,
voutsafed to be conversant emo^gst men so many years. Yea in so great
humility, pouertic, patience, tribulation, persecutions and temptations, which
took such (...) pains for our salvation in fasting, traueiling, preaching,
and praying. Which did (as Matthew tells) give (...) body and blood with an
unspeakable charity unto his disciples, and does give them daily unto us most
(...) and comfortably. Which lastly did suffer for our sakes a most bitter and
vile kind of death. And has (for our conversion unto faith and grace) done so
many miracles by his holy Apostles and other elect. And all this considered the
more that any man does honor any other then him, so much the more iniquity it
is not to rehonor him again. But it is most leude and wicked even to dishonor
him, especially since he is most excelent both by virtue and authority. And
therefore since by the before named benifits as well natural as supernatural,
especially by the incarnation of ye word, and by the glorificatio^ of his
humanity, god has so inexplicable, honored mankind, and has vouchsafed to
call us which of substance are no better the^ pore little worms of the earth
(yea and has made us) his sons, heirs, and friends: furthermore has
promised again to carry us up into the most worthy Court of the highest
heavens, and into the equality of the angelical blessedness: are not our sins
unspeakably huge and great, by yt which we do dishonor, offend, and despise a
God so wonderfully benign? which has also adorned certain of his present
elect (...) free chose^ with such most excelent holiness? Now therefore
(beloved) let us worship and reverence God in all things with the whole zeal
of our hearts. And let us do as much as we are able to ye honor of his name:
yea let us not think that we do any thing yt is worthy: but let us heartily be
sorry that we are able to do no more: because even as he is of exceeding
majesty, so is he worthy of infinite reverence.

Of the enormitie of sin by reason of the divine presence which beholds all
things.

Art. 10.
THis one thing furthermore does increase the greeuousnesse of our sins, and
does accumulate the contempt of our mind against God, that we dare be so bold
as to sin in the sight and presence of our creator, savior, and judge. And he
our eternal and most mighty Exodus 36.
God does most plainly, eternally, and unspeakably, behold, peize, and discern
all things that are past, present, or to come. As holy Job does profess
saying: does not God know my Job. 23.
way, and does he not count all my steps? And again so speaking to God thou
have put (sauth he) my feet in fetters, and have watched and marked all my
paths, and have considered the (...) of my feet, Whereupon in Hieremie it is
red thou Hier. 32.
most (...), great, and mighty, thy name is Lord of hosts: great in thy
councels, and incomprehensible in thy thoughts, whose eyes are open over all ye
sons of Adam, yt thou (...) give to every man according to his ways wherein he
walks. (...) not an earthly judge, or a mortal man think a great (...) or
dispight don unto him if any of his subjects should in his (...) and presence
transgress his precepts? But how much greater injury and dishonor do we
commit against ye highest, heavenly, and eternal judge, whilst we fear not
(...) in his (...) which is truly present every where, yea mostpresent and
fulfilleth, judges, and pondereth all things that are done. Here upon
(beloved) think always upon the divine presence, honor the looks of the
heavenly countenance, worship every where the pureness of the divine mind.
And blushe for shame to do that before the highest God, which thou would be
abashed to do before a good or honest man. Nay rather tremble and quake, and
presume not to think or to desire that before the presence of his (...), which
thou would be any thing at all a fearde to speak before a good or honest
man. For God beholds the (...) of the heart, and that which unto men, is the
speech of their mouth, that which is with God is the thought of the heart. And
again, that which the earthly judge before 1. Reg. 16.
whom thou art (...) does gather of thine outward deeds, the same the
dreadful and most just God can judge and determyne of thine inward desires,
which receives the intent or affection of the (...) or deed. That man is base,
(...) and unjust, which honors the presence, and (...) the judgment of men,
more than of God. Wherefore (my dearly beloved) let that offense never be
attributed (...) thee, but (...) hear always and in all places that saying of
(...) in thy (...). The Lord lives, in (...) sight I stand this day. And
therefore (as Boethius says) there is a great necessity of well doing commanded
us, because we do all things before the eyes of ye judge which sees and
decerneth al things.

Of the enormitie of sin by respect of him that sins.

Art. 11.
Hitherto we have treated of the enormitie of sin having regard to God,
against whom all sin is committed, either directly or by means. For although
certain sins are termed to be against god, certain other against the neighbor,
and certain against our selves. (I mean against the sinner himself) because
that God is the nerest object and matter most at hand unto some sins as unto
those that are directly contrary to the divine virtues, and unto some other
the neighbor is the nerest matter, and unto some he him self which sins.
Nevertheless all sin is against God, which detesteth, punishes, and
forbids all sins. For by ye divine laws al sin is forbidden or diswaded.
Now then it is requisite to speak somewhat of the enormitie of

First then the enormitie of sin may be marked by our inferioritie. For the
less that any man is by comparion with a master or lawgiuer, so much the more
humble, and so much the more in subjection he ought to be. Whereupon the
contempt seems to be somewhat) the more grievous if he become rebellious to
the law giver, or superior ^im self, the^ if he himself were greater, or if a
greater the^ himself did commit it. For man himself does possess ye lowest
place, in rank of matters or substances belonging to understanding, may not
the^ yt lawgiuer the most highly exalted God, (holy unmeasured, and to be
adored) disdain much when he sees us vile little worms of the earth (bearing
clayish vessel upon us, being compared to vanity and ashes, replenished in
our bodies with infinite sins against the soul) that we do not obey his
co^mau^dements, but dishonor his majesty, and forget his benifits, yea every
hour offending him incessa^tly, not harkening to his exhortations which he
makes unto us by his ministers, and not regarding his own presence?
furthermore by this consideration of our lewdness and vileness, we ought
vehemently to heap up, aggreuate, detest, and bewail, yea and to despise,
reprove, and to correct both our selves and all our excesses against God, since
yt we most poor, most miserable, and most vile creatures, which shall soon
die, (yea rather daily dying) have so often and so grievously dishonored,
offended, despised, and daily do not cease to offend our lord, our most highly
exalted, infinite, almighty, most glorious, and superessential God. Behold, we
dust and ashes, we worms and rottenness, which like a flour do come forth and
are w^thred, which fly away like a shadow, and never do co^tiuue in one ^state,
have so often and so vnmeasurably, halted and dissembled, and so incessantly do
sin against ye king of kings, against the Prince of all men, against the
creator of the world most laudable, inuariable, and most highly exalted, who is
the simplest, purest, most bright shinyng, and most holy ghost. Wherefore then
d^e we most vaynely glory? whereof are we most foolish proud? wherefore
do we ^ot humble, despise, bewail, and correct our selves, with fastings,
with stripes, with watching, praying, and other fruits of repentance. Therefore
let us earnestly be displeasant unto our selves, and let us most deeply and
without delay h^mble our selves before the most pure God, dispising no body
but our selves.

Secondarily, the enormitie of sin (on the b^halfe of the sinner) is noted by
the superiority of him that sins, as by pree^inence and preferment in
authority. For the more that he which sins be preferred in principallitie,
or iuditiall authority, the more he is bound to the more ample justice,
righteousness, charity, and exe^plare life. Especially since the judge or
president (according t^ the Philosopher) o^ght to be the lively law it self,
and the living equity: whereby his sins become the greater and more enorme,
especially if he have authority in Ecclesiastical matters, and be bound to
attend unto doctrine and preaching. Whereupon that which should be to a simple
man but a s^al tr^spasse: such is accounted in a parsonage a huge and heinous
offense and sin.

Thirdly, the enormitie of sin (as touching him that sins

Fourthly, on the behalf of ye science or knowledge of him that his gains or
profit in knowledge has been, ^ce Christ protests saying. The servant which
knows his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. As
the Apostle James does also testify saying: it is a sin to (...). (...).
him that knows good, and does it not. For as Peter the (...). (...). (...).
Apostle says: it were better not to know the way of righteousness, then to
go backward from it, after knowledge ^f it.

Fifthly, on the behalf of virtue, for the greater perfection

Sixthly, on the behalf of his state or profession. As if a

Seventhly, by the benifites given unto him that sins.

Eighthly, by the common custom of sinning, which inducet^

Ninthly, by reason of the age, for one self same fault is

Tenthly by ye easiness yt the sinner had not to have sinned, it might have
been with so much the more ease obs^ed and kept. For in sinners of such as be
of good understanding there is more voluntary consent, since from their inward
thoughts they are l^sse enforced unto evil. And therefore they do sin more
grievously then the rest that are their (...)quales, especially since they do
both abuse gods (...) unhappily, and are so much the more ungrateful unto
their creator. By these things let every man weigh and consider the enormytie
of his sins. Because in some men all these things (yea, fully all these
things, which do aggreuate sin) do concur, in some many. And in other
some fewer. But unto (thee my derely belo^ed) I propound the last of all these
points to be most singularely considered. Least thou should dampnably abuse
the goodness of thine excelent wit. But thou most (by a worthy endeavor) bend
they self so much the more warely unto all virtues: as it is easier unto thee
then unto others, to become virtuous. The which if thou do, thou shall be most
devout and most acceptable unto God. But if thou regard not thy doings, and
give place unto vices, surely thine iniquity and dampnacion will be exceeding
great. Whereupon Augustine in his second book, De ciuitate dei, says: If
there be any natural part apparent in thee which is laudable, it is no way
perfect nor purged but by pyetie, (which is worshipping of God) and by impiety
it will be ouerthrone and punished. Further of all that has been said the
very aggreuating of sin it self is to be understood by the other parts
thereof.

Of the enormitie of sin, by the object or matter about the which it is
committed.

Art. (...).
AS we have already touched, some sins are sayd^ to be against GOD, some
against the neighbor, and some against the finner himself. And it is
certein^, that the sin against God are the most grievous generally. It is
also now handled of the greu^usnesse of sin, having respect to God. And as
those sins are said to be most grievous, which are against GOD for his
goodness, majesty, holiness, charity, and his bestowing of benefittes. So
the lyker unto God that the neighbors be against whom the sin is committed,
the more grievous and enorme the sin shall be accounted. And thereupon the
enormitie of sin against the neighbor, Is first marked Luke. 10
He that hears you hears me, and he which dispiseth you dispiseth me.
Moses also says to the rebellious Israelites: Exo. 16.
Your murmuring is not against us but against God. And Romans 16.
hereupon the Apostle teaches in his epistle to the Romans: let every living
soul be subject to ye higher powers. For there is no power but from God: and
those things which are from god are ordained. But he which resists authority
resists against the ordinance of god. And they which do resist him do
purchase to themselves eternal damynation.

Secondarily, the enormytie of trespasses against ye neighbor

Thirdly, by the benifites which the sinner has received thy Parents from
whom the offspring has obtained, being nowrishement, attendaunce, and
instruction. Also against masters unto whom honor and love are due. (Or
rather according to the Philosophers opynion, we can not yield unto our parents
and our masters things equiuolent to their deserts. And therefore it is
written. Oh how evil a man is he which abandoneth his father? and he is cursed

Fourthly by the goodness, virtue, or holiness, of him against whom the
trespass is done, who, the better, ^ster, or holyer, that he be. So much the
more wicked it is to do him trespass. For a special honor is due unto them
that are wise and learned. And therefore the injury or lack of reverence that
is showed unto such men is accounted the more heinous fault.

Fifthly by the state, degree, or order, whereupon it is an exceeding great
offense to commit trespasses against the ministry.

Sixthly by reason of the age. For there is great reverence due unto the elders.
And therefore to do to them injury is thought the greater offense. Hereupon
the scriptures teach Leuit. 19.
us saying: before a gray head thou shall rise and do reverence.

Seventhly by the simplicity and ignorance, yea, or by ye folly of him
against whom the trespass is committed. Who, the more innocent or simple that
he be, the more cruelty it is co^ted to do him hurt. And in like manner if he
be either altogether or in part deprived of his reasonable understanding. For
unto such great compassion and succor should be ministered and therefore it is
counted a great evil in ye book of Iobe saying: The just man's simplitytie is
laughed to skorne. Iobe.. (...).


Eighthly by reason of the love or trust which we have in any Iobe. 36.
by his friend shall call upon the Lord and he will hear Eccle. 9.
him. And ^n Ecclesiasties: do not forsake thine old friend. For the new
shall not be like unto him. Hereby the dissimulers and crafty creatures do
provoke the wrath of god. Nynthly the imperfection or monstrous defect of any
person, Deuteronomy. (...)
sentence for the wydowe and the Orphante, and loves the stranger. Whereupon
it is written by such as s^steyne wrong in manner aforesaid, that their cries
came unto (...) ears of the Lord of Sabbath: Eleuenthly by the adversity
(...). (...).
compassion in my soul upon the poor and needy man. And in an other place.
When I satt (says he) like a King that has his army about him, yet was I the
comforter of them that mourned. Therefore a certain wise man does admonish us
saying: Fail not them that weep in consolation. And the Appastle says: we
should weep with them Romans 12.
that weep. By these things every man may consider the enormytie of his
sins against his neighbor, as by respect of him against whom the offense is
committed And generally the greater damage or evil that any man does by
trespassinge against his neighbor, so much the more grievously he sins
beyond his equals in comparison. And therefore to deflower a virgin is a very
huge offense. Slander also takes away the good name which is to be (...)
before silver and gold. Yea and sowing of discord, which breaks away and
diminishes love (that is to be preferred before silver, gold, and good name)
they are very huge and enorme offenses. Yea, greater in all respects then
theft. And again the more that the matter of sin or offense be consecrated
unto God, the greater is the offense. And last of all (my well-beloved) it shall be
meet for thee diligently and wisely to weighe the enormyties of thine own
offenses committed against thy neighbor by any manner of means. And that
according to the considerations before rehearsed and towched, thou endeavor
thy self worthily to correct them. Diligently (hereafetr) to eschew them and
to behave thy self well and orderly unto all men according to their state,
condition, or quallity, even as the Appostle teaches to Romans (...).
the Romans saying: Give unto all men their dew. Fear unto whom fear
does belong, and honor to whom honor appertains.

Of the enormytie of sin having consideration to thend and circumstances.

Art. 13.
FUrthermore the name of circumstaunce in actions of virtue, is taken
ordinarily by circumstance according to ye place, for as ye place does locally
in^yron and stand about the matter or thing in hand, yt which does ^ue^ touch
it, and yet is unto it an outward affection: So the conditions of human
actions, which concern the very actions themselves, and yet are without their
substance, are called circumstaunces. As Thomas in the first chapter of his
second treatise and the se^enth question. There are (says he) seven
circumstaunces which are contained in this verse.

Who, what, where, by what help, why, how, and when. For a man must mark who
did it, by what help, or assistance he did work, in what place, what time,
to what purpose, and in what manner it was done. But for as much as the action
takes his proper kind by the end or purpose where unto it tends, therefore
work it self is of the substance of the action. And therefore when the end
and the work are termed circumstaunces, it is not to be understood of the
principal end or action, in that that it is properly, but it is meant by some
end adjoined, and by some property applied about the work or action. Of
these circumstances this one. Is of greatest consideration. That is to say: To
what end any thing is done. And therefore to the more unlawful, or wicked,
end, or purpose, any thing be done, the fault is so much the more agreuated.
And if any man pretend his work to sundry ends or purposes which are
forbidden, the more, and the more perverse that these ends be, so much greater
is the enormytie of his sin. As if any man do steal to the end and purpose
that he may maynteyne delyghtes, banquitinge, and whoredom, yea, or to
attain thereby worldely promotion. And furthermore if any man be of the kind
of good men, if yet the end or purpose that he preteudeth ^e vain and lewed,
the thing then it self is unlawful. As if any man, pray, fast, and give,
alms, to obtain men's praises thereby. Then for as much as (by the testimony
of Dyonysius goodness is an entyer cause, (that is to say: whyther all the
circumstaunces of virtue before rehearsed, do concur) and the defectes or
euilles do happen by the omyttinge of any circumstaunces: Therefore the
greeuousnesse of the sin is so much the greater, the more that the number of
cir cumstaunces be which are forsaken, and the more that the party does go
from the very conuenyent circumstaunces of virtue it self. Hereupon let us
now not only be sorry that we do those things which of their own nature be
vicyous and absolutely evil, and do also omit things that we should do: But
also because we have sinned in an iuconuenient time, in a place more for
bydden, to a very wicked end and purpose, by dishonest means or assistaunce,
and in a most unapt manner and fashion, even vnfearfully and irreverently
altogether, we must consider also how often, and with what manner of person,
with how great delight in sinning, and with how great, or what kind of offense
to our neighbor. For the more that the desiere of sinning (I mean the very
willingness to evil) be more bent thereunto, the fault is so much the more
grievous. Likewise it is conuenyent and we must consider of the good things
which we do whither they be done in due time and place, with a right intent
and reverently, also. For it is more grievous in the time of divine service on
ye holy days, and in the church, to have a wandering mind, to tattle, to look
gazinge about, and to set mind, upon vice and wickedness. Therefore (my
well-beloved) endeavor thy self to fulfill the good deeds whereunto thou art
bounden, with the circumstaunces before rehearsed as much as in thee lies and
do heedely consider the greeuousnesse of thy sins, by all these things now
rehearsed which do aggreuate sin and wickedness.

Of the deformytie, hatefullnesse and loathsomeness of sin by consideration
of it self.

Art. 14.
Because god which is dishonored by sin does consist of an infinyte great
honorablenesse, a^blenesse and beauty: Therefore sin is judged to be also of
an infinite loathsomeness, hatefulness and deformytie. For as much as it is
displeasing, and contrary, to the divine will, holiness, and equiti^, hereupon
sin ought (by the laws of God) neither to be committed nor to be allowed for
no cause, for no fear of damage, danger, or torment, nor for any love of
commodytie, prosperity or ^ye. Yea, rather should a man willingly receive and
ind^ ^ost grievous death, then to incur the least sin. And therefore
whosoever does either for flattery or for menaces or by regardinge man's
favor, yield unto sin, he declares sufficiently that he is imperfect. To
conclude, the least evil of the fault, that is to say: The least sin is more
hateful and more to be fledd from, then any kind of evil in the pain or any
kind of punnyshment (yea, though it be infernal) as touching that it is
merely punishment. Therefore we ought not to sin for the avoiding of any
torment, loss, or discomodity, but rather ought a man to be willing to bear
any pain then to offend God: For to offend god is as much as to leese God.
(I mean the unmeasurable goodness of God) and to set our own wicked wills
directly against his most holy will. And therefore now (my well-beloved) consider
how great is their frowardness and how far are they distant from true
perfection, whose whole affection tends day and night to do those things
which are forbidden by thy divine laws. Which by slattery, gifts, and
poursute, do labor to draw those things, unto their consent, with the which
they may fulfill there most filthy desiers. And which study to be hououred, to
be inrytched, and to have their propriety in this world. Therefore let ye
state of our minds stand inflexible. Let us neither be puffed up with
prosperity nor yet over come with adversity. Neither let us fall hedlong from
the way of righteousness t^rough fear of man's displeasure, rebuke, or
dismaying, and let us beyond all comparison fear the death of the soul (which
is sin) more then the death of the body.

Against those which do more fear, eschew, and hate, the evil of the
punishment, then the (...) of the fault.

Art. 15.
Fear is the flying from or detesting of evil. Therefore the worse that any
things be, the more to be fled from, and the more detestable they are judged
to be. For as much as evil is the object of fear: So y^ it is already
evident that the evil of the fault is vnmeasurably to be fled from. But the
evil of the pain or the punishment of sin, or any kind of afflictiue
adversity, is not (in it self) absolutely evil, or simply to be fled from or
avoided. But it is justly sent by God, and is profitable in this world to the
taking away of sin, and the pouring of grace upon us. In hell it is the work
of the divine justice, and ordained for the fault although it be hurtful unto
the dampened. If the^ since these things are so, how imperfect, vile, and
childish, are they which in this life do rather fear and fly from the just
punishment, confusion, and rebuke of their sins, then from the very (...)
thie deformity of sin it self, the displeasure of the divine holiness, and
the dishonor of the highest God? These be those disordered and miserable
creatures in whom private love does wey down godly love, in whom seruyle fear
is greater then chyldish obedience, which do more honor, dread, and esteem
the sight and judgment of the world the^ of god: never fearing to do that in
the presence and beholding of God him self, which they would be abashed to do
in ye sight of a man being their judge in this world. These are more sorrowful
for their own temporal or corporal discommodities, losses, or punishments, the^
for gods displeasure for the loss of grace, or for the wounding of their
soul. These men do pretend and feign a certain amendment, when the judgment
and examination of men is at hand or approaches. But when he is absent, whom
they feared and is not looked for, to return shortly unto judgment or
punishment, the^ they live as they did before. Go to then (well-beloved) let us
fear God most sincerely, let us (without all comparison) hate the evil of the
fault, and heartily embrace such punishment as is laid upon us for sin, yea
and lot us bear it patiently. and let us most faithfully bewail and lament
the hurts of the soul (that is sins) more the^ the l^se of temporal things,
or the afflictions of y^ body. Last of all, we shall be able to accomplish all
these things, if we mark effectually that saying of Solomon: My son honor
God, and thou shall prosper. Besides (...). 7.
him, see thou fear no man. And again he says: He P^ou. 29*
that fears God, does tremble at nothing, and he y^ fears man shall soon
come to destruction. I mean not that we ought not at all to fear our
superiors, since ye Apostle Peter says: Servants be subject unto your masters
with all fear. But my meaning is, that they are not to be dreaded as me^, but
as the Uicars and ministers of God, least through the fear of them we offend
God by any means. Now pray unto the most merciful God heartily, and incessantly
for grace, to obtai^ the perfection in this article here discribed.

How sundry men, upon sundry causes and motyues, do eschew sins.

Art. 16.
FUrthermore there are some which are withdrawn from vices with only servile
fear. That is with the dread of punishments and not with an affection to
felicity, nor with the very sincere love of God. These men (as long as they
continue such) are not acceptable to God, yet such kind of fear is not
altogether unprofitable, in as much as it withdraws from sin. There is
nothing that is done as it ought to be, or acceptable and pleasing of God,
unless that proceed of the charity of God, and be done by the love of
righteousness. As Augustine in the xxj. book De ciuitate dei: vices (says
he) are overcome by a laboursome difficulty. Neither it is possible to do
that truly or sincerely, but only through a delight in true righteousness.
But they which do seem (by the means before rehearsed) to decline from
evil, and to do some good things, are evil and unfaithful servants, because
there remains in them an affect to sin, and a well lyking unto things that
are evil. Of such kind of servants our savior says to his Apostles: I will
not now call you servants: for the servant John. 15.
knows not what the master does. And again: John. 8.
some do eschew sins in hope of reward, and desire of everlasting
felicity. In these men the love of God is not perfect and altogether sincere
without dissimulation, because they are bended backewardes toward them
selves, beholding and thinking upon their own commodity, and occupy
themselves most in thinking of their hyer and reward. But if such d^ more
regard and affect their own commodity then the honor of God: If they be more
induced by y^ aff^ctio^ of private love, the^ by the motion of divine charity,
unto ye doing of good works, the^ they deserve nothing, and are rightly named
mercenary me^. Nevertheless it is lawful to serve god, by ye beholding ye
reward, and by ye affection to heavenly felicity. So as yt honor of God be
preferred before a man's own reward, and that y^ very reward of blessedness
which is desired, be ordered and diposed to y^ honor and glory of God. The
which who so does, he shall not only not be a mercenarie, but furthermore a
friend: because he loves God and righteousness above all things. Whereas they
which are not yet perfect, are accounted to have a beginning fear or mixed
dread: because they withdraw themselves from si^s, and do also apply them
selves to virtues, partly by the fear of ye punishments of hell, or these
temporal and present pains, and partly by the hope of heavenly rewards.
Notwithstanding y^ love of God (in them) does over wey private love, and they
desire the honor and glory of God both firstly, and finally. And therefore
they are in the state of health and grace. Furthermore there are others which
wtdraw themselves and depart from sins, and do good, by ye only love of the
divine godhead, and the true and sincere zeal of his honor, being converted
fervently with their whole mind unto God. And such desire or couette nothing
else (at all) but that God being glorious and holy, should be in all things
honored and loved, and do never think upon the reward, nor have respect
thereunto. Which bow not back toward themselves, but rather do altogether dye
unto themselves, to the end they may most purely live unto God. As the Apostle
witnesses saying: I live not now, but Christ li^eth (...).
in me. Furthermore if these men do at any time think upon their reward and
desire it, that shall not proceed of inordinate back bending toward
themselves, but by a charitable relation unto God, and because it is gods will
and pleasure that they should desire eternal felicity, as men confirmed in
goodness, and happily inioying God: that they should most perfectly apply their
whole mind unto his honor, love and praises. And so the love of the reward shall
not repugne the perfection of charity. These are the friends and sons of
God, whose minds are converted into the most pure affects of divine charity,
and the zeal of righteousness. And these men do in all places, and at all times
behave themselves virtuously: because the reason of well doing, is uniform,
pure, and stable in them, even as God him self, being the perfect love, the
zeal of very righteousness, the presence of the divinity, the love of
pureness, the mighty affection of divine honor, the well pleasing of good and
honest things, and of all virtues. Now then (my well-beloved brother) fly from
vice and exercise goodness, rather by the most pure love of god, ye zeal of
equity, and affection to pureness, then either by fear of pains, or respect
of rewards. And if thou have not yet attayued y^ perfection, pr^y unto god
therefore, and in ye mean while fly from sins. At y^ le^ by fear of eternal
da^pnatio^, and ye love of ye heavenly blessedness.

That we are not able in this life fully to comprehend the enormitie of sin.

Art. 17.
AS Augustine speaks in the xxj. book de ciuitate dei, the pain and eternal
punishment which is appointed for temporal sins, does therefore seem hard and
unjust unto man's sonces, because in this life we lack that sense and
understanding of the highest and purest wisdom, by the which it might be
perceived how much wickedness is committed in preuaricatio^ and dissembling
with God. For we have already manifoldly showed y^ the enormitie of sin is so
much the greater, as the goodness of God is greater, before the which the
frail goodness is by sin preferred. And likewise y^ the higher Gods majesty
and authority are, which by sin are dishonored, yea how much the greater gods
holiness and equity be, which do abhor y^ filthiness of sin. And again y^
greater that gods charity be toward us, and the more and better y^ his
benifits be, which he has bestowed upon us. And bi^ause we are not able to
comprehend in these fleshly senses and natural mind, the unmeasurableness of
the divine bounty, y^ vndiscribabe highness of the divine majesty, the most
clear infinitenes of the divine holiness and equity, and the greatness of the
divine love, and of his benifits toward us, nay rather that we are not able
with a clear eye to behold them: I do therefore certainly believe that we can
not fully know y^ e^ormitie of sin whilst we are in this estate. Here upon the
perfect and holy men, y^ more sincerely and loftily y^ they did behold God in
this world, and did in their minds (being lightened and anointe^ from above)
the more diligently mark those things whereby the enormite is agreuated and the
better percei^ed (whereof I have already handled many) so much the more they
despised, humbled, and corrected themselves, yea and did most vehemently
ponder, bewail, and chastise the least sins. To conclude: one sin is
aggreuated by another. Since therefore, the sins of our affections, speeches,
things committed and omitted, be so many that they exceed and ^scape the
knowledge and nombring of our thoughts and minds: it is certain y^ we can not
understand the enormitie of our vices, but by a very singular grace from God.
And therefore it is written: who Psalm 18.
understands his faults? purge me O lord from my hidden falts: and from
offenses unknown spare thy servant. Hereupon in all respects we ought (by
right) patiently and with all gladness to sustein all adversities whatsoever
happen unto v^, for our so hidden lurking many and great offenses. But because
we do not ponder nor consider the enormitie of our sins, because we do not
humble our hearts low enough before God, because in adversities we do not give
thanks unto God, which loves us, rebukes us, and chastizeth us: but being
overcome with impatience, we fall into disordinat sorrow and baseness of
courage. Yea further because the other things a little before rehearsed, which
do aggre^ate sin as well on the behalf of the sinner, and of the object or
matter whereaboutes the sin is committed, as also by means of the ends and
circumstances are so many and so great in perticularitie, that none of us can
distinctly know them all: Therefore we are not able fully to understand the
greuousnes of our sins. But we ought infinitely to humble our selves, and
heartily to call upon the divine clemency, and only to breath too, or take
comfort in the mercies of God. And to say with the true penitent sinner: mine
iniquities have over taken me, and I had no power to see them. And again: our
iniquities are multiplied over our heads. And in another place: our sins are
grown up to heaven. Last of all: though we can not fully comprehend the
hugeness and enormitie of our wickedness. Yet by that most bitter, eternal,
and infernal pain which the just God appoynteth for our sins, it appears
doubtless ye they are truly so incomprehensible, great and enorme: which God
does yet nevertheless even in hell, mingle mercy with his justice, in that he
punishes less the^ we worthily deserve. And yet the enormitie of any mortal
sin (how little so ever it be) is so great y^ there is no creature in the
whole world so well-beloved of God, but he would hate him and dampne him (for
ever) for one of these grievous sins, if he find it in him finally, at his
ending. Yea and so great is the enormitie of sin that it makes the sinner so
displeasing unto God as he him self does not remember, any good thing which
the sinner did before. As our Lord and judge did testify by Ezechiel saying:
if (...). (...).
the just man do turn away him self, and work iniquity, I will not remember all
y^ righteousness which he has don. Therefore he that stands, let him take heed
y^ he fall not: no man is sure. And in the Proverbs it is said: blessed is y^
man which (...). Cor. 10.
is always fearful. And furthermore how great the enormitie (...). (...).
of sin is, it may hereby be marked, that no creature was fit to make
satisfaction for the sin and transgression of mankind, and to take away the
same, but it became the very only begotten of God, yea and it behooved (by a
certain mean) the true and unmeasurable God, to be inca^te, and to suffer and
dye, for the redemption of men from the gylt of sin. If thou mark these things
rightly (my well-beloved) thou shall abhore sins, thou shall bewail the, and ^ye
from them. And shall warely behave thy self before the presence of the divine
majesty.

Of the sundry effects and ^rtes tha^ come by sin.

Art. 18.
Contrary causes are accustomed to have contrary effects. But sins and
their vicious qualities, are contrary to virtues and their actions. Then as
grace does make nature perfect, so sin does infect it, hurt it, and imbase
it. And as virtues and the gifts of the holy ghost, do make the strengthes
(...) forces of the soul to be ready, prompt, and easily inclined to well
doing, yea and (by mean and working of the holy ghost) very well and ready
nimble therev^too: So sin and vicious qualities, do foreslow the forces
before named, and draw the^ backward from goodness, make them weak and unready
to do well, prone and prompt to evil, yea they make them easily inclined to a
diuilish instinct, and to follow the violent sway and force of affections.
Hereupon Hugo in his book of the Arck of Noe says: what temptation so ever
does assail a soul forsaken, and abandoned of divine succor, it
overthrows it. And Beda witnesses: that a man fallne into sin, Lord my
God. Sin does also (according to Augustine) in an hillate and bring to
nothing. Because sin it self is nothing, and all men by sinning come to
nothing. By leesinge the essential being (not of nature) but of grace.

Eyghtly, one sin does draw and dispose a man unto another.

Ninthly, sin does make such virtuous deeds which were done before to be
unfruitful and does exclude man from the glory of the heavily kingedo^e. As
it is written: Let y^ wicked be taken away least he should see the glory of
God.

Tenthly, of a member of Christ, it makes one a member

Eleuenthly, it makes man (who ought to be the Temple

Twelfely, sin makes a man unstable. For the finner

As it is written, the wicked shall walk about: for they are (...)
as the dust which the wind drives from the face of the earth: (...). (...)
because their hearts are not made fast unto the highest, unchangeable, only
true and most perfect goodness. Ttherefore they wander in things created, and
are divided in mind, and are most vnordinately affected. Whereupon Jeremy
speaks saying: Jerusalem has committed sin, and therefore it is become
unsteadfast. Furthermore even as the bayte upon the hook does beguile the
fish, So does sin beguyle the sinner. Because whiles he does vaynely and
wickedly delight therein. It brings him to everlasting sorrow. Hereupon
Augustine in his. xiiii. book De ciuitate dei does affirm saying. We may
well say that all sin is a lie. For we do not sin (says he) but of a
desyer that good may come to us. And yet of all sin evil comes to us.
Again, sin does make the sinner like unto a Serpent, which goes upon his
breast, and eats the earth.

Even so sinners do cleave fast unto sin, and do strive to fill and glutt
themselves therewith. Sin does also show y^ the sinner is a fool. Because
by sinning every man does more and more, ouercharge, grieve, and oppress,
himself. He gathers and lays upon his own shoulders the sticks wherewith
he kendeleth the fire that burns him in hell. Yea he serves him which
requires and seeks nothing but his eternal dampnation, and will so much the
more, torment him, the greater service that he has done him. Furthermore sin
does take away true liberty. And makes thereof most miserable bondage.
Because (as our Savior witnesses by the Evangelist) Every man that sins is
the servant of sin. Therefore Augustine in his fourth book De ciuitate dei:
Does confess that the goodman, although he serve, is yet a free man. But the
wicked (says he) yea, although he reign, is yet the servant of as many
masters as he has vices. And again in the fourth book he says that the
will of man is then truly in freedom, when it is not in bondage to vice or
sins. And Salomo^ in the book of his Proverbs protests: That (...). 4.
righteousness does raise up and enoble the people. But sin (says he) does
make people miserable. For if pain make a man miserable, and ye fault much
more miserable, then shall it so much the more in all respects make him
miserable, as the fault is, more detestable then the pain is. Whereupon
Augustine in the xi. book de Trinity says: To will or desiere (says he)
that which is not decent, is a most miserable thing. And again says he, every
man is made mserable by only evil desire. But more miserable by power
thereof. For thereby the desiers of an evil thought are fulfilled. And because
the sinner does cleave and stick fast unto vain things, therefore sin
does finally leave him (which sins) vain and void of all things. Romans 6.
As the Appostle says to the Romans. What fruit had you then (that is to say
in sin when you sinned) in those things where at you now do blushe. For the
end thereof is death. Furthermore sin does cheefely grieve the sinner, at the
time of his death. For it makes him sorrowful for the loss of the temporal
things (that is to say: The delights, riches, and honors of this world)
which he loved. It makes him also to fear the straight judgment of God. The
infernal punyshementes of the speedy coming of the Diuills. Who then do
cheifely endeavor to draw y^ sinner into desperation and many other evils.
And then the wicked is sorrowful that he has lost and spent his time so
viciously and unfruitfully. Here withal after death, sins do vnspeackeably
grieve the unjust. Because they show y^ they are before the just judgment of
God most worthy of everlasting pain and confuston. And then they morn to here
that terryble word: Go you accursed into everlasting fire. And do
vnrepayreably hold them as turned away from the high goodness and fountain
of true felycitie. And lastly: As sins are hurtful to them that are in sin
themselves, even so then grieve those which by repentance do^ with draw
themselves from sins.

First, because it never recouereth the glory of the first

Secondarily, because it brings us to pain and penalty.

Thyrdly, because it keeps man back from glory. For the

Fourthly, because he shall never recover the time past, and de ciuitate dei
does say: Our mind (says he) in the which reason and understanding naturally
have residence, does become unable and weak (by certain cold and darkesome
vices) not only to cleave to the fruicion of God but also to bear and abide
that unchangeable light. Until such time that being from day to day healed
and renewed, it may be made capable of such great felycitie. Whereby it is
manifest how foolyshely they behave themselves which foreslowe their
conuersions and say that after a certain time they will be altogether converted
yet remayninge the mean while in their vices and wickedness. For they do not
rightly weighe into how many dangers, perrilles, and hurtes, they fall in the
mean time. And therefore sin does always hurt many men.

First, him which sins.

Secondarily, the neighbors and all the church of god. also diminyshed, and
weakened, by him which is wickedly conversant and occupied.

Thirdly, it hurts also those that are dampened. Because Solatium est misero,
socium habere miseriae.

Fourthly it hurts (by a certain mean) the blessed in

And lastly, the sinner does incur many evils and dangers, (...). 2.
unto thy ways? For a wound hurt again, is the hardlyer and more slowly
healed. God also is made the harder to be pacified. And the Devil the stronger
to possess, as Christ says in the Gospel: That then goes the Devil Luck.
11
and takes unto him seven other sprytes worse then himself. And going in he
dwells there. And the end of that man is worse then the beginning. Also
sinnne is forti^ed to prevail before the judgment of reason. As Augustine
speaking of him self does say. More prevailed the increasing evil then the
uncustomed goodness. Lastly even the sinner himself becomes more impotent
to rise. And thus behold (my well-beloved) how many and how vnspeable evil
things a man does incur by sinning. And suerly if thou do not amend thy
liefe by reading and knowing these hurts, and dangers which come by sin. If
thou do not detest and abhor sin, if thou do not walk in pureness of
life before God, then shall thou be vnexcusablely reproved of great faults by
thine own virtues. And shall not do that which beeco^meth the natural
goodness of thine excelent wytt. For it is apparent by these things how truly
Augustine spoke in his twelfe book De ciuitate del: saying: Sin hurts
nature. And by that means it is contrary to nature. And yet by that vice
nature is apparent to be great and lawdable. For by what means so ever vice be
blamed, by the same undoubtedly nature is praised. For the right blaming of
vice, is because thereby a lawdable nature is dishonested.

Of the infinite mercy of God.

Art. 19.
WE have already spoken many things of the enormytie, filthynesse and impiety
of sin. And it is now thereby made manifest, how vehemently the holy and most
highest God, is dishonored by sin, and how he hates and abhors the same.
Therefore least any man should by consideration thereof, fall into weakness
of courage, or be broken with disperation, or faint with over much sorrow, or
pyne and wyther away with indiscreet curyositie, We will say somewhat again of
the incomprehensible and unmeasurable mercyes of God. And therefore as the
goodness of God is pure infinite and most plentiful, so the sweetness of
his liberalitye, and his clemency is altogether unspeakable, vnlimytable, and
vnexcogitable. Exceeding and infinitely passinge, all our malice, need, and
misery. Yea, more then all the waves in the Sea pass a little drop of
water, or the great heap of the whole world does pass incomparabily the least
seed that is. Let no man therefore dispare by the enormytie of vices. For
thereby he should offer an extreme iniurye to the divine mercy. And should
most vehemently dishonor the uncreated verytie of the higest GOD. As though
Gods goodness and clemency (which has promised forgiveness and grace unto
all men how full of iniquity so ever they be, if they do truly repent) were
less then his wickedness. To conclude is not ye mercy of the glorious God,
and he which is only to be worshipped, most infinite, who in every moment does
perceue so many sins, to be done in this world and sees himself to be
dishonored, despised, and blasphemed, so unspeakably of so many sins, and
yet does preserve them in being, does incessantly communicate unto them, the
goods of nature, and of fortune, does nowrishe them, cloth them, and provide
for the^, yea since (according to y^ which has been said before) ye enormity
of sin is so inco^prehensible, even therein y^ wonderful great, and infinite
pytie of God, does appear that he ever will vowchesafe, to be reconciled or to
behold, or to receive into his grace and favor, the man with whom he were but
once offended or displeased by sin? And behold even those of whom he has
been so often times offended by such grievous sins, by whom he has been so
often contempned, and set behind earthly things in comparison, he does not
only vouchsafe to receue them unto forgeuenes, grace, and favor, but often
times he does prevent them in incomprehensible pyetie, and does happily change
their hearts (by inward compunaion) unto salvation: taking from them all
hardness of heart. And filling them with so much grace and goodness, that the
same does now most abound, where before iniquity was most abundant. And so of
most hateful enemies, they are made most dear and acceptable unto God:
therefore we must not ^ispayre for any thing. For as much as God by his mercy
does patiently abide sinners, does gently revoke them, does dissemble, and
dyffer revenge and punishment, does deliver them from many and manyfold
dangers, does liberally and (...) give them grace does multiply that which he
has given, does keep and preserve that which he has multiplied, and does
reward with heavenly things that which he has kept, and preserved. To
conclude, God doe^h joyfully receue unto (...) the sinner, which (...) unto
him, does mollyfie his heart, does quyckly forgive the offense which he
committed. And after forgiveness does never remember the injury. Again God
of his mercy does send us adversities to prove our patyence withal, he gives
us prosperytie that he may provoke us to love him. And by his mercy does bring
again unto himself those that go astraie, and does guide unto him such as
return, does raise up them that fall, does stay and hold up them that stand,
and does lead unto glory all such as do persevere in godliness. Behold how
great and how very unspeakable, incomprehensible, and unmeasurable, the
clemency of our God is especyally upon his elect? And yet let no man sin the
bolder by this consideration of the divine mercyes, presuming most foolishly
upon Gods benignity. For he is accursed which sins through hope. For ye
better, more meek and clement that we know God to be, so much the more
intentyuely we ought to love him, and not to dishoner or dispyse him. Wherefore
between desperation and presumption, let us observe a sapientall mean, hoping
with fear and fearing with hope. And so let us contynewally be carefully and
fearfully conversant before God.

Of those things by consideration whereof, sins be the more effectually
avoided.

Art. 20.
THere are many and almost innumerable things which ought to enduce us unto
the avoiding and esthewing of sins. First the consideration of the
shortn^sse, vanytie, unstableness, and dysceitfulnesse of this present liefe.
For what is our life, but a smoke most (...), and a moisture fading by little
and littell, (...) our days are like a shadow upon the earth, and (...) at
all. How long soever our life seem^ (...) in this world, yet in comparyson of
the never ending lyef which holy Job says: Spare me O Lord for my (...). 7.
days are nothing. We see also with our eyes how many and how innumerable this
present liefe does deceive. Which being delighted, over darkened, and bedect,
with the rytches, delights, and honors of this world do neglect those things
which pertayne to their health and salvation, do never covet or desire
spiritual good things. nor do always and enerie day perpare themselves unto
death. And therefore even as they live so do they make an end. And they do
most unhappily dishonor God whiles they are yet sound and in health, so at the
time of their death they are most justly of him forsaken despised and
condemned. Is it not then more wholesome, to contempne this liefe for the love
of that most happy and eternal lief which is to come? To abject all the vanity
and impiety thereof and to cleave most faithfully fast unto that divine
eternal and vumeasurable goodness

Behold in this present and most unsteadfast lief, we must of necessity have
regard either to eternal felycity or everlasting

Secondarily, the diligent consideration of death does not

Thyrdly, the consideration of the highest and most rigorous end of the world.
Which will be so terryble as no tongu^ is able to conceive the same. Therefore
whosoever does deepaly consider how miserable sorrowful and horrible a thing it
will be, then with body and soul to go down into the infernal pit, to fall
headlong into everlasting ^yer, being shutt in the most tenebrous prison of
hell, there desperately to remain for ever, to have the most dolorous (...)
and society of Devils, and to be there incessantly tormented more then can be
told: That man doubtless will avoid and eschew sins. Who so ever will
bewail those which he has already committed, will keep his heart with
fearful watch.

Fourthly, the effectual consideration of the whole infernal

Fyftly, then the consideration of that highest and incomprehensible heavenly
felycity which God will give to those that for his love do eschew and hate
sins, is of great power to withdraw us from sin. Since the hope ^f reward
does diminish the force and smart of the scourge, there can be nothing in this
world so painful, so laboursom, or so hard, but y^ he that does rightly and
worthily ponder the inexcogitable glory of that blesseonesse, would not
readily and willingly endure.

Sixthly, to the same end preuayleth devout, trus^ie, and often praying. ^s if a
man (which thinks and co^sidereth that without the abundant grace of God, he
can not fly from nor (...) sins) do therefore never cease to pray heartily
unto God for grace to live virtuously. For we must (as our savior says)
always pray and never cease.

Seventhly, the consideration of the diuyns presence is chiesly auaylable to
the eschuing of sins, by the which god does behold and consider us every
where. By which consideration there aryseth in us a chaste shamefastness from
doing of any thing that is dishonest.

Eighthly, the consideration of his benifits.

Furthermore, it appertains unto the^ which are perfect, to avoid sins,
chiefly by consideration of the divine goodness, before whom (in sin) the
frail goodness is preferred.

Also by consideration of ye divine majesty, which by deadly sin is
infinitely dishonored.

Again, by consideration of the divine holiness and equity (...). 2.
unto the which sin is infinitely displeasing.

And likewise by consideration of the divine charity, by

Moreover, by the very love of virtue and pureness, and

First patience in poverty, that a man may suffer need^ and penury in all
things, quietly and gladly as an Ambassador sent by God, w^ither it be in food,
clothing, or other necessaries. For as ye abundance of temporal things, is the
(...) of many vices. So poverty wtdraweth from many evils.

The second is the dispising of worldly men and their pratses, yea though thou
be in all things contemned, reproved, and troubled without cause given. For so
is the swelling of pride repressed, and a singular grace obtained of the Lord.

The third, is a ghostly magnanimity a stout mastership

The fourth is y^ eloyning of a man from comfort of worldly

The fifth, of conference with learned virtuous men and the following of their
counselles, and between God and thy conscience to take an account of thy life
pass^d, does help to overcome sins, and the temptations of the (...), for
since the diuil is the Prince of darkensse he does hate and fly from the
light, or the recordation, or manifestation of his deceiptes, and the humble
accusing of a man's own self. But the forgetting or keeping secret of his
wyles, he (...). Hereupon our savior says: Every man which does evil,
(...). (...)
hates the light: but he which deals truly, comes to the light that his
works may be made manifest, because they are done in God. But there are some
which are very naughtely dangerous shamefast, (...) no will to call to
remembrance and examyne their own consciences of the secrets of their
thoughts, affections and temptations, whereby it comes to pass y^ being
overcome they sall and are (...) and wrapped up in sundry vices, without purpose
and (...) to be converted unto God.

In like manner to fly idleness, does prevail much in the avoiding of sin.
For idleness breeds vices, and therefore some fruitful occupation must
always be taken in hand.

Furthermore, I judge that nothing is more effectual to the eschuing and
avoiding of all euilles, to the resisting of the diuill, to the profiting in
all charity virtue and grace, to the applying of holy works, and to the
earnest submission of a compunct, meek, a holy mind unto God, then the
inward, frequent, and diligent meditation of our Lords passion. For when we see
how much God loved us, how great patience, meekness, and humility Christ
did show and teach in his passion: and how being stretched upon the Cross, he
prayed for them that killed him, by weying and deeply considering of all which
things we shall throw from us, all pride, wrath, impatience, carnallitie,
voluptuousness and envy. Studying to get charity, meekness, patience, and
repentance. Behold now (my well-beloved) let the provident consideration of all
these things before discribed, which may make the^ eschew those things which
displease God, and chiefly are hurtful unto thy self (that is to say sins)
let it always (I say) lead thee and guide thee, that with a cleansed thought
thou may evermore increase in charity, in divine grace, and in all the
gifts of the holy ghost.

How a man ought to behave himself here i^ earth, which desires to attain
vnt^ perfection of life.

Art. 21.
Whosoever desires to apply his mind unto the o^tayning of inward pureness
and holiness, and to attain to true perfection of life here on earth.

Ought first of all to found him self and his conversation upon true humility
and the fear of God. For god does resist the proud: but unto them that are
humble, he gives so much the fuller grace, as they have the greater 1.
(...). (...).
depth of humility. And again he says: if thou do not hold James. 4.
thy self instantly in the fear of God, thy house shall be quickly ^le. 27.
subverted and overthrown.

Secondarily, he ought (so far fourth as God will grant the measure of his
grace, and as in him lies) to fly and abhor all sin. Forasmuch as sins
do (in such manner as is before rehearsed) hinder the increase of grace, the
ferue^tnesse of charity, and the cleanness of holy life.

Thirdly, he ought very often times and most diligently

Fourthly, in all things that he does, he ought to have a 1. Timo. 5.
and judgment. That is to say, the judgment of discretion going before thee.
And in Ecclesiastes it is (...) some (...). 23.
do nothing without counsel, and thou shall not ^nt thee after thy deeds.
Therefore in all things it is ^o be weighed whither they be lawful, expedient,
or profitable. Whither they be lawful having respect to God, and whither they
be expedient, having regard to the edifying of thy neighbor. He that is such
an one will always and in all places behave him self fearfully. Such an one
was Job. I ^eared (says he) all my deeds, knowing that thou spa^st not him
that ^ffendeth.

Fyftly, he ought to keep his heart with all diligent heed Prou. 4.
least any vain thought or inordinate affection do remain therein.

Sixthly, he should bring himself into such custom, that whatsoever he do or
labor abroad, or whatsoever he hear others speak, or he him self speak unto
others: yet always he do (as much as by the help of grace he may) lift up
his heart unto God, and within him self reuolue somewhat that is godly, saying
with all his thought: A clean heart create in ^e O Lord* And such other
meditatious as seem most^ (...). (...).
pleasant and most convenient unto his devotion: but chiefly he must pray
incessantly unto God for increase of grace, and for the custody of his heart.

Seventh, he ought in all things to have a most ^ncere intention, fervently
and zealously desiring the honor and worshipping of God. And thinking thereupon
more then on him self or any other thing.

Eighthly, he ought in all affection of body and in all adversity to ^ioyce
heartily because such things are profitable unto him, as touching God. But
because it is unacceptable unto the holy ghost whatsoever we present unto it,
neglecting that whereunto we are bound, therefore he ought first to pay unto
God reverently his dettes and duties: as prayers or divine and holy service,
distinctly pronounsing, lifting up his heart, and fashioning these things (as
with a taste of mind) even as it were from his own affection. Yea let him
raise up his heart unto God by contemplation of his goodness, holiness and
benifites. These things (my most deerly (...). (...).
beloved brother) I do write unto thee rudely and in haste, as they come into
my memory, and as God him self (from whom all goodness flows) did
vouchsafe to give me understanding, to the end thine heart may be inflamed
toward the love of perfection: and that it may know how to obteyn the same.
For if thou do rightly and wisely use the gifts of nature doubled in thee, by
the divine grace, then shall thou with a wonderful ^acylitio attain unto
sing^lar perfe^tien.

And therefore I do vehemently exhort thee, and earnestly desire that thine
affections toward these earthly things may be temperate, couetyng the
riches of this world no farther then necessytie does requyer, modest I^fe does
de^und, and the inward pro^tt of thy soul challenge. For Augustine says in
his nynth book De ciuitate de^: A man's soul is so much the more unlike that
incorporall enternytie, and unchangeable goodness, as it more coueteth and
desiereth temporal and mutable things. Yea let thy thoughts altogether
dispyse the vnpure delectations of the flesh. Because as Augustine says in his
second book De Trinitate: The reasonable soul is made so much the more
spiritual, and yt more fervent, the more and more, that it dies from carnal
concupiscences. To conclude the more preryous that thy soul is then thy body,
so much the more diligently see that thou love, seek, and heap up, the
spiritual rytches, the inward comeliness and decking of virtues, before the
outward garnyshing of the body and garments. Not desiering to please men, but
to please thy creator, Savior, and most dreadful Judge, who is as above all
things, the highest and most blessed God.

Amen.
The Nedles Eye.
The Prologue of the Author.
OUr savior Christ by the mouth of his holy Math. 6.
Evangelist Matthew in his sixth Chap. says: I will declare unto thee (O man
says he) what is good, and what the Lord thy god does require at thy hands.
Uerely eue^ to do justice and righteousness, and to walk carefully and
warely before thy Lord God. For as much as god has formed and made thee a
reas^able creature, he has created thee to yt end yt thou might obtain
everlasting felicity, he has furnished thee with all things necessary to ye
atteyning thereof, that thou might deserne between good and bad, between
truth and falsehood, and between virtues and vices: choosing and following those
things which are good, true, and vert^ous, and abhorring (yea utterly for
saking) all evil, false, and v^tious things. Wherefore our own reason and
understanding (being instructed by the doctrine of the holy scripturs, and well
taught and grounded in ye holy laws of god) ought to be ye judge of all our
life and deeds, in such sort y^ every man might every day of his life wisely
dyscusse, truly discern, and effectually correct, his own conversation. And
although we are forbidden by gods word to judge other men disordredly,
according to the (...) saying: Judge not and you shall not be judged,
nevertheless let Math. 7.
every man judge himself by consideration of his own life, and let him
abhor whatsoever he sindeth reprehe^sible therein. Yea let him bewail it,
avoid it and leau^ it not unpunished. But let him amend it by the fruits of
repentance. And this is meant by doing of justice and righteousness. For
whosoever does so, shall eskape the straight judgment of God, and the
everlasting pains of hell* As Paul the apostle does witness in his eleventh
Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corynthianes saying: If we judged our
selves Not doubting of salvation but putting away carnal security^.
we should not then be judged.

Moreover we ought to walk warely and circo^spectly before the Lord our God,
continewally fearing least we offend the eyes of his holy Majesty in any
thing, and y^ we neither loose the benefit of his great grace in this present
life, nor yet the fruityon of his glory in the world to come. Nor yet thereby
encurre the danger of everlasting pains in hell. And here upon the holy word
of GOD does say: (...).
Eccle. (...).
The man is blessed which walks always (...). And ^ee which is with out
fear or dread to do (...), cannot ^e justified. As also the appostle Paul
does exhor^ us to this fearef^ll and careful wal^yng (...) GOD saying: (...)
for your sa^uation, with fear and tremblyng. Phil. 2.
As also Saint Hierome says: Cursed be ye (...) which ^th (...) god (...).
Wherefore we must dilig^tly (...) all heedynesse, and the true effects of Godly
charytie, serve the highest GOD and Father in chyldyshe fear and obedyence. As
it is wry^ten by the Psalmyst: Serve God Psalm. 2.
in fear, and rejoice before him with tr^bling. Such an one was holy Job
saying rightly of him self: I have always feared GOD (says he) as the rage
of waters that might ouerwhelme me. And again: GOD is he whose anger no man
may resyst. Therefore have I been troubled to beehould him, and have been
grieved with fear when I considered him. So that whosoever is dyssolute in his
heart, light of mind, and does neither weighe nor consider the heavenly eyes
which always behold him, nor yet does reverence and dread the presence of that
fearful and eternal judge? But does proceed in such a careless order, and
so neglygently beehaue him self, as though he had already passed all (...),
and were not of GOD to be judged, does not he lamentably ^ast him self
away? And shall he not light in the hands of the living GOD. That he may
receive everlasting punishment with the reprobate in the depth of hell.
Wherefore my dear and welbeeloued in Christ Jesus (to whom I write this work)
do not neglect thy self carelessely, in a vain kind of securytye. Nor do
not thou walk irreverently before the highest God, which does contynually
behold thee. Do not injury unto his Majesty by living wickedly: But (as
Moses does exhort thee) keep thy self, and thy soul, warely: And forget
not the words of the Lord thy God, neither let them slip out of thy
remembrance, at any time: For here upon it is that Augustine says: Such as
fear not gods justice, do hope for his mercy in vain. And Hi^rome says: If
we would believe and often think upon the presence of god, whose Majesty
sees and judges all things, I believe that we should very seldom, or never
fall into any sin. And this it was that holy Job meant, when he said: Does not
god know my ways? and number all my Job. 13 and 23.
stepps? and a gain he says: Thou have observed al my paths, and considered
ye steps of my feet. Where upon Basyle also does admonish us saying:
Remember that you stand in y^ sight of God, which beholds the thoughts of
your hearts, and knows all secrets. For this consideration of his divine
Majesty does also induce an observation of his precepts. Whereupon the
Psalmist says: I have kept thy commandments and thy testimonies, because
all my ways are in thy Psalm. 11^.
sight. Thus whosoever will fear God let him assuredly think, that he does
behoulde all things. Let him be ashamed to stand with any unclean thought in
the presence of his infinite Majesty, yea, let him be abashed to have any
blott or imperfection in his soul, before ye face of y^ highest god. For it is
written: Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth, Eccle. 12.
before the time of thine affliction do come.

It is written in y^ xi. Chap. of Eccle: Be meek and paicient to hear y^
word of god. For the more we do love any thing, so How diligent we ought to be
in the hearing of Gods word.
much ye more willing we are to hear of it or to talk of it. Whereupon ^ohn
speaking of y^ lovers of this world says: they are of ye world, and they
speak of ye world, and the world hears them By the same reason I say, y^
whosoever does love god truly, does desire his blessing and does spiritually
esteem him (...). John. 4.
self in GOD, even he does hear his word willyngly, does retain it
diligently, and does fulfill it fervently. For these are signs of
predestination to everlasting salvation. And hereupon our savior says: He
that is of God does hear John. 8.
his word, and therefore you hear not, because you are not of God. For the
word of God, or the holy scripture, is the food of the soul. And even as we
despair of his natural life, which receives no corporal food, or vomiteth
up, and holds not that which has received: Even so, the life of grace is to
be despayred in him which is not careful, diligently to hear, mindfully to
retain, and efectually to fulfiill the word of God. And therefore (my
well-beloved in Christ Jesus) att^d and mark ye word of god with good affection,
hear it humbly and reverently, read it, and peruse it as an Epistle sent thee
from the holy ghost. Neither yet is it sufficient to know the will of God, or
to have it in reverence, but we must also Psalm. 118.
fulfill the same. As the Psalmist says: I have laid up thy words in my
heart, to the end that I might not offend thee. Luke. 12.
And the Evangelist sath: The servant which knows his Lords will and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And the Apostle James in his Canonical
Epistle says: He that does know the good and does it not, offends
grievously. And here upon Augustine does conclud, that the word of god is of no
less worthynesse, then the body of Christ. Neither is he less gyltye which
hears the word of God neclygently, then he which receives his body
unworthily. And therefore since I writ these things unto thee for the health of
thy soul, by the help and grace of God (without whose provydence and help,
no tree grows nor leaf falls) I require that thou read these things with
no less dillygence and earnest affection, then they are fervently and
zealously written for thine instruction. For so the natureall goodness of thy
quick Eccle. (...).
capacytie does require. As it is written: A good ear will harken unto wisdom
with earnest desire. And how acceptable Sap. 6.
and well pleasing that were unto god, appears by the wyseman saying: The
earnest desire of wisdom shall guide a man to the perpetual kyngedome. But
what wisdom? Not the wisdom of this world. Not the wisdom of Philosophers,
Poets, or Rethorycians. For (by ye (...) of ^he Apostle) God esteems the
wisdom of this world for mere folly. And Saint Hierome that holy father,
does call Aristotle (who was Prince of Philosophers) a father of fools or
Prince of ignorance. But the words before rehearced are meant by the wisdom
and perfect knowledge which is contained in holy scriptures. And are not they
to be accoumpted vain and foolish, who settinge a side such things as are
requisite for the souls health: And omitting ^he obseruaunce of gods holy
commandments and the wholesome knowledge contained in his holy word, are
earnestly and contynewally occupied in things altogether vain and
superfluous, yea things which god does not by any means require at their
hands. And thereupon we see such men most como^ly blinded with infinite
vanyties, vnfearefully and unawarely conversant and delighted in plays,
pastimes and (ouermitting greater offenses) in mere tryfels and fantasies. Is
this (think thou) the straight way leading to Math. 7.
life everlasting, the which (as Christ himself does witness few can find
out? No: But do thou as the holy word teaches Eccle. 3.
thee, seek not things above thy reach. Nor search not things beyond thy
strength. But look what god cu^maundeth, and thereupon do thou always
medytate. And as for these superfluous toys of prophaine mystries, do never
troble thy brains therewith. Again what pros^teth it to have knowledge of
things created, without a dew reverence and worship of the creator? Nothing at
all. But rather it hyndereth much, and makes such smatterers (as guess
thereby) to fall into danger of co^dempnatio^. Wherefore let not ye study of
natural Philosophy more delight thee, then the study of true morallytie which
is deuynity. But let the chief delight consist in the study and understanding
of holy scriptures. That thou may say: O how sweet are thy words unto my
Psalm. 1^.
mouth? more sweet then fine honey. And again: I have delyghted in the ways
of thy testimonies as in much rytches. And likewise: The law of thy mouth is
profitable unto me, yea more then thowsandes of gold and silver. By experience
thereof, one of the Fathers in holy church did say: Nothing in this life is
tasted more sweetly nor swallowed more greedely, nothing does so separate
man's mind from the world, nothing so str^gthen it against temptation, nor any
thing more help and stir him to all goodness, then the study of the holy
scriptures. And again he says: Whatsouer is written in holy scriptures is
verity. Whatsoever is therein commanded, is honesty, and whatsoever is therein
promised is true and perfect felicitye. This is then the most wholesome and
profitable study, which teaches a man to know himself to correct his life,
and to proceed in all goodness by the grace of the holy spirit. And thereupon
Augustine warns us saying: Use reading of holy scriptures for thy glass,
whereby thou may move any blott or blemishe that thou find in thy self.
Yea theu may therein learn to preserve whatsoever thou perceiuest to be
fair in thee, by doing that which is fayerer then it seems to be. For the
word of god is most plentyfull, containing in it all delights. And therein (as
in a myrrour) when we do look and gaze with the eyes of our inward mind, we
do also see and behold the secret shape of our souls. Yea we may thereby
perceive how much we have profited, or how much we are gone a straye from
perfection. Whereupon Isodorus says: The reading of holy scriptures does yield
prosit. For it does not only teath and instruct a man's mind, but it brings
back to the love of god such as are by vanyties abstract and carried into
concupiscence. Can any study then be compared to y^ study of this wisdom? No
surely. For as Gregory says: Even as the holy scriptures do excel above all
other knowledge and learning without co^pariso^, teaching us the perfect
truth, calling us to ye heavenly habitatio^, inuyting and provoking y^ readers
heart from worldly desirs, to the^braceing of high and heavenly treasurs, being
neither so dark yt they are to be dred nor yet so plain y^ they are to be
despised: eue^ so does the use and exercise thereof take away all weariness,
and the more they are red the more they delight, surpassinge all other scyences
even in the manner of writing and handlynge. Whereupon Hyerome also says: Love
the study of the holy scryptures, and thou shall not pass upon the vicious
desires of the flesh. So that I do greatly desire (well-beloved) to deck and
bewty^e thy soul with this divine and supernatural knowledge of the holy
scripturs the which shyneth as a certain blase or bright b^ame of the
everlasting, uncreated, and highest wisdom. And the very reading thereof (by
the testimony of Hyerome) does sharpen y^ sense, increase y^ understanding,
warm the will, shake of ^owth, quench lust, provoke sweet sighs, distyll
pleasant tears, and makes us (as it were) neeare neighbors unto God himself.
Wherein when we bestow our time and study, the holy ghost does talk and
common with us even famylyarely as Isodr says. And surely thou art singulerly
endewed with capacity toward thatteyning thereof, since thou art bewtified
with a natural sharpness of understanding, in such sort that thou may by
Gods grace say being yet but a young scoller, I have enclyned my soul unto
goodness. And I beseech thee most merciful God to grant me such a delight in
searching of his true wisdom, that thou may say with the auctor of the
book of wisdom: Her have I loved and searched for even from my youth, and I
Pro. 3.
wooed her to be my wife and my spouse. And I became in love with her bewtye,
so that entryng into my house, I will lie down by her and take my rest with
her. For her conversation does not weary me, neither is there any bittern^sse
in her company, but joy and gladness dwell with her for ever. And hereupon
also it is said: Wisdom is more precious then any riches, and all that m^n
desire is not thereunto to be compared. God forbid then that thou(my well-beloved)
should set thy mind or occupy thy thoughts in things that are lower and
of vyler estymation.

THe path of the just, comes forthwards like unto a Of two kinds of ways
where in men do walk.
bright shyning lamp, and it in creaseth until it be brod dai but y^ wa^es of
y^ wicked are dark and they know not where they fall. As y^ holy Evangelist John
does witness Pro. 4.
(...). John. (...)
in his first Epistle saying: God is light, and in him there is no manner of
darkness. Also Dyonisius writes that God is the pure, full, and infinite
light, the lively, intellectual, original, and most clear brightness. Since
he then is the end and uttermost bound of our way and perigrinage, we ought to
walk toward him by the bright shyning paths and fair ways, that the whole
way may be like unto the end of our journey, and the midst unto the
uttermost bo^ndes thereof. For otherwise we can never attain unto him. Now
this pathe of ye just, is virtuous deeds, good life and conversation, together
with a wary observation of Gods laws and commandments. Wherv^on Solomon
Prou. 3.
says: The ways of the Lord are fair ways, and all the paths thereof are
peaceable. For the ways whereby we iourneye unto God and the heavenly
kingdom, are: good thoughts, holy medytations, fruytefull talk and deeds
of charity acceptable unto God in Christ Jesus. These are justly called the
paths or ways of the just, for as much as they be the certain fruits and
tokens, whereby we pass and make way(the grace of God helping us) from this
exyle, unto the heavenly habitation. The which ways and paths are by good
reason termed bright and shinyng, since they have their original beginning
of Gods grace and charity, which are the supernatural lights of the soul.
Yea because with their brightness they chase darkness from the minds of
men, they unite and knit together our hearts to the uncreated and heavenly
light, and make him which (exercises himself therein,) to s^eme clean, holy,
and acceptable unto God, and a good example unto men. Whereupon the Apostle
says: That the just Phil. 1.
do shine as Lanternes amongst the wicked. And again Ephe. (...).
unto sinners converted he says: You were once darkness but now you are
light in the Lord. Furthermore this pathe and way of the just, does proceed
from good to better, from imperfection, to perfection, from one virtue to
another, from the way unto the end of the journey, yea and it increases
until it be broad day. That is to say until the everlasting day appear. For
as much as it ryseth (by faith) to the special kind of the thing sought for.
Even unto the everlasting and most blessed fruition and visien of the highest
and most reverend Trinity and Godheade. This is the way of the chosen, the
unspotted way, the way of all virtue, leading (by the travail of repentance)
unto everlasting rest and quiet. And of this way the Psalmist says: Blessed
are they whose Psalm. 118.
ways are uncorrupted, and which walk in the laws of the Lord their God. And
thereupon Job said: I kept the Job. 21.
way of the lord, and did not decline from it. As also Jeremy Hiere. 6.
said: Ask which is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find a
refreshing for your soul. But now: there is another way of the reprobate, a
darkesome way, (that is to say) a wicked and ungodly way, which lacks the
light of true understanding, and is not guyded with the light of grace. But is
obfuscate and darkened with ye clouds of passions and concupise^ces,
perverting and overthrowing all just judgments, and leads to the dungeon of
infernal darkness. This way is seen by vicious qualities, unbridled
appetites, concupiscence of ye flesh, wicked thoughts, evil deeds, unseemly
and unlawful talk, and neclecting of time. The which do so ouershadow and
darken the eyesight of the mind, chat it can not see the spiritual ruin and
overthrow into the which it daily falls headlonges. For in this slippery and
damnable way, (which seems good unto the wicked, although the end thereof do
lead unto death) men fall from the highest, unchangeable, and most blessed
God, unto a chaungeable, frail, and vain apparaunce of goodness, from the
state of grace and salvation, unto the state of gylte and condempnation, from a
spiritual life, to a carnal life, and in the end, from the right way to the
infernal prison. Of the which way or ways (being wicked as aforesaid) it is
written: you blushe and be ashamed of your ways. And therefore (my beloved)
go not Eccle. 5^.
into the way of ruin and perdition, neither follow the liberty of worldly
vanities and thine own desires, but do thou diligently follow and imitate
the way of the blessed and chosen. For whosoever follows ye things which
delight the flesh and the outward senses, whosoever does embrace the
looseness of his heart, and the joys of this world, he doubtless walks
in a dark and dangerous way. But he that walks according to the Psalm. 118.
precepts and lessons of the Gospel, he chooses unto him the brighte way of
the elect, and may say with the Psalmist: I have kept my feet from all
evil ways, that I might keep thy words. For the worthy and perfect
fulfillyng whereof let us pray daily, or rather hourly, with devout mind,
saying: Dyrecte my steps according to thy word, and no unrighteousness
shall have the upper hand of me.

The Apostle Paul in his second Chapter to the Galathyans Of three sundry
sorts of trauaylers in these paths.
says: I am fastened to the Cross in Christ. Yet live I, not I, but Christ
lives in me.

And whereas I now live in the flesh, I live in the faith of the son of God
which loved me, and gave himself for me.

And surely this is the wholesome doctrine of christian religion. That for the
transgression of our forefathers, all mankind was depryued of their pleasant
habitation in the terrestiall Paradyce, and thrown out into this world, as
into a vale of misery, into a place of banishment, and a country far from our
native residence. To the end that through the blood of Christ Jesus, we might in
this world show the fruits of true repentance, and incessantly bewail our
own calamity, until we may be thought worthy after this life, to enter into
the place of rest, or everlasting kingdom prepared for the elect children of
God.

Whereupon Gregory says: we went from our country (meaning the
terrestryall Paradyse) for our pride, disobedyence, followynge of the visible
goodness, and tasting of the fruit prohibited, but we must return
thereunto again by humility, obedience, contempnyng of the visible goodness,
and by brideling our carnal appetytes. And therefore in this life we are
called Trauaylers or wafaring men, because as the Apostle says: We have not
here Hebr. 13.
any certain residence, but we must seek for it in the world to come. And
again in another place he says: whilst we 2. Cor. 5.
are in this corporal body, we dwell as strangers from the Lord. For we walk
by faith, and not according to our outward form. And in like manner the
Psalmist singing speaks Psalm. 38.
unto God and says: Hold not thy peace though I be a stranger and an alien in
thy sight, as all my forefathers were. Now it is expedyent for a prouydent and
circumspecte trauayler, that having necessary things for his journey, he
load not nor over charge not him self with other things, nor that he stay
in his way without some reasonable and urgent cause. Neither yet that he
busy him self to entermedle with things done by other men whom he passes
by in his journey, but that holding the kings high way, and neither declining
on the right haude nor on the left hand, and being contented with necessary
food and apparel, he make have, and incessantly travail with all possible
speed to draw near unto his iourneys end. So ought every Christian to
consider that he is but a trauayler or a wayfaring man in this present life,
and therefore let him so order his whole conversation, that he obtain the
felicity which is to come, and to attain to the heavenly and everlasting
kingdom of God. Yea let him direct all his steps unto the glory of God,
fulfilling his holy commandments, and by such virtuous degrees, let him
aspyre unto the heavenly habitation. For here unto the Apostle Paul does
exhort Cor. 7.
us saying: it remains that they which use the benifites of this world,
should be as though they used it not. And that they which be married, should
be as if they were unmarried. For the outward show of this world shall pass
over. And again in another place he says: Pauing meat, (...). Tim. 2.
drink, and clothing, let us be contented. For they which 1. Tim. 2.
covet to be rich, do light in the snares and temptations of the diuil. But
happy is he which so knows his habitation that he may say with the Prophet,
woe is me that my resting place is prolonged. He that so says, and so
coueteth Psalm. 11^.
to come unto the everlasting habitation, he is worthily to be called a true
trauayler, and one that goes in the right ready way. But because it happens
oftentimes that a trauayler seeing sundry strange things in his way, is
delighted therewith, and stays to behold such things, or to seek and inquire
of novelties, whereby he foresloweth his ^ourney, and remembers not the
country which he has to travail unto: but rather is so drowned in the
delights of strange countries, that he taryeth there for altogether, and never
comes to his iourneyes end. Therefore there is a playner and more perfect way
whereby we may go to the country of the chosen. Which is: that a man do go
not only by the ways and means already declared, toward the heavenly
habitation, but furthermore that he do not regard, care for, or seem to
see, any impediment, stop, or let, in his way. But rather pass by them and
despise them as things which appertain not unto him. And such trauaylers or
wayfaring men are they which care no more for the praises and commendation of
this world, the^ they do for their disprayses, no more for prosperity the^
for adversity, for riches, then for poverty. Finally, which do not (worldly)
set their minds on any of the things which delight men in this life, but do
(mortifyedly) set light by them all, as by most vain trifles and toys. Unto
the which perfection the Apostle does exhort us saying: we must always bear
about us in our bodies, the (...) of Christ Jesus, that his life may be made
manifest in this our mortal flesh. And such were they to whom the same
Apostle Colos (...).
did write: you are dead, and your life is hidden in God with Christ Jesus. And
such also was Jeremy speaking unto God who says: Thou know that I have
not desired the days of man. And such are all they which do not glory but
in God the Lord, and which made them selves strangers and alliens from this
world. And such an one may properly be called dead unto the world. And yet
there is another way higher and more perfect then these. Which is: To
extinguishe all selfeloue, and to be ravished in divine charity, and thereby
to love our s^lues in Christ Jesus perfectly and spiritually. Not only that
(trauaylerlike) we can eschew the impediments and stops in our way to God,
neither yet only that (deadmanlyke) we can set light by the prosperities and
pleasures of the world, but also that we abhor with all our heart all
things whereunto the world cleaves, as riches, delights, lusts of the
flesh, promotions, vain praises of men, and free skope to do what we list.
Yea let us with all our heart abhor, detest, and fly from all these things*
as griefs and deadly torments of the heart, because such things do rather
hinder and ^oppe, then further our help forthwardes our course to God, and our
journey to the heavenly habitation. To conclude, let us with all our hearts
i^brace, cleave to, and desire, all such things as the world accoumpteth a
Cross. Which are aduer^tyes, or hard conditions: as abstynence, watching,
disciplyne, desire to be unknown to the world, love to be contempned
thereof, and ioyfullye to bear all barde punyshementes for the love of God.
Knowing that these things will be profitable unto us, as well for atteyning unto
our iourneys end, as also to make the goodness of God satisfied and pleased
with our forewardnesse, whereby we may escape the punyshementes due for our
heinous offenses, and proc^de in grace to our heavenly habitation. Yea hereby
we are made like unto Christ which susfered for us, and therefore shall like
unto him receive a joyful reward in the life to come. And heerevpon we may
rejoice P^alm. 18.
herein, as in great treasures, and as the wicked and reprobate do rejoice
and glory in the prosperities of this world. For such as attain unto this
perfection, may say with Paul: God sorbid that I should glory but only in
Gala. (...).
the Cross of Christ by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. In like manner may we b^ thought crucified, and not only alyens as the
first, nor dead as the second sort. For in this third degree of perigrination,
the very height of all christian purity does consist. And such were the most
blessed Apostles, who being scourged and reproved by the high priests, did go
away rejoicing out of the sight of their consistories, that they were thought
worthy to suffer that continually for the name of Jesus. Consider then (my
well-beloved) in which of these three kinds or sorts of Trauaylers thou art to
be accounted. For he which does only attain unto the first rehearsed
degree, let him not thereby boast that he is in surety of salvation. And
therefore it shall be thine industrye not to be contented with the first
degree, but that thou have desire of (passing by the second) to clyme unto the
third degree of perfection. That leadyng a heavenly and angelycall life in the
flesh, and daily increasing in all faith, charity, knowledge, and grace, thou
may be accounted amongst the sons of the holy and glorious God, and not
be foreslowed after thy departure from the glory of his majesty.

And out of a sermon of holy Bernard I have taken certain chosen sentences
touching this matter. Be not (says he) like unto the f^lishe Trauayler,
whom the fair show of this world does entyse, the prosperity thereof
does lulle him on sleep, the favor thereof does deceive him, and the joys
thereof entrappe him, in such sort that being drawn and turned from God, he is
held back from his journey, and hyndered in his ways. Do not then use or
esteem this world as thy country (as Beda forewarnesh) because this is the
difference between the chosen and the reprobate. That the elect (being now
Alyens and strangers banyshedde, do expecte and hope for a perpetual
habitation in heaven, and do so much the less delight in the frail joys of
this present life, because they hope to receive the joys ^out end which are to
come, and to reign with Christ for (...) But ^he reprobate, have their
country here. And unto the desires of this life, they only do cleave, and
therefore after this life they are sent into everlasting banyshement, whereas
lacking all pleasures and delights, they do only suffer adversity in
torments.

The (...) Matthew in his seventh Chapter has Of the ^t way to salvation, and
the broad way to perdition.
these words: Enter (or go in) by the narow gate, for the way is broad and
(...) which leads unto destruction: and many there he which go in the reat.
But the way is straight and the gate narow which leads to everlasting life,
and few there be which find it out. These words proceeded from our savior
Christ, and are reported by his Evangelist saint Matthew. And what could have
bin spoken more terrible then these words? or what sounds more thundringly
in our ears? It had been sufficient to terrify the stoutest heart, if Christ
had only said: The way of salvation is straight, and broad or wide open is
the way of dampnatio^* Whereby it might have been sufficiently apparent how
hard it is to be saved, and how eas^e to be dampened. But he proceeds saying:
That very few do find the straight way of salvation, and that ^erie many
do walk in the void open way to dampnation. Whereby he does ensinuate also
that right few shall be saved, and very many dampened. The which he does more
evidently set down in another place saying: Many are called, but few are
chosen. Therefore who would not Math. 22.
fear, yea and tremble to hear these words, if he be of the faithful, and
have obtained a lively belief in Christ Jesus? For the faith and true duty of
a christian is such and so mystical, so great and yet so difficult, that
although we certainly know by the testimony of Gods spirit the certainty of
our salvation in Christ, yet should every wayfaring man in this world do
very well to fear and forecast least he in respect of infirmity of flesh
should fall and offend, and so consequently should do well to walk in dread
and reverence before the Lord God. For as we are bound to believe that after
this transitory life we shall be brought before the Tribunal seat of Christ,
the everlasting God, and infallyble, dreadful, and most just judge: there to
receive from him either everlasting pains of hell fire, or the everlasting
joys of heaven: even so if we behold the same with a clear and lively faith,
it were wonderful if ever we should be free from trembling and dread. But the
malice and necligence that is in us does blind our hearts. For if we were to
pass through a field or place full of thieves, wherein few passengers or
wayfaring men had escaped, who were he that would not fear exceedingly to
light in danger of corporal death? But now we pass and walk daily through a
field of this wicked world, replenished with all kind of diuilish
temptations. Wherein (as is abouesayde) very few in comparison do escape
dampnation. Neither yet do we fear but laugh, play, sport, and banquet. Yea
we are thoroughly replenished with a vain and most perilous security or
carfulness. But (my well-beloved) let it not be so, let it not (for Gods sake)
be so amongst us. Let us not so superficially hear the words of Christ,
least we neglect, yea and loose our selves in unrecoverable, intolerable, and
eternal destruction. Let us rather profoundly, and cunningly, fulfill the
words of our savior, thinking always upon that which is written: Sanctify
the Lord of Esaias. 8.
Hosts, for he is your fear, and your terror. And again: Prou. 13.
Be thou all day in the fear of God, and thou shall have whereon to hope in the
latter day. Where upon Hieremie also considering Hiere. 10.
these things said: There is no man like unto thee (O Lord) thou art great,
and thy name is also great in strength. And who shall not be afeard of thee O
King of kingdoms? Where upon it is also written: Great and wonderful are thy
works (O Lord God omnipotent) just and Apoc. 7.
true are thy ways (O Lord) and King of all worlds. Who will not magnify and
fear thy holy name, because thy judgments are manifest? But before I wade any
further, let me say a little of the words before rehearsed of our saui^ur
Christ. For he says that the way is narow and the gate straight, which leads
to salvation. Or rather (as I take it) he says that ye way is very narow, and
the gate very straight. For in y^ he demands interrogatiuely, how straight
is the way. etc. It is to be understood y^ he meant very straight and narow. But
he plainly affirms that the way is broad and spacious which leads to
everlasting dampnatio^. And by the words before rehearced, the understanding
hereof is made manifest. For as I have a little before alleged, there are two
kinds of ways which men walk in. One bright and virtuous, (the which is the
way of the chosen, which fearfully and carefully serve the Lord God) and that
is the straight and narrow way. For as much as knowledge and virtue are always
occupied about hardest things. (As I will hereafter more plainly declare.) And
there is another vicious and darksome way, which is the way or life of the
reprobate, the which is accoumpted broad and spacious, because it is an easy
matter to declyne from the rules of reason, or to faynte from the right line of
virtue, and to omit the divine laws of Gods commandments. And yet about this
point the Philosophers had some question: not altogether unprofitable here to
be rehearsed. For whereas by their opinion, reason coueteth always to the best
things, and virtue (by Damascenes opinyon) is according to nature consenting
unto reason: yea and by Tullyes, or rather by Augustines and Basiles opinion,
there are certain sparks or seeds of virtues borne and bredde in us, it
might seem thereby that virtue were very easy and light to be followed.
Whereunto I would answer that God surely has put in us by regeneration will to
follow virtues whereby (by grace) they might seem light and eas^e to be
obtained. But the difficulty ryseth upon our own imperfections, corruptions,
and infections, whereby we are always more prone to the evil then to the good.
Much the rather through the oryginall sin which we brought with us, the which
does continually make four great and deadly wounds in our souls) to wete:
ignorance in understanding, malice in willing, infirmity in passion, and
concupisce^ce in appetite or desire. Moreover by y^ Philosophers ^pinio^ also
it falls out, y^ the further of or distant y^ our intellectual substance is
from ye first being (which is ye divine understanding, y^ very perfect end and
skope whereunto all things ar to have relation) so much ye more difficult it is,
and by so much the harder means, it may attein unto ye same. The^ since that
the reasonable soul of man is so much inferior in ye rank and order of
intellectual natures, as y^ therein y^ intellectual light is so feeble y^ in (it
self) it is at ye first like a smooth playned Table to be (...) upon, (but not
yet painted) it is plain and evident y^ (of it self) it should very hardly
attain unto the uttermost scope and end therefore appointed, which is the
majesty of the eternal God. As also the proposicio^ will be true if we speak of
ye natural felicity of the soul, and the natural virtues in us. Wherefore by
stronger reason it is much more to be verified, if (...) of ye supernatural
beatitude thereof (which is the sight and beholding of God face to face) since
ye virtues of y^ uttermost end or scope, are by all comparison more excellent
and more lofty, then the natural beatitude, or natural virtues of our soul.
Whereby our soul has great need of the incessaunt help, motion,
inspyration, and grace of God. For there are almost innumerable impedimentes
of virtues which do daily happen unto us, as well by the means of our own
flesh, as also by the world and the devil. By the which we are not smally
hindered, drawn back, and fore^owed from all virtuous conversation. Whereupon
Bernard says: The first impedyment and grievous occupation that we find in
our way, is the very necessity of our life. The which whilst it requires now
meat, then sleep, and such other things necessary, it does without doubt
oftentimes hinder and withdraw us from spiritual exercises. And as y^ Apostle
says: The devil goes about 1. Pe^. (...).
like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. Yea and the world also does
present many (nay to many) offenses and lets from doing well and virtuously. So
that it is very hard always to keep in the mean and middle of virtue, and
never to decline to any of the vicious extremes. But yet (as Dyonisius
teaches) virtue it self, or the action thereof proceeds of an entire and
universal cause, wherein all the circumstances of virtue it self do concur.
But vice does consist of the defect or imperfection of any circumstance, and is
commonly seen to err, fail, and perish by infinyte means. Whereupon Solomon
said: The number of fools is infinite. So that we see suffitiently how the
Eccle. 1.
way of virtue is straight and narow. But the way of vices is spacious and
large. Especially to the unwise and imperfect, but not so much to them which
are of good zeal^ to perfection, as shall be hereafter declared.

A certain man said unto Jesus: Lord tell me how shall A reprehention of our
sloth, necligence, and dastardlinesse.
I do? since there are but few which are saved. And Christ made answer in
the first of Luke, saying: strive ye to enter or go in by the narow gate.
Notifying thereby the words before rehearsed to prous the small number of them
which shall be saved. And furthermore for the better understanding how straight
and narow the way is which leads to salvation, mark we the words of
Gregorius saying: The straight and narow way wherein every man is constrained
to walk, (which does carefully regard the fulfilling of Gods commau^dements) is
to live in this world, and yet to have no manner concupiscence thereof. To
covet none other men's goods, neither yet greedily to retain our own, to
despise the praises of y^ world, to love (for god) to be reviled, to fly from
glory, to follow y^ which is despised, to hate flattery, to honor such as set
light by ye world, to forgive the^ which offend us from our hearts, and to
co^serue ye grace of charity immovably in all things. As also ye fruits of
repentance (as abstinence, watching, and praying,) together we the renouncing
of our wills and co^cupiscenses, are straight and narow passages which will bring
him y^ trauaileth therein, to much rest and quiet. For there is (...) unto such
an vnco^parable reward, which neither eye has seen, 2. (...).
ear has hard, nor the heart and thought of man is able to co^prehende, which
is eue^ the pure, and everlasting Beatitude most full and most perfect, which
is even god himself, y^ blessed, superexalted, and vnmesureable goonesse. And
herein our intolerable neclygence, overthwart paruersen^sse, and (...) may
apeare. Since for such an unspeakable treasure we cannot take pain to tread
and travail in that narrow way, no not for a small time or iorny. Whereupon
Chrysostom says: Thou art commanded (O man) to walk in the narowe way. Why
then do thou question and curyously search for ease and abundance, they
which serve worldly Princes do ask no such manner of demands. Only they
inquire if they shall have gaynes and reward. The which being ones known and
answered, they refuse no labor nor pain, they eschew no danger, they deny not
to do any ye most vile or paynefull dewty y^ they are set unto. They suffer
and abyd, travail, long and perilous iorneyes, despights, punyshments and
alterations of times. And all this for ye hope of gain and the greediness of
money. But we co^trarily (which should seek heaven and the infinite treasures
thereof) do streyne much courtesy for ye ease of our bodies, and dysdayne to
suffer any adversity. Behold how much we are more tender and more miserable
the^ they? what say thou O man? or what do est thou? thou preparest thy self
to clyme into heaven, and demaundest yet if any dyfficulty or stop be in thy
way. If any rough or paineful thing is like to encountre thee. Yea thou art
not hereof ashamed, neither do thou blush hereat, but furthermore do even
(as yet were) bury thy self quick in y^ earth. Now put the case that thou
should certeynly meet with all ye evil things under ye son, if all
perils possible were imine^t unto thee, if injuries, ^launders, quarrels, fire,
sword, wyld beasts, misfortunes, hunger, sickness, yea and all the evils that
may be told or thought of, should attones ouerwhelme thee, should not al these
things seem unto thee rydiculous, and worthy to be contempned, in respect of
such and so great a treasure and reward as thou thereby should win,
wherefore let no man be so abject or unhappy, nor of so base and coward like a
mind, y^ whiles he wysheth to atteyne heanue, he be careful about the
earthly rest and delights of this world. For it should be to him indecent not
only to seek after them, but to esteem or honor them when they be already
obtained. Whereupon Gregorius says: No pain is great, neither ought any time
to seem long whereby we may win the glory of the everlasting kingedome. Let
us labor therefore stoutly, and fight hardly against vices. Yea let it be most
pleasant unto us to be weryed in the service and wars of God. Because we are
assured that our labor shall not be in vain. But that God of his mercy will
reward our faith. For such as are not set on work here we men (especyally in
actual repentance) and are not ^kurged or punyshed as men in this life,
shall be skourged and formented with wicked spirits in the world to come by the
opinyon of Hierome.

Furthermore for the more perspycuous reprehention of our sloth, and for the
better styrringe up and warming of our cold minds, let us consider how many
and how great pains men do suffer and e^dure for earthly, frail, and small
co^modyties. That even yet thereby we may learn (for the love of GOD, for the
inherytaunce of his kingdom, and for the everlasting felycytie) to walk
waryly and worthyly in this narrow path. Let us learn to despise all worldly
vanyties, and make oblation of our selves to God altogether with an unfeigned
heart and devotion. (...). Cor. 1^.
For as Augustine does by y^ way rehearse, unto what storms and tempests, what
dreadful and hortyble roaring of the wyndes and waves, do merchauntes submitt
themselves, to get rytches which are fadyng and shall sone peryshe or be lost?
yea riches which bring greater storms of care to keep them, then they
found trouble or pains in seeking them? What rages, what furyes, what coldes,
what perils, by sea, by land, in dens, in deserte, do huntesmen hazard
for the poor pray of a selly beast? Yea how long can they hunger and thirst,
and how vile meats can they be contented with all, for the obteyning of the
same? men suffer themselves to be cut and launced, to be burnt and seared, that
they may remove (no everlasting pain) but a pain of small co^tine wau^ce, with a
pain of greater patience. The Knight and soldiers undertake most crewel
wars for small and tryflyng pleasures in this short and uncertain life. Yea
they spend oftentimes more years in attayning their desires, then they live
afterward to enjoy them. But in all these examples, such as love not the
things rehearsed, do thyncke them grievous. And they which do love them,
suffer the same extremyties also, but think them nothing grievous. For love
makes ye hardest, seuerest, and most grievous things to seem easy, gentle,
light, and almost nothing at all. Let charytie then be able to work much more
effycacy, yea let it make us more patient, more happy, and more stowte, the^
greedy covetousness can make them for the obteynings of mere myseryes. Since
we may be sure to obtain the true and everlasting treasure of felicity. Let
all tempor all adversity be easily borne by us, when we may^ both avoid and
eskape thereby (as by a fruit of our faith) To. (...). vers^ 17
everlasting pain, and obtain also an everlasting reygne.

For the passiones of this te^porall world, are not sufficyently worthy for ye
glory to come, which shall be revealed in us as y^ Apostle says: Let us not
serve god we a sluggish mind, and lukewarm zeal, but let us ministre unto
him with a feruente spirit, least he turn the sentence of that Revelation
upon us: I know thy deeds that thou art neither hot nor cold. And because
thou art leukewarme neither hott nor cold, therefore will I begin to vommyt thee
out of my mouth.

The first commandment is: Thou shall love y^ Lord thy (...) whereby the
narrow way is (...).
god with all thy heart and with all thy soul. With all thy mind and with all
thy power. And this commandment contains in it the end, the rule, and the
perfection of all the commandments. To the full accomplyshement whereof (as
much as may possibly by us be performed) not only all the other
commandments, but all the dyscyplyne of Christ in his holy gospel, do also
tend. And this commandment is not fully fulfilled and accomplyshed at any
time in this world, until we come to the everlasting kingdom prepared. Yet
such as with full deuoytion and syncerity of mind do renounce and forsake all
worldly vanities which may hinder their love toward the divine Majesty, and
do only bend their eyes toward God according to their dewty, do go
nearest to the accomplyshment and fulfillynge of this commandment. But when
we have done all that we can, yet are we unprofitable. And yet every wayfarynge
man which iornyeth and trauayleth in this life to attain unto the everlasting
kingdom, must thus farreforth fulfill it, that he love nothing more then GOD,
nor nothing that is contrary to his will. Yea and that he rejoice finally in
nothing but in GOD only. Now then we have said much of this straight and
narrow way to salvation. And thereby it falls out that it is the observing
and keepyng of Gods commandments in holy scryptures contained, and of the
lessonnes taught us by our savior Christ. Let us then also consider which be
those straight commandments and precepts, for the dificulty whereof Christ
himself did affirm that the said way was so straight and the gate so
narrow. And again that the way was so broad and spatyous which led unto
everlasting damnation. Behold our savior says then: You have hard it said
(quod he) Thou shall not kill. But I say unto you that whosoever is angrye
with his brother, shall be gyltie in judgment. But he which says unto his
brother Racha: (That is a word of dysdayne or reproach) he shall be gylty to be
condemned by ye whole council. And ^e which says to his brother: Fool, he
shall be gylty of hell fire, which is everlasting co^dempnation. Is this now not
a hard and straight sentence? but moreover he says: You have hard that it was
said of old: Thou shall not forswear, Mark. (...).
but I say unto you, swear not at all. But let your communycatioo^ be yea:
yea: and nay: nay: Where upon also the apostle James in his Epistle says: My
brethren above all things swear not. Again our Savior says: Resist you
not the evil dooer. But if any man stryke you on the left cheek, turn the
other unto him hlso. And he which will contend with thee in Judgment and take
thy cote from thee, give him also thy cloak. Love your enemies, do well to
them that hate you, and pray for them which persecute you and quarrel with
you. What thing can be ha^der then this word? For even as it is most easy
and most natural for a man to love his friend, even so it is most hard and
most unnatural for a man to love his enemy. And yet as Hierome says, it is
necessary toward salvation. Nay rather (says he) he which hates any one
man, does love no man truly and spirytually. No neither can he love himself,
nor God, being in such grievous and heinous sin.

Furthermore our Savior says: If you do not forgive Math. 6.
offenses one to another neither will your heavenly father Mat. 7.
forgive you your sins. And again he says: Lay Mat. 10.
not up treasure in earth and be not careful for to morrow. Luke. 12.
And also: Judge not and you shall not be judged.

Furthermore, think not (says he) that I came to set peace in the world. I
came not to set peace, hut the sword. For I came to separate the Son from
the Father, the daughter Math. (...).
from the mother, and the sons wife from her father by Luke. 14.
law. And then: He which loves father or mother more then me he is not worthy
of me. Also: he which takes not up his Cross and follows me, he is not
worthy of me. And in another place: The kingdom of heaven does suffer wrong
Math. 11.
or violence, and yet the violente do take even (...) force. Luke. 1^.
And again: For every idell word that men speak, they shall render accoumpt
in the day of judgment. And like wise he that will come after me, let him
d^nye himself and take Mat. 13.
up his Cross daily and follow me. For he which will Luke. 1.
save his soul, let him leese it. For he which loses his life for me, he
shall find it again. And then thus: Woe be to him by whom offenses come. And:
Whosoever offends one of these little ones (believing in me) it were better
for him that a mylstone were tied about his neck, and he drowned in the depth
of the Sea. And again: Mat. 19.
Unless you convert and become as one of these ly^tle ones, Mar. 10.
you shall not enter into the kingedome of heaven. Herewith Luke. 18.
not forgetting that: It is easyer for a Camel to enter Math. 20.
through a Needles eye then for a rytch man to enter into the kingdom of GOD.
We must remember also where he says: Whosoever amoungest you would be
greatest, let him be your mynister or servant. And: Woe be to* you rytch men
which have your consolation here. Woe be to you which are filled, for you shall
hunger. Woe Luke. 6.
be to you which laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep. Woe be to you when
men shall praise and bless you. Or thus: what see thou a moth in thy
brothers eye, and can not see a beam in thine own? Well: Jesus said unto a
certain man: follow me. And he answered Lord suffer me first to go and burye
my father. And Jesus said: Suffer thou the dead to burye their dead. And he
says: Fear Math. 10.
not them which kill the body but cannot kill the soul. But fear you him
which has power to throw the body and soul into everlasting fire.

And in another place: O fool: This night shall they take thy soul from thee.
Then whose shall that be which thou have gathered? And thereupon: Such is every
man which ^uke. 12.
hoordeth up treasure and is not rytch in GOD. What should we ouerpasse these
sentences. Sell that you possess and give alms. Unless you repent you shall
all peryshe to gither.

Depart from me all you which have done wickedly. (...) thou make a dynner
or supper, do not (...), thy brethren, thy kynsmen, nor thy next rytch
neighbors, (...) peradventure they bid thee again. And so thou be well
recompensed. But when thou make a feast, call the (...), the weak, the halte
and lame, and the blind, and thou shall be blessed. If any man come unto me
and do not hate his father, mother, wife, children, brethren and ^isters,
yea, and his own soul, he cannot be my discyple.

And he which does not forsake all that he has, cannot (...) discyple. And
that which is hyghly esteemed with me^, is abhomynation in the sight of God.
Finally: When you have done all that which was comma^nded you, then say: We
are unprofitable servants, we have (...) but that which we ought and were
bound to do.

Again: Every man which exalts himself shall be (...) low. And he which does
humble himself shall be exalted* Beware least you ouercharge your bodies with
gluttony, drunkenness, or the cares of this world. By these and infinite
other places (my dearly beloved*) thou (...) perceive how straight in deed
and how narrow, the way and gate are which lead to salvation. But of these
before (...) passages, some perteyne unto the commandments. And thereunto all
men are bounden. Some other are of conncell and advise, which nevertheless are
to be observed of as many as profess Christ sincerely. Yea futhermore the
self same may apeare by diverse other Scryptures. For the Apostle says: They
which are of Christ have crucified their flesh with the vices and
concupysences thereof. Whosoever therefore do not extinguish vice and
concupisence, nor chastyse their bodies, they then perteyne not unto Christ.
Again: A wyddowe (says he) which lives in delights, is dead living. For
though she live by life of nature, yetis she dead by the death of punishment
and judgment. Then if delightful life be a fault or sin in wyddowes, how
much more blameful is it to be thought in such as ought by reason of their
(...) to be gydes and paternes of godliness to others? Hereunto many things
might be added, but let these suffice. And these (well-beloved) I have here thus
rehearced, to the end I might thereby induce thee to the fear of God, the
watchful care of thy heart, and to the diligent reading of scripturs, least
thou should in vain flatter thy self with gods mercy. And so become one
of their socyetie which walk in the broad and spatyous way. For as the
Apostle says: If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reygne with Christ. If
we be pacyente with him, we shall also live with him. Yea, and must we not
according to the Apostles words, enter into heaven by many trybulations? But
it is true (which GOD forbyde should be verified in thee) which Bernard says:
Lord many would reign with thee, but they will not suffer with thee. Many
would be with thee but few will follow thee. Many would find thee but few
do seek thee. Therefore let us not be afeard to bear trybulations since
Hierome says: No servant of Christ is without trybulation. And if thou suffer
no tribulation, it seems thereby that thou have not begone to be the
servant of God.

Our sweet Savior for the recomforte of mankind did All these notwith
standing Christ's yoke ^s swe^te and his burden (...)*
say as Matthew rehearses in the eleventh Chapter of his Gospel, these
words: Come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy laden, and I will
refreshe you. Take my yoke upon you, and learn by me for I am meek and humble
in heart. For my yoke is sweet and my burden light.

These words our savior Christ spoke of himself. Wherewith we must understand
that the yoke of Christ is none other thing then the law of the Gospel, or
the performaunce and wary heed of Gods commandments. By the which we are
bound under the obedyence of his holy will, and are restreyned or separate
from this worldely life.

And the burden of our Savior may be understood by the observation of his
holy words. And of such a yoke it is written: It is good for the man which
has borne the yoke (even from his youth) which the reprobate do put from
them. According to that saying of Hieremye from the beginning thou have broken
and cast of the yoke and said: I will not serve. So that we may perceive
that in effect all is one, the narrow way and straight gate leading to
salvation, and the yoke and burden of our Savior Christ. But then some will
say: If the way be straight and the gate narrow, how can the yoke of (...)
sweet and his burden light? Whereunto I (...) were that the self same yoke,
yea and (...) self same way^, are straight, narrow, paynefull, and (...) to
such as are foolyshe, imperfect, and ^ot yet exercysed in fpirytuall life, nor
have yet tasted the sweeteness^ of the same. The which nevertheless to the
perfect, the verteous, pure, and Godly zeales, which serve God fervently and
love him, is broad, easy, and most pleasant. So that that they rather run
speedely, the^ walk leasurely therein.

Whereupon the holy and (...) Prophet confessed saying: I have run all the
ways of thy comaundementes whiles thou have dylated and enlarged my heart. And
again: I have walked at large (says he) because I sought out thy
commandments. To conclude, (...) lykelyhoode, nor no form, does more
delectably or readily work in man's my^de, then love. For love of his own
proper nature and reason, enclyneth and draws the lover to actual loving.
Whereupon it is compared unto a weight. Now, therefore since charytie is the
cause, gouernesse, and Empress of all merytoryous deeds, the which (charytie)
is called the life of the soul, and without it nothing is meritorious: yt is
thereby evident that y^ more we do profit and proceed in ye love of god,
so much the more we do de^bly exercise all things that proceed from god. Yea
so much the more we do heartily abhor those things which perteine unto the
world. Sythens y^ unto him which loves ferue^tly, nothing can be more
pleasant then to do any thing yt may seem acceptable unto his beloved. For
true love esteems nothing to be hard, grievous, rough, or deadly. Yea let us
consider if any pain, any strypes, or any wounds or death it self can
ouerco^e or daunte true and hearty love? surely no. For if it be perfect love in
deed, it overcomes al things and yet feels no pains. The love of God is an
infallyble treasure. He that has it, is rytch. And whosoever lacks that, is
poor and needy though he have all the world at will. And therefore well doing
does so much the more delight the minds of men, and sins do^ so much the more
yrke and dyscontent them, as they find in their hearts a perfect and sincere
love toward God that highest and unchangeable goodness. Arristotle the
heathen Philosopher confessed that it was a perfect sign or token of virtue,
to be delyghted in the actyon thereof. And surely true it is that the more
virtuous we beecome, the more we are delighled to excercyse and do ^e true
fruits of repentance. Again: As nature, is the very begenning of all
natural actiones and operatio^s, so gods great grace (workyng in us) is the
very first, formal, immedyate, and intrusecall beginning of all good and
acceptable deeds. And even as they which are (naturally) well disposed, do
exercise with case and great delight such works and operations as perteyne unto
nature, so when a man begins ones to abound in ye grace of god, the^ he
does also (daily) more ioyefully and with ye better will exercise himself in
gods commandments and good deeds. And this happens most often unto such as
are meek and humble of heart. Whereupon Bernard says: Nothing is hard to ye
humble, nor nothing unpleasant to such as are meek of heart. And right easily
are y^ commandments effectually kept, when yt grace of God does give and gyde
forwardnes of will, and obedyence with true humylitie do appease the Iudg^s
indyngnation. Neither can a man say that he serves for mere necessytie, when
the thing which he is commanded to d^, is of him right heartily loved and
desired. Then if we deeyely and effectually consider that it is for Gods love
that we do such things as we take in hand, we shall then think nothing to be
hard or difficulte. Nay rather if we should all dye for him, or execute and
fulfill all verteous exercyses for his sake, we shall it be able to do nothing
worthy of the benifites which we have received at his hands. And thereupon
Gregorius says if the mind be ones fixed in God with a steadfast intent, then
we esteem all things to be sweet and pleasant how bitter or sower so ever
they chance to be. Yea, we shall find great rest and quiet in all those
things which do afflict us.

Futhermore it is certain, that the more a man's mind be bent unto any one
thing earnestly, so much the more his entontions toward any other thing be
slackened and laid aside. Then even as the lovers of this world (which do
altogether wrappe and enfold themselves in the desires thereof, and are
altogether occupied in vain and transitory things) do (as it were) loathe and
are weary of spiritual and godly things, yea as they d^e pray unto God
hastily and without an inward affection, even so those which love GOD and do
wholly dedycate themselves unto his service, desyringe to cleave most fervently
unto him, and to be wholly occupied and conjoined with him: do hatefully
abhor, loathe, and fly from, those things which apperteyne unto the world.
Yea they desire and rejoice to be incessantly occupied and conversant in the
praises of God, and walk in the straight and narrow way with great delight
and pleasure. Hereupon it is that Gregorius witnesses saying: love is as
strong as death. For (says he) even as death does kill the corporal body, so
the love of God does (through the hope of eternal life) kill in us the love
of temporal delights. For he whom the charity of GOD does swallow up, him
does it also make vnsensyble too the feelynge of any external desyers. For
it is of necessity that the sweetness of Christ Jesus, should make sower and
unpleasant the taste of this life. These things then have I here said to the
end that I may turn thee (my well-beloved) from the (...) of the world, and
inuyte thee unto the most sincere and perfect delyghtfulnesse in GOD. Yea that
I might entyse thee unto the state of perfection, and enduce thee to prove how
sweet God is and how pleasant it is to serve him fervently and famylyarely.
So that thou may not only beecome a servant, but also a friend, yea
abeloued Son of thy creator and Savior. For this is more wor^hy to be
desired, then all this world with all the glory and pomp thereof. And I hope
that the Lord GOD will grant thee understanding of all these things. For I
presume not to think that this mine exh^rtation will any way profit thee,
unless the holy Ghost be present and give thee taste thereof and wisdom by
his secret enspiration. For it is written: The inspiration of the omnypotente,
does give understanding and knoweledge.

The friendship of this world is hateful and enemy to god. There What it is to
contempne and despise the wordly.
fore whosoever coueteth to be friendly unto this world, he shall thereby
become an enemy unto god. As Augustine well witnesses yt only love and
charytie, make distincton between ye sonn^s of god and the sons of the
Diuill. For in ye sons of god, the spiritual and divine love does prevail.
Whereby they climb ente^tiuely unto heavenly things. And in the sons of the
diuill, the love of this world, yea the pryuate, inordynate, and wicked lust
thereof (which unto godly charity are strong poyso^) do reign and prevail
altogether. The whole text the^ of holy scripturs does exhort us unto ye
extyrpatio^ and rooting up of this private and worldly love. As also it
encourages us to the prositable proceedings in charity and the love of god and
our neighbor. Furthermore yt is private love by yt which we are turned back
and bend to esteem our selves vitiously. That is to say: by coveting those
things which are profitable and delightful to our nature, more then yt things
which pertayne unto god. As for example, riches, delights, honor, praise, and
such other worldly vanities. But he which does truly love him self (in god)
does co^te^pne and throw away all those things as vile and abject. I mean the
superfluous use thereof, and I take this word Contempning, or utter mislyking
for the full and extreme Contempning or mislyking that a christian ought to
have thereof. But because every creature of God is good, and therefore to be
loved, and we are bidden and commanded to love ^ur enimyes, and not to
contempne any man but our selves according to Esayes words: Woe be to thee
which dispisest: shall not thou also be despised? Hereupon aryseth a question,
how it were to be understood that the holy scriptures do command us to hate
and despise this world. But if you mark my words well, you shall perceive,
that since every man which loves the world does thereby become an enemy
unto God, it falls out also that the contempt of this world is of necessity
unto salvation. Whereupon some curious mind might in^erre that all secular
people which are married and thereby do love each other, should (hereby) stand
in state of condempnation. Whereunto I answer that love is to be taken diverse
ways, as well in Philosophy, as also in divinity. For both Plato and
Pythagoras did exhort their scholars and sects to dispyse the world. But to
come unto a more particular distinction.

First the world is taken for the Element of earth, or for the whole globe and
compass of this earthly habitatio^. And so it is taken in the Gospel where
Christ spoke unto his Apostles saying: Go you out into the whole world and
preach the Gospel to all creatures. And the Philosophers do say that the
least Star of the fyrmament is bigger then the whole world.

Secondarily, it is taken for the whole regyon of the Elements and their
myxtures. Whereupon it may be that the Apostle said: The figure of this world
does pass over. And to that sense the Prince of Philosophers said. This world
(says he) must be adjoining unto the cources of the higher powers. That the
whole virtue and power thereof may thereby be governed.

Thirdly, the world is taken for the whole corporal substance created* And so
Plato in his book de Timaeo, does seem to bring in the s^nsible world.

Fourthly, the world is taken for ye whole universal thing, in the which
visible and unvisible separate and materyall substances are comprehended. And
thereof this text may be meant: The world was made by him. Yea so also the
Philosopher says: Nothing is without the world.

Fifthly, by the world is taken for men remaining in this world, or for all
mankind. Whereupon it was that the Apostle said: Let all the whole world be
subi^cte unto God. And Christ him self said: This Gospel of the kingdom
shall be preached and declared in the whole world.

Sixthly, the world is taken for the chosen and predestinate unto salvation.
Whereupon we read: So God loved ye world that he gave his only begotten son.
etc.

Seventhly, the world is taken for the perverse and reprobate. Whereupon our
savior said unto the Jews: you are of this world. But I am not of this world
(that is to say) of the number of ungodly men, leading a vain and worldly
life. Of which number you are your selves. And again he said unto his
Apostles: Because you are not of y^ world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. And in this sense ye world is most
commonly taken in scriptures, especially in the Gospel and Epistles of Saint
John.

And last of all, a father of the Church which has written a treatise of the
vanity of this world, does take this word: The world for the changeableness
of man's conversation in this life. Since then the holy scriptures do bid the
world to be contempned and hated, according to that saying: Love you not the
world nor those which are therein.

Therefore by this word: The world we must understand worldly and vain
creatures bent unto transitory and not unto heavenly things. Yea and there
with must we comprehend earthly substance, and such things as the worldlings
do most accoumpt, as temporal prosperity, carnal delights, to be praised and
honored, and to become rich and clyme alofte. For all these sensible and
temporal things are to be contempned and hated. Not as touching their very
being, but because they hinder and stop us in the way, and foreslow our
journey unto the heavenly kingdom. And we must contemp^e and hate them, least
we do cleave and stick fast in the mire of them. As they do which set their
chief end and felicytie in frail and transitory things, seeking, loving,
wyshing, and desiryng them more then they do God.

Therefore whenever we see any man to prosper exceedingly in this world, and
to lead a voluptuous conversation according to his appetite, let us neither
esteem nor magnify him. Let us not affect such kind of life, nor greatly set
by (but rather dispyse) such a man. I mean not that we should hate him in
nature, nor dispyse his person absolutely, but his vices, and him self, in so
much that by them he is eloygned and estranged from God.

Whereupon the Psalmist says of the just man: The Psalm. 14.
wicked was brought to naught in his sight. But such as fear God, he
glorifieth. Aristotle in his Ethyckes has this sentence: Magnanimytie is full
of contempt, for it sets light by those which live vylely.

All this notwithstanding, we ought to bestow the affects of charity and godly
compassion upon those which are wicked and unjust, according to their
necessity. Yea and much the more because we see them to be wrapped and
enfolded, yea blinded and muffled to rejoice, flourish, and exalte themselves in
this world. And thereupon Hierome says: we more weigh and mark sinners to
be most wretched, when we perceive their faults to be left unpunished. Yea
both he and Ambr^se say: There is no certayner token or sign of a reprobate
sense, and damnation to ensue, the^ to prosper and to be without any cross or
punishment in this life. Especially (...). 3.
since the Lord says: I cha^tise and rebuke those whom I love. Now therefore
let us well consider how it comes to pass that the contempt and hatred of this
world is of necessity to salvation. For unless it had been by some manner of
means necessary to salvation, the Apostle John had not said: if any man love
the world, the charity and love of God (...). Joan. 2.
the father is not in him. It is therefore to be said, that there are two
kinds of hating and (...) the world, speaking generally thereof.

The first whereof is: that the world and such things as are therein should be
contempned and hated, for as much as they do directly hinder and withhold us
from God. That is to say, least they be loved more then God, or contrary to
his will and commandments. And least any man should take felicity in them,
and cleave wholly unto them contrary to the laws of God in holy scriptures
contained. Least he prefer earthly goods before heavenly goods, and least he
set the temporal praises and honors of this life, before the celestial joys
prepared. And finally, least he love and esteem this present life more then
the life to come. And for these reasons the hating and dispising of the world
are necessary unto salvation. So that every man is bound (in that sort) to
hate and despise the world, as well single men as married folk. The which lesson
I judge to be very difficult unto such as dwell and remain in this world. Now
the second kind or manner of dispising and hating the world, is executed by the
full and absolute aband^ning and denying of all worldly things. As if any man
dispising and throwing from him the riches and delights of this life, should
choose to serve God in obscure and more private life.

So that (in this sense) to hate and despise the world, is utterly He means
not Monks nor Friars I trust.
to refuse and cast of all temporal things, seculer pomps, yea worldly manners
and dignities, and so to despise all the vanities of this life that we may
walk in the right way by the assistance of Gods grace and holy spirit. And
whosoever does thus, he is sure to displease and offend worldly men. For even
as likeness of things is a cause of love and well pleasing, so unlikeness is
the original cause and mother of hatred, and withdrawing of minds and
affections. Hereupon the Apostle asked this question: Do I (says he) seek to
please men? If I should yet please men, I should not be the servant of Christ.
And likewise the Psalmist says: God has broken in sunder the bones of such
as seek to please men. They were consumed because god despised the^. Is not
this a most horrible and dreadful word? For what can be more fearful then
to be despised of God? since Solomon Eccle. 7.
says: Consider the works of God, since no man can amend him which God
dispiseth. And in this sort to despise y^ world, is not only to hate and
despise all frail, worldly, and vain things, in that they do dyrectly, but
in that they do also chanceably let or hinder Gods creatures from attaining
unto him. As the wise man testifies saying: They are as temptation Sap. 14.
to a man's soul, and as a Trappe or snare for the feet of the foolish* And
therefore we hate them not only for that they withhold us directly, since
Solomon says: God made Eccle. 3.
his works to be feared. But also because even chanceably they do vaynely
delight the reprobate with the comeliness of his creatures, and with the
particular profit which they seem to carry with them. So that they there do
stay and stand still ^ternally, and never attribute the honor and glory unto
the creator, who is in deed the only end and scope whereunto we should tend
and frame our doings.

Heerevpon Isodorus says: it is better to have the hatred of the evil, then
their company. For even as the conversation and life of those which are godly
do render many commodities, so the company of the wicked does bring with it
many euilles.

Now in this treatise I intend to speak chiefly of the contempt of this
world, as it is set down in the second note. even that which concerns the
state of perfection, and the observing of Gods words. And yet I shall sometimes
bring in somewhat of the former kind of contempt, in as much as it of
necessity toward salvation and the fulfillyng of Gods commandments.

My part (says the Lord) is my soul. And therefore I (...) three (...)
which move us to contempne the world.
will expect and look for the Lord. For the Lord is good to them which trust
in him, and to the soul that seeks him. And as the scripture says: A
threefolde cord is hardly broken. Let us therefore by a threefold persuasion,
and by a tripartyte kind of demonstration, set down how holy, how divine,
and how acceptable, how wholesome, how noble, and how expedient it is
altogether to contempne the world and those things which are therein. Now some
persuading reasons or demonstrations of this blessed contempt, are to be*
understood on the behalf of God. Some other on our own behalf, and some on
the behalf of the world it self. Whereupon orderly and decently to proceed: on
y^ behalf of God these things ought to induce and beget in us a contempt of ye
world.

First the love and goodness of the glorious and blessed God. Secondarily: The
zeal that we have to honor him perfectly as much as in us lies.

Thirdly, ye great benifits which we receive at gods hands.

Fourthly, the consideration of his promises.

Fifthly, because god him self in proper person did so counsel us.

And lastly, because he did so him self. Of the rest I will treat hereafter.
Now touching the love and goodness of God it is written: Thy name and thy
memorial (O Lord) Esaias. 26.
are in the desires of my soul. My soul has desired thee by night, yea thy
spyrite is in the secrets of my heart, and early in the gray morning will I
wait for thee.

Herein as goodness is the obiecte of our appetyte and desire, so since god is
the highest, purest, unmeasurable, and perfectest goodness, so is he
insinitely to be desired, and to be loved. In such sort that we ought beyond
all comparison to love him above all things. And so consequently, it is meet
and requisite to dispyse, to refuse, and to cast away, whatsoever may let,
foreslow, or turn us from his love, and the feruentnesse thereof. But the world
and that which (...) thereunto, do withdraw us, and specially let and (...) us
from the love and goodness of God (as Gregory says:) we are even so much
disioyned and separated from the love of y^ high God, as we are wrapped in
worldly things, delighted in base things, and occupied in earthly things. For
virtue is both greater and of more force when it is united, the^ when it is
dispersed) therefore the more that the (...) of our mind are dispersed and
divided into the inordinate love of worldly creatures, the weaker also, colder,
blynder, and more unapt they be to love God.

Whereupon Chrysostom says: look how much thy mind is set upon any thing,
and even so much the less it is set upon God. For what are these earthly and
carnal things, but only heavy wayghtes and burdens which draw down the
affections of man's mind from desire of heavenly things. Let us therefore extend
our whole heart unto God. Let us be borne unto him with our whole mind. Let
him be such a cause of love unto us in all other things, that we esteem no
worldly creature more the^ for that it may (as a mean) serve us toward the
attayning of his love. That is to say, so far forth as it may be unto us
necessary and profitable to further us in our way toward the heavenly
kingdom. But let us become so fervent in the love of God, yea let us so much
esteem his most sweet and delectable love, that we may despise all and
singular other vain and transitory things as vile durte. So that the
omnipotent and eternal God may be more precious, more to be desired, more
glorious, sweeter, fayrer, and in (every kind of comparison better,) of more
perfection and worthiness the^ any other thing. And let any living worldly
creature be loathsome unto our souls, being thus occupied in contemplation of
the divine majesty. Let us see and perceive hereby that the whole (...) world,
(in respect or comparison of the vndiscrybable God) is but as a small title of
no reputation or louelynesse. Yea in such sort that we think these
transistorie things unworthy to be looked on. But that we be wholly
transformed, (...), established, dissolved, and swallowed up in Christ Jesus.
So that we may say with his holy Prophet: The God of my heart, and God is my
portion for ever. And Psalm. 72.
again: I will love thee O Lord my strength. And as the Psalm. 17.
Apostle said: I know that neither death nor life, nor any creature, Romans (...).
can separate me from Gods love. Let us but marks and behold how vile it were,
for the delights of the mortal and miserable flesh, for the praise and glory
of men, and for temporal honor and preferment, to be withdrawn or foreslowed
from this highest, supressentiall, unchangeable, and incomprehensible goodness
of God. Let us be made heavenly conformable unto God, and deyfyed: yea familiar
and 1. Cor. 6.
entyrely beloved unto the living God. For what have we to do with these
earthly things? we being made and created to the shape and likeness of the
most holy Trinity? being redeemed and made free by the blood of Christ, and
called to Genesis 1.
the blessed fellowship of Angels? Let us therefore dispyse Apoc. 1.
all these things, and let our whole occupation, conversation, entention, and
affection, be fixed and altogether reposed in him only which is only
necessary to be imbrased, according to the admonition of Augustine. Let man
(says he) if he turn any way, convert him self unto him which created him:
for by going back from him, he waxes cold, but by turning unto him, he shall
wax warm. By going back he shall wax dim and dark, but by turning to
him, he shall become bright and shyning. For even where he received his
creation and being, there must he also fetch his being good or godly. For he
the Lord our God is ye very sweetness, sweet above all kind of sweetness.
Brighter then any light, deeper then any secret, and higher then any honor or
degree. Moreover he is that purest kind of life: to turn (...) om him were a
grievous fall, but to return unto him is a high rising or clyming. To abide
in him is a certain dwelling, and to dwell in him is happy life. And even as
corn in the wet furrow does rotte and (...), but in the rydge or higher part
of the land, it is preserved and florisheth, so our hearts if they be raised up
to God shall never putrify nor decay. But if they be overthrown or sunken in
earthly things, they rotte and consume immediately. And mine earnest desire is
(my well-beloved) that thou do spurn from thee and despise all transitory
things, and detest and abhor all the pomp of this world, for the love of the
divine bounty, and through the affection that thou haste to proceed in the
imbrasing thereof. Yea and that by the desire of so contemplatyue and holy
meditations, thou may with all thy heart and mind be given over unto him.
All which can not come to pass unless thou despise all corporal delights,
all worldly vanities, and all thine own desires. As Cassianus affyrmeth
saying: our affections (says he) are never perfectly kindled to the desire of
eternal things, neither is our understanding ever sharpened unto the perfect
contemplation of heavenly things, until the cares and desires of the flesh
be perfectly bridled in us. My (well-beloved) if thou will be rich, and a
possessor of infinite goods and treasures, give ear then unto the counsel of
Ambrose. He that will (says he) possess God, let him first renounce the world,
that God may be unto him a blessed possession and heritage. For look how much
thou dye unto y^ world, so much life thou gaynest with God. And the more that
thou live as to this world, so much the more thou dyest unto God.

To conclude, whosoever loves the world, does love an enemy, imbraseth a
Traitor, and dandleth in his lap an unspeakable danger.

Whereupon Augustyne said: if this world delight thee, thou shall always be
unclean. And if thou lovingly kiss the world, he will hungrily and greedily
swallowe and devour thee. And to make an end of this division, we ought above
all things to love God.

First, for his unmeasurable goodness.

Secondarily, because he first loved us.

Thirdly, because he powers so many benifits upon us.

Fourthly, because he has promised to give us greater rewards in the heavenly
kingdom. And to this feruentnesse of charity let us always enforce our
selves. For by Augustynes opinion: it is neither the great number of works,
nor the long continuance of time, but the greater heat of charity, and the
better readiness of our will, which makes God (for his Christ) to accept our
merits. For whosoever does observe charity in all his actions, he fulfilleth
as well that which is apparent, as also that which is mystical, in Gods book.
For charity does (as it were) open the mind, and makes the lover to be
loved. O Lord my God thou art (...). (...). 13.
charity (says the Apostle) thou art love which can not be extinguished. Do
thou therefore lighten my heart, and make it dronken in thee. Wherefore am I
tossed about? wherefore run I from one place to another? why do I wander after
many things? Is there not in thee only (most holy, honorable, mighty and
glorious God) y^ perfect possession, y^ incomprehensible ple^tie, and y^
infinite abundance of all things y^ are good, pleasant, or to be desired? The^
what is more excele^t, or more lovely, y^ I should therefore wtdraw my heart from
thee, and turn it unto frail things, coveting or desiring any manner of thing
without thee or besides thee? And where was I when I was not with thee? Whither
ran mine affections astray, when they did not desire thee only? O God of my
life, how vaynely is it consumed? And how unfruitfully are my days stolen
away whilst I lived idelly and unprofitably before thee? But from Psalm. 41.
henseforwardes let my soul be immovably fixed in thee. For even as the
heart desires the fresh fountaynes when he is chased, even so my heart
desires to be with thee O God.

Whosoever does glorify me, I will also glorify him says How contempt os the
world comes by the ^eale. which we have to God his honor.
the Lord God in the second Chapter of the first book of the Kings. And they
which co^tempne me shall be dishonored. For of the love of God, the zeal of y^
divine honor does rise and proceed. As also an exceeding affection to adore and
worship him in all things. Which zeal y^ prophet Helie had when he said: I am
become zealous in zeal for the Lord God. And y^ more (...). Reg. (...).
fervently that we love him, the more ent^tiuely also we desire to worship him
in all things, yea and to enduce others with us to the worshipping of his name.
For even as God (by reason of his unmeasurable bounty, and his infinite
amyablenesse) is such that no man can love him so much as he is worthy to be
beloved, but does infinitely fail thereof. So by the reason of his majesty,
dignity, and unmeasured asured holiness, he is infinitely to be honored. So
that every man is much defectyue in doing of such reverence unto him, as he
(in him self does deserve. And here upon the holy fathers profoundlye pondering
these considerations) did esteem all their deeds and conversation, (how
perfect so ever it were) to be of none effect. And therefore ye doctors say: A
man should rather suffer death, the^ commit ye least fault or offense wilfully.
For as much as sin (in that it derogateth any thing from the exceeding great
majesty of God) is a huge and unreasonable enormitie. Then if we do honor the
excelent majesty of God so much ye more, because by ye beholding and
consideration of his worthiness we are able to despise and heartily to reject
all frail, vain, and transitory things: to the end yt being unburdened and
clean dispatched of them, we may attentively give our selves to yt pure, free,
and entire worshipping of ye same: it must needs follow that they which
through zeal do altogether dispyse and forsake the world, shall immediately
honor God with all integrytie of heart. And therefore (by his grace and mercies
are made worthy to be glorified, honored and extolled with him. And likewise
the less that a man do occupy him self in many businesses, so much the more
perfectly he is bent unto the only God. And so much y^ loftier and more
sincere his mind is, in the praising of his name. Yea he may so much the more
be wholly at leisure to exercise him self in his service, and walk uprightly
in all godliness. Moreover Solomon says: Honor God with all thy substance
(...). (...).
and ye first fruits of thine increase. If then it pertayne unto the honor of
God, to offer him any part of our outward substance, it must by stronger
reason appertain more unto his honor, to refuse all worldly things freely for
the worshipping and glorifying of him, and to present our selves unto him with
full devotion. And so do they which co^tempne the world in such manner as is
beforesayd. And therefore to the end thou may incessantly (as much as in thee
lies) give thy self unto the praise, worship, and honor, of the divine
majesty, yea that thou may quyetly repose thy self in the sweet
contemplation of his mercyes, rejoice in his blessedness like a natural
loving child, and spend all the days of thy life virtuously, I exhort thee
(my well-beloved) altogether to disspyse the world, and to pass over all the
transitory vanities thereof with a noble courage, yea to go heartily to work
in the only honoring of God. For is not the vileness and lothsomenesse of
this world, infinite being compared to ye highest and unchangeable goodness?
yea do thou not think it an unworthy thing, (by occasion of earthly and
worldly conversation) to be hyndred and let from the duty which thou owe
unto the honor and majesty of God* and to be withdrawn from the holy
exercyses of virtue and godliness, (...). Reg. 2.
for the most vain liberties of worldly conversation, and unlawful actions?
To conclude, if thou do in this manner glorify God and despise the world, then
God doubtless will cause thee to be honored exceedingly as Esaias witnesses
Era. 5^.
saying: if thou glorify God (following not thine own ways, nor yelding to
thine own will (the Lord will give thee rest, and will fill thy soul with
comely brightness. Yea then shall thou be much delighted in the Lord, and he
shall set thee up above the height of the earth. Whereupon Hyllarie says:
This do I chieflye owe unto God, that all my power, all my senses, and all my
spirits may sound his praise. For to that end we received body and bodily
members, yea life and soul of God, that we might worship him generally with
them all. And therefore the Apostle says: As you Romans 5.
have given over your members to serve uncleanness and iniquity, so now
(says he) give over your members to do right^esse and holiness. And this it
is to honor God worthyly, and to do (for his honor) whatsoever we may
possybly do to please him, yea and yet nevertheless humbly to confess that
we do nothing worthy of thanks or merit. Therofore it is written: To
gloryfie God as much as lies Eccle. 43.
in us shall prevail with his mercy, and is beyond all praise. Defer not
then (my well-beloved) to give whole possession of thy self and all that thou
have, thy body and thy soul, yea thine inward thoughts and outward actions
unto the divine Majesty. Least abusing gods gifts thou consequently serve ye
Diuill. For whosoever does live vytiously, he is a servant of the Diuill.
John. 8.


The Prophet Esaias in his lxiii. Chapter has these words: How the
consideration of gods benesits exhorts us to hate the world.
I will remember the Lord for his mercy. Yea I will praise the Lord for all
that he has given us, and for all that he has bestowed upon us according to
his goodness. If then we would perfectly know how carefully we ought to seek
the way of salvation and walk therein, yea and how much we ought to dispyse
the vain delights of the world: Let us heedely consider what the only
begotten Son of god, did, suffered, and took upon him, for our health and
salvation. If he then, through the wisdom and prouydence of God the father,
yea through ye eternal, uncreated, vnbegotte^, and unmeasurable foresight did
(not without great cause and reason) take upon him, do, and suffer, so many
things for us: If the only begotten Son of God being perfect and o^ypotent,
did for our health and salvation take upon him our substance and nature, if he
were (for our sake) conuersaunt here on earth so many years, if he did
sustain and endure so many trauayles, labors, and pains, for our enstruction
and redemption, finally if he suffered therefore most bitter and cruel death,
let us not set light by our selves, nor make small accoumpt of our salvation.
Neither let us think that we can be saved by sleighte and superficyall serving
of him, by cleaving unto worldly vanyties, neither yet by living carelessly and
without fear. For neither is the everlasting pain of dampnation so avoided,
nor yet the heavenly kingdom is not so obtained. For Christ suffered and was
crucyfied for us, that we might thereby follow his stepes and example. Then is
it necessary that we be conformed unto his passion, and that we crucyfie our
selves as he did. For whosoever says that he remains in God, must walk even
2. Tim. 2.
as he walked. Where upon the Apostle said: If we suffer with him, we shall
reign with him also. And again he says: Be you folowers and imytators of
god, as his best Epho. 5.
beloved children. And what else is it to be conformed unto Christ's passion, to
dye with him, and to follow his steps, but even to mortyfie all vanyties and
wickedness, to co^stitute our bodies wholly in y^ fear of god, to restrain
and bridle our own Zach. 9.
natural lyberty, under ye commandments of his holy laws, and to submyt our
wills altogether unto his godly will? for when we know and believe yt our Lord
and Savior (Jesus Christ) did most patie^tly suffer innumerable derysions and
mockes, slanders, blasphemies, labors and pains, with all meekness of Mat.
11.
poverty, with all lowlynesse of mind, and with all perfection of charytie, so
as finally he suffered the most vile kind of Job. 19.
death for us, let us think that it were most indecent for ye servant if he
should live in delights, rejoice in worldly rytches, and wallowe in earthly
vanyties, whose master Job. 1^.
was so busily conuersaunt, afflicted, and killed for ye servants sake. For yt
servant is not above his master. And Gregory said well: Nothing is so
grievous but that it might be suffered with good will, if we would often call
to memory the passion of Christ. Harken then unto holy Bernarde speaking to
thee in the person of Christ. Behold O man (says he) what I suffer ^or thee.
There is no pain comparable to that wherewith I am tormented. I call unto thee
because I am afflicted for thee. Behold the pains wherewith I am tormented.
Behold the nails wherewith I am nailed. Behold how all my body is stretched
out upon the Cross for thee. And look how great mine outward pains are, so
much yt greater is mine inward greifin y^ I find thee so unthankful. If thou
weigh these things (well-beloved) with att^tiue mind thou wylt soon^ contempne
the world, and overcome the concupyscences thereof, thou will desire to follow
Christ, abhor all things that are worldly, and refuse to be co^uersaunt with
such as walk in vanyties. For god forbid that thou should be ungrateful
for such and so many benefits And yet ungrateful should thou be, if thou
give him not thanks for the same with thy whole heart. But thanks can thou
not give unless thou do medytate, mark and acknowledge them. Since the
chief point of ingratitude (as Seneca says) is forgetfulness. Therefore cast
and reuolue in thy mind every day what God himself did and suffered for thee.
Yea and besides this, the benefits are also innumerable which god does daily
bestow on us. So yt by the consideration of them, we ought of good right to be
kyndled in love toward God, and in a zeal to honor him with all devotion.

Pea and an affection also to be always giving of thanks and so consequently
to laud and praise his name incessantly. For have we not received from him
whatsoever we have or 1. Cor. (...).
be? y^ goods of fortune? the gifts of nature? to be? to live? to feel? to
have understanding? yea have not we received of him the gifts gf gra^, ^ayth,
hope, and charytie? the gifts of ye holy Ghost, and the sacraments? How often
has god most mercyfully spared us when we offended? how pitifully has he
prevented us? From how many snares and peryles has he preserved us? what
great gifts of glory has he promised us? Yea how many have been condemned
to hell fire, which offended and sinned less then we have done.

Let us then not be forgetful of such and so great benesites. But let us
with the Psalmist humbly and thankefully say: What shall I requyte unto the
Lord for all that he has given me? I will bless and magnyfie the Psalm. 111.
Lord at all times, his praises shall always be in my Psalm. (...).
mouth. For of all other faults, ingratitude is the worste. Especyally that
kind of ingratytude whereby we become unthankful unto God the most lyberall
and abundaunt benefactor of all other. If any man should cut of thy hand or thy
foot, how much would thou think thy self bound unto him which would
heal it again and restore thee thy member? If thou were blind, deaf, or
lame, how much would y^ love him which would cure thy defect? how then, art
thou not ashamed in that thou love not god ferue^tly, which has given thee
all those gifts before named and has also promised thee far greater then
they? therefore let these great benyfites and lyberaltyes of god toward thee,
stir in thee a contempt of this world, and enduce thee to take in hand all
such things, as may most lively express his honor and glory. For as it is
most certain that he which is by nature best dysposed unto virtue, were most
faulty if he should be blinded by the world to live vycyously, so (thou having
good gifts of nature) it were no small cause of grief if thou should
foreslowe thy self from executing the same.

The things which in this present life are mome^tarye and light (although they
be some tribulation) may exceedingly How cote^pte of the world may come by
consideration of god his promises.
work in us a great ma^e or weight of glory in the world to come, if we
behold not those things which are seen with eye, but those which cannot be
seen. For the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen are eternal. By these words of Paul it appears that the
trybulations of the chosen (although they be long, bitter, and grievous) yet
by regard of the celestyall glory and reward to come, they are light and but
of small continewaunce. For the reward to come is incomprehensible and
everlasting. But now is he a perfect and most pure lover of God, which loves
him not by beholding this reward, nor reuerenceth him not for desire of his
own profit, nor worshipeth him for reward of mutual consideration toward
himself: But which purely (for the very incomparable goodness, love, and
worthynesse of God) does all that he can to his honor with all dilygence. For
the better obteyning of which perfection, and for the full purchasing of so
great sincerity in Gods love, let us yet even by the beholding of the
infallible promyses of God, go stoutly forewarde to do any thing that may be
most pleasant, most perfect, and most acceptable unto him. And let us
contempne the world and the gallantnesse, delight, pomp, prosperities, and
vanities thereof, taking in hand to walk in the way of perfection, in the
fulfilling of Gods word, and in a virtuous and right religious life. For since
the eternal God, is a most free goodness, a most fervent charity, and a most
plentiful rewarder, therefore a man of reasonable understanding will confess
that the more he refuses and lays aside for his sake, the more sincerely
that he renounce him self, the more he dispose him self to the obtaining of
Gods gifts, and the more wholly, perfectly, and entyrely that he offer him
self unto him, even so much the more will God also she we him self the more
abundant in mercies to him, the more soundly and sweetly he will breath his
holy spirit into him, the more familiarly he will be conversant with him, and
the higher will he exalte him in glory, multiplying his gifts of grace in this
present life, and dooblyng his rewards of glory in y^ world to come. Whereupon
it is written in holy scripture: if a man do direct his heart unto God, he
shall draw his breath and spirit toward him self. And here upon the holy,
true, and merciful God has promised not only a blessed and excelent
glorification, in the heavenly kingdom, but also a most plentuous and liberal
reward in this present life, to such as despise the world for his sake. Saying
in his holy gospel: Whosoever leaves father and mother, his brethren or
friends, or his possessions for my names sake, he shall receive an hundredth
fold, and shall possess everlasting life. And what means he by these
words: He shall receive an hundredth fold? Marry that for the external,
carnal, and temporal goods which he has left, he shall receive the
spiritual gifts of grace, and the gifts of the holy ghost, which are more
then an hundredth fold better even in this life. And after also shall receive
eternal life, and the consumation of glory. Wherefore (my well-beloved) if thou
desire to be truly, and spiritually enriched and enabled, contempne then (for
the lou^ of God) all transitory and frail things, yea and whatsoever worldly
men, (which have in deed ye spirit of this world, and not the spirit of
Christ) do make greatest account off, and think most desirable, that do
thou dispyse, as most vile dyrte and mire: or rather as the very snares of the
diuill. If thou do so, thou shall become the Temple of the holy Ghost, and the
most blessed trinity will inhabit and replenish thy soul with all the
abundant delights thereof. For this is promised by y^ son of God saying: If
any man love me, he will keep my words and testimonies, and my father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. O happy
soul, in whom those three so plentiously do abide. Furthermore, harken what
Christ has promised unto the co^temners of this world, you (says he) which
have forsaken all things, and have followed me, when the son of man shall sit
in seat of his majesty, you shall sit also upon xij. seats, judging y^ xij.
Tribes of Israel. And this it is that Paul meant saying: You know not y^ the
saints shall judge of this world. Behold what an unspeakable dignity this is,
and how they are honored of God, which for his honor do forsake all things. And
thereupon Gregory says: whosoever being styrred with the prick, or goade of
godly zeal, does forsake such things as he here possesses, shall
undoubtedly obtain there a height of iuditiall dignity, y^ he may come to
judge with y^ judge, because by consideration of ye judgment, he did chaste^
himself willingly with poverty. Do not therefore lose so many godly treasures
which shall remain for ever, for these things which can be but small time
possessed. For behold Christ says: I stand at ye door and knock, if therefore
y^ open ye door of thy heart, and harke^ unto my counsel, I will come in unto
thee, Apoc. 3.
and enter into thy mind, and thou shall sup with me. So yt thou see how God
will cherish thee with heavenly comfort, will fulfill thee (...). Pet. 2.
with spiritual delights, and thou shall taste how sweet God is, and how
manifold is the multitude of his delightfulness. All which the lovers of this
world can not taste, because they are not worthy to receive y^ holy ghost. As
our savior said unto his Apostles in ye xiiij. Chapter of John: I will pray
unto my father for you, and he shall give you another spirit, even y^ holy
ghost, whom ye world can not receive. Whervppo^ Bernard says: The holy
delectatio^ does decline him which is first occupied in seculer desires, and
suffers him not to mingle vanity with verity, eternity with frailty,
spirituality with temporaltie, nor high things with low things. That thereby he
may learn what things mount upward toward heaven, and what things draw
downwards toward earth. For if y^ mind have wherewith to be outwardly delighted,
it remains inwardly without spiritual delight. And y^ it is which Hierom does
so worthily say: If we cut from y^ flesh such things as do most delight in, we
sha^straight straight way find in ye spirit that which will delight us. If the
outward wandering be shut up, the inward access to God is opened, for the less
y^ the soul be dispersed in it self, the straighter it is erected to things
above, by spiritual proceeding. And therefore to the end y^ thou may (by y^
brightness of y^ holy ghost) holsomly behold that most noble worthiness of
those spiritual and supernatural good things, set light by these temporal
vanities, ye^ spurn from thee, and utterly forsake al y^ is earthly. For as
Bernard confesses: They which are delighted in things y^ are present, and
subject unto frailty, can hardly or not at all behold and co^template things
y^ are heavenly and eternal. But he which accompteth the^ as dust or shadows,
shall be ye sooner raised up in spirit to ye attaining of spiritual and heavenly
things. And herewtal since thou do (my well-beloved) seem to be somewhat
delighted in riches, honor, and glory, therefore I dare not fully say unto thee,
y^ thou should make no manner account thereof. But mine admonition is, y^ you
should not ernestly nor heartily desire y^ deceiuable riches, ye worldly
honor, nor the glory of men, but y^ with thy whole heart thou seek and
search narowly for the spiritual treasure of virtue, the heavenly honor, and
the eternal glory. And so shall thou become a right rich man above all them
that love this world. For Hierome says: those only are to be accounted true
riches, which make us abundant in all virtues. And therefore if thou desire to
be rich, then love and embrace the right riches of virtue. If thou aspyre unto
the height of honor, then make have toward the heavenly kingdom. And if thou
covet a crown of glory or dignity the^ travail to be appointed and
enthroned amongst ye Angels above. And this meant Gregory when he said: despise
worldly riches and thou shall have abundance. Contempne worldly honor and thou
shall become glorious. Set light by ease and corporal quiet in this life, and
thou shalt have life everlasting. Whosoever can learn to contempne him self,
shall soon learn to despise all things for God only. And he that does so,
may say with the holy Apostle. I have lost all things (says he) to the end I
might gain Christ Jesus.

The Prophet Esaias in his seventh Chapter cried out saying: Because God him
self in proper person (ene^ Christ) did counsel us, therefore we ought to
despise the world.
This nation or people is without wisdom or advise: would God they could taste
or understand, and would foresee the latter end. As also ye Philosophers rule
is: Discentem oportet credere. A learner must believe. And the Prophet also
witnesses: if we believe not we shall not understand. And Solomon in the first
of his Proverbs says: My son barken thou unto the disciplyne of thy
father. And in another scripture we read: if thou see a man of understanding,
straight way watch to draw near unto him. And again: let not the words of
the elders pass by thine ears unmarked, but stay thereat: and from the
bottom of thy heart join thee unto the sayings of the wise men. Then if
hereby we be taught to give ear unto wise men, to believe their words, and
to follow their counsel and advice, is it not without all comparyson more
expedyent that we give ear, believe, and obey the only wise God, which is in
him self the oryginal, separate, and eternal wisdom? Since then the very
true God him self, the only begotten son of the father, for his abundant
charity and love wherewith he loved us, came down into the world, taking upon
him our nature and shape, appearing visibly unto men, being (...), eating,
drynkyng, and talkyng wi^ them: of all other it were m^st meet that we should
harken (...) unto his counsel and advise. And per^orme it thoroughly as much as
in us may be done. But Christ did by many means and ways (as appears by his
sayings) manifoldly advise us to contempne the world, by promi^ng r^wardes, by
prefering help, and by making him (...) ^r ex^. The which also the holy
Evangelists and Ap^les ^d most evidently set forth. Therefore obey ^d ^low
h^s counsel: especial^y since he is the way and the truth. Which hest knows
the perilles of ou^ passages, and what is most expedyent for us. For since he
so entirely lo^d us, that for our redemption he vouchsafed to dye, we ^ay b^
most assured that the counsel he gives us is most lo^nde and sure to lean
unto. Wherefore become thou his disciple (my well-beloved) and follow in all
things his m^st wholesome and sound doctrine, that thou may so much the
more bl^ssedly and with more delight behold him in the heavenly kingdom, as
thou now do believe and harken unto him more attentyuely in this life. To
conclude, if an Angel should come down from heaven, appearyng visibly unto
thee and saying: Behold the will or counsel of God is that thou dispyse the
world, would tho^ not by and by ob^y, and believe it? But now not an Angel,
not a messenger, but enen the God of Gods, the creator of Angels, and the
Lord of all things is come in proper person. Yea and has with his own mouth
given thee counsel to contempne the world, and to make thine estate perfect.

For where as he counseled the rich young man which from his tender years had
observed all the precepts in the golden Tables saying: Thou lackest yet one
thing. If thou will Mat. 19.
be perfect, go and sell all that thou h^ste and give it to the poor, and
come and follow me: and thou shall have treasure in heaven: he left the same
counsel or advise for ^ee also, who peradventure yet have not observed the holy
precepts in all points from thy youth bywardes. But thou will say: Can all men
lead a perfect life? or forsake the world altogether? Oh this is a foolish
obiecttion, and meet for fond, worldly, and wicked men. Of whom Solomon
says: the number of fools is infinyte. And the holy fathers have answered
this kind of objection at large.

For there is great difference in judgment between that which is required to
the conservation and mayntenance of the first vndeuidable substance, and that
which is requisite to the conservation and mayntenance of the form or
likeness. But to remain in the world, to do and perform the act of
generation, and to till and manure the earth is not requysite for the
mayntenance of the first vndiuydable substance, but for the mayntenance of our
own shadow, shape, or likeness.

And therefore let no man which finds in him self any promptness or
readiness refuse that grace of God working in him and say: The world must not
be altogether unprovided or vnfurnyshed.

For I pray thee tell me, if thou should altogether give over the world,
and give thy self to a holy and solitary life, should the world therefore
fail? Think thou that for thee only the earth shall be abandoned, or the
rocks tranferred and moved out of their places? No no but do thou give ear
and follow the counsel of the most grave and wise counsaylor, which is the
Angel or messenger of the great counsel on high. So that thou may safely
defend thy self from infinyte perils, and walk in a safer, shorter,
quyetter, and more acceptable pathe, until thou be received into the resting
place of the Lord thy God.

Christ spoke (as his Evangelist John rehearses in the Of the co^te^pt of the
world by the example of Christ.
eight Chapter) saying: I am the light of the world. He that follows me
walks not in darkness: But shall have the light of life.

Where upon Leo did right Clerkely affirm, saying: The whole vyctorie of our
Savior whereby he overcame both the world and the diuill, was begun and
finyshed in true humility.

Furthermore as Bernard witnesses, Christ did always choose those things
which were most grievous unto ^esh and blood, and which did most declare
hum^tie. For he chose a poor mother, of whom he was contented to be borne in
the midst of the cold winter, in the midst of dark night, in a strange
place, and in a homely Cribbe. When he was borne he was wrapped in a few torn
cloutes, and laid in the Ox Maunger. Yea moreover when of him self he was
rich and abundant, or rather the very true, highest, and omnipotent God, he
became poor for our sakes. And so poor that he said: The birds of the air
have their neasts, and the Fores their dens, but the son of man has not
where to hide his head. And how many persecutions he suffered and endured Math.
8.
by the Jews is sufficiently testified by the Evangelists. For some said unto
him: He has a diuill, and the man is John. 10.
mad. Some called him glutton, bibber of wine, and friend Math. 11.
to the Publicans. Some said that by Bekebub chief prince of the diuils he cast
out wicked spirits. Other said: How is this man from God, and we know that
he is a sinner. Will he kill him self. Sometimes they would stone him, some
other whiles throw him down headlong, and at last they betrayed him, and put
him to a most vile kind of death. But in all these things what did the
innocent Lamb of God, the son of the everlasting Father? Forsooth he was
patient, he restored good for evil, he spoke words of salvation and health
even to the unthankful people, he prayed for them which crucified him, like a
sheep he was led to the Slaughter, and he lay still and held his peace
like a Lamb in the Sheepshearers hands. When Esaias. 54.
he was most fal^y and wrongfully accused before Pylate Mark. 54.
and Herod: he answered not one word. He was made by GOD the father, obedyent
even unto death. He made him self a sacrifyce and oblation for us. He was
wounded for our offenses. And therefore stretched out upon the Cross. Yea his
hands and feet were pierced with hard nails until all his bones might be
numbered. And thus it was expedient that Christ should suffer and enter into his
glory. Then if we desire to be christians and of the number chosen to be
saved, what remains for us to do? even that we follow and imitate Christ's
poverty, humility, and patience. That we chastise our own bodies by the true
fruits of repentance. That we crucify our flesh with all the vices and
concupiscenses thereof. That we make haste to walk in the narrow path with all
fear and carfulness. That we be not overcome with evil, but let us
vanquishe the evil with goodness. Let us not render evil for good unto any
man. Let us not pampre and cherish our flesh in miserable delights. Nor let us
give place to any lightness, vanytie, or toys. Whosoever can observe these
points, he ^yspyseth the world happyly, he over comes himself laudably, and
he learneth of Christ what it is to be meek and humble of heart. For above all
things we must found all our conversation in true humylitie. Whereupon Leo,
spoke gravely saying: All the dysciplyne of christyan life does not consist
in cunning words, in sharpness of wit, in dysputacion, nor in vain desyrs
of glory and praise, but in the true and voluntary humility which our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ did choose and teach (as the stoutest kind of
defense) even from the womb of his mother unto the death of the cross.

Whereby it appears also how trwe it is that Cypryan says: All the life of
man, (if he live like a chrystian, and according to the Gospel) is a cross
and a martyrdom. As also Chrysostom trwely says: No man may well be termed
a chrystian, unless he be conformed unto Christ in manners and conversation.
Wherefore (my beloved) if we know that Jesus Christ is our savior and Lord,
let us blushe and be ashamed if we be not found conformable unto him.

Let us be abashed to live, carnally, delycately, and su^pteously. To joy and
tryumphe in men's praise and favor. To seek chiefly our own commodytie and
preferment. And to walk puffed up with a vain and a proud heart. For our life
is in the myddest between the Angels and Beasts. If we live according to the
flesh, we are to be compared unto Beasts. But if we live according to the
spyrite, we are made fellows with Angels. And if we yield to spyrituall
sins and offenses, as pride, ambition, vain glory, and wicked vanytie, we
are now coopled unto Diuills rather then unto brute Beasts. Especially since
that spirytuall vices (speaking in Genere) are much greater and more grievous
the^ carnal vices are. But would thou know who were rightly to be termed a
christian? He is truly a christian (says Augustine) which shows mercy to
all men, which is not moved nor disquyeted with any iniurye, which feels
another ma^s pain or grief as if it were his own. Whose table is not shut
from any poor or needy. Which is accoumpted of small glory or estimatian
before men, to the end he may be gloryfied before God and his Angels. Which
dispyseth earthly things to obtain heavenly. Which succoreth thee miserable
and afflicted, and is moved to compassion by other men's tears. Therefore let
us cleanse our selves from all blottes and blemyshes both of flesh and spirit.
And let us imytate Christ our King by a wary and a fruitful life, abhoring and
despysing all wrath, all indignation, stoutness and fleshelynesse, that being
altogether converted, we may be made as little babes again.

Saint Paul in his third Chapter of his Epistle to ye Galathians The
consideration of our own pe^illes enduceth us t^ co^empne the world.
has these words: Pray you therefore co^tinewally that you may be thought
worthy to eskape all ye evils which are to come and to stand before ye Son
of man. Now since we have spoken of such things as enduce y^ contempt of this
world on ye behalf of god himself, let us also treat of such things as ought
to enduce us thereunto on our own behalf. For we are set in the myddest of
snares, and are enu^d on every side with enemies, yea and enclosed contynewally
with a famylyare enemy, (yt is our own flesh stryuing against the spirit) and
as the Apostle says: Our wrestling is not Luke. 12.
against flesh and blood, but even against spyrites or powers of the air and
Diuills. Not that he meant we had no manner of strife nor wrestling against
flesh and blood, but because the strife, contention, and wrastlyng which we
have against the temptations of Diuills is much greater and of more force. In
as much as they be infatygable, craftye, and ^rewell pryckes provoking most
greedily the overthrow and condemnation of our souls. Whereby it appears
that we are be set round about with innumerable and exceedinge great peryls.
What therefore can be better aduysed unto us, yea what can be safer or more for
our health and salvation, then to seek a place of refuge, to go into some
streng walled town, and therein to seek some mancion of rest and quiet? In
the which there may be found as many defendors and protectors as there are
inhabytors. All armed with the right spyrituall armor, and most redye to fight
against sin. And where is this place? Or this strong walled Town and City?
Forsooth even in the congregation of the devout and relygious. Whose heart and
soul are all one in the Lord. Of whom every one does by speech, by prayer,
and by examples, draw some other to follow him in perfection. Which using
virtue for an armor do set opposytely synguler and competent virtues against
every perty^uler and neglygent vice. For behold how good and pleasant a
thing it is for brethren to dwell to gether Psalm. 132.
in unity. For as Solomon says: If one of them fall, he shall be raised up
again by a another. Yea they have contynewall and most excelent salues and
oyntements (that is to say remedies) against the daily temptatyons of the
Deuylles, and the wounds of vices. And those remedies are: Daily troubles and
confusyons, rebukes of superyours, enstructio^ of ye faithful, consolation of
yt merciful, observation of god his word and co^mau^den^ts, watching, fas^ing,
prayer, teaching, and holy medytations And to conclude even as in this world,
one does draw another unto sin and vice, even so in the congregation of ye
devout and faithful one does draw and entyse a another unto virtues. And even
as worldly society does much hinder, so this does very much further and
advance the perfection of godly life. As Salomo^ says: The man which is
helped by his brother is as a Pro. 8.
strong City well walled. And the Psalmist says: With the holy thou shall be
holy, and with the wicked thou shall be paruerted. Psalm. 17.
Where upon the holy word does again exhort us saying: Be of daily
conversation with the holy man. And with whom soever thou know to keep the
fear of God before his eyes, and whose soul is according unto thine in
holiness. For in this world a man falls often, but ryseth seldom. Is soon
hurt grievously, and late healed perfectly. He fails much and profits but
little. But in the congregation and feloshype of the faithful and true
chrystians, all these things (by Bernardes opinion and by certain experyence)
are clean contrary. For there men fall seldom and rise often.

Are lightly hurt, and more easyly cured. Do less decrease and much more
increase. Consider then even deeply, the quantity, qualytie, multitude, and
magnitude, of thy perils. Truly if this peril whereof I forewarne thee, were
only for the loss of temporal things, for troubles, or afflyctions, yea
were it for transitory infirmities, loss of lives, or abiding of most bitter
and paynefull death, yet were it tolerable, and I would not be so careful for
thee. But this peril whereof I mean, is concerning the irecuperable loss of
the highest, unmeasurable, and unchangeable goodness of God. And ^wyse it
concerns the purchasing of everlasting da^ion and the pains of hell.

So that if thou do not esteem and dread this peril vehemently, then have
thou not thine eyes illumyned neither yet a clear and lively faith, but a
deadly and a dark Spyryte.

For is this peril not to be feared (with out all comparyson) more then any
damage, l^sse, trouble, (...), grief, and languyshing, adversity, or temporal
death? Yes surely. And for that cause if thou would in the day of judgment
be void of fear and be saved, then be not void of care, vainly light and
unfearful, but careful, busy, and fearful. For in so do^ing thou shall at
the last be safe and free. Furthermore since by Salomons words it seems:
That we are ignorant whether we are yet worthy of the love, or hatred of God,
and that all things uncertain are so reserved till the time to come, therefore
we ought to be heedy and careful before God, least we encurre the danger of
his infinyte wrath and everlasting dampnation. To the avoiding whereof it is to
be considered that certain sins and vices (namely of the flesh) are the
better avoided and overcome if a man does estraunge and withdraw himself from
the materyall cause of the same. But how can thou overcome such vices and
their branches, if thou do not fly from the materyall causes thereof? But
do daily keep company with such as vnhappyly wallowe and toumble in those
enormyties, yea if thou do become a fellow unto them, eating, drinking, and
walking with them? For Hugo says: That it is impossible for any man t^ eschew
sin, unless he refrain the company of sinners. Then they which are daily
co^uerasant with such as walk the broad and large way of perdytion, and are
like and conformable unto them, in eating, drinking, clothing, speech,
pastymes, and such other light affectiones, how shall they be able to avoid
their more grievous off^nces? or how can they contynewe in the straight path,
and right way, walking with the^ which wander so at large and straying so in
every broad and b^ way? god forbid yt thou should arroga^tly think thy
self of such and so great perfection. Since it is written by Solomon he that
handles pytche shall be defiled therewith. And he that does communycate with a
proud man, shall be endewed with pride. Does it not follow by the same reason
that he which communycateth with a lecher shall be defiled with lecherye?
Augustine says: I beheld the Ceders of Lybanus. Whose fall I doubted even
as much as the rewyne of Jerusalem. And yet they both fell. To conclude I say
in few words, that the more thou neclect the perils of thy soul, the more
thou prosperest in this world, the more delycately thou cherysh and tender that
frail flesh of thine, the more theu follow the will of thy heart, the less
thou regard the loss of thy time, the more thou do now glory, laugh, and
wander in vanyties, so much the more miserable art thou, and so much the more
grievously to be bewailed and pyttied. Yea y^ less yt thou thy self bewail
thy blyndenesse, iniquity, and negligence, so much the more thou art of others
to be bewailed and pyttied. Wherefore (my well-beloved) rowse thy self from so
many peryles and dangers. Flee from this world which is the enemy to thy
soul, convert thy self wholly and perfectly to the Lord thy God, leave and
forsake (for his sake) all the goods and delights of this life, and he will
give unto thee all the treasures and abundaunces in the kingdom of heaven

Our Savior says in the seventh Chapter of Matthew: The world is to be
co^tempned because it is hard (therein) to attain salvation.
He which hears the word of God and does it not, is like unto a foolyshe man
which buylt his house upon the sand. The floodes came and the wyndes blewe,
and burst into yt house, and the rewyne thereof was great. The holy fathers do
compare this world to a great and ragyng Sea, which is tossed with tempests.
And is passed with great dangers and many difficultyes.

Again behold the Lord GOD (with whom all things do consist in an
unchangeable eternytie) as the highest thing to be seen or beheld vpwardes.
And the world it self as the lowest thing downewardes. Then consider (say
they) likewise the mind of man placed as it were in the myddest beetwene them
both. The which (by the crcellence of manes condition) does floate above the
chaungeablenesse of this world and yet has not attained the vnchaungeablenesse
of the divine nature. Then if man's mind should chance through love and greedy
desire of these things which pass downwards, to drown it self therein,
immediately it will be overthrown with sundry waves, and being (as it were)
divided from it self, will quickly be dyssipate and destroyed.

But so much the easier it will be to gather it altogether on a heap and to
preserve it, if it raise up it self with an earnest thought and desire,
forsaking those base and earthly places until at last it become altogether
unchangeable by atteyning unto that highest, and most excelent immutabylity.
Again when a man's mind does declyne downewardes by the love which it has to
earthly things, it suffers shipwreck in the floodes of this world. And
being myxed or myngled amongst the changeable things, does flow away with
the stream. Yea and it is by a kind of twofould danger, tossed and retossed.
For both it is in peril to be drowned by ye deep affection it bears to the
lower parts, and again by contyne wall working of the wave in multitude of
affections, it is meruelously dyssypate and dysseuered. But if it raise it
self vpwardes from the love of this present life by the desire that it has
unto eternytie, and do gather together all his thoughts and cogitations, then
does it (as it were) swym alofte in the floode, and does spurn and kycke away
all traunsitory things as fylth or weeds swymming lose in the water.
Therefore let the mind of man (as it were) so repose it self in safety, by
raising it self above and on it self toward God and by retorning to it
self, in it self, that by the considerations aforesaid it (being raised
above the world) may behold the perils a far of and rejoice that it has
by any means eskaped them. And this it is to go into ye Arc of the heart and
the spyrituall Ship. By help whereof we may happyly eskape the waves of
this world wherewith we are tossed always. Then spurn from thee and despise
these transitorye and frail things, and behold thou art swoome and eskaped
out of this great dyluge of roaring waters. Consider deeply and medytate the
heavenly Sacraments of thy redemption, together with the benefytes of the
divine goodness bestowed upon thee, and thou art already entered into the Arc
of thy heart and the Ship aforesaid. Again this world is most conveniently
compared unto a large feelde full of crewell thieves and robbers. In the which
many are killed and murdered, and very few eskape at any time unwounded or not
sore hurt. Yea and that which is worst, they which walk commonly in this field
do betray each other into ye hands of those thieves. That is whilst one of
them does lead another into the fall of finne, whereby he falls into the
devils hands. And thou (my well-beloved) if thou would be afeard to walk in
such a feelde replenished with thieves who might endaunger thee with temporal
death, how dare thou then walk through this wicked world, wherein so many
enemies are suborned by wicked spyryts, and so many stumbling blocks are laid
to make thee fall into everlasting fire?

Again this world is compared to a wood set on fire whereof (in manner) all the
trees are burnt and destroyed. For we may daily behold how the love and
charytie of God is waxed cold in men's hearts, how the love of the world has
prevailed, how the fire of concupyscence, the feruentnesse of pride, and the
flame of covetousness are kyndled. In such sort that (almost) every man
seeks to shyfte for himself. And never seeks Christ Jesus nor those
things which pertayne unto his glory. Men are careful for worldly
sustenaunce, and not for the pureness of the soul, nor the cleanennesse of ye
heart. Yea they do rather seek to avoyde the dysco^modities of this present
life, then to eskape the bitter and eternal torments of hell fire. And how
then dare thou choose but be careful how to eskape out of this wood? yea and
that with speed least thou be burned and consumed with the fire of vice and
lewdenesse? Lastly, it is compared unto an old City which for the more part
is become ruinous, battred, and destroyed. In such sort that the enemies may
aproch and assault it on every side. So that it is now no safe dwelling
therein. But we must fly unto some stronger place of defense. For if we do
rightly consider our own frayltie, how prone we are to evil, and how slow to
goodness, we shall find it requisite to seek some safer resting place for
our souls, wherein we may the better eschew and avoid all occasions of sins.

The princely Prophet in his four and fortyth Psalm, The co^temp^ of the
world may be stirred by the very profit which ensues thereof.
has these words: My daughter behold and give ear, and bend thine ear to
me, and forget thy people and the house of thy father, and the king will
earnestly desire thy coomlynesse. Although these words be lytterally to be
expounded by the Church which is the universal Spouse of Christ, yet may they
also be understood by every faithful soul and mind which is also the
particular Spouse of Christ. For as Saint Augustine says: every soul is
either the spouse of Christ, or the devils concubyne. And therefore the holy
Prophet saying: Forget thy people and thy fathers house, means, despise these
earthly things in respect of God and for his sake. Set aside kynsmen,
brethren, neyghbors, and all ^arnall affections. To the end, that all thine
affection may be toward God. Yea make thy self rich of spiritual riches,
and adorn and deck thy self with all grace and virtue. For the more
perfectly that thou contempne worldly things, so much the more thou shall be
replenyshed with heavenly treasure. As Gregory says: He does very well
withdraw his love from the creatures, which does only with the eyes of his
heart and understanding, behold the exceeding bright beauty and louelynesse of
the Creator. So that (my dear and chrystian brother) if thou do so, the king
of kings, the lord of lords, the only begotten son of GOD, will earnestly
desire thy coomelynesse. That is, thine inward coomelynesse, thine inward
reformation, the bryghtnesse of thy wisdom, and the feruentnesse of thy love.
And that shall be said unto thee which is written, in the Cantycles: O my
beloved how fair and amyable thou art? yea he will lou^ thee being so fair
and lovely. He will bless thee with heavenly light and the true fruits of the
holy Ghost. He will assocyate thee unto him for ever. So that thou may
enjoy him thy fill most swe^tely and aboundauntly. For in him the whole
fullness of blessedness does consist. Yea the delight of God is to be with
such a soul, and to d^cke and adorn it daily with great plenteousnesse, and
to vysit and comfort it with most godly reioysinges. Then let us (for gods
sake) by the beholding of so great profit, and by the desire and affection
which we ought to have unto so great nobylitie, learn to contempne even from
our hearts this most vain, varyable, needye, frail, and intysing world,
which with draws us from God. Since it cannot satysfie nor cont^t our affecte
nor our desire. As Augustine (...) saying: A reasonable soul created to the
likeness of God, may be occupied in all things, but it cannot be
replenyshed, satysfied, nor fulfilled. For he which is capable of GOD, cannot
be filled and satisfied with any thing that is less the^ God. And again he
says: O Lord thou have made ^ur heart for thee, and it is therefore troubled
and out of quiet until it may come unto thee. Now we have showed before
sufficiently yt the more our soul is stretched out or d^spersed in earthly
things, yea the more it be occupied in temporal things, and affected unto
worldly things, so much the less can it be occupied, gathered together, or
affected toward God. And therefore if we would have it incessauntly occupied
and exercysed in him by sincere contemplation, fervent love, deep medytation,
contyne wall prayer, hearty praise, and thankesgeuing, let us withdraw and
turn it away from the world and all that is therein, and let us wholly apply
it, yea and as it were lay it flat and prostrate before the divine majesty.
For so shall it wounderfully grow and increase in grace. And let us so
entirely love and conserve this true godly and most noble perfection, (which
is beyond all comparyson better, more excelent, and more to be desired, then
all the goods of this world) that we may altogether and in every respect,
contempne the world (for the love and desire which we have to the said
perfection) as a thing of nothing and altogether vain. Neither yet let us
think that we have done any great thing to leave and forsake earthly and
base things for so supernatural and excellent treasures, but let us singe
praises unto God with an humble and lovely spirit because he has so taught,
illumynate, erected, and styrred up our hearts to the true discerning, and full
forsaking of all vanytie and vileness in this world. For they are truly
blessed whom the Lord ^oth so vouchsafe to teach, so to enduce unto the
contempt of the world, and so to raise and styre up unto the full perfection of
a spyrituall life. Now (my well-beloved) should not he seem to have a mind sore
darkened, and a hard heart, which having red, hard, and understood these
things, is neither provoked to contempne the world, nor enflamed to attain
the Godly perfection before rehearsed? Do not thou then for the love of the
less, hazard to lose the more. Be not more delighted in creatures then in the
creator. Do not cleave more earnestly unto the world, then unto God. For
behold the world with all the concupyscence and vanytie thereof passes away
and vanysheth like smoke. But he which does the will of God, shall abide for
ever.

It is written in the seventh Chapter of Ecclesiastes remember thy latter
end, and thou shall never sinnne. The contempt of the world by consideration
of four things at the latter day.
And surely such as neither the horror of death, the trembling fear of Gods
judgment, the bitter and everlasting pains of the infernal torments, nor
the infinyte felicitye of the heavenly habitacion can provoke or styre to walk
warely, to amend their life penitently, to fear GOD and to contempne the
world: Are to be thought of a stony or rather a steely heart and mind.
Especyally since we must believe (nay rather we know perfectly) that we must
once dye, and yet we are altogether ignorant when we shall be called hence.
Therewithal we must understand y^ after this life there is no time of
conversion nor repetaunce. And why do we then ouerskype any (...) or occasion
wherein we might do well? Why do we suffer an^ hour to pass without some
fruit or profit? Or why ^are we presume to persevere in such estate, as (yet)
we ^ave not dye therein? But let us do as Solomon says: Whatsoever Eccle.. 9.
thy hand can work, that do thou work earnestly. For there are neither
working, skyl, connyng, nor knowledge, beneath where thou go.

Yea let it not be fulfilled in us which Salom^n says in the same place:
(meaning by the neglygent and vna^ uysed) even as fyshes are taken with the
hook, and birds with snares, so are m^n caught and over taken in the (...)
ill hour which shall sodeynely come upon them. Wherefore let us never suffer
the horror of death, the stryctnesse of Gods dreadefull judgment, nor the
fear of hell fire, to be estranged or eloyned from the eyes of our
understanding. For as ^ierome says: N^thing can more withdraw a man from sin,
then the often remembrance of death. And as Chrysostom says: This world is
de^full, the end thereof doubtful, the issue horrible, the Judge terryble,
and yet the pain vntermynable.

To conclude even as Ambrose says: (Plato the Philosopher was also of the same
opymon) the wh^ life of the^ which are wise is exereysed in the (...) of death.
And therefore let us forecast what we must be in time to come. For whosoever
does stoutly consider in himself that he must dye, he shall doubtless despise
things pr^sent and make have toward things to come. Whereupon it rest^th
that god would have our end unknown unto us And y^ day of our death
uncertain. That whiles it is always unknown, and yet always thought to be
ready at hand every man might be so much ye more fervent in operation, as he is
ye more vn^rteyne of his voratio^. Therefore let us not ouerpasse such (...) and
dreadful causes with skipping and dancing. Neither let ^s sollycit the affairs
of our death iestingly or unadvisedly. But when we rise betime let us not
think to live until the evening when we lie down to rest, let us not presume
of our vprysing. And by these means we shall easily bridle our selves from all
vice and worldly affection. Let us well ponder that the hour approaches
wherein we shall remove out of this life into an unknown region. There
immedytately to abide before the trybunall seat of the most mighty and
dreadful indge. Then our time myspent and unfruitfully lost will plainly
appear to be irrecuperable. Neither shall any thing that we have vnordynately
loved or unjustly done here, be any way able to help or to comfort us. Then
shall we be sorry that we have lived so carelessly, that we have omytted so many
good things, and committed so many evils. But let us now (whiles we have time)
show forth the true fruits of repentance. Let us now so reverence and
honor Christ our judge, that we may then be reverently by him received. Let us
now be so sorry and contryte for our sins, that we may then by Christ be
eternally comforted.

Again if we do well consider the stryctnesse of Gods judgment, we shall
even thereby learn utterly to despise all the vanyties of the world, and
greedily to run to true repentance. For in the day of judgment, the world
shall stand in flaming fire, which shall burn and consume the wicked and
reprobate. Christ shall be resident in the air. All the holy companyes of
Angels and of the heavenly Citizens shall be assys^aunt and shall vysibly
appear. The reprobate shall lie upon the ground or earth (which they have so
loved) with their horrible, black, and loathsome bodies, which then shall be most
deformed and horrible to behold. Some being half eaten and torn with the
worms in their sepulcher. All the rabble of hell and all mankind shall be
present. Then every man's life shall appear unto himself that they may all
at ones acknowledge the judgment of God to be most just. Oh what care, what
pain, what intolerable Math. 25.
myserye and dread will it then be for the wicked, to see that they must by
and by be thrown into ye torments For immediately this sentence must be
pronounced: Oo y^ accurssed into everlasting fire. The earth shall open her
mouth and swallowe the^* And they shall fall hedlong into the most deep pytt
of hell wherein they shall be shutt and enclosed perpetually. Let every true
Christian be teryfied by the remembrance of this judgment, as Hierome was
(...) saying: As often as I do consider that day, I do shake and tremble on
all parts. For whether (says he) I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, the
sound of that most terryble troumpet does always thunder in mine ears
saying: Rise you that are dead and come unto judgment.

And again he says: When God the Lord shall come to judge, the world shall
pytiously roar and cry. One Tribe shall shocke and iustle against another.
The most mighty Princes shall go bare and naked groping round about. Plato the
fool shall be brought in with his fond Desciples. Aristotels fine arguing shall
not then prevail. When the Son of that poor handycraftesman shall come to
judge the ends of the world. Then our sins shall be on the right hand, redye
to accuse us. On the left hand, an infynit number of wicked spyrites ready to
take hold on us. Underneth us, the horrible mass or Chaos and confused heap
of hell. Above us, the heavens opened and rent in sunder. In the air, the
angrey Judge. Without, the world burning. Within the conscience skalding and
skorching. Yea the just man shall hardly be saved. Woe be unto the wretched
sinner so overtaken. Whether shall he fly? It shall be impossible for him to
lurk here and there, and it shall be as intolerable to appear. The reprobate
which are to be dampened seeing these things, shall be troubled with a horrible
fear, they shall mourn and languish for vexacion of spyrite and say: We have
erred from the way of truth and the light of righteousness has not shyned in
us. We have ouerweryed our selves in the way of iniquytie. Wherefore (my
well-beloved) let us learn and choose (with the chosen of God) to abhor the
delights of the world, to bring forth the true fruits of repentance, to
serve God with dew reverence, fear, and pureness of heart, rather the^ to
encurre wylfully so great callamyties. For whosoever does dyligently and
profoundly reuolue and ponder these pains and torments of hell fire, he shall
undoubtedly abhor all sin, all vanity and praise of this wicked world. For
what a thing is it to be for ever enclosed in the prison of hell, in the
myddest of unquenchable fire, in a most fylthie stinckinge and lothesome
lake, there to be vnspeake ably tormented, and with innumerable pains to be
afflycted, without any least hope of delivery? For Gregory says, there
shall be in hell intolerable cold, unquenchable fire, a worm always gnawing,
a stynche always smelling, palpable darkness, the skourge ever stryking,
the ougly spyrites always greeuing, the confusion of sins, the desperacion
of all goodness, the hate and detestinge of all that is good and ryghteous, an
vnremedyable turning back from the high heavenly majesty, and an
irecuperable turning toward all evil and frayltie.

For although in hell there be the prycke of pain and punyshement, yet there
is no corection nor amendment of will and consent. Since the reprobate shall be
so accused with their own iniquinye, that righteousness nevertheless shall
not by any means be of them embraced, loved, or desired. But what need we to
heap to gether somanye words of proof of this matter? Do thou thy self
imagnne to behold (with the eyes of faith and understanding) a lake full of all
myserie, yea most brymfull of all desperation, trouble, crying, and howlyng,
boiling, with a most skalding fire, and abundantly replenyshed with most
sorrowful souls, and then consider what a thing it were to be for ever
grieved and tormented therein to walk contynually in the blase of such flaming
fyres, to be racked and tormented incessantly, and to be perpetually afflycted
with the most horrible socyetie of the dampened, and the most ougly faces and
shapes of the Diuills? For this is it which in the book of Job is called the
Tenebrous land overwhelmed with the thycke clouds of death. The land of
myseryes and darkness, where the shadow of death, and no order, but
perpetual horrur does enhabyt. For over and besides other infinite pains of
hell, there is also troublesome, paynefull, and vnestymable dysorder
co^tineually. Then do not they seem unto ye most unhappy, yea more then
thryse and four times most unhappy, who for these most short and transitory
lyberties, unlawful delyghtes, worldly vanyties, frail affections, rytches or
prosperytie, do fall into such an unspeakable myserie which shall endure for
ever? Wherefore let us come forth and forsake this broad and open way of these
worldlynges leading unto destruction and unhappiness, and let us embrace and
follow the straight way, living fruitefully, fearfully, and reverently
before y^ Majesty of the highest God.

Yt is written in the lxxxiii. Psalm: How lovely and delightful The glory of
the blessed is a principal mean to make us to contempne this world.
are thy Tabernacles O Lord god of virtues? my soul does eagerly desire and
faynte in the Court of God. And as the doctors and Fathers of the Church have
agreed, the love and charytie of God is the life of the soul. So that without
love and charytie, nothing is pleasing, nor acceptable before God. Neither can
it profit any thing at all toward the obteyning of the heavenly felycitie.
Then all our actions, our thoughts, affections, speaking, doing, or suffering,
cannot be acceptable in the sight of God, unless it proceed from charytie,
either by way of allurement, by way of commandment, or by way of direction.
Whereupon it follows that such as do bewail, confess, and repent, their
misdeedes only for fear of pain, for seruyle dread, they do not therefore
obtain forgiveness. For every good deed, ought to be done for the zeal of
justice and righteousness, and for Godly charytie, but not for fear. Thereof
the Apostle said: If I speak with the tongues of Angels and of men, and yet
have not charytie in me, it shall nothing profit me. For the^ do we
chiefly perform our duties when we reverence GOD not only for fear, but
also for the sure trust and confidence that we have in his love. And when
zealous affection, (not dread) does raise us upwards to do that is good. By
this dread is understood and meant the seruyle fear which only and
principally does respect the punishment and correction. Of the which saint
John says: There is no fear in perfect charity. Then si^ce we might be
enduced (as has been beforesayde) to the contempt of this world by the
consideracion of death, judgment, and the pains of hell, yet ought we much
more and by much stronger reason to be enduced thereunto by the consideracion
contemplacion and love of the perpetual blessedness and glory of the chosen.
The which is of a certain infinite dignity, since it is an immedyate frewition
of that unmeasurable, good, holy, and glorious God. Wherefore as this frewition
is altogether supernatural, we can never atteyne thereunto but by
supernatural means. As thankeful thanksgeuing, Faith, Hope, Charity, and the
other gifts of the holy Ghost. And the more perfectly and plenteously that
these means do dwell and abide in us, so much the more vehemently we despise
all worldly and temporal things and plainly perceue their, vanity, vileness,
and do Yea we do so much ye faster, more affectionately, more abunda^tly,
more swyftly and incessantly, aspyre, go forewards, approach, or rather run
outryght toward y^ blessedness of the heavenly Paradyse and habitacion
Embrasing and executing all the help, favor, and assystance of gods holy
spirit more redyly and more chearefully. Wherefore let us be moved (by the
desire of the felicity and glory of the ^lect) to perform stoutly and
courageously all things that may please God. Let us quickly and out of hand
forsake the world, yea let us account all the fraylties thereof to be as
dyrt and doonge. For as Augustine does well testify: The beauty of
righteousness, and the pleasantness of theternall light, are such and so
great, that although a man might therein remain but one only hour in a
day, yet even for that small space innumerable years of this life beeinge
full of delyghtes and flowing^ with temporal pleasures, were worthily to be
forsaken and set at naught. For in the citi^ of God and the kingdom of the
elect, the law is charity: the king is verity: the peace is felicity: and
the who^e course of life is eteruitie. Wherefore (my well-beloved) prepare thy
self and mark narowly what a great felicity the blessed enjoy, and what
exceedyng delight it is to see God plainly* and distinctly. For the fayrer
that any thing is, do we not account it also the more delectable to behold it
plainly and perfectly? Since God then of him self is essentially, totally, and
vndescribably, fair, holy, pure, and bright (...), or rather the true and
infinite beauty, the (...) substantial form, the separate, eternal,
perfect, simple, and vnmyxed, comeliness, the chief fountain, original
cause, and exemplare show, of any fayrenesse, comeliness, pureness, and
clearenesse, in all creatures, the most beautiful and comely of all other
beyond comparison: it is therefore most euydent that to see and behold him
face to face, and in his proper person, is most delightful, most delectable,
and most glorious, exceedyng (too too much) all other delight and glory more
then can be with words expressed. For the better, sweeter, and perfecter that
any thing is in it self, the more delightful and pleasant the fruition
thereof must be. But our Lord God being omnipotent, only to be adored, happy,
and (of him self) most excelent pure, vndescribable, and incomprehensible
goodness, that infinite sweetness, that so perfect Being, that whatsoever
pertayneth to the fullness, worthiness, Ens.
and pr^heminence, of any Being, present, paste, or to come, (...) needs agree
and be like unto it in all perfection and excelencie, it must needs follow that
the immediate fruition of it, should be altogether and in all respects, most
pleasant, sweet, and delectable. For the obtaining whereof, all the joys,
honors, praises, and prosperities of this world, are infinitely and with
exceedyng lothsomenesse to be dispysed. Then consider in such sort as thou
may, what joy it would be to see and beheld the eternal being of his
divine majesty. How it is and has been from the beginning of it self, made
^or created by any man, nor dependyng of any thing, but to it self, of it
self, by it self, and in it self always sufficient. Consider how much good
it would do thee plainly and face to face to behold the vndiscribable,
admyrable, and incomprehensible God, and in his ever springing wisdom and
sapyence to see and discern the whole order, comeliness, truth, and
perfection, of all the universal world, with many other most secret treasures
of gladness? yea to enjoy this unmeasured goodness and treasure, and wholly
to possess it. And therewith to have all that may seem fair, amyable, or to
be desired. Again to be so exceedingly illustrate with the godly wisdom, and
so abundantly replenished with the divine goodness, that all thy capacity,
understanding, and all thy desire, might therewith be thoroughly filled and
satisfied. Yea furthermore, consider what exceeding pleasure it would be to
taste the sweetness of godly peace and tranquillity, to be even swallowed up
in the love of thy creator, to be transformed into God, to be made perfectly
like unto him, to embrace him lovingly in him self, in such sort that thou
coul^est not at any time be withdrawn or plucked away from his sight, love,
and imbrasings, to see and perceive yt most blessed vision and inward
contemplation of the holy Trinity, and the issuing out of the same, how the
son proceeds from y^ father, and how the holy ghost proceeds from them
both, how their persons are to be worshipped as one in being, and three in
subsisting, and finally, to behold and perceive perfectly their mutual well
pleasing, joy, imbrasing, love, and glory. For the divine and uncreated
persons do mutually love each other with an unmeasurable kind of love, they
behold each other with an infinite kind of delyght, they inioye each other
with an vntermynable kind of sweetness, and they them selves (only) do
fully and comprehensiuely, know, and behold them selves. So that the chosen
shall rejoice in them selves at the sight and vision of God, in themselves they
shall rejoice in the beautye and comeliness of their heavenly bodies, and the
bodies of their corporal creatures, and in them selves they shall reioce in the
glorification of the body and the soul. As also without and about them they
shall rejoice in the society of the Angels and blessed people of God. In
them shall doubtless be s^ne the true bryghtnesse of the summers light, the
true pleasaunt^esse of the spryng, the perfect abundance of the harvest, and
the right tranquillity and rest of the dead winter. In them God shall be seen
without end, shall be inioyed without contempt, and praised for ever without
weariness. In them God shall be an abundance of light and truth to the
reason and understanding, a multitude of peace and quiet to their will and
consent, a continuance of eternity to their memory, and an immovable ^taye
to their estate. O life of lives, most lively, sweet, amyable, and ever to
be thought on, wherein chief security, secure tranquyllitye, quiet
delectabylitye, delectable felicitye, happy eternity, and everlasting glory,
are to be imbrased and inioyed in Gods mercy. In the which there is to be
found the affluence of riches, the influence of delights, and the confuence of
all good things. Wherefore (my well-beloved) let thy soul be inflamed with the
desire of this blessedness.

For it, let all thy good actions be exercysed effectuallye, and let thy mind
medytate thereupon customarily. Do not subject thy self to the peril of
loosing this glory, for the world and vanities thereof. For finally, it
reteyneth so great grace in this life, and so great glory in the world to
come, that though we were sure that we might inioye them in this world, yet
for the love of increasing and profityng therein, we should worthily leave
and forsake all things for God. Who of his great clemencye give thee
understanding to taste and perceive these things perfectly, and to harken and
obey unto good and godly counsel. For the judgments of the Lord our God are
incomprehensible and very dreadful. And where he powers his grace into one
and not into another, that (as Augustine says) is for some hydden cause, but
for none vniustnesse in GOD. But I shall daily beseech God in y^ bowels of
Jesus Christ, that he will make merueylous his mercies in thee every kind of
way.

Solomon uses these words in the xx. Chapter of Ecclesiastes. The disquiet
labor and troubles of this world enduce the contempt of the shame.
God has given wisdom, knowledge, and rejoicing to the man that is good, and
to the sinner, affliction, and superfluous care. We have already treated
suffitiently of the contempt of this world, as well on Gods behalf as on our
own. Now then it shall not be amiss to speak thereof by regard of the world
it self, the which if it be well considered, it contains in it self whereby
to be contempned and despised. And first this one thing comes to memory,
that the lovers of this world are tossed and retossed with sundry troubles,
disquiettes, afflictions and labors, in such sort that it ministers more
pain and bytternesse then delight and quietness in all things whereof men
hope to have consolation. For whilst they are withdrawn or turned back from
the highest and most simple goodness, (in whom only true peace, and true joy
do abound) they disperse them selves in temporal and earthly things. And
being not perfectly established in any one thing, they are carried about
universally. Whereby they are affected with manifold passions and thoughts,
as now with delight, then with dollor, now with love, then with hate, now with
desire, then with disdain, now with longing, and then with loathing. For they
have not the skill to bring things unto an equal measure by the judgment of
reason and discretion, nor to be in a kind of tranquillity in every
occurrent, but (like unto bruit beasts) they follow the force and sway of
their pangs and passions, according to the impulsive motion of their
sensualities and lusts. Whereby it falls out most commonly that they never
continue long in one disposition. And besides these considerations (according
to the Philosophers opinion) a man which delights in contemplation and
speculation, has (in him self) sufficient matter and cause of good delight.
Since he is filled with speculation, and reioyseth in heavenly considerations,
(that is to say) in scientiall and sapientiall points of knowledge, in the
which he is spiritually delighted. Neither does he seek or require delights
in sensual things out of him self. But the unlearned, the carnal, and
worldly men do not taste any such delight, neither have they sincerely the
matter or material cause of delight and contentation within them selves.
Therefore they seek to rejoice in outward things wherein they stumble (not
always upon pleasant and prosperous success but) oftentimes upon hard and
ouerthwarte accydentes, which makes them most commonly to endure grief and
disquyet of mind. And by good reason should that man which is devout and
spiritual, contain in him self wherewith to be spiritually delighted in God,
yea even in adversity. But the worldlings and the vytious men have now wrath,
then sadness, now envy, the^ indignation, and sometimes sudden fear (which
be most painful and bitter passions) whereby they do not only wound and
weaken their soul, but many times also they fret their mind and waste their
corporal strength. For somewhiles they are (as it were) resolved into vain
mirth, puffed up with vayn hope, and stretched out into vayn desures, and
straight ways again they rejoice in that which ought to make the^ sad, and
ware sorrowful for that which might give them greater cause of comfort, gaping
for that which were to be s^unned and a^oyded, and flying from that which is
most profitable and worthy of long expectation. So that whither they be merry,
or mo^rn, they are always unhappy, and deserve pains in the time to come.
Yea so much the more grievous payns, as their affects have been y^ more
disordered. Whereupon the Lord says (speaking of such as glory and host not
right, but worldly and vaynely) Even as much as he gloryfyeth Apoc. (...).
himself, and walloweth in delights, so much do you give unto him of torment
and lamentacion. And also Augustine witnesses: A disordred mind, becomes a
pain and punishment unto it self. But forasmuch as (b^foresayde) in the
lovers of this world, affectiones are dysordred, preposterous, and overthwart,
it must needs fall out also y^ they are grievous and payneful unto them selves
which possess them. And thereupon it is confessed: we have walked Sap. (...).
in the hard and difficult paths. We are even wearyed in the ways of
iniquity, but we are altogether ignorant in the ways of the Lord. Whereupon
it is likewise written: The s^und of terror is always in the ears of the
wicked. And when it is peace, he yet mistrusteth y^ enimyes attempt. Job. 15.
Again if they chance at any time to rejoice, their mirth turns also to
their own overthrow. ^ut the well ordered mind, the quiet and devout mind,
is evermore pleasant and comfortable in it self. And therefore by Hieroms
opinion, the places wherein charity does reign, are the very Paradise of
God upon the earth. Yea upon the quyette Esa. 66.
and meek hearted, the holy ghost does rest and abide. For a well instructed
man is sweet and comfortable to his own soul. I mean a man well instructed
in such instruction as is decked and adorned with virtues. And therefore
although there were none other reward assigned unto thee quiet, peaceable, and
well ordered mind, then this inward contentation and sweeten^sse of peace,
sincerity of a clear conscy^ce and holy consolation: all (which are daily to
be found in it self) it were yet worthy and a right worthy thing to
endeavor and study continually how to be decked with virtues, wholly to give
it self over unto orderly living, and fully to renounce and forsake all
worldely delyghtes and vanities.

And according thereunto says Gregory: That is the true and highest joy or
consolation, which is conceived in the Cr^ator and not in the things created.
And when so ever thou receive that (says h^e) no man shall be able to take it
from thee.

In comparyson whereof all other mirth is mournyng, all other pleasure is
pain, all sweet sour, all leefe loathsome, and all delyghtes are dollo^ous.

And again he says: Nothing in this life is more laboursome or paynefull,
then to be tossed with ca^thlye desires. Neither is there any thing more quiet
then to couette or desire nothing. But the spiritual riches (says he) are
loathed when they are not yet had nor possessed, and that is of such as have
not yet tried them. Which may peradventure be a cause (my well-beloved) that
thou art the less allured and entysed unto the divine, sacred, and most
sincere delyghtes of spiritual conversation, and that thou make the less
haste therevntoo, because thou haste not (as I guess) yet tried them. But give
ear unto this holy father Gregory, make haste, yea post have, to attain unto
a perfect spyrytuall life, leauyng the world and all the concupiscences
thereof.

And I hope that thou shalt taste how sweet the Lord is, for great is the
multitude of his delectablenesse.

And thou shalt be delyghted in the multitude of Christ 1. Pet. 2.
his peace, the which passes all senses and understandings, and which the
worldlynges can not taste. Because as the Psalm. 30.
Prophette witnesses: There is no peace unto the wicked says the Lord God.

And to conclude, according to the old Proverb, who is so honored, that he
is not sometimes troubled? who is in such estymation, that he is not also
sometimes in trybulation? And who sits on high that is not subject unto
vanytye. And as Gregory says: The more that any man is extolled with honor
and dygnytye, the more is he laden with grievous burdens.

And all things that here do excel, are more vexed with grief then they
are reioysed with honor, and more does the fall of dampnation threaten and
affrighte them, then their hope to attain everlasting blessedness can
recomforte them. For mercy is granted to those which seem of least dignity.
Whilst they y^ are mighty suffer therewith mighty torments. For judgment
shall be most grievous unto the^ which bear greatest authority, and have
greatest prehemyne^ce. And thereupon Chrisostom said: who desires to entrude
him self into spiritual promotio^s, or to take charge of souls. but such an
one as fears not Gods judgment? it is a great security of mind and quiet
of conscience, to reteyne nothing that has in it any seculer concupiscense.
Yea and it is a vile and miserable bondage, to be altogether troubled in
worldly affairs, and to leave God forgotten Although unto many worldly men it
seems grievous to be occupied or co^uersant in any thing else then private
profit, which have not the skill or understanding how to occupy them selves
in holy and virtuous actions. And the soul of man is such that without love
and some what to be exercised on, it can not continue. So that the less it be
occupied and affected obout god, so much the more it is powered out and
bestowed in vain and earthly things. Again Bernard says: the insatiable
love of riches does much more torment men with desire, the^ the use thereof can
recomfort them when they have obtained it. For there is labor and pain in
gettyng of them, fear and dread in possessing them, and much sorrow and grief
in forgoing them. Yea gold does most grieve him which has greatest abundance
thereof. Therefore to the end thou may with a quiet mind serve God
deuo^tly, fly from and eschew the troublesome affairs of this world, the
cor^orall delights, and the deceyuable treasures. Cleave fast unto God only
that he may become thy joy and comfort, and thou shall sing with the Psalmist:
In God is my hralth and my glory, he is the God of my help, and my hope is in
him. And let such rejoice in temporal things as have not the skill to desire
heavenly and everlasting treasures.

It is written in the holy word of God: Watch you (for The loss of time or
misspending of spiritual pro fits, enduce the contempt of the world.
you know not when the Lord comes, over night, at mydnight, or in the gray
morning) least when he comes suddenly he find you sleepyng. Look to your
selves, watch, and pray. How much so ever we love God and the life to come in
the heavenly kingdom, even so much we ought to eschew all such things as
hinder and let us from the getting of the everlasting beatitude and union unto
the divine majesty. And what (I pray you) does so much hinder us from the
obtaining thereof? ^or sooth riches, delyghtes, honors, vanities, and worldly
prosperities. For a man being wholly bent unto them does not only myserably
and vnfruitefully leese such time as God lends him to repent and (...), but
furthermore he does daily fall into many vices, commyt many faults, he
remembers not GOD, omytteth all duties, and runs into innumerable
impedimentes to salvation. And thereupon Christ said: How hard it is Mark. 10.
for them that are rich to enter into the kingedome of God? For riches being
ones possessed, are very hardly despised. And earthely things (being ones
gotten) are more stryctly beloved, then they are coueted before they be had. So
that they which altogether apply the multiplyinge of riches, do neclect to
seek the joys of the world to come.

And whiles they do not medytate and deeply consider the soundenesse of
eternity, they love and esteem this banish^ment, as it were the heavenly
habitacion.

To conclude, how much more the lovers of this world do forgett GOD, even so
much the more also are they of him abandoned and forsaken, and so much the more
their hearts shall be hardened. Whereupon it oftentimes happens that they love
nothing effectually which pertey^eth unto God. They covet not heavenly
things, but (for the most part now a days) the worse that men become, the
more careless yet they are. And whiles they never look up to see from whence
they be fallen, nor fear the punishments to come, they wax ignorant how
much they are to be lamented.

For the more that they cleave unto vain and evil things, the less they
acknowledge the good things which they have lost. And a mighty thing do they
account the glory of this world. Yea and a tryumphant glory do they esteem
it, to floorish presently according to their hearts desire. Never fearing nor
foreseeinge the perpetual punishments which they shall be forced hereafter to
endure.

That man only perceives that it is nothing at all to floorysh in iniquity,
which has already withdrawn the footestepp^s of his affection from the love of
this world. For if we would think upon the eternal rewards, we should soon
esp^e that the present glory is nothing at all. But he which fyxeth his heart
in things present, never weying nor considering the punyshmentes to come for
the wicked, but is puffed up with false riches, and reioyseth when he has more
cause to be lamented, he is subject unto many mischiefs. Since there can be
no truer nor ryghter myserie, then false and vain tryumphyng. Yea and every
man does so much the more outwardly rejoice, as he does inwardly the less
remember him self. These sentences before alleged I have gathered out of
Gregory, whereby thou may plainly perceive how perilous a thing it is
(especially for such as profess reformation) to apply our affections unto
these earthly things. But peradventure thou do purpose to use riches without
abuse, and to be conuersaunt amongst worldlyngs, but not worldly and
wantonly, and to eat and drink amongst them without ryotte or banquettyng.
And finally to use the favor and honor of men without tryumphyng or glorying
therein.

Surely if thou could perform this, it were a great perfection. But hardly
can the best and most perfect continue therein. And how seldom it is seen,
mark thy self by these words of Gregorius: It is commonly see^e (says he)
and does seldom fail that voluptuousness and sensual appetytes, do
follow banqueting. For the body of the rich glutton is melted and dissolved
into delights, and his heart is opened unto vain joy. The rich man is
overcome with excess of delight, and becomes unbridled in boastyng words.
He runs where he lusts, and falls into all unlawful things. Yea those
things which were the occasions and allurementes of his vices, do become the
instruments of his pain and punishment.

But examyne thy self whither thou do only feed and sustain thy body
according to thy necessity and vtillity, or if thou do not delicately and
tenderly pamper and cherishe thy vol^ptuousnesse. Or else harken aga^e unto t^
words of Gregory.

As it is impossible (says he) that fire should (...) in water, so is it
impossible that a comp^ (...) contryte mind should live in (...). For (...)
mere contraryes, and each of them distroy^ and (...) the other.

Furthermore weigh and consider the excel^cie of ty^ and be abashed to spend
it in vanities, (...) p^sse it o^r v^fruitefully, and to lead thy life therein
wick^dly. Y^ harken unto the doctrine of the ancient fath^rs: (...) of us ^et
light by time which is consumed in (...). The word flies from us irr^uocably.
The ty^e ^th from us vnredeemably, and the fool knows not nor marketh not
what he loses Let us talk and common together (say some) v^till an ^oure be
paste. (...) thou do^ let pass an hour, the which the merry of thy Creator
has (...) thee to repent, to obtain grace, and to win and attain unto
euerlas^yng ^lorie. Until the time do pass over, wherein thou ought (...)
make intercession unto the di^yne mai^stie, appro^ and make haste unto the
company of the Angels, sighe and lamente for the loss of thy (...)
heritage, aspyre unto the felicity pro^ysed and pr^pared, stir up thy ^acke
and ^uggish will, and bewail and (...) the iniquityes which thou have
committed. For though we set so light by time, yet by Bernardes opynion,
nothing is more precious. The days of health and salvation pass over our
heads, and no man marketh them. Wherefore (my best beloved on earth) every
eueninge or time that thou go about to take rest or quiet, reuolue and cast
in thy mind how thou have spent the day. What evil thou have committed, and
what good things thou have omytted. How many good things thou might have
done and dyddest necl^ct them. How thou have dishonored God and pleased the
diuill by sinning and doing amiss. How thou have wounded and hurt thy soul,
and displeased God.

Finally, how near thou haste approached unto hell. This being done, yield
thanks and glory unto God for all that thou have well done, and for all that
thouhast done amiss, be sorry from the bottom of thy heart. Determyne an
amendment, and accomplysh it in deed. Consider herewith that sinners which do
now spend their time in worldly vanitye, do at the hour of their death seek
one hour, or the least momente of time to repent. The which they had then
rather obtain, then a massye heap of Gold as great as the whole world.
Remember that at the day of judgment all time that was lent thee shall be
required at thy hand^s how thou haste spent it. Yea every least moment or
twynckling of an eye. Therefore let thy heart be replenyshed with good
thoughts, thy mouth with holy words and readyng of scriptures, and thy hands
with doing of virtuous deeds. That as often as the enemy do come, he may
find thee armed. For such as he does find idle, he cease not to tempte
them. Then if it be so evil to be idle, how much worse is it to be evil
occupied?

We find written: The praise of the wicked is The contempt of this world by
consideration of the vanities thereof.
short, and the joy of the Hypocryte like unto a moment. If his pride go up
into heaven, and his head touch the clouds, yet in the end he shall be as
a dunghyll.

He shall be like unto a dream flyinge away, which is not seen when we
awake, and he shall pass over as a nightly vysion.

If we do^ well and thoroughly consider the eternytie of the felycitie and life
to come, yea the soundenesse, truth, and vncorruptiblenesse thereof, I do
verily believe that this world and present life, together with all temporal
glory, shall even from the heart seem vile unto us. Neither shall we disperse
our affections in worldely things, but rather we shall most gredily seek out
y^ everlasting joys and unchangeable good things prepared for us in ye
heavenly kingdom. For in as much as our soul is immortal, and for ye brightness
of understanding, much higher and worthier then any material substance or
nature, it ought not to take joy or felicity in corruptible, material, or
tran^torie things, but it ought to go forwards with a pure heart, toward the
immortal, unvariable, and ^st perfect God. So that we ought not to love this
present life, but the life to come principallye and above all things. Yea we
ought to despise and contempne all transitory delectation, all temporal
honor, and all praise of men, for the hearty love of the divine and celestial
beatitude. For look how much we cease from the affection of worldly vanity
and temporal glory, so much the more do we please God, and so much the
nearer we approach unto the blessedness which is to come. For unto God only
all honor and glory are due. From whom all good things do proceed. 1. Tim.
1.
But to us be confusion and shame which do so often offend, dishonor, and
neclecte God. Wherefore it shall not be lawful 2. Col. 10.
for us to glory in our selves, nor to have a vayn delight in our selves. But
as the Apostle says: He that gloryeth, 1. John. 2.
let him glory in the Lord.

Behold the world passes over, and all the glory thereof. Jacob. 4.
And what is our life in this world but a smoke and vapor 2. Reg. 14.
showing it self a little, and s^raight way is vanished and gone? we all
slip away like water into the earth. We are earth, ashes, dust, rottenness,
and worms meat. So that when a man is dead he shall inherit Snakes and
Worms. To conclude, what is this present life but a continual and ^oste
swifte course unto death? For some part of our life is continually and
without ceasing wasted and cut off. And therefore David said: Our days are
like a shadow upon the earth, and there is none abidyng. And Ezechias said:
my life is cut of as the web from the Weauer. Yea even whylest I yet began,
he cut me off. And Job: remember me O Lord, for my life is like Job. 7.
a puff of wind. And in respect of the eternity, the lastyng of this life
is nothing as Job witnesses in the same place saying: Spare me O Lord for my
days are as nothing. Heerevpon Chrisostom says: Let us pass (says he) one
hundredth years in delyghtes, yea ad thereunto another hundereth, or (if you
list) ten times an hundereth, and what shall all this be, compared to
eternity? shall not all the whole time of this life, in the which we seem to
enjoy so many delyghtes, and to have free scope unto vanities, shall it not (I
say) be as a dream of one night compared to the eternity? Yes for as
Hierome says, if thou had the wisdom of Solomon, the beauty of
Absalon, the strength of Sampson, the riches of Cr^esus, and the myghtie power
of Octauianus, what should all these profitte thee when as straight ways, thy
body shall be delivered unto the worms, and thy soul unto diuilles? For as
Augustyne affyrmeth: If Adam yet lived, and should dye this day, what could
it then avail him to have lived so long?

Now therefore (my dearly beloved) weygh these things deeply. For such as
neglecte to mark these things presently, ^arly or late they shall say
(vnfrutefully) with the reprobate in the day of judgment. We have erred from
the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not shyned in us, and
the bright son of understanding has not risen unto us. What has our pride
profited us? Or what has our pomp and boastyng prevailed us? All those things
have passed over as a shadow, and as a swyfte running messenger.

For then shall the heavens reneale the vanity of the lovers of this world
together with their iniquities, and the earth it self shall rise against them.
Then their sin and transgression shall be manifest with such as have said to
God: Depart from us. We will not have the knowledge of thy ways. Then shall
the round world fight against them in Gods behalf. All things which have
been shall then suffer punyshement, and yet shall not be consumed. Yea they
shall suffer and sustain according to the multitude of their inventions. For
the wicked is reserved until the day of perdition, and shall be led unto
the day of fury, and shall drink of the wrath of the almighty. Let these
things ter^rifie thy mind, and withdraw it from the world. Yea principally
let them join it unto God.

Furthermore, the vanity of this world does hereby most manifestly appear,
that the prosperity thereof is expected and gaped for with an exceedyng
greediness of mind, and when it comes it can not be retained. But all
things pass over, and all things fly away. This day is paste, and the
beginning of the next is not yet known whither it shall be quiet or
laboursome.

For so passes over the glory of this world. And there upon Augustyne
demands saying: What will thou love temporal things (says he) and pass
away with them, or will thou love Christ and live eternally with him? For it is
impossible that a man do both enjoy the present delights and the joys to
come. It is impossible both here to fill the paunche, and there to satis^e the
mind. Men may not pass from one delyght to another, and appear glorious
both here and in the world to come. Yea and the contempt of worldely and
temporal things is euydente by this that God does oftentimes bestow them
more aboundantlye upon his enimyes and them which are reprobate, then upon the
elect. For the elect does consider (by the end) that those things are of
none account which do transitorilye and seculerly delyght. And therefore
Hierome says: the speedy cons^lation of the goo^, is the end, of the wicked
well considered and foreseen.

For whilst the good perceive by the destruction of the wicked what evils and
perils they have passed and eskaped, they account all things light and easy
which they suffer and endure in this life. So y^ b^hold (my well-beloved) how
great the deceit of this world is, and how exceeding great is the blyndnesse
of the love which we bear to the same. For whilst the wicked does willingly
and with great delight remain and continue in this world, hopyng to live long,
and setting many things in o^der for the time to come, sodaynely and unawares
he is commanded to dye, and in a moment to leave and forsake all those
things which he so faltily has loved and esteemed. Heerevpon our Savior
Christ brings in the rich man speaking unto him self and saying: My soul
thou haste much good and treasure laid up for many years. Take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry. But God answeareth him ^uc. 12.
saying: O fool this night shall they take thy soul from thee, whose then
shall that be which thou haste so greedily gathered? Let us therefore gather
together true and spiritual riches, which will not forsake us at the time of
death, but will appear with us before God, and make us seem comely and
beautiful in all virtue and godliness. In these kind of riches we may daily
increase and profit, yea and in such sort that such profit may be much
more auaylable unto us, then if we possessed all the riches in the world.
Wherefore let us not myspende the least space of time, nor be occupied in good
things only, but in the most excelent things. That we may always search
out those things which draw nearest to our salvation. And so grow nearer and
nearer neighbors unto God. And be always reverently and hon^urably
conuersaunte in the syghte of the heavenly Father.

Let us think and think again upon the quiet peace and tranquillity of a
pure heart, upon the delectation of a soul beholding the majesty of God, and
upon the securitye and fyrme hope of the mind which loves God. And hereby we
shall soon find that to give over our selves unto such things is as much as
to be conformed unto God.

And that such as do otherwise, are deformed and not reformed. For it is not
every thing which is created defectyue? And every transitorye thing unquiet?
Yea it is short, and of small contynewaunce, but mutable and subject unto
time.

So that the lovers of this world ^aue nothing firm or stable but are
themselves also light and unconstant, as it were set in a whyrlewynde, since
they put not their dely^ht in God only, but in all vain and transytory
t^inges, now affecting this thing, and now that thing. Now loat^yng that they
erst loved, and straight way deuring and ceu^ting some other vanity not yet
possessed. But the just and such as love God do persevere quiet, vnyforme, and
s^ble, being founded upon the eternal God as upon an vn^oueable foundation.
And thereupon Solomon said: The wicked shall not be seen. Like unto a storm
passing over. But the just shall be as an everlasting foundation. Augustine
bewayling the lovers of this world, does exclayme and say: O lovers of the
world wherefore labor you? Why do y^u afflyct your selves about nothing? Whiles
you might possess the creator of all things? What s^eke you further? What may
suffyse and content men's mind, whom the creator of all things cannot suffice
and content? For if you may have all goodness (which is God) why go you about
to possess things full of mysery? Can your hope and expectacio^ in the world
be any thing else then to be thereof beloved? And therein what is not frail?
What is not transitory? What is not changeable? What is not sinallye full of
perils by the which you pass on unto greater yea and everlasting perils.
And of the vanytie of the worldly life Hierome says: O life (no life but)
death. A deceiptfull life, laden with sorrow, weak, and ouershadowed. New it
florysheth, straight way it wythereth. Depryuing him of life, in whom it
seems life. O frail, momentay^, and bryttell life the more thou growest, the
more also thou decreasest. The more thou proceedest, the more nearer thou
aprochest unto death. O life full of snares how many men do thou entangle,
and how many by thee now do abide infernal t^rments? Oh how happy is he
which knows and perceives thy deceyptes, how much more happy is he which
sets light by and cares not for thy vain delights? And he is most happy
which is well dyspatched of thee.

In the first Epistle of John and the fyft Chapter, it is The malice and
continual hurt which the world she weth to the lovers thereof may cause us to
contempne it.
written: All the whole world is set on wickedness. Yea is not the world
subject unto the Diuill, and replenished with all iniquity? Whereupon the same
John in his second Chapter of his second Epistle says: All that is in this
world, is concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of things seen, or pride
of life and conversation. And as Peter says: The wicked are servants of
corruption and 2. Pet. 2.
of sin. For of whom soever a man be maystred or overcome, unto him he is a
servant and in bondage. And he which is the bondsman of sin, is consequently
the servant of the Diuyll. Whereupon Paul speaks of the wicked 2. Tim. 2.
saying: Let them turn back from the snares of the Diuill, by whom they are
holden in captyuitie even according to his pleasure. And Christ in his gospel
does term the diuill the Prince of this world. Meaning not the round globe of
the sphere, but the worldly creatures which being turned back from God, are
overwhelmed and buried in earthly things. Of whom Hierome meant saying: Going
back from the Lord, they are written and regystred in the earth. But Christ
says contrariwyse to the elect, rejoice and be ioyefull. For your names are
written and regestred in heaven. Now Beda expounds these words thus: By the
world and those things which are therern, he understands men which
inordynately and excessyuely do love and esteem the world. And such have
nothing but concupyscence of the flesh concupyscence of things seen with eye,
and pride of life. For in these vocables and proper names of vices, John does
comprehend and enclude all kynds of vices. For the concupyscence of the
flesh, is all that pertayneth unto the volupteousnesse and delyghtes of the
body. By the concupyscence of things seen with the eye, are meant all
curyosyties which are committed in learning of wicked arts and ornaments,
all contemplacion of filthy and wicked sightes or spectacles, all superfluous
desire to get temporal and tryflinge toys, and all curyous carpynge and
marking of our neighbors imperfections. By the pride of life and conversation,
is meant the pomp and beast which men conceive in worldly promotions. So that
the world is replenyshed with Diuils. For what else do men that live according
to the world but strive to wrappe and enfuolde themselves in sundry sorts of
sins? Yea and to wound and wearye their souls, with the maynes of
myschiefes, and the shaftes of sundry shameful concupyscences, until at last
they feel not their own harms? We see fulfilled Ose. 4.
in the Church that which is written by the Prophet: There is no truth, there
is no mercy, there is no knowledge of God on the earth. The cursed vices of
murder, theft, Hier. 6.
adulterye, and lying, are come flowing over us. From the greatest to the
least, all men apply themselves unto covetousness. The Pryestes have not
said, where is y^ Lord, and the pastors have used collusion.

It is easy to be seen unto what an exceeding great rewine ye church is come
in every e^at, degree, and order. But if christya^s did live now as they lived
in the primityue church and first coming of the Gospel there should be no
such great necessytie to fly from the world. Marye as men do now a days
(for the most part) live, it is a high dyfficulltye to live well, or to
declyne from heinous sins in ye world. Especially for such as are not
exercysed with verteous quallytie or paynefull labor, but do abound in
riches and are conversant in greatest pompes and highest places. Deceiptes,
ambytion, envy, volupteousnesse, and all other evils are powered out upon the
earth. Every man beats his brain how he may multyplye and increase his
substance, but no man cares how to save his soul. Men are afeard least they
should fall into pouertye, but were it not much more to be feared to light
into the bottomless pyt of hell? The world is the furnace of vices. The which
these worldlings do heat and warm with the fuel of sin.

And therein do burn and consume themselves and their companyones. For they
are so much blinded, that they neither see nor fear the peryles which are
notoryous and well known to all men. But do triumph and reioise in their
evils like phrentyke and made men. Yea if there be any whom they see not
wrapped in like wooes, they accoumpt them to be blockyshe and senseles
creatures. Well said that Philosopher: As often as I was amongst men, I
returned Sen^a
(says he) the worse. And another says: An evil companyon draws his
fellow to mesdeedes, and so he which was Alanus
before good, becomes evil and wicked. To conclude even as the people of
Israel could not depart from Egypt without the help of thy divine Majesty,
even so no man ca^ be pulled or withdrawn from this world, unless he be
helped with the finger and power of the heavenly hand. Yet Exo. 12.
shall there never be found any defect in God, so that man will do his best
that he may. Again the world is compared to a deserte by the which the
children of Israel went from Egypt unto the land of promise. And in this
desert they met so many letts and impedyments, that of threeskore Deuteronomy. 2.
thousand numbered, only two (even Caleph and Iosue) were brought into the land
of promise. O how the Diuils does rejoice to see them all now in the synke and
filthynesse of their sins. Men cleave unto worldly things, and in worldly
things they are wise, but they neither care for God nor for his
commandments, neither are they astonyed when they hear his most terryble
judgments. But they account them as fables. Oh all things that are, be evil
bestowed upon us. For our hardness is never moll^ed. But think we that God
will omyt his judgment? Or leave these sins unrewarded? Or suffer the words
which he has spoken of the judgment to come and of the everlasting pains, to
be falsified? God forbid that we should so think. Furthermore whosoever is
overcome with the love of earthly things, he is not delyghted in God. But no
man can long abide without some delectation. And therefore such as are not
delighted in spyrituall things, do power themselves out unto worldly solace.
And so consequently are overwhelmed in the multitude of sins and vices.
Whereupon Saint Augustine says: Blessed is he O Lord which loves thee. For he
which loves not thee, loves the world, is servant and bound unto sin, he
is never quiet, never in safety, but is dystracte and dyspersed in the
varyable cares, vanities, and pompes, of the world. And whosoever does
contempne the volupteousnesse of this world, and thereby eskaye the snares of
the Diuill, shall be most happy in that his soul is delighted in such things,
as cannot be blotted or defiled with any uncleanness, but is immediately
cleansed and purged with ye cleanness of truth. And since y^ law of God does
so delight him y^ he shall be able there by to avoyde and eschew y^ delights of
y^ world. But as long as we delight in the deceyptfull taste of iniquity, so
long we shall think it most sower and bitter to fast of equity. And to whom
the world seems sweet and sauorye to him Christ seems bitter and sower.
Yet having tasted the spyrite of God, all flesh shall (as it were) dote and
play the fool. Again whosoever does with his whole mind serve and please
this world, is thereby enfected with a manyfold deformytie of vices. And he
which tastes nothing of the heavenly sweetness, will not be afeared to be
polluted with earthly desires. But if such as for the love of God despise the
world, keepyng themselves contyneually conversant in spyrytuall things, cannot
yet he altogether pure and cleansed from sins, with how heavy burdens of vices
are the^ laden which are not afearde to walk in the myddest of the world
wrapped in vanities, without carfulness or fear of God? What is their life
but sin it self? For the mirth and joy of the world, is wicked^sse
unpunished. But y^ which the reprobate do account delight and comfort, that
the elect and verteous do take and def^ to be most greeuo^s pain. Thynking
and concluding that the soul (...) needs perysh^ (...), by that wherein the
^she (for a time) did delight most pleasantly. Wherefore you lovers of this
world, howl and cry out, which do myserably kill your body and soul before
the time appointed. Whiles you attend wholly upon the vices of gluttony, and
lecherye, immoderately, and vylely. And thereof (even in this world) do
proceed sundry infirmyties, and sudden deaths. Rejoice and be merry now
in this most short space which you have, that hereafter you may complain and
bewail with the Diuill perpetually. Banquet and drink dronken, that after a
while you may call for a drop of water, and yet not have it, when you shall be
dampened in hell with the rich man which lived in great delights, and fared
delycately every day. Why are your hearts harder then iron, steel, or stones,
when you do not weye and consider, nor ^e not afeard (in pain of these most
unhappy and frail sollaces and vanyties of this world) to hear that most
dreadful and horrible sentence of Christ go ye accursed into everlasting fire?
But here peradnenture you will say: God is merciful and benign, he would not
the death of a sinner but that he be converted and live.

And again: In what hour soever a (...) repent him, I will no more remember
all his iniquites. So that if a sinner (...). 18.
do bewail his sins eue^ at the very time of death, he shall be saved. And
I do confess that all these sayings are true. Nay rather the excieding
greatenesse of the hea^nly piety, does beyond all comparyson exceed and
surpass the very capacytie of our mind. For it is unmeasurable. As may
plainly appear in that he (...) sinners so long to the end they may be
converted, yea expects and desires their conuersyon, he (...) such as
retorue most mercyfully, he quyckly for (...) all (...), and does abundantly
power as much grace upon them, as if they had never sinned nor offended.

And is not this an infynite piety? But his equytie and i^styce is no less
then his pitiye. And though he do bear with, and long suffer such as he
attends to repent and convert, yet if they do not convert, he does the more
grievously punyshe and detest them. And that which the Prophet says of the
contrytion and sorrow of a sinner, must be understood of true contrytion and
hearty repentance. But the true contrycion does proceed of the true faith and
love of God, and of the lothing of sin, and an affection unto righteousness.

Yea and as Hierome testyfieth: Repentance and hearty contrytion are necessary.

Whereunto that saying of Chrysostom agreeeth: Compunction is the thing which
makes purple seem vile, makes men desire hearecloth, love tears, and
eschew company.

Syuce then these things ^ee certainly thus, what Repentance even at the last
gasp^ (...) not denied but the driving of of the same (...) dangerous and
disalowed.
kind of contrycion and bewayling can that be which comes only at the very
hour of death, and then repents because he thynkes he can live no longer? Or
(peradventure) if he hoped of longer life, he would defer it? Surely it
seems doubtful that through seruyle fear and constrained faith, his
contrycion proceeds by the only beholding of his own only refuge. And that
it is not true contrycion, but a terryfing of the spyrite. But he which will
soundly and perfectly repent, must first be sorye for his fault, because it is
filthy transgression and offensive unto GOD. Yea and a dishonor unto the
divine sanctitye and Majesty. We read in the Machabes: That Antyochus did
repent, and yet obtained not mercy. The Apostle does write the like of Esau: He
found not 2. Mac. 9.
(says he) place for repentance, although he sought it with tears.
Therefore let no man deceive himself Heb. 12.
with vain hope or solyshe perswasyones. For as Hierome says: This I hold
for certain and do think most true, that he has no good end which led
always an evil life. Which being sound and in health, was not affeard to
offend god, but wallowed and toumbled in the vanities of the world. The death
of Saints is most precious in the sight of the Lord, but the death of sinners
is most abhomynable. The sinner shall be persecuted with this revenge, that dying
he shall forget himself, and both living and dying he forgot God As. Augustine
confirms saying: He cannot dye evil, which lived well. Nay skarce can he dye
well, which lived evil. And yet we must not despair of any sinner. But they
are to be exhorted and styred to repentance even in the last gaspes. For some
times percase it happens (although very seldom) that he which in time of
health did neglect repentance, shall yet by repenting then obtain mercy. But
he is a most arogant fool which passinge over his lyse in health does put his
souls health unto that ploonge of peril. But let us do that which is more
sure and sase. That is to repent and amend whiles we be sound and in health,
praying most faithfully with the Prophet: Cast me not out (O Lord) in mine
age, and leave me not nor forsake me not, Psalm. 70.
when my strength and power fail me. For behold says the Apostle, Now is
the acceptable time, and now are the days 1. Cor. 5.
of health.

Who is this rising as the day rose (says the princely The excelency of the
soul conformed to God, and the vileness of the sinful soul.
Prophet in the sixth of his Canticles) fair as the Moon and bright as the
Sun, and terryble as the forefroont of a battle? and John says in the
third Chapter of his first Epistle: We know that when he apeareth we shall be
like unto him, for we shall see him as he is, (that is to say) clearly and
perfectly in his form and proper kind. For the intellectual sight, is and
consists by view of the intellygible form or shape, whereby we see what is
the likeness of the thing ones understood. Neither can that likeness
plainly represent the thing, unless it be made equal unto the thing it
self. But every shape, likeness, or form created, does infinitely fail and
come short of the full representacion of the divine essence or being, and
therefore God is seen only in the heavenly kingedome, because then the very
divine ^ssence it self is united unto the minds of the blessed in the steed
of the intellygyble form or (...). Not by Inhaesyon or cleaving to, but by
assystaunce and (...). So that the di^yne essence or being is quod and quo
(that is to say) the very thing it self, and the thing whereby all things are
in this blessed vysion.

Furthermore this vision is more then most worthy and altogether supernatural,
the which all the chief Philosophers did think impossible to be put in any
mind created, no not in their separate substaunces. So that to obtain the
same, we have need of many supernatural gifts, means, and helps,. As first
that there may be given us from God a blessing even grace making us grateful
and acceptable, the which does bedecke and adorn perfectly the very essence or
being of the intellectual and reasonable nature. And makes us fyt to deserve
eternal life, and to be conjoined unto the supernatural diuinytie.
Furthermore the love and charytie whereby god and the first being, or essence,
is loved, is spirytually, supernaturally, purely, freely, and fully distylled
into us from the holy Ghost. And with it, hope and faith also. This charytie
and love does (as it were) counterpayze him that has it, with the love of the
whole vnyuersallitie. So that yet it makes him love God more then all things
that ever were created. Yea the least dram of this love and charytie does make
God to be loved above the whole world. And otherwise man should not be in state
of Salvation.

For according to the holy Fathers, whosoever has this charity and the grace
before rehearsed, he has also the gifts of the holy ghost, and all the other
virtues conuected unto charytie and conjoined unto perfect grace. Yea the more
he profits in this grace and charytie, so much the higher does he grow in
good gifts and virtues.

To conclude, the excelencie and worthynesse of these supernatural good
things is such and so great, that it can hardly be comprehended or expressed.

For no natural perfection, no beauty, no coomlynesse, nor no bright shyninge
light, can be thought equal unto it. No the heavenly lyghts do not so much,
nor so well adorn and ^e wtifie the substance of the Sun and Moon, as
those graces do bewtifie and adorn the substance and being of the soul.
Neither doothe the Sun so much bewtifie the heavenly Fyrmament, as Charity
does bewtifye the Soul.

No the seven Planettes do not so much adorn the heavenly Spheres or
Cyrcles, as the gifts of the holy ghost do adorn and bedecke the powers of
the soul. The vnyuersallytie of the Stars does not so much adorn and set
forth the eighth Sphere or Fyrmament, as the vniuersallytie of verteous
actions does dignifie, adorn, and perfect, the Soul. For even as by the
Philosophers opinion, true felicity consists rather in action, then in
outward form, even so in divinity also more virtue and perfection consists
in exercise of godly actions, then in profession or aparaunce. And the more
noble that the outward aparaunce be, the more noble should the action and
execucion be also. Therefore since the forenamed gifts and treasures of grace,
be habytes or outward tokens of so great highness and excelence, does not the
christian soul seem unto thee to be most noble, gallaunt, and godlyke, which
is occupied continually in the exercise of those habytes, and which is so
spiritually, supernaturally, and godly conversant? yea which does so perfectly
worship and reverence God, whose conversation is altogether in heaven? For
surely here upon it has been written, that such a soul: is the daughter, the
beloved, and the spowse of God, privy to his heavenly secrets, most familiar
with him, conformable in affections, and the entyrely beloved heir of God, the
coheyre with Christ, which beholding gods glory with face dyscouered, is
tra^sformed into the same likeness, from one brightness to another. For as much
as it lotheth all worldly, frail, carnal, and human sollaces, all praises,
honors, and seculer pompes, and all that dyspleaseth God. But whatsoever it
knows may please God, that does it with all earnest affection embrase. To
conclude, even as by the Philosophers traditions every motion has his
dignity, name, and prospertie from the end whereunto it tends, even
Terminus ad que.
so the action is dignified by the worthiness of the object and matter about
the which it is occupied. Then how great is the dignity and glory of that
soul, whose mocion and action, Circa quem.
life, and whole intent, are continually occupied about the highest God? and is
termyned in him who is most certeyn^ly of an unmeasured dignity, and does
wonderfully excel all other things? These things (beloved) I do thus
briefly rehearce, that I might thereby enduce, stir up, and kynd^e, thy mind
to the love of the true and heavenly nobility, (hat is to say) the holy and
deuo^te conversation, and most blessed perfection of life. And to the end thou
may the more earnestly covet the same, I will say some what of the
vileness, perverseness, and deformity, of the sinful soul. The which
being by deadly sin turned and withdrawn from God, is spiritually dead,
and does nothing acceptable unto God, nor profitable toward the atteyninge of
everlasting life. It prefers these transitory, sensible, worldly, and most
vile things which seem good, before y^ highest, eternal, most perfect,
infinite, and unchangeable true God, being omnipotent, and more then most
glorious above all other. Whereby it does highly dishonor God. Yea it proposes
unto it self an end and terminacion in frail and vain things. Neither does
it finally rest in the creator, but is altogether ungrateful to him, caring not
at al to cleave unto him, to be sub iect unto him, nor to obey him. It is made
like unto the wicked spirits, attended with vices, hateful to god, despised of
his angels, and incessantly does wound, hurt, defile, and make it self
damnable. For y^ more that any man be delighted in earthly, transitory, and
carnal things, the more wickedly and vylely he lives, and the more unhappy he
is. And the more he rejoice in the vanities of the world, the more
contemptible he ma^eth himself unto God. Because he is not fearful, nor
careful to obey God, and to give him his due reverence in all things. To
conclude we are chiefly lykened unto god by virtuous actions, and holy
affections unto divine charytie. But by p^ges, vanyties, and vices, we are made
most unlike unto him. For simylitude and likeness are cause of love, as
dissimilytude and vnlykenesse are cause of rancor and hatred. Yea the
perfection of any creature (especially of a reasonable and intellectual mind)
is to be proportionately made like unto his creator. Then the more lofty that
we become through virtue, so much the lyker and better beloved we are unto God.
Yea so much the fayrer and more comely we are inwardly adorned. But the more
that we sin, the more unlike, odyble, and ilfauored we seem unto our God.
Which out of all doubt is a most miserable and unworthy thing. Therefore we see
there is great difference between ye virtuous and vytious souls. And as by
the Philosophers opinion, a man which spends his time in contemplation is
most pleasing unto the gods, even so by the same doctrine, a man which gives
himself unto vices, and naughtynesse, is ten thousand times more abhomynable
then the brute Beasts. As may also plainly appear by the diversity of their
rewards. For god does place and constytute the virtuous, in the fiery heaven,
giving himself unto him for reward, and communicating all things unto him by
an immediate and most blessed kind of union with him himself. But he does
put from him the vycious for evermore, delyuereth him over unto wicked
spirits, places him in hell, and judges him to everlasting pains. Judge and
discern therefore between these two (my well-beloved) and choose and observe that
which seems best unto thee. Do not so embase and make thy self vile, that
thou become a bondsman to sin and to the diuill. Do some little thing for the
love of god. And do not thou neglect ye dignities, holiness, comlynesse, and
godlynes, before rehearsed, for ye rytches, delights, and honors of this most
short and uncertain life. But live before the highest God, fearfully and
waryly. Especially since by one grievous sin, thou ^ightest lee^e all thy
supernall gifts of grace, and so thy soul (like unto the Diuill) should
become foul, froward, and disordered.

Our Savior Christ in the sixth Chapter of Saint Lukes Light laughing vain
pa^ times and idle speech are to be aoybed
Gospel pronounced these words: Woe be unto you that laugh now, for you shall
weep and lament. Now this word (Vae) or (woe be unto you) is commonly taken in
holy scripture for eternal dampnation.

Then if Christ do threaten everlasting dampnation to That laughing only is
condemned which is altogether worldly and void of the sear of God.
them which laugh, who is he that dare in this life be careless, light minded,
or iocunde? truly none but the reprobate and such as go in ^aunger of
dampnation. Since this is most certain that: He which is with out fear of God
cannot be justified. Wherefore if we do well consider with how great peryies
we are enclosed, with how many snares we be entangled, and with how many vices
and sins we Eccle. 1.
are daily assaulted, yea how imperfectly and v^reuently we serve God, how
many evils are daily committed in the world, how much God is dishonored, how
many they be which daily do perish and cast themselves away, unto how many
vices, periles and pay^ our forefathers, our friends and kynsmen both living and
those which are departed, are and were subject, we shall find much more cause
to weep and cry out then to laugh and rejoice. And that did a holy Father
well consider, who seeing one laugh and skoffe, did sighe and say: We must
render accoumpt in the day of judgment before heaven and earth, and do
thou laugh and skoffe thus? Hereupon Solomon says it is better to Eccle. 7.
(...).
go unto the house of lamentation, then unto the house of laughing and
rejoicing. And again: I thought laughter to be but a deceypt, and for joy I
have said: Wherefore art thou deceived in vain? Here I would not have thee to
understand that I mean every laughter or rejoicing to b^ so grievous an
offense, but I speak of lightness in laughing, and such vain laughter and
mirth as is altogether dysordred, and void of godliness. And of such
laughing, James says to the rithe men: Your laughter be turned into mourning,
and your joy into sorrow. Chrysostom reproves (...). 4.
dalliaunce and vain pastime although honest recreations be (meanewhile)
excused being done upon some reasonable cause and godly intent. But dyse play
and such like are forebydden expressedly, especially to such as profess the
truth. And of dauncinge the same Chrysostom says: where dancing is
commonly, (says he) there the diuill daunceth for company. Neither did God
lend us our feet to the end that we should exercise them in tryppinge like
goats and kyddes, but y^ we might keep company with his holy Angels.
Furthermore, if thou do well consider how the son of God for thy sake was
hanged upon the cross, with his arms stretched out, how for thy sake he was
mocked and taunted in a white and purple garment, nay rather, how he was
strypped naked, and naked raised up on the cross, and there sundry ways
derided and mocked. I trust that thou wylt neither take delight in dancing,
nor in curious, precious, nor pompous garments. No nor yet in the praise of
men, but wylt despise and eschew all such vanities. As touching the guard and
watch of thy tongue and speech, Solomon says: He which keeps his mouth
close, and his tongue still, he keeps his soul from perplexity and trouble
of mind. Pro. 21.
And again: Thou see (says he) the man which was so swyft to talk, folly
it self is no more to be despised then Pro. 29.
his correction. And hereupon Gregorious says: Fly from and eschew, rash
and unwary words. For vain talk does soon pollute the mind. Let such
things only proceed out of thy mouth, as do not pollute or offend the ears
of them that harken thereunto. Uayne speech is a token of a vain mind and
conscience. For the talk of the tongue, is the Image of the heart.

By the talk that we hear, we judge the mind that spoke it. Whosoever does
not bridle and repress idle speech, he shall quickly fall in offense. Such as
the man is, such is his communicacion. Then if idle talk be se much
reprehended, what shall we think of skurulous, deceyptfull, biting,
slanderous, malicious, and envious words?

In the tenth chapter of Ecclesiast. it is written: Nothing Against the
supersluitie of riches especially in the (...) gie.
is more wicked then a covetous man, nor any thing more mischeuous then to love
moony. For the man which does so, sets his soul to sale. Now it is
certain that temporal things are directed, and ordered, unto, and by the
spiritual things, as unto their end and only skope. But thend and
terminable skope is loved and desired one way and the means and degrees
whereby we atteyne to the end, are love and desired another way. For the end
is of it self and by it self to be desired and loved. As (for example)
health, in the faculty of Physic. But the means and degrees to attain unto
things, are to be desired and loved, in that they are profitable or available
to the attayning of the end or skope which we seek to get. That is to say,
that by them the end may the more conueuiently be obtained. Then let the case
be this, that riches are finally ordained for the spiritual proceeding and
profit of our souls. And therewithal join that the profit and perfection of
our souls does concist in the action of virtue. That is to say, essencially
in the acts of faith, charity, and wisdom, (meaning the contemplacion and
love of divine things) and dystributiuely in the actions of the moral virtues.

Then shall we find that riches are so much to be thought lawefull, so much to
be desired, and so much to be loved, as they are profitable and necessary for
the sustentacion and sobre nourishment of our bodies, and for the needful and
decent clothing of our members. By the which use the soul is made apt for the
acts of contemplacion and divine love.

But if they be further desired, then fall we truly into covetousness, which
is an inordinate appetyte and desire to temporal things and vanities. And is
of it self and in it self a grievous and deadly sin, and contrary unto
righteousness. Although sometimes god for his mercy does bear with it and
forgeueth it. Now what might hereupon be concluded were hard for me to
pronounce. But give ear to the holy fathers and writers. Augustine and
Basille. It is no less offense (say they) to take away from him that has
ought, then to deny the needy such things as thou have and may emparte unto
them. The bread which thou deteynest, appertains to the hungrye. The
garments which thou lockest up, ought to cloth the naked. Yea the money and
treasure which thou hydest in the earth, might be the safeguard and redemption
of such as are in mysery. And be assured that thou do invade, assault, and
spoil, as many as thou might succor, and do not. Here unto the words of
Hierome do also agree. Whatsoever (says he) we have received of god more
then does serve our necessary use, that ought we to distribute unto the pore.
And if we bestow upon our own vanyties and affections, that which we received
to employ upon their need. How many soever do dye of hunger, or naked need
in y^ places where we remain, we shall render account for their blood in the
day of judgment. Herevpo^ Ambrose says: He which is the bondsman and
servant of worldly rytches, let him keep and watch them as a bondsman. But he
which therewith does loosen and shake of the yoke from such as are in bondage
and captiuitye, he does distrybute them like a Lord. These words do generally
concern every Christian, but especially such as profess the Gospel.

For they are bound unto an especyall cleanness of heart and conuersacio^ that
they may be example to all other people. It is therefore most indecent, and
worthy of all condempnation that they serve and are bondmen unto the (...) and
infirmyties of y^ flesh wherein there abounds most ^lthy leacherye and
gluttony. For whiles they live tenderly and delicately, filling their belly
with meats, their eyes with ^eepe, and their minds with ^yne delyghtes
tumbling and wallowinge in soft down beds, and wholly gi^ing themselves
over unto dallyaunce, pastyme, and unfruitful communication, do they now
walk in the straight and narrow way of salvation? No surely for as the Apostle
says: woe be unto you which are filled, for you shall be hungry. Woe be unto
you rich men which have your consolation here on earth. Therefore let us be
ashamed since many Heathon Philosophers did leave us examples of great
sobriety, much abstinence, and exceeding great contempt of excess, and pomp
in clothing and substance, and we which profess y^ true knowledge of Christ,
do wallow and tomble in such and so many ryottes, curiosities, and vain
pompes. Yea and that not only such as are secular, but even many of the
Clergy which should lend example of perfection to the lay people.

It is written: Cast not away (my son, the discyplyne Nothing is more
perilous then the prosperity of (...) world.
of the Lord, nor faint not when thou art of him corrected. For whom the Lord
God loves, him does he chastise, and is pleased in him even as the father is
delighted in y^ child. The equity and justice of God does require that as no
good deed remain unrewarded, so none offense nor transgression be unpunished.
But even the very elect do not live in this world without offenses and
misdeeds, (for we offend all of us in many things, and if we say that there is
no sin in us, we deceive our selves, for ye just man falls seven times in a
day) and therefore it pertayneth unto the divine bounty and providence, to
chastise us in this life, least we should be contemned in the world to come.
And so of his (...) to pardon us everlastingly. As also this correction and
chastisement of God, wherewith he does fatherly exercise and visit us, is not
only profitable to the wyping away of our sins already committed, but does
also chie^ withdraw us from those whereunto we presently inclyne our selves,
and disposes us ready to eschew and avoid sin in time to come, whilst it
takes away the occasion of (...), terrisieth us, and teaches us to beware.
For vexation gives understanding, and he which has once tasted of the ^odde,
is afeard to come unto it again. Yea it makes a man humbly acknowledge, and
bewail his offenses. Whereupon the Lord says: I chastise thee, least thou
should seem giltlesse in thine own conceit. And again as Hieremie says:
Thou have chastysed me (O Lord) and I am become skillful thereby. Finally, such
chastisement disposes a man to greater delight in his journey, and (if it be
patiently borne) it obtayneth great reward in the heavenly kingdom. And
therefore it is that God does manifoldly chastise and correct the elect in this
life, yea he does reprove and amend them as he says: Those whom I love I
chastise and reprove them. Whereby it may plainly appear, that such as God
does not punish in this world, but suffers them to wander untouched, yea
and does prosper them in this worldly prosperity, although they be
replenished with many exceedyng great vices, and suffers them to clyme alofte,
and to live Lordlyke at their pleasure: they are not of the elect number but
of the reprobate. For it is written: All they which (...). 8.
have been faithful and pleased God, have passed by many Psalm. 30*
troubles. And the Psalmist says: manifold are the tribulations of the just.
And therefore though the reprobate be not chastised of God with a fatherly
correction, that is for their deserts. Whereby they have so incurred the
wrath and displeasure of God, that he vouchsafes not to correct them in this
life, but lettes them remain unto eternal torments in hell fire.

And therefore the Psalmyst says: of the reprobate and Psalm. 80.
unthankful sort: I have let them loose even according to the desires of
their hearts, and they shall wander in their own inventions.

To conclude, the holy Prophettes seeming (with the imperfecte) to wonder at
this temporal prosperity of the wicked, and the manyfolde afflictions of the
just, did thus talk with the Lord saying: O Lord thou art just if I argue
^ier. 12.
with thee, yet nevertheless I will speak justly unto thee.

Wherefore does the wicked prosper in his ways? and it is well with all them
that conspire against thee? And another says: wherefore do the wi^ed live?
they are raised up on high, and replenished with riches, and the s^ourge lob.
12.
of God touches them not. Yea surely such as are yet imperfect, are woonte
to marvel hereat, and are (in manner) withdrawn or turned back from seruyng
of God, why^st they behold them selves afflicted. But such as are perfect, do
neither wonder so, nor are moved, knowing well en^ugh that GOD (for the causes
before rehearced, and for other secret causes known to his divine majesty)
does afflicte and skourge the elect, and leaves the reprobate unpunished.
And therefore (well-beloved) I write these things to make thee wary and
watchful, and to the end thou may be afeard to be accounted amongst the
r^probate, if thou find thy self infinitely prospered, sinning unpunished,
suffering none adversity, glorying in corporal commodities, living after thine
own lust, pleasing men, and praised, extolled, and magnified in this world. For
the Psalmyst says: God Psalm. (...).
has broken in sunder the bones of them which please men. They are confounded
because God has forsaken them. And is not this a horrible saying and a
terrible word? But the Apostle witnesses the same saying: If I should yet
please men, Gala. 1.
I should not be the servant of God. Yea our savior him self Luc. 6.
says: woe be unto you when men bless you and speak well of you. Whereupon
Augustine answers: This world is more dangerous when it seems mylde and
flattering, then when it is troublesome. And is more to be taken heed of when
it entyseth it self to be lyked and esteemed, then when it forewa^neth and
enforces it self to be contempned and set light by. And according to
Gregory's opinion, God chooses them 1. Cor. (...).
whom the world forsakes. And thereupon the Apostle said again: Take heed
and mark your vocation (brethren) for there are not many wise men (according
to flesh and blood) nor many mighty, nor many noble and worthy amongst you.
But God has chosen those which seemed ^oolish and poor to the world, that he
may confound and overthrow thereby these worldly wise men. And he has chosen
the weakelinges of this world, that he may thereby confound the strong and
mighty. And behold he has chosen the unable and contemptible things of the
world. Wherefore (my dearly beloved) let it not delighte thee to live and be
conuersaunte amongst the mighty and rich potentates of this world, nor to
keep company with the carnal and dreadlesse wightes, but always associate
thy self with the better sort and best learned, that thou may pro^tte in
wisdom and virtue. Least thou be dampened together with this world, and so
leese thy lotte and heritage amongst the ele^e. For if thou will believe
Hicrome, he will tell thee that of a thousand rich and mighty men, sharce
one is found fit or worthy for the kingdom of God. Ther^ore pray th^n unto
God that he vouchsafe so to punyshe and correct the presently, that thou be
not condemned hereaf^r ^petually. For thou art not better then was (...)
which was sanctified in his mothers wambe. And yet he says: correct me (O
Lord) but in thy judgment and not in thy farie, least thou bring me to
nothing. For as the (...) testif^eth: If we be without correction H^br. 12.
and disciplyne, we are no sons but bastards. Wherefore think nothing more
hurtefull, then to abide amongst the unfearful, vay^e, and wicked company,
nor on that other side think nothing more wholesome then to remain amongst
the godly, fearful, and devout sort. For follow thou reason, and not affection.

If thou hold not thy self instantly in the fear of God, He which a^oydeth
not the least offenses, shall fall often times into the greatest
thy house will quickly be overthrown and subverted. For the f^are of God
does draw back from sin. And thereupon Solomon said: He which fears God
does neglect nothing. Then he holds him self in the fear of God which
instantly and vncess^ntly is careful least he should offend him. Or least he
should sin and incur the danger of dampnation. Now by this house in this
por^ion of scripture mencyoned, is m^nt our har^e wherein we dwell and abide by
cogitations and afflictions. And this house is soon subverted and ouer^hrowen
by falling into the most grievous and odyous sort of sins and offenses.
Whereby all grace and mercy is taken away, and the sinner does spiritually dye
therein, unless he convert unto the fear of God. Whereby it appears
consequently, that he shall hardlye eschew and avoid these grievous and
greatest offenses, which does not daily accustom him self to eschew the
least faults and transgressions. For the common custom of triflyng faults and
misdeedes, do bring with them, the falling unto greater enormities. Since the
least do dispose and (as it were) prepare a man unto the greatest. Yea they
take away the feruentnesse of charity, and do hinder and let the increase of
grace in us. Whereupon the holy fathers affirm: He that is negligent in small
things, does by a little and a little fall and ^lyde away altogether. So that
(my singulerly beloved) if thou will continue in the state of health, grace,
and charity, (that is to say, out of all grievous sin, and cause of
dampnation) do not only be diligent to avoid the greatest offenses but the
least also. For otherwise thy fruits are dead before the face of God. Whose
voice when the sheep hears not, he strayeth and wandereth. Now it is a
grievous sin and offense more to cleave and stick unto, to be more delighted
and affected, in the create, frail, and vayn things of this world, then God
him self. Whereupon Hierome says: A mind dedicated unto God should as well
beware of the least as of the greatest offenses. Knowing that account must be
rendered of every idle word. And therefore Gregory says: He that takes not
heed of the least, falls into the greatest offenses. Then such as do daily
follow vanities, laughyng, bablyng, sportyng, dallying, wandering here and
there, and accustomyng them selves to all lightness, and in the mean while
do very seldom or never repent or amend, how can they choose but become
culpable also of greater enormities? Therefore let no man ^oye, ^latter,
neglect, nor beguyle him self. But the better to avoid and eschew these ^ares
of the diuill, these knottes of temptation, as sloth and negligence, yea and
the better to proceed and increase in goodness, and in all v^tue and grace,
it is greatly auayleable to have a faithful, godly, wary, exp^e, just, wise,
and entyre familier friend. Unto whom a man may be bold to lay open boldly all
his secrets, doubts, and scrupules. And by whose godly aduyce, he may be
instructed, kindled by his exhortations, and helped by his assistant prayers.
For the friendship of such being founded on godliness and honesty, is of great
force and efficacye before God. Whereupon the ancient fathers said: that the
frauds and temptations of the diuill are by no worldly means more repulsed
nor defended, then by the socyetie of a zealous friend unto whom a man may
lay open his heart and mind. Least the power of the diuil being secretly
shut therein, do infecte and utterly distroy it. And thereupon it is
written: A faithful friend is a strong Eccle. 6.
protection. And he which has found such an one, has a great treasure. There
is no comparison to a faithful friend, neither can the weight of Gold nor
silver counterpeyse his faith. A faithful friend is a medicyne of life and
immortality, and such as fear the Lord shall find such friends.

And in another place he says: Blessed is he which fyndeth a faithful
friend. For since man is naturally a living creature which defireth company,
it is natural (say the Eccle. 35.
Philosophers) that he should be helped. And since man is not a good judge over
him self, it is expedyent that he open his grief and conscience to some
other more meet to judge thereof. Therefore harken unto counsel, and be not
ruled by thine own sensual appetyte. But endeavor thy self to eschew all
familyaritie and society of wanton worldlings, for that is greatly hurtful to
thy soul.

God is a spirit (as it is written in the fourth Chapter It is good to pray
and sing Psalms.
of John) and they which worship him must worshipp^ him in spirit and truth.

And although we ought devoutly and carefully with all reverence to perform
and execute all the works of God (for he is accursed which does the work of
God negligently) Hiere. 48.
yet those actions of virtues which are immedyately (and without any interim)
done and exercysed about God, ought to be done and exercysed with a greater
reverence and singular zeal. Now prayer, singing of Psalms, and adminystring
of sacraments are actions of virtue pertaining unto Gods honor. And therefore
they are to be executed with all diligence and perfection. Whereunto first is
required the observation and keeping of the divine prec^ptes. For it is
written: He that declineth his ear least he should hear Gods law, his
prayer is execrable. And again: Cursed are they which declyne from thy
commandments. Therefore first the conversation must be made conformable unto
the prayer, and next the heart must be united unto God by often proof and
continual attentyuenesse. For of such as are backewarde and do not attend,
the Lord spoke by Esaye Esai. 29.
saying: This people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me. And the wise man said: Before Eccle. 18.
prayer, prepare thine heart and soul, and be not like unto a man which
tempts God. Therefore attentiveness is chiefly necessary, and ought to be
always in the beginning of prayer and singyng of Psalms. For the virtue of
each good beginnin^ does shine in as much as follows, and the latter end
follows virtuously by guide of a good beginning.

Furthermore, for as much as there are three sundry effects in prayer, (that
is) acceptance with God, obtaining of that we crave, and a certain sweet
refection of mind which be feels that prays, the before named
attentiveness shall be sufficient to the former two of these affectes. But unto
the third, there is requisite a continual and mighty attentyuenesse. For
according to Basilles words. Even as the taste of the mouth does discern and
taste every morsel or piece of the bodily sustenaunce, whilst it cheweth and
gnaweth it, even so the inward taste of the soul ought in prayer and singyng
of Psalms to mark and taste the sense of every word and sentence. And that
the forenamed actions and duties may be perfectly discharged and executed,
there is required a great warynesse and watchfulness of ^arte, and an
affectionate recollection or repiticion of (...) toward God. And therefore
some have thought no (...) nor pain comparable unto hearty prayer. But such
prayer and singing of Psalms is of great (and exceedyng great) efficatie
toward the obtaining at Gods hands of all things which we do healthfully
require. And there upon Christ said: True worshippers and prayers, shall worship
and pray to the father in spirit and verity. And Basille says: the divine
help is to be craved, not ^ackly, nor with a mind wandering here and there,
for such an one shall not only fail to obtain, but further shall stir and
provoke God to anger. For it is requisite in time of prayer to behave our
selves purely, and stoutly. Stoutly, that we may reverently and joyfully
attend the Lord our God. Not sloughfally nor sleepily gaping and yawning,
neither whisperyng and muttering, and cutting of our words in the midst, but
with a stout and courageous sound (as best becomes) let us pronounce our
desires before the holy Ghost. Then purely also, that we think upon none other
thing but the Psalm or prayer which we sing or say. For the holy ghost will
not acceptably receive that which is proffered, if we neglecte that which is due
unto him. And pray not nor sing not over hastily. In praying and singing of
Psalms we have two especial things to mark and attend. That is our own
myserie, and Gods mercy. To the end that by the consideration of our own
myserie, imperfection, frayltie, and malice, we may be provoked unto true
humility. And by the consideration of Gods mercy, goodness, and love, we may
be induced to a (...) desire to be united with him. And so the actions before
rehearced may proceed of charity and true humilitis, and all vain chaunting
may be avoided. Yea and that we may desire to please God only, and be more
delighted in the sense, then in the gallantnesse of the words, and more in
devotion, then in warblyng with the voice, least we commit any wanton gesture
or action.

For Augustine says: whenever it happens that I am more delyghted with
the music, then with the effect of the words that are ^ung, I confess
(says her) that I (...) offend grievously. And again: the barkyng of Dogs,
the bleating of Cattle, and the gruntyng of Swyne, does more please God, then
the chauntyng of wanton and ryotous Priests. For what preuayleth the noise of
the lips when the heart is dombe? And even as a voice without tunablenesse
does seem like the gruntyng of swyne, so being used without devotion it is
worse then the bleating of Calves. Wherefore let our prayers and denotio^s be
sung or said distinctly, with a due reverence, attentiveness, and affection.
And in a meet place and time convenient. Without bablyng of things
impertinent. Without whisperyng and pratyng, and without dissolute laughing. It
is written for our instruction, in the first Chapter of Ecclesiast. O vanity
Examples of the vanity of the world.
of vanities, and all is vanity. I have seen (says he) all things that are
under the Sun, and behold all is but vanity and vexation of the mind. Tell
me then (said a holy father) what see thou? I see (answered another) men
saylyng with a prosperous wind, whom the calmness of the Sea, the
brightness and clearenesse of the air, and the sweet breath of the pleasant
wyndes do much delight. I see also sundry folk ha^ueting and making merry in
the Ship, leapyng and r^roysing with all-kynde of Music and melody, yea
even the fishes of the Sea do slocke and gather about them for the increase of
their delighte. Seems not this a great and most desirable felicity? but
pronounce not thy sentence over hastily. Rather tell me what see thou follow
these things? I (see says he) the heavens skoule and ware cloudye. Yea the
sudden and vehement blastes of the wyndes do ouercast the Skies with mistes,
the Sea is troubled and tossed, and (alas at the last) I see the Ship with
them that sailed therein swallowed up in the roaryng waves. Alas what was it
that I so praised? What a huge / calamity does presently follow so short a
prosperity? And another demanded in like sort what see thou? And it was
answered: I see Marchauntmen bringyng home with them Carts and Camelles laden
with most precious merchandise. Which come forwards merrily and joyfully, hopyng
for great gain and a good market. And their prosperity seems great. But
what follows? I see (said he again) an army of Soldiers suddenly rushyng all
at once upon these Merchants, and having amassed them with the sudden
assault, they spoil them, put them to flight, and kill them most
myserablye. Oh what infinyte myseries do suddenly follow a little mirth? Some
man beholding this world, does seem to see an house abo^dantly replenyshed
with all kind of riches and furnyture, and the master of the householde
rejoicing in his children, his great famylie, his great herdes of beasts, his
full barnes, and all other delights. And this seems a great felicity. But is
not this true there with that the more a rich man possess, the more he is
vexed with cares? And although he a lone do bear the burden of his
car^fulnes, yet that which he has skraped togi^her with such payn^* does
much more profitte others then (...) self. For (...) fears least they should
diminyshe when they are gotten, he fears the vyolence of the mighty, and
suspecteth the faythfulnesse of his servants. Another see^reth to see by the
world a solemn mar^ prepared, wherein there is great pomp and tryumphe. And
that ^meth a wonderful good thing, because mankind is thereby preserved
without any injury done to (...), and the wedded parties are knitte together
with the (...) of love. But how rare a thing is it to see married folks agree?
How great carfulness does follow marriage? What pains are there taken in
bringyng up of the children? And in necessary pro^ision for the house? How
many causes and quarelles of suspicion and dissension do daily grow between
the man and (...)? What infinyte dread^ of (...) do invade them b^th, (...)
enimyes should distroy them? Some have lykened this world unto a (...) with
learned studyents. Wherein the great^ (...) all are bent unto sundry good
faculties and (...). (...) similitude would seem to be more pleasant then
(...), (...) they are altogether occupied in wisdom. But (...) very deed
these foolish wayfaring men or trauaylers which are so curiously occupied in
searching the mysteries of things created, do in the mean time forgette. God
their Cre^tor, and neglect the execution of that which (...) unto (...). And
their conversation does well witness that they (...) of all others, since
nothing is more (...) then their curyositie. Yea their (...) is (...), since
commonly at the time of their ^ath they are fru^rate of the hope of salvation,
whose life and time of health* did neglecte to walk in the pathe of the right
way to the same.

For surely such are of all others most vaynely occupied, as omit those
things which God requires at their hands, and without the which they can not
be sa^ed. And are not continually occupied in the same, but rather (...) aside
all fear of God, do busy them selves in such (...) as God does not require
at their hands, and as rather hinder then further their salvation. And they
are (...) of God and man, because they prefer the deligh^s and prosperities
which they synde by the way, before the great (...) and blessed^se of the
kingdom p^pared. Cleaving (...) things present, then to the joys to come.
(...) comes it to pass (says Hieremias in his eleventh Chapter) that my
beloved has committed many (...) parts in my house?

Say^th Paul in his second Chapter to the Romans: The opinion of certain
Philosophers touching the cont^mpt of the world.
Since it comes to pass, that the people and nations which have not the
law, do yet fulfill that which the law contmaundeth, they become a law unto
the^ selves. Now to ye end that ye confusion, vileness, and perverseness of
Christians, may the more plainly appear, I will a little touch how much the
Philosophers (being guided only by natural reason) have abhorred such idle
and leude conversation. Plato says: It is not the part of a Philosopher to
study about the pleasures and delights of meat, drink, and venerie. A
Philosopher does think it dishonor to be bravely apparelled or decked, and is
content with such clothing as may serve his necessary use. A Philosophers
intention is not about ye body, but furthest from it, and is wholly occupied
about consideration of the soul. The mind and soul of the Philosopher does
despise and disdain the body, and flies from it, that it self may be
wholly occupied in and about it se^fe. For out of our bodies proceed
thousands of impediments unto contemplation, whilst we are busied for the
necessary sustentation thereof. A Philosophers meditation, is the loosyng and
separation of the mind from the body. It is a rediculous thing for a man that
all his life time did prepare him self unto death, if then when it comes,
he be troubled or molested therewith. If thou perceive any man to shrynke at
death when it comes, say boldlye he was no Philosopher. As often as the
mind or soul is allured by the body unto these worldely and chaungeable
things, it is seduced and sore troubled. But as often as the mind or soul is
exercysed by it self in speculation, it is straight ways transferred into
sincerity and immortality.

The body and the mind being both in one, nature (...) yet command the body
to be governed, to serve, and to be subject. But it commands the mind or
soul to rule and bear dominion. True Philosophers do abstain from all
things that are corporal, and are not greedy lovers of money and riches. These
sentences Plato affirmed. Now Socrates (by Saint Hieromes testimony) did
utterly contempne riches. Dyogenes forsaking all these worldly pompes, did
choose to live in his Tun. Tullye and Seneca have ^ritten most sharply and
bitterly against the love of riches and voluptuousness. Then if these men
being only enduced by natural reason, and only for the attayning of natural
felicity and science, did thus contempne all vices, and led such a strickt
and hard life, of how great condempnation are Christians culpable, which being
instructed with the doctrine of the gospel and very law of God, to whom the
only begotten son of God him self did personally come, and made him self an
example for them, are not yet ashamed to lead a wanton, vain, and delycate
life, are blotted and blemished with carnal marks, ^leaue fast unto the
world, forget heavenly things, and are not dilygent and careful to honor God
with all their hearts? But my beloved: be not thou lykened nor conformed unto
such unworthy men. Rather follow the footesteppes of the holy fathers that
thou may be able to please thy Creator, and to offer unto him the flower of
thy youth, whilst it does yet floryshe and sproute. The which will be unto him
most pleasant and acceptable. As Gregory witnesses saying: in that age that
man's hear is yellow, his eyes glistering like crystal, his face fresh as
the Rose, his sound health increases his strength and force, his young and
lusty years promise long continuance upon earth, whilst reason and the
senses are quick, whilst the hearing is more ready, y^ sight quicker, the
gate upright, the countenance lovely, and the body lusty, they which in this
age (says he) do rule and master them selves, and do assocyate and
acquaynte them selves with God, they may expect and hope for the reward of the
blessed Apostle and Evangelist John.

Where upon Hierome says: it is good for a man when he has borne the yoke
from his youth vpwardes. Therefore (well-beloved) do not foreflow thy conversion
unto the Lord, neither defer from day to day, least his wrath come sodai^ly
upon thee. Offer thy self wholly to God, and he will wholly bestow him self
upon thee. Be thou of a right (...), and put thy hand unto the strongest and
s^outest trauayles. Fight like a good Soldier against the enimyes of the soul.
For he shall not be crowned with glory which has not maistred the proudest.
The creator of all things which is above all things, the highest and most
blessed God, vouchsafe to give thee all these things, for his unmeasured
goodness, and for the advancement of his honor and glori^. Amen.

Solomon in the xxix. of his Proverbs says: Our Of the vanity and
wretchedness of this present life.
days are as wounds upon the earth, and yet there is no death. And Augustine
in his thirtenth book and tenth Chapter De ciuitate dei, says: From the
time that any man begins to be in this mortal body, he does incessauntly
travail to dye. For thereunto tends all his mutabilitie in all his life (if
it may be called life) that he lives to that end that death may come. For
all men are nearer unto death after a year finished, then they were before it
begone, to morrow, then to day, to day, then yesterday, and even anon, then
now.

For all the while we live, some little space of our life is taken away. And
that which remains does daily become less and less. So that the whole
course of this our life, is nothing else but a recourse unto death. And in this
course no man is suffered to stay nor to linger and go softelyer then his
fellows. But all men are drouen on with equal steps and paces, and are all
conceived alyke to their end. Neither does he which dies soonest, pass over
the day faster then an other whose life lasted longer. But having each of them
equal momentes and times to pass over equallye, that one had his end and
determinate time set nearer, and that other further of.

For it is one thing to have lived longer, and another thing to have gone or
proceeded slower or quicker.

And therefore whosoever does the longer linger his days before he dye, he went
notwithstanding never the more slowly, but he had the longer journey to
perform. Yea and if it should be accounted that a man does begin to dye (I
mean to be dead in deed) from the first moment that death claymed his right
in this our exyle, (which is even from our swadlyng clontes) then all this
lingryng and detracting of time, should in accoumpt be no time at all. For what
other thing do we accomplysh in our days, hours, momentes, and times, then
that this life being consumate, death (which all that while was in hand) may
be fulfilled. Of these things Augustyne speaks largely in the Chapter
before rehearsed, and the Chapter next following. But of the infinyte euilles
and myseries of this present life, he treats more plainly in his xx. book
and xx. Chapter of the same work saying: As touching our first original
beginning, all mankind was in damnable estate as well witnesses this our life
(if it be a life) so full of such and so exceedyng great euilles. For what else
betokens the horrible depth of our ignorance, from whence all error
spryngeth? the which did receive all Adams children into a darkesome corner, so
that a man can not from it be delivered without pain, sorrow, and dread? yea
the inordynate love which we bear to so many things giltye of vanity,
whereon so many cares do ryst, so many perturbations, so many languyshings,
^cares, madness, joys, dyscords, contentions, wars, treasons, wrathes,
enimities, frauds, theftes, spoils, ryottes, and prides, do sufficiently
bewray our misery and damnable estate. Furthermore, Augustine in his book
entitled De miseria mundi, does plainly treat saying: Take heed to thy self
least being wrapped in the snares of ye diuill, thou become a pray to y^ hu^ter
which ra^geth and seeks whom he may devour. For this life is fugityue and
untrusty, since it does not perform faithful dealing, no not to the lovers
thereof. Yea even from the beginning of the world it has deceived all such as
put their trust therein. And all such as have wrapped the^ selves therein, it
has beguiled. And so it has showed it self uncertain to all men, y^ it might
prove it self a liar unto all men. For behold the world which we so much
love and esteem, does pass over and ^ly away. And yet we follow it ^ing so
from us, through a blind mind of carnal cc^upis^, and cleave fast unto it
whilst it (...). So that being unable to hold it up falling, we fall with it
percompany. Yea is not this our life like unto death, since therein do abound
so many dolors, lamentations, sighs, and so great miseries? one man being
grieved with loffe cries out. Another continually bewayleth the bareness of his
ground. One lamenteth the death of his friend, and another sits sadly being
over whelmed in poverty. So y^ there is much tribulation from y^ time y^ man
comes into this world. Yea his first voice or sound does show infirmity. He
is borne an infant, and straight way cries out. He can not yet speak, and
nevertheless he is y^ Prophet of his own calamity. His tears are witness of
his misery, pain, and dread, y^ is to come. When he is grown a little, he
begins to hunger, thirst, and to be weary. To conclude, man has always
two sundry torments which (by turns) do vex him continually. The which are:
fear and sorrow. If A man be well, he fears, and if he be evil at ease he
soroweth. What is he whom the prosperity of this world has not deceived? Or
who is it y^ has not ben grieved with y^ adversity thereof? the^ behold man
what great afflictions thou do suffer in this world, which thou so much
estemest. Wherein (in very deed) there are nothing but false and deceiptful
voluptuousnes, and true (yea undoubted) calamity. No safety of mirth and
joy, but a tormentyng fear, a greedy covetousness, and a fruitless
lamentation. And who is he which can number or accoumpt all the euilles and
discommodities of this life? For to ouerpasse with scilence those euilles which
do commonly oppress all men (that is to say secret sorrows, and especial
griefs whereof all men may find them selves guilty) let a man but call to
mind what euylles he has both sustained and committed from his youth
vpwardes, let him but set before his eyes the times passed, and diligently
consider how many vain labors he has vndertake^, how often he has swet in
vain for ye love of this wretched world.

How often he has found deceyptfull issues of his most earneste trauayles,
and let him then ponder that after long troubles he has yet obtained no rest,
and he shall quickly know what accoumpt is to be made of this world.

O miserable man then what do thou, or whether go thou? whiles thou art
in this world, thou do but just and roonne in a Tyltyearde. Wherein thou
find an enemy which is to strong for thee, whom thou neither can see nor
yet eskape from him. He entyseth thee with tryflyng toyesthereby to rob and
despoyle thee of the joys of heaven.

Yea and thereby to put into thee, the very torments of hell. His lackye lies
close hidden in the way, covered with earth which is the devils concubyne and
lenunan. The enemy of mankind does behold the manners and natural
enclynacions of every man, and unto what vice they be most prone, and those he
sets before their faces, which may most aptly allure and betray their
minds. And whiles he makes them gaze at the gaynes of glystryng gold, they
never see the peril of their perdicion, but like fools being deceived with
the delights, which they see and carnally do love, they never mark how they
fall hedlong into damnacion. And because all men are void of understanding,
they perish perpetually. Wherefore if the world do please and delight thee,
beware the deceyptfulnesse thereof. Remember that as Solomon Jacob. 14.
says: Lamentacion and dolor do come in the end of joys and merymentes.
For all man's pleasantness is bitter and sour in the end. When a man
reioyseth in the world be reioyseth not in God.

But yet alas how many there be which rejoice in the world, and never rejoice in
God? To rejoice in the world, is to boast, tryumphe, and glory, in iniquity,
vanity, riches, honor, outward coomlynesse, fylthy conversation, and vain
pastimes with vnfreutefull and leuds communicacion. Which is in effect, to
purchase sorrow and lamentacion. For no man can embrace Christ and the world
both attones. Many men professing Christ, do praise him, love him, and render
thanckes unto him whiles they be in their worldly prosperity. But if
adversity light upon them they curse* and blaspheme him. Such men serve god
for profit and not for love. Unto whom the Lord God may justly say: For your
own benefit and commodity you have observed my commandments, and not
because you loved me with a pure intent. And wherefore do thou extol thy
self in vanity (O man) is not thy body (as the Preacher says) dust and
ashes? Art not thou Eccle. 10.
thy self of earth, and shall soon be resolved again into earth? Look into
the Sepulchers of the greatest Prices, and see if any other thing do there
remain but bones and dust? And all this being thus, do thou by so many
errors make have unto hell, which have been enstructed in so many paths to
heaven by Christ him self? Why is that beloved which must be forsaken, and
that neclected which may perpetually be enjoyed? These sentences and many such
like. Saint Augustine does most deuoutely propounde in his books before
named. And finally he writes in a certain Sermon saying: Attend and mark, O
miserable Soul of sinful Man, that horrible hour in which thou shall depart
from the body. Where as thou shall prefently behold the wicked ministers of
Satan, the cursed diuills, the horrible dampened spirits, and the most crewell
roaryng Lyones, ranging and hunting about for their pray, which is thy
sorrowful self. With the twynekling of an eye, the horrible places of eternal
pains shall apeare, the Chaos or confu^ed heap of darkness, the horror of
mysery, the terror and tremblyng dread of sorrow, the quaking fear of
horrible vysions, and of that most horrible mansion, where there is continual
weepinge and gnashing of teethe, gnawing of worms, howling and crying, the
lamentacions of them that mourn perpetually, and the voice of such as cry,
woe, woe, woe be unto us children of Eve. When the wretched and unhappy soul
departing out of ye body shall hear these things and such lyk^, or rather a
thousand fold worse and worse then can be expressed, when it shall behold them
and feel them, then may it sensibly understand, what exceeding trembling
dread and terror does ensue of the love and delights conceived in this
frail, unconstant, and most wretched wo^. But my beloved: do thou forecast
all these things, (...) suffer none of these admonicions to slyppe out of thy
mind. That thou may eschew and eskape eternal pain and punishment, and
atteyne unto the joys which shall endure world without end.

Amen.
A LETTER WRITTEN by I. B. unto his famyliar friend G. P. teaching remedies
against the bytternesse of Death.
WHen I remember your request made unto me at our last parting, which was, that
I should write some what unto you, either to engender in you a meditacion of
contented death, or at the least to diminish the desire of long life, I can not
but much like and commend in you that disposition, whereby it appears your
desire and mind is let not in the love of things transitory, but in knowledge,
and in that knowledge, which of all other is most perfect and meet for a wise
man: For if that be worth the learning that is necessary, and that for every
age, degree, and sex, all creatures must necessarily dye, and no man of reason
dies better, and more like a man, then he that has learned the Science
thereof. And if that knowledge be worth the learning, whereof comes certain
and great commodity, none can be compared with the Science of well dying, the
fruit whereof is comfort, and life never en^ynge.

And as this knowledge is most perfect and worthy learning, so have you taken
a very meet and convenient time for the atteyninge of it, which is youth the
flower of your age, haing in it self strength and ability to learn any
Science, and leaving time to practice that is well learned. For as none other
science profitable (being lyberall) is suddenly learned, neither is it enough to
bid a man though he be wytty, suddenly to draw a figure in Geometry, make a
proporcion by Arithmiticke, be a good sowldier, ingenier or other like, (for he
may say he lacks time, teaching, and exercise to atteyne such knowledge,)
even so is the science of dying well, to be learnid with time, meditacion, and
exercise. And who so says to a sick man not practiced herein, be content to
dye, and forgo this mortal life, may here of him again I know, what it is to
live by experience, but to dye I have not learned, and the lesson is not so
easy as you think it. Wherein if many would do, as you seem to mean, that
is, to learn to dye when they may b^st live, they should both live more
quiet, and dye better contented.

And now somewhat to satisfy your desire, and to enter into this treaty,
which I entende not to make long, I will keep this order, First to show that
unto a Christian man, Death is not to be fled, but rather to be desired, or
at the least well to be taken, no plague, but ^enefyt, no loss, but gain.
Next I will show what the lettes and causes be that make us indge otherwise.
And thirdly tell how those lettes may be removed, and our opinion somewhat
changed, to think of Death and life as they are without prejudice that men
commonly bring with them. To the heathen not knowing GOD, nor the virtue of
the life to come, the first part, that Death is not to be fled, shonnid, and
terrible, is a lesson hard, or rather vnposs^ble to be taught. For life being
good as all men think, and of it self it is, no man can willingly leave the
good, but for the better, for otherwise he shall think him self, to make
such a bargain, as the P^ete says, Glaucus made with Diomedes, and change
gold for copper. And because the heathen know not the be^r (which knowledge is
learned only in Christ's schole) (...) of their books though they wrote, many
of the contempt of Death, with fair and glorious words, could make either
them selves or their heirs with right judgment content to dye, if they might
live, to leave pres^t life which they thought good and were content with, for
an other to come, whereof their knowledge was none or doubtful and uncertain.
And therefore a Philosoper among the rest most learned, Aris^.
said, of all things dredefull most dr^adfull is Death. And the excelent
Dratour, who in health and wealth spoke Cicero.
like a whole man, and as a man learnid, persuaded other, being for a time
banished, was him self without all comfort. And when he drew toward death,
perceued he had said more then he could justify, and perform in him self.
In like case was the Emperor for wisdom so much renowned, M. Aurelius.
who approaching near to death, and speaking as he found cause by proof, and
trial, and not as he before had vaynely thought, said, he was toubled with
the fear of Death, because he knew not whether he should go, nor what the
gods immortal (for so he termid them) had determined of him, unto whom he
recommendid him self with this doubt, that if they had appointed any good of
him, they should then show it.

These three examples of the best, with other able to fill a great volume, do
well show that the heathen were not learned in this science, an^ much less
meet to be scholemaisters and teachers to them that will rightly learn it,
and therefore I intend not to use their examples, though they make a fair
muster, which when I see other men do in this argument, writing unto a
christian render, I think they do not well remember what is meet for the
argument they take in hand, and for the person to whom they write.

But as to the heathen the end of life and being, is and (for causes
aforesaid) must be dreadful, so unto a christian man it neither is nor should
seem so, unto whom death is ye beginning of life, the gate of bliss, the end
of soro^ and mortal ^reefe. Whereof he is not only informed by conjecture like
to be true, but assured by promise of him y^ can be all things saving false,
so that a scholar of Christ should rather doubt whether the Sun shine by
day, or whether he feel being awaked, then whether the promises made thereof
be assured or no.

Then if it be so that Death ends all sorrow, pain, misery, and travail, and
sets us in place of sol^ce, comfort, bliss, and quiet, and that such, as
neither has enterlacing of the contrary, nor end of it self, Who is sorye to
make this change, but he that believes not how good it is, and how well made,
or how shall we think he believes it to be good, and also true, who slyeth
from it, when it is coming toward him, or would not have it true in him
self that he believes? Let him fear Death who has not hard of Christ, to
whom Christ has promised naught, desirous neither to hear of him, to see
him, not to be with him, whom fantasy leads, vanity pleases, lust rules,
and the world blyndeth, seekinge for rest in trouble, for joy in sorrow, for
ease in pain, for assurance, where ^thinge is but slyttinge, for (...), where
nothing please the long.

But he that is a Citizen of Jerusalem, a soldier under Christ's banner, armed
with Faith, shylded with Hope, strengthened with Charity, who knows in whom
he has put his trust, and where he looks for his meede, Such (...) one is
content to use this life as his ^lgrimage, contented if it be short, not
offended if it be long, desyringe neither the one nor the other, but still
lookinge to his home, ^earing with the rest because he appoynteth his quiet
there. Unto him (because Christ is life) death can not be but gain, because he
^indeth that he seeks, and atteyneth that he loves, content to leave the
world which loved not him, or which he louid not, whose commodities if he
sought, he found nothing but either occasion to envy them he should love, or
to strive with them, that would enjoy them as well as him self, (...) be angry
with them that kept him from the atteyning the^ whom being men he should
embrace. Yea though he hat^ nor misused no man (which is hard in that cause to
^oyd) yet loving the world and the commodities thereof, he found means whereby
he was moved, to forget his iourny and the end thereof, to make his Inn his
home, to sit down before his ways end, to turn his love from the better to
the worse, from heaven to earth, from God to him self, or rather from and
against him self, to things vain, which first would make him worse then
they sound him; and afterward leave him when he began to love the^, and leave
him in that evil estate they found him not. So if the world do undoubtedly
hurt them that love it, and be but pay^ and travail to them that love it not,
because they hau^ (...) nor pleasure where they love not, then follows it,
(...) love is only to be bestowed on God, and that ^n must desire to be where
his love is, for so natu^ (...) love be true. And surely if there be in us the
(...) ^ue of god, we can not be asrayde of that ^ich brings (...) to him, nor
loathe to hear of that, without which we can not come to him. And if the were
no more benefit in Death but that he makes an end of sin, sith sin
displeases God, and ^aritie wills us to love that he loves, and (...) that
he hates, we can neither be afrayd^ nor ill content with death, which
brings us out of the occasion of sinn^, and danger thereby to dis^lease God.

And although this seem unto many hard, and unto some almost vnpossiible,
m^suring all other by their own foot^, y^ any man who may enjoy life should be
content or desirous ^o l^ue y^ same, yet is it not only aprou^ ^ost undoubted
and true by y^ teching of scriptures, which no man can deny, but also by y^
example of infinite martirs, whereof each country has had great numbers, who
having liberty to fly and thereby to live, inflamed only with the sire of
charity and love of god, were not only co^t^t to be taken, but offered the^
selves for his sake, whom they louid, and that not only men, in whom
naturally courage is, but women and children, whose weak sex and tender age
declared more plainly what true and hearty love is able to work, which as it
brought Christ down from heaven into earth, so being truly rooted in man it
is able to draw him from earth into heaven, without respect had to him self,
or any thing that is his.

And thus much spoken of the first part does now make the way open to bring
in the second, for it may be said, if there be any means to take away the
fear of Death, and diminish the desire of life, who should atteyne to the same
so soon as christian men. And since we be all of that number, how comes it
then to pass that so few are contented to dye, and many so affrayde thereof,
that neither them selves will think of it, nor willingly hear other speak of
it. To the which question, although I might in few words answer, and say
that there lacks in us that lively and perfect love of God and the life to
come, which should be in us and was in them of whom I spoke. Yet to make this
point more plain (for it is less to say all then to touch each part of
all) I find three causes especial that make men desirous to live and loathe to
dye.

1 The one is our weakness which seems to have some excuse, because nature
desires the conceruacion of it self, and abhors dissolucion which both
takes away our being, and also brings with it great grief and pains, which
men seeing in other and flying in them self, fear Death, whose servants and
messengers they are.

2 The second cause is, either the lack or the small quantity of faith in us,
whereby we believe not, or fayntly believe the marvelous promises of
incomparable bliss promised by GOD unto his faithful, after this transitory
and present life.

3 But the greatest cause is the third, which is a love and sweetness
conceived of this life, the goods and commodyties of the same, wherewith who so
is possessed, it can not be avoided, but unto him the very remembrance of death
which takes from him that he loves, must be sower and bitter, as the
scripture says. To say somewhat to these three things which makes life sweet
and death sower, is the third part of my matter, which I promised to entreat
of.

And for the first, which is a natural weakness inge^dering of it self the
fear of death, we can not say it has no power in us mortal men, since Christ
our patron being more tha^ man confessed to have some feeling of it in him
self. But if we consider yt he was weak to make us strong, who gave the onset,
and made the conquest of death and weakness, and that not for him self, but for
us, and in our nature, saying afterward to us, be bold and fear not, I have
made a conquest of the world, And y^ he has by taking on him our nature,
meruelously joined and incorporated us unto him, so that by grace and
participacio^ y^ is true in us, which by perfection of nature was true in him,
the^ find we that this weakness remains not as before in his force, but is
enforced and cou^teruayled by a strength given us besides our selves, which
because we should firmly believe, not to be imagined or only in words, but
true and in deeds, God has showed it by the example of thousands of his
martirs, not flying as before is said, but desiring death, not fearing but
conte^ning it, triumphing in torment, co^quering in weakness, not saying, sad
and heavy is mine heart until death be past, but I desire to be in the feeling
to begin to live, sweet is the torture, cold is the fire, dull is the axe, for
what is there in death dreadful unto a faithful and christian man, is it the
dissolucion of the body? that a christian man desires? who is able to say I
long to be dissolved: is it that death brings an end of life and being
hear? that is not much to him that knows he has an other life to come, in
comparison of which this is no life but death, no joy but sorrow, no ease but
travail, no quiet but misery. So that either there is in dead very small and
weak faith in us to believe gods promises infallibly made to all his. Or if we
do assuredly believe the^, the greatest fear in that behalf is past, for he
that loses his life temporal, fyndeth eternal, goes from labor to rest,
from ye sea into the haven, from weakness to strength, from sickness to health,
from death to life, from sin to justice, from sorrow, heuines, and pain, to
the place where there is no grief nor sighinge, those former parts are then
past. Let the heathen fear to dye, who may truly say, I know not whether I
go, nor what is ordained for me, to what end the gods have created me,
whether it be good or no, who are borne in sin, and not newborn in holiness,
who have neither teaching or knowledge of life, neither promis of the same. But
a christian man being taught y^ death is the enter to life, that he is ordained
to live with Christ, created to be partaker of his glory, regenerat and
sanctified by him with promis of bliss inestimable, if he after all this
return to the same love of life and fear of death y^ is in ye gentil, what
does he then else, but practice to be come a gentil and heathen again, selling
away his enherita^ce for less then a mess of potage, and renou^cing his
privilege whereunto he is singularly and especially called.

But as we have said before, weakness may be a great cause to make a man fear
death, and lack of belief a greater, but yet are they not ye greatest, for
perfect love overcomes weakness increases and reuiueth faith, where love is
whole and sound, the rest is soon recovered, if it be lost, or increased if
it be decated. But if love be either divided between god and this world and
life present, or wholly translated from god unto things tra^sitory, How should
a man be content to part from y^ he loves, and seek that he cares not for,
sith it is so true, saying, yt where the man loves, he lives, and impossible
is it, that who so is delited here and possessed with the love of this life,
should willingly hear of death, which can only be welcome to them, that
thereby desire to be with Christ, whom they love better then themselves or this
life, and so can be content to leave ye good for ye better, their well-beloved
for the best beloved, or y^ they esteem light they entirely and tenderly love:
For if it be asked what is the thing of such force y^ is able to make a man
content to forsake his goods, his living, him self and his life if we will
answer truly and in few words, we must say it is love and nothing else,
which where so ever it be fa^ed ma keth al other things seem nothing in
comparison of yt it lyketh.

And herein to use some examples, it was none other thing ye made the
Philosopher cast himself into the burning fire of Aetna, nor the Romain
getleman-on horse back to leap in where y^ earth gaped, ye young man after y^
reading of Platoes book, to break his neck, So many captains and soldiers
wyllingly and wittingly to go to their death, but love: They louid something
better then life, the wysest their country and friends whom they would
preserve, the other fame, and as they called it immortality, the lightest vain
estimacion and glory, but every one somewhat wherewith they were led.

Since the^ love is of such force, as y^ same is able to bereue a man not only
of his goods and treasure, but also of his life and that by his own will and
consent, the right way to learn co^tentidly to receive death when god sends
it, is to learn to employ well and fasten our love where it should be and is
due, that is upon god, and the life to come, loving that only for it self,
and other things so much and so far, as we neither change nor remove y^ out
of his place, which lesson if it be not only believed but practiced, makes the
life godly and comfortable, and ye death easy. And who so ever marieth him to
the love of the world, following y^ desires thereof, and making the desires of
it his delight, yt man may speak boldly of death until it come. But when he
shall stand upon his guard to receue ye assault, he must and will undoubtedly
shrink and show him self a weak soldier, lacking ye armor yt should the^
defend him, for if faith his buckler bid him be strong, and thinck upon ye
conquest, yt Christ his captain has made, and upon yt triumph y^ is provided
for him, his own heart and conscience, which is near him than his armor, will
say, all yt is provided for such as bear their love and true heart to their
only captain, whom they promised to serve, for such as before in ye time of
their service did resist his enemy and his atte^ptes, and not for such as
yielded themselves prisoners unto him, content to be in his Camp, and to fight
under his banner. His sword which is the word of God, being not well handeled
of him before, nor much occupied, will then agree ill with his hand, and he for
lack of exercise, not able to give a strong blow therewith, his curates of
charity so thin, that each dart and arrow shall perce it, his helm of hope
vnlyned, neither well fitting to his head, nor able to keep of the force of ye
byll. Is it possible think ye y^ a soldier thus armed, and besides this not
exercised in feats of war, should withstand a mighty, strong practiced and
well armed man? no verily. He will either run away, if the ground serve him or
with shame be taken prisoner and captine.

When I consider the manner of dying of such as were in gods favor, of whom we
read in the Scriptures old and new and compare our selves with the^, how
willing, ready, and glad they were to leave this life, how loath, backwarde,
and sorry, we are for the greater part to do the same, I marvel we should be
called one man's children, that are so unlike in condition.

Moses being told he should no longer live, and therefore to provide his
successor did we his own hands order and appoint Joshua without co^playnt,
sorrow, or token of grief, providing for the^ yt should. live, as it were
nothing thinking on him self.

Isaac bid his son go hunt, provide and get him meat, that he might bless
him before he dyed. The lycke co^tentacio^ appeared in Jacob, Tobias, David,
and sundry other whom we find not only never to have shunned death, but
co^tentedly to have received it. The love they bare unto God and his will in
their life, kept the^ from disorderid love of the world, and from the common
sins and vices, which men for worldly things commit, and being not troubled
with conscience and remorce thereof, saw no cause to shun and to fear death.
And as this love of god, and his will, increased in the new testament, where the
holy ghost, the spirit of love, was and is more ple^tiously powered in to y^
hearts of ye right beleui^g. So ye love of life decresed, and the desire of
death increased in y^ best professors thereof, the appostles and martirs
infinite, not only contented to leave this life, but also desir eddeath. who
receuig ye faith and gospel, and beig taught thereby to co^fornie the^ selves to
y^ life and image of Christ, did with perfect faith ple^tious charity, and full
hope co^me^d the^ selves to ye will of God, and ye expectation of the life to
come, which they knew was provided for them y^ loves God, neither is there any
other cause why we dye not like the^, but because we live not like them, we
fear death because we live not well, some more and some less, according as ye
order of our lives has been, and who so says yt the manner of death is a
touchstone to way the life, is not much deceived, I will not say but many men
may dye well yt lives ill, for mercy is above judgment, but none content to
dye, but he yt by death looks to be with Christ, which is he yt by his life
shows that he knows and loves Christ, without which love y^ more faith at
yt time, the less comfort. For faith teaches Gods mercy, and his justice, and
if justice be all against us, either faith ingendreth in us sorrow of such a
life, and so repentance which is good, and an entry toward life, or if it
engender not an earnest repentance, it brings nothing to comfort, ease, and
releue us, but all contrary.

And therefore he yt will live in continual meditation of death, which is y^ way
to make him a familier, and so no dreadful gest, nor stranger, must live in
love, I mean y^ love of vprightnes, honesty, cleanesse, justice, and
integrity, doing good where he can, and having intent to hurt none, getting
uprightly to su^in himself and his, and of that remains departing liberally
to the poor as he sees cause, and is able, to such a man y^ remembrance of
death ca^ not be unpleasant, for it shall neither take him unprovided, nether
beriue him of any thing wherewith he is disorderly in love. Such a man living
co^te^tedly in y^ place wherein he is called, and traueling carefully to fill and
satisfy the same, when death approaches, does meekly say to God with Christ, I
have done ye work thou sentest me to do. And albeit there has been much
weakness and many infirmities in his travel and accomplishing that work he
was sent to do, yet with a great indifferency, he shall be able to use ye
words of ye virtuous and learned Bishop, neither have I lived so among you that
I should be ashamed to live, neither do I fear to die, because we have a good
Lord and master. The man so living, and so thinking is only happy, neither
troubled with inordinate desire of high estate, which he takes but for a
place to travail for many, neither affrayde to be in meaner then he is,
knowing that where so ever God places him he has his work to do, wherewith
he may please him, ever quiet, content to dye, and not unwilling to live.

But here some man may say, although he be not disordridly desirous of life,
yet can he well be co^te^t to live, though not for him self, or for his own
sake, yet for others, and therein wishes nothing ungodly, but dece^tly to keep
ye place whereunto he is called, which he can fill, if not better, yet as well as
an other man, to help such as need him, to bring up his children, to see the^
disposed, and finally to bestow ye benifits y^ God has lent unto him, he y^
makes this objection, and lies not on him self, is not of y^ worst sort, nor
much to be misliked, unto who^ nevertheless it must be answered, if his desire
be to live for others, who by him may be y^ better, he must consider y^ well
doing is not all his own, whereof though man be y^ minister, God is the giver,
and who will dispose him self to do many good, and none hurt, and so continue
God knows, man knows not, but this man knows, y^ without gods giving he
does it not, and well knows he also, y^ happy had been Salomo^ if he had been
taken in his youth, and well doing, the like may ye read of many, and say by
experience of some, and whither he would be one of them by long life he knows
not, if there were no danger, it should not have been written, he y^ stands,
let him take heed y^ he fall not, if he think there were no danger in him self,
the^ is he proud, and like to be one of them that would fall, if he doubt, then
is it wisdom to put him self to him that knows. And since he knows and is
sure that after death no sin is done, better is the choice to go with safety
as Gods servant when God wills, then in continuance to put that in a
hazard, which if it go amiss, at the end can not be recovered, nor the
loss redubled. Deep in pain lie many, who by long life fell into sin, and
thereby into their damnation, who had then dyed in their youth, had lived with
Christ, and how much they bewail their long life, and the oceas^o^ of their
pai^, no tongue can tell, nor heart think. But to return to the matter, if he
say he would do many good in long time, and live according to his place and
calling, let him show that in the time he has given him, and if (in so doing)
he be taken, since he may say to God, I have done the work thou sentest me to
do, and when God calls him away, he knows there is no more appointed for
him to do, he knows also there is no more cause for him to live, because
desire of doing good was the only cause why he would live. His children are Gods
more then his, who leaves not the seed of the just, who calls him self the
father of Orphans, and judge of Widows, whose blessyng if they have, they shall
prosper, though they lack a mortal father. And if they lack that, much sorrow
and small comfort should the father have, to see that he could not amend, for
each good father neither makes, nor leaves a good child. And yet does not
such a man lack wife and friends to whom he may commit the care of children,
and if his friends will do much for them at his request and recommendation,
why should he mistrust Gods pro^uydence, help and dyrection, if he commend
them unto him? By whom him self lived, wife and friends, wit, strength, goods,
and revenue with other like, which to enjoy men desire to live, good gifts are
to be taken thankfully at the giuers hands, and so long to be kept as may
stand with the giuers will, and good contentation, but as no civil gift
delivered upon condition may courteously be required beyond and against the
gyuers mind, although he be our equal, or inferior, so Gods gifts who owes
no man ought, and gives all without cause, have much more this condition to be
rendered at his call, freely and willingly as they were, delivered, or rather
lent, which gifts of his as love tokens, should not serve to make us wish
long to be from him, for then is his love ill recompensed, but should make us
desire to be with him, and to see him, of whom we have received them.

As the Prince, who sends to his servant being in a foreign country far
from him, Jewels precious in token of remembrance, does thereby move a kind and
loving servant the sooner to return to y^ presence of so good and mindful a
Lord, especially if y^ presence of his said Lord shall be infinitely more worth to
him then all his former tokens, for although it be not blame worthy for any
man to use Gods gifts, and to delight in the^, yet if he love ye gifts, and
forget ye giver, he is very unkind and if he love both ye gifts, and the giver,
unless y^ one love so far surmount the other, that in comparison of ye
greater, the less be drowned, and appear nothing, that love is disordered,
taking good for the best, and resting where it should begin, I leave here
unsaid, that health and strength of body may impair by sickness, wife be
lost by death, and friends turn to enimyes, goods and revenues casual, such
as may decay, or without desert be taken away to ye occasion of great heaviness
and sorrow, of al which who so makes otherwise his account is far deceived,
so that to leave them whole untouched of any mishap before rehearsed, and many
other that may chance, is not lost but gain. This have you made me in an
argument, handeled by many men excelent in virtue, learning, and wit, put my
pen to the book, that is to say to paynte after Apelles, and grave after
Lysippus, which wise Arti^cers ever shunned to do. But because you said that
circumstances might commend the matter, and the love of the writer move you the
more attentively to read, although I have not sati^ed my self in the argument,
yet have I gone about to satis^e your affection. Wherein as love has caused me
to do against my will, so must the same move you to ^eare withal that is to
little, or to much, and so amiss, which is all I fear. And therefore do
recommend the same to be corrected by men of better judgment, and your self
(...) the tuition of the almighty.

FINIS.

