HOLD FAST, A Sermon Preached at PAVLS Cross upon Sunday being the XXXI. of
October, Anno Domini 1624. By JOHN GEE, Master of Arts, late of EXON College
in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. and I. N. for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the great South door of Paul's. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR ROBERT NANTON, Knight, Master of his Majesty's
Court of Wards and Liueries, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
SOme in their Dedicatories employ their Pen, not so much to crave Patronage,
as to buy and purchase it by large (and happily deserved) commendation of those
whose names and favor they implore. How plentiful matter in this kind I might
be furnished withal, they well know that are able to balance your piety,
learning, and othervertues. But as Cato resolved to have a mean Tomb, or none
at al, that it might rather be asked, why he had no Monument, then why a
sumptuous: so in my speaking to and of your worthy self, rather would I be
asked of many, why I said so little, the^ of any one, why so much. I therefore
here address my self to your Honor, by approach to that side only which
lies most conspicuous and opportune for my harbor, and that is the
contemplation of you as you are by his Majesty appointed the worthy Head, and
Master of that honorable Court, erected for the protection of those, who by
reason of Nonage, are unable to support themselves against injury. In which
employment, out of your religious and virtuous resolutions, the world knows you
most ready to do Justice, and yield Protection, as by way of Judicature unto
Orphans, so also in a larger extent by way of favor and countenance to others
that need the same, especially in cause of Religion.

My poor self, though not pleading either Wardable Tenure, or Infancy of
years, yet in the general as a Churchman, and in particular, as devoted to do
all the service I may for the maintenance of Religion established, presume to
cast my self as a Ward into your tuition. First, Ecclesia semper est pupilla.
the Church by the Civil and Canon Laws, is said to remain in perpetual
pupillage, and justly claims succor and defense from men in high place, as
unable to relieve it self against either those Corrupters that will thrust in
with strange fire, to pollute the Altar; or those Spoilers, that would cut
short the skirts of Aarons clothing. Then also for my personal case in regard
of my disabilities to undertake so high a task, I must needs acknowledge my
self to be a weak Infant, Puer sum, non possum loqui; Ierem. 1.4.
and the more liable to wrong, because encompassed with adversaries exasperated
against the Truth, and me for speaking Truth. Ezck. 2.6.
Briars and thorns are with me, and I dwell amongst Scorpions, whose stings
are the sharper bent against my breast, because I have indeauored to give
Antidotes unto the Kings liege people, for their defense against such balefull
poison, whereof my self have formerly had a taste. Nor am I more by mine own
danger driven, then by your goodness drawn to cast mine unworthy self, and
these my poor Labors into the bosom of your Protection. Though it be perhaps
none of my least faults, that without your Honors leave I have intruded upon
your Patronage, yet I cannot be so mistrustfull in so good a cause, as to
fear your either repulse, or offense.

In this good hope I crave your honorable Pardon and Favor, always praying
God, whose cause I defend, whose truth you advance, to prosper your Honor in
all your laudable and religious endeavors.

London, Nouemb. the 11, 1624. Your Honors bounden at service to be commanded,
JOHN GEE.

HOLD FAST.
REVEL. 3.11. Behold, I come quickly, hold fast that thou have, that no man
take thy Crown.


AS John the Baptist, so much more John the Evangelist was a burning and a
shining Lamp: John 13.23.
He was the Disciple whom Jesus loved, he leaned on his Lords breast, e sinu
Domini imbiberat Mysteria, Aug. in Ioh.
from out of the bosom of his Master he drank deep of the fountain of
heavenly wisdom.

He wrote his Revelations in the latter end of his deep age; and (as may
seem by the profit thence unto Gods Church) was to that end in special
manner, and miraculously preserved; as if the lamp of his life could not be
put out, till he had kindled all the lamps of his Writings, to give light to
the Sanctuary of God upon earth. The tempest of violent death could not dash
out the candle of his mortality. Fasciculus Temporum. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib.
13 cap. 18. and 20.
For he being under Traian put into a vessel of scalding oil, yet was not
completely martyred. And under Domitian banished into Patmos, one of the
Islands called Cyclades, or Sporades, lying in the West part of Asia the less,
and by the Aegean Sea; there his life in extreme age was not consumed amongst
the duresses and distresses of that banishment, till he had finished his
course, and wrote to the neighboring Churches the last Omega of the
Scriptures. Christ who present with him in body loved him; no less loved him
being absent. And therefore, as he appeared to Abraham in the Mount, Gene.
22.12. Gene. 28.11. Exodus 3.2. Ierem. 38.6. Daniel 2. Acts 10.6.
to Jacob in the Field, to Moses in Midian, to Jeremiah in the Dungeon, to
Daniel in Babylon, and to Peter in the house of Simon: So in good time he does
appear to his beloved John in this desert Isle, and comfort him in his exile,
with sweet voices, heavenly visions, and most glorious Reuclations.

His first Vision contained in the three first chapters of this Book, is of
seven golden Candlestickes, and seven Stars, representing seven famous
Churches, and their Angels or Bishops in Asia minor, to which he was directed
to write so many several Epistles. At the seventh verse of this Chapter begins
the Epistle to the Angel of Philadelphia, a City of Mysia, and one of the
Gentile Churches, to whom he chose rather to write, then to the Churches in
Judea, to signify, that now the kingdom of God was come to the Gentiles, the
partition wall broken down, Romans 3.
the (...) or Arc of the Covenant opened, the Gentiles were admitted and
adopted into the fellowship of Gods people: yet so, as under the several
estates of those seven Churches, Paraeus. Bullinger. Gorran.
(according to the opinion of learned Expositors) the future estate of other
Churches is deciphered, and the doctrine therein contained, so nearly
concerns succeeding times, that the conclusion of every Epistle has this
general Memento, Let him that has an care hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches.

In the first part of the Predictions and Instructions given to this the sixth
in order of those Churches, the Church of Philadelphia, he commends the
patience of the Angel or Bishop there, threatens his enemies, and assures him
of aid and affistance.

In the latter part, he first exhorts him to constancy, then recounts the
rewards of Conquerours.

He exhorts him to constancy in the words of my Text, Behold I come quickly,
hold fast that thou have, that no man take thy crown.

He recounts the rewards of conquerors in the words immediately following my
Text: Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out etc.

Where is Praelium and Proemium, a holy war, and a rich reward. A combat to
be undergone by him that will win, or keep his Crown.

The former verse, whereof I have made choice, is the Christian man's Castle,
not unlike the Tower of David, A thousand Shields hang therein, and all the
Targets of the strong men.

The force of the words lies, 1 Exhortation
first in an Exhortation, which is as the middle and center of the verse, Hold
fast that thou have; and about it these two Motives twine like the Serpents
about Mercuries Rod: 2 Motives.
First a Promise by way of Prediction, Behold I come shortly. Secondly, a
Monition by way of Caution, That no man take thy Crown. Both these are sacred
treasures laid up in the Arc.

The first, The pot of Manna, sweet, nourishing, and comfortable, Behold, I
come quickly.

The second is the Rod of Aaron, That no man take thy Crown.

The first of these entertained in us by Hope.

The second kept safe by Fear.

The Hope of future good and happiness, unto his Spouse the Church this most
welcome voice, Behold I come quickly.

The Fear and awful reverence, working out of salvation with fear and
trembling, when our Master, Prophet and King does instruct and move us saying
to every faithful Soul, take heed, That no man take thy Crown.

In the first we behold the Son of God as most amiable and comfortable,
speciosus prae filijs hominum, fairer then the sons of men, and with Peter we
say Quo ibimus, whither shall we go but to thee, for thou have the words of
eternal life; Behold, I that am the way, the truth and the life, do come
quickly.

In the second we view him as appearing in a bright consuming sire, a two-edged
sword coming from his mouth, with a Rod of iron in his hand, with a voice full
of terror and amazement, threatening, least another take thy Crown.

In the first he appears as in the gentle wind.

In the second he shows himself as in the thunder?

In the first the voice of Christ is as a sweet Cimball.

In the second like the sound of many waters.

The first is a motive of Comfort, promising aid and assistance.

The second of Terror, threatening a degradation for want of perseverance.

In the hand of this good Samaritan is soft Oil, and sharp Wine or vinegar. A
comfortatiue and a corrasiue. Such is his method of curing, if by fair
promises he cannot persuade; his manner is by threatenings to compel. I begin,
and intend most to insist on the maine branch of my text, the matter
principally intended, encompassed, and walled in (as it were) with the other
parts, the Exhortation, Hold fast that thou have; where two points readily
offer themselves to be considered.

Actus and Obiectum.
1 Actus a performance, Hold fast. 2 Obiectum, the Object, the matter or thing
possessed, that which thou have.
Loose no opportunity but Hold; not slightly or perfunctorily, but firm and
fast; thou have begun well, even so persevere, holding that which thou have.

1 Hold fast.] Strong was the poison of Heretics, and sharp the sword of
Tyrants, in this age of the Primitive Church: like brethren in evil, they were
leagued and linkt in conspiracy against the Lord and his anointed, against
Christ and his Disciples. The one sort being Satan's Advocates, the other his
Assasines; the one beseiging the holy Jerusalem without the walls by
hostility; the other undermining her within the walls by Conspiracy and
Treason. Heretics like the Locusts with Scorpion-like tails, did not only
hurt wandering and wavering Christians, with the deadly sting of their
contagious errors; but also endangered many of them who had the seal of God
on their forheads. Tyrants like the great red Dragon with seven heads and ten
horns, never ceased to persecute the Spouse of Christ, and to make war with
her seed: So that by the Impostures of Heretics and Cruelty of Tyrants,
some Christians were drawn to leave their Hold and fall back from the Truth.
Against such cowardly Combattants, these enemies of the Gospel, that thus ran
away from the banner of Christ, this good Angel of Philadelphia, had
hitherunto opposed himself. Now because he should not sink in the midst of
his conflict; our Savior incourageth him and his Church with this Exhortation,
saying, Hold that thou have. As if he should have said, thou have begun in the
Spirit, end not in the Flesh; as yet thou bear the Image of God, then
fashion not thy self according to the World; thou art yet in the Light,
delight not then in the works of Darkness; thine Alpha has been sincerity,
then let not thine Omega be seusualitie: without perseverance the best
Professor is but as a branch cut off from the Vine, he can bring forth no
fruit, a painted Tomb full of rotten bones, a fruitless Fig Tree, with goodly
blossoms. Very profitable therefore and effectual is this Act or Performance,
Hold fast.

Constancy and Perseverance are in the Scriptures principally set forth by
four Metaphors, Ploughing, Running, Standing, and Holding. The first two
signify Action and Motion; the other Quiet and Immutability.

For the first of the four, our Savior says, No man that puts his hand to
the Plough and looks back, is apt to the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke 9.62.

For the second, Saint Paul says, So run that ye may obtain. 1 Cor. 9.

For the third, the same Apostle says, Stand therefore and your loins girded
about with verity. Ephesians. 6.14.

For the fourth, my Text says, Hold that thou have, that is to say; persevere
in faith and righteousness, and use thy function without fear.

Holding is a natural action and gesture of the hand and other members, which
not only men of understanding by reason, but even babes and sucklings do use by
instinct; nay all living creatures, yea and some stupid bodies also, though
they have not this architect organ of the hand, yet have they the reach and
force of appetite, which as it carries them by way of desire to those objects
which are natural and convenient for them; so when they attain such objects,
they have also the faculty of natural retention or Holding, which by instinct
without discourse, teaches them to continue the fruition of that which is
acceptable and profitable unto them. Hence in nature we see between some
sympathising bodies, not only a concourse when they approach, but also an
adhesion when they mutually touch. So the Iron and Lodestone coveting one
another, do upon touch cleave together and fastly hold that mutually which
they have.

Shall not Grace be as effectual and powerful as Nature, to run to and to
cleave to that which is ordained for spiritual food and establishment? Shall
Understanding and Knowledge in us be more dull, and less active then stupid
instinct in senseless bodies? If Lapis inanimatus a dead stone, can hold that
which it desires and enjoys. Shall not much more we that are Viui Lapides
(as Peter calls us) the living stones of Gods spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.9.
cleave fast to our foundation being cemented vinculospiritus, by the bond of
the spirit? Hold then firm and fast that which thou have. Do not sell thy
spiritual birthright and possession for worldly portion with profane Esau;
do not loose them by negligence and disuse, like those that have Charters or
privileges granted to them, but never bestirre themselves to use them, nay
perhaps not to look into them, like him that his his talent in the ground; do
not forfeit them for want of Rent and service paiable and due to our great
Landlord, who will say of his planted Vineyard, Expectani vuas sedecce
labruscas, I looked for grapes but behold wild grapes. Esaias. 5.
Isa. 5. Forsake not thy first love like an Harlot; desist not as Demas, make
not only a fair show as Saul and Judas, but with Paul persevere and continue
constant unto the end, though thou bear in thy body the marks of the Lord
Jesus. Gal. 6.17.

It is obseruable that in all the holy Spirits letters, sent to those seven
Churches in the second and third Chapters of this book, one of which is this
to the Angel of Philadelphia, Corona nondatur nisi legitime certanti. Tim.
all the promises run to perseuerers. Vincenti dabitur, to him that
overcomes shall it be given; to him that holds and holds fast. Nec
paranti ad praelium nec pugnanti ad sanguinem, multo minus tergiversenti ad
peccatum, sed vincenti ad victoria^. Not to him that prepares to fight, nor to
him that resists for a time, much less to him that shows his back in
cowardice, but to him that ouercomes to conquest is the reward promised.

And thus having viewed and considered in general the Act and manner of
Holding, Obiectu^ quod.
Hold fast: we will now view the special Object or matter about which it is
to be employed. It is here expressed Notanter et innuendo, by pointing to it,
quod habes, That which thou have. And so these words are a kind of Index or
Asterisk to direct us by a sign or mark to a thing thereby signified.

This Monitory does not so much call or awake us to look abroad, as to search
and pry narrowly at home, to reflect upon our selves with a Nosce teipsum;
view, and search, and judge thy self and thine own, non alios, non aliena,
not other men, not the affairs of other men. See what thou have of heavenly
and spiritual possessions, and be sure that thou get a perpetuity in them.

This watchword of remembrance quod habes, is like the Gnomon in the Dial of
Ahaz, which will tell how far the Sun is gone back, even to a Degree: By
examining what spiritual benefits and graces we have received, what light has
shined upon us, what influence of heavenly blessings we have formerly felt: we
shall find whether our shining Lamps have decayed in light by clowdie
eclipse, or started back from their regular motion by undue retrogradation,
what hold we have lost of that heavenly inheritance which we have formerly
laid claim unto. The style and phrase of exhortation is very emphaticall to
this purpose used by the Apostle, Hebr. 2.1.
Heb. 2.1. (...), Ne dilabamur, which Stephen translates by way of exposition,
Ne dilabatur nobis and effluat illa salus, let not the words of salvation slip
and runn out from us, as water out of leaking vessels. The graces of God in
Christ, are called Waters flowing unto life everlasting, John 4.14. Now we
know that the nature of water is to be fluid and passable, it easily slippeth
away, unless the vessel be very stanch wherein it is contained: Even so is
it with our spiritual possession, it slideth from us, and is easily lost,
unless we be very vigilant and careful.

But to come yet nearer to this Quod habes. As in the valewing of a man's
riches, it is not enough to avouch in gross, that he has great store,
unless some special quantities or kinds be particularized and recited, as by
Inuentory: So here we cannot sufficiently either value other Gods children, or
try our selves whether or no we be bankerupts in grace, unless we know of
what sort this heavenly treasure is, which is thus to be held, where had,
where sought, and where not yet attained.

The total of these precious Jewels may be reduced to two heads: 1 Veritas,
Truth of Christian doctrine. 2 Probitas, Sincerity of righteousness.


The former of these Theoreticall, the other Practical.

1 The former containing the form of wholesome doctrine without corruption.

2 The latter, the sincerity of Sanctity, Obedience, Charity, and such like,
in honest conversation, without all hypocrisy or dissimulation.

1 In the first kind, some hold not that which they had, but fall away by
Heresy, Error and Superstition, through the corruption of their
understanding, extinguishing or darkening the light of saving knowledge. Of
this number the Church has been troubled withal in all ages, Apostates,
superstitious Idolaters, Heretics, maintainers of the fancies and traditions
of men, opposite to the truth of God. Of this sort were the Pharisees in the
Jewish Church, the Arrians, Macedonians, Marcionites, Manichees, Eutichians,
Pelagians, and others in the Christian Church.

2 In the other kind, some hold not that which they had, but fall away by the
corruptions of their will and affections, leaving the parts of piety toward
God, righteousness toward men, 2. Tim. 3.
being lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, professing outwardly
godliness, but denying inwardly the power thereof. Of this sort are our
Metaphorical Idolaters, that worship the wedge of gold, and make it their god
by cleaning thereto through insatiable covetousness; cruel oppressors of the
poor, that grind the faces of the needle, denying relief to Christ in his
poor members, who apply only to their purse, Tene quod habes; luxurious men,
that make their belly their god, whose end is their shame.

Both sorts of these having been enlightened with the knowledge of Gods Truth,
and in some measure (at least in outward performance) having walked in the
paths of common honesty, laudable virtues, yea and Christian obedience; yet
have forsaken this straight path; they have gone in the way of Cain, and have
been seduced in the wages of Balaam for reward, and perverted in the
gainesaying of Core. The whole Epistle of Jude, and the second Epistle of Peter
are fit Comments to express the Character of these crooked degenerating
Christians.

In considering this Proposition, as it is entire in it self, Tene quod habes,
Hold that thou have, we view the large extension of it, in respect of those to
whom it is spoken, to wit, to all Persons, and Times.

1 It concerns all persons, either 1 Individual, every singular Christian. 2
Collectiue, or Christian Churches.


2 This Precept is spoken to all, Times.
both persons and Churches in all Times, during the warfare of this world;
whether in time of new plantation of the Church, or ancient continuance; in the
Summer of flourishing peace, or the Winter of bitter persecution; in the Spring
of our jolitie, when we should sacrifice our tender years unto the Almighty,
or in the declining of our drooping age, when we expect like ripe shcaues to be
brought into Gods barn; in the days of our youth, when we are to remember
our Creator, by holding our selves fast unto him; or in our decrepid old age,
when the keepers of the house tremble, Eccles. 12.3.
and the strong men bow themselves, and the grinders cease, and those that
look out of the windows be darkened: that is, per totum vitae curriculum,
during our whole race and pilgrimage in the Mesech of this world.

As for the Persons whom it concerns; Persons.
first, Individually the Spirit stands at the door, and knocketha t the
heart of every Christian, ringing this watchword in his ear, Tene quod habes,
Hold fast that which thou have gotten. None so great a proficient in Christ's
School, but needs this lesson to be inculcated to him: none so raw a beginner
to whom this instruction can be unseasonable. Thou that art but a tender Babe
in Christ, feed on the sincere milk of the Gospel; and to that end forsake
not vina vbera veteris and noui Testamenti, Bern.
the two Pappes of the Old and New Testament; be not beaten off from sucking
spiritual nourishment from them. Thou that art grown up a strong man in
Christ, and have sensus exercitatos to discern between good and evil, light
and darkness; thou that can instruct others in the way of truth and
godliness, 2 Timothy 1.14.
Hold fast thy Depositum, Lest when thou preachest to others, thy self become
a castaway. And well it is by Saint Paul called the Depositum of pledge, a
thing committed unto us in trust. For as by the law of nature, read depositum,
does bind every such fiduciary, not to use the pledge as his own proper goods,
but to be accountable for it, and restore it when it shall be called for;
otherwise is guilty of injustice, and violating of the dictamen rationis, the
principles of natural reason: So here for the treasure of Gods truth committed
to our hands, we must acknowledge our selves to be but depositarij, trusted as
pledge-keepers, and not as proprietarij, Lords and masters of it: For we are to
give account thereof in illo die, in that great day of general Audit, when
every one of us shall be called to a reckoning how he has discharged his trust.

Wherefore for the better endeering this possession; first remember how thou
have received it. Secondly, foresee the dangerous means which draw thee from
it.

The first is, Vnde habes, from whence thou have it.

The second, Quomodo non tenes, by what means thou do lose it.

First, whence have it thou?

1 By Baptism, whereby thou have put on Christ, Galat. 3.27. whereby thou art
buried with Christ, whereby planted together to the likeness of his death.
Romans 6.4.

2 By the Preaching of the word. When thou were but a young twig, thou wast
ingrafted by Baptism unto Jesus Christ; now after thou art grown to be a
stronger branch, thy root is watered by Gods Planters, whose instructions
distill upon thee as the rain, whose doctrine does drop as the dew, or as the
small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass. Deuteronomy.
32. Paul planting, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
Apollo watering, God giving the increase; who affords the Sunshine of his
grace for the helping thy growth and fertility, and vouchsafes in patience to
expect thy fruit these diverse years, pruning thy boughs with the rod of
chastisement and affliction; nay, descending yet further, to dig and dung the
hungry soil about thee: but if after all this planting, watering, pruning,
fatning, thou shall remain still barren, and cumber the ground, even to the
hindering of other plants from thriuing, what can thou expect, but that the
axe or hatchet of Gods judgment should stub thee up by the roots, and thou be
cast into unquenchable fire?

Secondly, the manifold dangerous means of loosing our Hold by, may be reduced
unto these three, Rapto, Furto, Dolo.

The first is, violence of Robbery, when as by strong hand invasion is made
upon us, to quit and forsake true Religion for fear of death and persecution.
So in the Primitive Church, some by the violent torments of raging persecutions
were through humane infirmity driven to let go their Hold, being not able to
resist ad sanguinem, Cyprian.
unto blood. Whereupon some did temporise, conforming themselves to some
outward actions of Idolatry; others delivered up the Books of holy Scripture to
the Pagan persecutors, who thence were called, Traditores. These (alas) did
humanu^ pati, show themselves to be but men, not being able to keep upright
the ship from wrack in such violent and tempestuous storms.

The second means of dispossessing us of our heavenly treasure, 2 Furto.
is Furto, by Stealth; that is, when either the cares or pleasures of this life,
fullness, plenty, peace, politic complying with others, conforming our selves
to our neighbors or companions, do seduce us to embrace this present world,
and to tread Gods truth under our feet: when we permit by conniuence and
sleepiness, the tares of corruptions to be sown amongst the wheat Gods word
and truth: that is, when (...), the wicked one steals away the good seed out
of our hearts, Math. 13.
and scatters instead of it the banefull and poisonous seeds of corruption,
both in doctrine and manners. For so by Gods judgment it commonly comes to
pass, that degeneration in the one, begets a corruption in the other: where no
due care is of preserving the truth of God in sincerity of Religion; there God
suffers one sin to become the punishment of another, by consequent
lewdness and impuritie of life, which then and there has greatest dominion,
where the Gospel is bereft of free passage, where corrupt superstition and
dotages have thrust out of the throne true Christianity, where the weed, and
rust, and canker of late invented and obtruded novelties have ouergrowne and
almost eaten out the pure gold of Apostolical Doctrine. And as this is most
just; so is it in it self in natural reason most probable. We see by
experience, that he who has held a coard with both hands, if he let go the
hold with one, he is the less able to hold fast with the other. The Anchor of
our hope is pitched, not below in the bottom of the Sea, but above in the
highest heavens: with both hands we hold fast this Cable; the one sticking
close unto God, by holding to his truth in Religion, the other by remaining
constant in purity of conversation. If we do but let slack one of these our
hands; though the Angel of God, yea God himself should cry loud unto us,
Tene quod habes, yet hardly shall we be able to maintain our hold with the
other.

The last means of loss is Dolo, by Fraud, 3. Dolo.
which is practiced upon us by the Devil, by the world, and the flesh; by
wicked and lewd company employed as their instruments; and this engine likewise
works upon us in both the objects, both of Piety, and of Honesty, both in
dogmaticis, in the doctrine of faith, as also in moralibus, in perverting our
lives to vitiousnesse. The deceit in this kind is different from the former,
because there the Devil gains ground of us only by Surreption, possessing
our minds and affections with present apprehension and titillation of pleasure,
which so transporteth us, as that the understanding is lulled asleep, and
considers not the loss and danger. But in this a kind of Compensation is
pretended by way of bargain or exchange, and our wandering souls are
possessed with an opinion of Truth and Piety, when we run headlong into
iniquity or error. Here I say men are dealt withal as by Commutation, to
leave that which they have, for another doctrine which is pretended to be
better, though indeed nothing but counterfeit, and gilded over with the forged
luster of beauty, and ornament of outward pompes, feeding the eye, and
possessing the captiuated senses of the simple: wherein we behold the
deceitful boldness of the great enemy and his instruments; who being as Saint
Peter speaks, themselves the servants of corruption, 2. Pet. 2.19.
yet promise liberty to them whom they seduce. And this is that snare of the
Devil, wherein they are caught to do his will; which as it is powerful in
enticing unto moral crimes, so much more does it work upon the weaker members
of the Church, to seduce them from the truth of the Gospel, and to carry them
up and down with every wind of doctrine.

But who, or what am I (reverend, honorable, and Christian Auditory) that
presume to take this task in hand, to utter this Text with these polluted
lips? Can I undertake to speak the words of exhortation unto Constancy, who
my self have been so late an example and spectacle of Inconstancy? Can Tene
quod habes sound well out of the mouth of him, whose actions have spoke too
loud, Emisi, amisi quod habui, I have left and lost that which I had, and ought
to have kept. So many worthy Spectators, and judicious Auditors as I behold
this day, may be as so many witnesses or accusers to stop my mouth, or at least
to open it to profess, that I am unworthy to be a Physician to others, who
have had most need to hear that voice of Cura teipsum, Physician heal thy
self.

Most true it is, that my foot, hand, and heart have been taken, and too long
held in the Snare of the Fowler, and carried away captive into Babylon; where,
if I consider mine own demerits, I deserved to be held in the chains of
spiritual captivity, and to be kept perpetual prisoner in the dungeon of
Error, Superstition, and blindness; wherein my guilt has bin the greater, in
that mine hands have not been beaten off from this Hold by the violent force of
persecuting terror, but have been willingly and wilfully stolen away by mine
own corrupt and carnal passions. For which mine obliquitie and grievous
defection, as formerly by pen, so here by voice, and before this
Congregation, I humbly crave pardon of our most reverend mother the renowned
Church of England, then also of the spiritual Fathers, these Churches lights
and guides, the Lords Bishops, and of my venerable brethren the rest of the
Ministry, and generally of this and all other Christian congregations, whom no
doubt I have scandalized. But above all I implore the mercy and indulgence of
my heavenly Father, that he will vouchsafe to embrace me his returning
Prodigal Child: giving him all humble and hearty thanks, that he has
reduced unto his fold, this wandering and diseased Sheep, and to our ever
blessed Savior for daigning in his mercy, to look back upon me with his
gracious eye, as he did upon his lapsed Apostle. It was thy mercy (Oh sweet
Savior) which raised me out of that stupiditie, and made me to have a lively
sense of thy Truth and mine own falsehood; and therefore as thou did upon
the fall of thine Apostle judge him not the less fit, but the more able
thereupon to establish others, by saying unto him Eu tu conuersus confirma
fratres tuos. I am therefore not discouraged, but the more emboldned by the
sense of my former diseasednesse to stir up others unto constancy in holding
that faith which they have received.

Thus much for this precept as it concerns every christian soul, (and my
self in particular) to hold his own portion that he has, least he be left
poor, and naked, and blind, and miserable, when as perhaps he thinks
himself rich and well clad and wanting nothing.

Now (right honorable and beloved Auditory) give me leave to insist upon that
subject, collectiue members of Christ, namely, particular visible Churches and
Congregations. To them the Spirit as to a great and numberless Auditory
preaches this wholesome Sermon of Perseverance.

Thou visible particular Church of God, Mat. 13. Pom. 13.
whosoever thou art that have received the Word with gladness, that have cast
away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light; that have
abandoned the vanities of Paganism, and the crooked perverse errors which
follow man's natural corruption: thou that have submitted thy neck to the
gentle yoke of Christ's Cross, and embraced the glad tidings of the Gospel,
and doctrine of sincere faith, Romans 1.16.
which is powerful unto salvation to every one that believes; Stand fast in
that which thou have received, strive and wrestle for that faith, quae semel
tradita est sanctis, which was once given to the Saints; Jude. v. 3.
loose not by fainting orstarting, that Crown of Honor and sacred reputation,
which thou have worthly got amongst other Christian Churches. Imitate those
holy Confessors and Martyrs, quorum nomina in benedictionibus, whose very names
are blessed. If God call thee unto a fiery and bloody trial, prize not this
transitory life, above the word of life, Gods Gospel, and above the Lord of
life, Gods only begotten Son, and above eternal life, Gods bountiful and
free gift. Reu. 2.10.
Esto fidelis, Be thou faithful unto the death, and Christ shall give thee the
Crown of life.

Thou that art a fruitful Vine, planted by Gods own right hand, and watered
with the dew of Heaven, take heed that thy branches be not torn away by the
violent blast of persecution, when God shall be pleased to suffer such tempests
to trouble the lower region of the Air in this militant Church. Has God
planted thee in a fruit full hill, Esaias. 5.
fenced thee and gathered out the stones from thy Vineyard by Reformation; take
heed that thou suffer not thy fence to be trodden down; be watchful, that the
envious man do not throw in again those stones by deformation. Be careful
also that thy boughs and limbs be not stolen away by night, by those that
creep through the hedge into the vineyard. Take heed, that the little foxes do
not undermine thine enclosure, and purloine away thy best fruit, when they
pretend to look another way, and profess only to request courteous and
harmless harbor for a while in thy ground: but in the mean time work
themselves in, and dig their earths, and bring in their young cubbes thither,
which will soon learn, not only to climb up to the top of the vine, and
crop the fairest branches, but also scratch up the root of it. Of these I will
say nothing, let the Spirit speak, Cant. 2.15. Cant. 2.15.
Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have
tender grapes.

That I dwell not too long upon Universals, give me leave now to descend unto
particular application of this precept, by discussing what kind of Church it
most properly concerns, and who are they that fruitfully use, or peruersely
abuse this wholesome spiritual counsel, Tene quod habes, Hold that thou have.

First, for the having; The Church of Rome arrogateth unto it self the prime
possession of this spiritual tenure; that they only hold it in Capite from
Christ himself, in their own head the Pope; that al other Christian Churches
are but vnder-tenants, as holding by deriuation of petty leases from this
universal Landlord; that they have an indefeasible perpetuity thereof, as
intailed unto the Pope, sibi and haeredibus in perpetuum, to him and his heirs
world without end; that other Churches have no other Charter of it, then a
Transcript from that Original, and no longer can hold it, then whilst they
are conformable and serviceable in Tenancie of vassalage or villenage to the
Lords of the Manor of Rome. A vain fond incroching forgery of usurpation, as
authentical as the pretended donation of Constantine, of the patrimony of
Saint Peter, and other privileges unto Siluester the Pope.

To these we may well say with the Apostle, Came the word out from you, 1. Cor.
14.36.
or did you preach the same, 1. Cor. 1.
or were we baptized into the name of S. Peter, or S. Paul? If Prioritie imply
original tenure in faith, surely Jerusalem must be the grandmother Church.
Isai. 2.3.
For de Sion exiuit lex, Out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem.

The ancient Fathers reckoned not one, but many, Tertul. de Praescript. aduers.
Haret.
Ecclesias matrices and originales fidei, motherly original Churches, wherein
the faith was planted severally by diverse Apostles, not by one. And therefore
whersoeuer any church can show conformity unto the Charter of the Scriptures,
it may rightfully plead this Habeo as well as any other the Church of the world.

As for the church of Rome, we deny not but in the primitive and better times,
it might well say Habeo, I have this pledge of Truth, and Teneo, I keep it
entire and sincere: But the present Roman Church, or rather the Papal faction
in the Western Church, has long since left that Hold; the present Church
there having little else but local prescription for property herein.

The ancient Christian Romans, Romans 3.24.
that we are justified freely by grace. The present in Rome, or depending on
Rome, imbaseth this doctrine, by mixture of works, preparatory, satisfactory,
and superrogatory.

The old Christian Romans were so obedient unto their Instructors, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. The now new Romanists subduce
from this yoke their Clergy and Votaries; nay they subject the Scepter of
Princes to the Popes beck.

S. Chrysostom. in Romans 13.
Chrysostom upon the aforesaid words of the Apostle, said, Si Propheta, si
Euangelista, Though thou be a Prophet, or an Evangelist, yet thou art a subject
to the higher powers. And S. Bern. Bern.
Qui conatur excipere tentat decipere, He that would except any, goes about to
deceive. But the modern Order of Jesuits are more learned then these Fathers,
and more wise then the very Apostles of Jesus.

The ancient Christian Romans learned of S. Paul, Romans 10.14.
How can they call on him on whom they have not believed? And therefore as they
believed only upon God in Christ: so in prayer they called only on him. But the
present Romanists fill their churches and altars of Invocation and oblation
with ten Saints for one Christ.

The old Romans believed S. Paul, Stipendium peccati mors, Romans 6.23.
the wages of sin is death. But the new Romanists distinguishing of sins
mortal and venial, maintain, that there be some sins for which death is not
due.

The old Romans believed, eternal life is the gift of God; Romans 6.23.
but the new, that it is due to the worth of good works.

The ancient Christian Romans learned (no doubt) the same doctrine of this
Apostle, which he taught their brethren the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 11.26.
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords
death until he come. But the new Romanists rob us all of the Bread by a
pretended Miracle of Transubstantiation; and the Laity of the Cup by a trick
of Concomitancie.

But I am not here to read a Lecture of the differences and degenerations of
the present Roman Church, which are soundly and plentifully demonstrated by the
lights of the reformed Churches in their controuersall Books. Only this I
infer, that of all Christian Churches that I know extant this day in the
World, the Roman troop, (especially in the superlatiue Tenants of the
Jesuits) can least of all justify themselves and say, either Habui quod
teneo, I had it from Christ, that which I now hold; or Teneo quod habui, what I
received from Christ and his Apostles I still maintain entire and incorrupt;
such redunda^cie of Articles added to the faith, which are not of faith, such
enervation and corruption is there of those which truly belong unto Faith. So
that in obedience unto this divine precept of holding that which we had from
Christ, we cannot hold with the^, but must hold against them that withdraw us
to Antichrist.

As they hold not what and where they should, so do they peruersely and
vehemently labor, to take and maintain hold where they should not. And
therefore there wants not in the Court of Rome a politic care of maintaining
this principle, Tene quod habes, let nothing go that may be gotten by pretense
of Saint Peter's Keys, Saint Paul's Sword, Interdictions, Excommunications,
Crusadoes and such like. To this end has been abused the simplicity of
christian people, and the devotion of Christian Princes, to the increasing of
the Popes spiritual power, and the erecting of a temporal.

Some think that the Sea when it gains upon the Land in one place, by
swallowing up some Towns and Villages, it loses in another; but sure the
more swelling waves of the Sea of Rome, whersoeuer they incroach, cannot abide
any rampire against such inundation, nor will loose any foot of ground gotten;
so Universal Oecumenicall is the Roman Ocean: And where Papal usurpation has
been once beaten out, the hunger is more sharp to enter again. They that say
Tene quod habes, will much more busily sweat for Redime quod habebas.

No marvel then if they besiege and set hotly upon a reformed Church,
whereout in former times they sucked no small advantage, as appears by one Pope
that well understood the commodities of England, Vid. Mat. Paris.
who said, Vere hertus noster delitiarum est Anglia, vere puteus est
inexhaustus, et vbi multa abundant, de multis multa licet sumere. Verily this
England is my Paradise, it is a plentiful Well that cannot be drawn dry, and
where there is Gods plenty, we may take enough and spare not.

There is a strong fenced Town in the Low Countries, Breda.
which at this present suffers great distress by a violent siege, which
assault no doubt is the hotter in the Enemy, because that Town being the
inheritance of a great Prince, The Prince of Orange.
was of late rescued out of their hands. Let us at least so far make this our
own case, as to apply this to our spiritual use, to consider with what heat
and hungry desire the Papal faction endeauours to lay again upon us that
their yoke of bondage, which we not many years since, have by Gods blessing
shaken off. And long may they vainly long to intrude again into this Paradise
to trample and devastate it, with their Superstitions and corruptions.

Yet for our better caution, that we may claspe our hold the faster, let us
take view of some of their forces and engines, by which they would beat off
our hold and maintain their own.

I will not search into those usual engines and fortifications which they set
up in every corner. Their Churches pretended Unity, Universality,
Visibilitie, Infallibility; their multitude of Saints, of Votaries, of
Miracles, and such like general Arguments. I will only touch upon those their
devices and employments which more nearly concern us in this Church and
State, being their attractiues ad habendum and retentiues ad tenendum for the
Roman cause. Of diverse of which kind I have made more large declaration by my
Pen heretofore, not here to be repeated, but only some adioynder thereto to be
made of some particulars since come to my notice or remembrance.

Amongst which I must first acquaint you with their planting Agents and
Emissaries for the gaining men to their party by acquaintance and subtle
insinuations. Planting Agents and Emisartes.
To that end there has been a project of the Jesuits to plant their
fellow-Iesuites and other Priests, not only in the Suburbs (which they count
well furnished with that stuff) but in every street within the walls of this
houourable and religious City. Whereto they have made a note of such Citizens
as they thought they might make use of to afford them houserome. One whom I well
know was spoken to, to help to procure lodgings for them in such parts of
London as he was acquainted in. Nor is this seducing office appropriated to the
Ecclesiastickes only, but further transmitted to other Laicke vnder-Emissaries,
who shall walk sometimes under the vocation of Physicians, whereof one shall
carry Popish Books with him to men's houses, and shall tell them that two or
three of them be such as have been shown to our best Protestant Divines in
England, who have acknowledged that that they cannot be answered. Another when
he comes to administer Physic shall advise his patient to leave his Laicke
profession, and study Divinity, not in the petit Universities of Oxon or
Cambridge, but in the more excellent Universities of Doway, Saint Omers, Paris,
Valledolid etc. Another of that strain shall be so nimble as when he comes
to his Patient, he shall entice away his young schollerly servant, and convey
him against his Masters will privily beyond the Seas. Nay, yet lower Sciences
shall be a disguise for such vnder-suborned Agents, as Teaching of Music,
and Dancing; the end whereof must be to make their Scholars turn their heads
and heels, till they caper out of their Religion.

I name none, lest I should seem rather to be an accuser in bitterness
against the Adversary, then a monisher in charity and duty to my Country.

Their next engine is, Their working upon the discontents of young Scholars,
2. Supplanting young Scholars
and magnifying their parts and deserts, by bemoaning the neglect had of their
worth in our Schools and Colleges, extolling of the Discipline and Industry,
Eight English Colleges in Spain.
eminent Learning and reward in the Seminary Colleges beyond the Seas,
offering them means and opportunity of transportation, with Letters
Commendatory in their hand, and money in their purses.

Hereof I have formerly given some examples, yet now will add, how in their
holding fast young Proselites, they exercise (though preposterously) this
precept of Tene quod habes, Hold that which thou have gotten; which they do
not only by glosing arguments, and idle books of Miracles, Visions, and
Reuelatious, by which they work upon the mind and fancy; but also they add an
external means of surety, not much unlike that which the Jews used against
our Savior after his Passion, who set a sure guard about the sepulcher, Math.
27.
lest he should rise again. So these when they have hoodwinckt and buried any
Proselite in the dungeon of their Superstitions, they provide ne resurgat, lest
he should open his eyes, and rise up to behold the light of the Truth. And
therefore they set a guard upon him, to keep him from conuersing or conferring
with any but themselves.

I have formerly related of a Nouice-intended-Nunne, whom after they had gotten
into their clutches, they were so careful over her, that they would not suffer
her to step into the street, without one to watch her like a Constable. Whereto
I add, that since I understand of a young University Scholar, upon whom a
brace of Jesuits gained ground so far, that he yielded a kind of consent of
late within this twelue-moneth, to be transported by them to the University
of Doway. To which end some money was gathered amongst the Romanists for his
Viaticum. But because the Jesuits did not think their motives of Argument to
pierce so deeply into him, that they might be assured of his constancy in
that resolution, they added thereto the strong coard of corporal detension, or
restraint; and for diverse weeks till he should be packt over, they kept him
in their Chamber close Prisoner without Bail or Maineprise: Employing of him
there in transcribing certain idle papers of theirs, pretended for the Press,
written by one of them professedly against a worthy Knight of this Kingdom.
Sir Humph. Lynde.
But the young Scholar being (as it seems) not wonted to be a Recluse, and
liking better to breath a little fresh air, so soon as opportunity was
offered, walked out into the streets, and meeting with some of his good
friends, to whom he imparted the intention of his gadding beyond the sea; was
thereupon dissuaded, and reclaimed.

By which young Scholar I am likewise informed, that in his time of keeping
thus retired in the Jesuits Chamber, there were daily brought thither great
packes of English Popish Books, by some Traders, (perhaps not far from this
place) who make other show in outward profession, but are content to make
Merchandise of Religions on both hands.

As they have their incroaching hooks to draw in those that are of ripe
years, 3. Theeuing away children.
so much easier do they get into their power and disposal, the tender Plants,
and very Flower of our English Gentry: I mean young children of either Sex,
whom in their Nonage they deprive of English air, lest breathing it too long,
they should be imbued with a deep love of their own Country, and transport
them in foreign parts, to be planted in Popish Colleges and Monasteries
erected to that purpose, to breed in them a distaste and auersation from the
present Church and State established in England.

Innocent Infants, who without crime are banished their native soil, and many
of them under pretense of an old Monke-tricke, Ciuiliter mortuus, robbed of
their inheritance, which should have descended on them from their Parents. But
in all of them our Estate is robbed, both of their Persons, and also of the
Money allotted for their several portions.

Of this kind, since the last Session of Parliament, by the care of
Magistrates and Officers, there have been intercepted from Transportation
about the number of seventeen, whom I need not here recite by their names. But
how many pass sine strepitu, we know not. To the examples recounted by me in
writing, I will add one.

A Gentleman of Barkshire having but one only child, a very ingenious
towardly Youth, whom he had long kept to School; a Neighbour-Papist assisted
by a Priest, enticed away this young man, and conveyed him to a Monastery
beyond the Seas, to the great grief, and almost heartbreaking of his said
Father: who beside the loss of his Son, was thereby plunged in another
mischief; he having purchased the greatest part of his Land in his Sons
name: and now knows not what will become of the same, but tells me, he
doubts that the Priests will cause his Son convey it to some Popish friend
for their use; as they are Merchants cunning enough, and need no Broker.

Another of their stratagems is, The sealing up of the Book of God, and
instead thereof filling their hands, and eyes, 4. Waste paper dear sold.
and hearts with idle superstitious fabulous Pamphlets. A strange tyranny and
scarce credible, had not this latter age produced it, that at the hearing of
Confessions, when they begin to rack men's Consciences by recital of offenses
against the first Table of the Decalogue, the leading Captain offense, which
they set in the forefront, is mustered forth by asking, Whether they have
read, or so much as cast their eye upon the Scripture in a known tongue.
Belike too invisible and insensible is that punishment, which they incur of
Excommunication ipso facto, by taking a taste of the Scriptures by any private
reading them. Hereto is added therefore the greatest corporal punishment, even
death it self. For in the Inquisition what is more capital, then for a man to
be detected to have had in his bosom or house, that dangerous poison which we
call, The Book of God. But in the place thereof they send abroad, and load
them with frothie, chaffie, muddy Pamphlets of fabulous Miracles, wherewith
they feed the course stomachs of their ghostly children, being indeed (though
against S. 1 Cor. 14.20.
Paul's counsel) very children in understanding.

When the fogge of Popery so ouerclouded a great part of the world; it is not
so much to be wondered, that men groaping in the dark, should take such stones
for bread But now that mist is (God be thanked) dispelled, per lumen Euangelij,
by the light of the Gospel; (and long may this daylight last, without night,
without eclipse, without cloud.) Now what a stupiditie is it in a Christian
Nation, that any of those that live within kenning of Euangelical truth, any
that breath the air of this City, and other places where Gods true worship is
taught, and these vanities blown away with the blast and breath of Gods
Messengers: that any English man or woman of common discretion should apply
their ear or eye to intertaine such lewd, ugly, monstrous fables, as are
obtruded upon them? The greater is the guiltiness of their ringleading
Masters, who professing to be guides to the blind, and spiritual Instructors
of their Catholic children, dare in the face of the Sun forge such
Mountebanke trumpery, and farce Books with them on purpose, ad tenendum, to
hold their slavish followers in blind dotage of false grounded devotion, and
ad habendum, to get money out of their purses, for such false sophisticate
ware. I know some Popish Masters, who make it their Rent and Reuenew, to
become Brokers in this kind. Their Fables, I have recounted diverse of them, ad
pudorem scriptorum, perhaps ad nauseam Lectorum, to shame those forging
Writers, and I doubt to the wearying and cloying of my Readers.

I will not trouble the patience of this Honorable and Venerable Auditory with
recital of such trumpery. A Jack Daw loved gold well, and so do those that
tell this tale. You may read likewise of Sparrowes excommunicated Discip. Ser.
69. de Tempore. A Raven excommunicated for breaking of a Church-window, vid. a
book entitled, The life of Leo Tusc. printed at Col. p. 264. since no Raven
will come within a mile of that Church.
Yet if any one list to have a taste, let him consider whether it be not a
profaning of Gods Ordinance, to magnify the power of Excommunication by such
ridiculous inventions as this; to wit, in their Book of Miracles, called
Pratum spirituale, I find one of these jolly Tales, that

Once upon a time there was a Crow, or Iacke-daw had stolen a gold ring; and
thereupon incurring the Sentence of Excommunication, refused to eat, and pined
away, till an Abbot absolved the Crow, and then he was in good liking, and
iocund as before.

I say nothing, but in the Greek proverb, (...), such unsavory food is fit
for nothing, but to be thrown out to the carrion Crows.

Another kind of their engines may be Indulgences, Crusadoes, and Jubilees.
These are a kind of Handmaids and attendants upon Romish auricular Confession,
they being indeed little else, but Absolutions of the largest size, and dyed in
the deepest grain. These are very fruitful hooks ad habendum, for the
Papacy, which seldom come home unladen. But this engine works another way
then the former: They upon the Judgment, Conscience, and Person of those whom
they take and hold; this upon the Purse.

The Popes grand Staple Fair, Iubilee-Faire.
which was wont to be once in an hundred years, in imitation of the Gentiles,
and after once in fifty years in imitation of the Jews Iubilee, (which was
merely proper to those people:) Now by degrees, for the better advancing of the
revenues of the Papal Exchequer, is multiplied to every five and twentieth
year. And now at next Christmas will the wheel be come about, which grindeth
good griste for the Roman Batch. The most gross and palpable Invention for
the squeesing out money from the people, under the pretense of Devotion, and
acquitall from sins, that ever was put upon the Christian, nay Heathen world.
As if there should come out again a Decree from Augustus Caesar, That all the
world should be taxed: Luke 2.
so pack they up their money for Rome from all quarters. Nay, and many cannot
be content to send, but they will needs be their own Carriers: so sick are
they of their money, so weary of resting in quiet at home, that they are aestro
perciti, driven with a gad-flie to sally over the Alps, or to plough the back
of diverse Seas, to visit the holy Fathers Iubilean pomp, to see him portatum
humeris, to ride on Cockhorse on men's shoulders, and with a golden hammer to
beat open the gates of a typical Paradise: where a parjet wall being to be
broken down by the Pope, I have heard of one who having gotten a piece of
mortar, sold it by the way home for a good round sum of money to bear his
charges.
happy is he that can get but one crumme of the holy mortar that is scattered.
Their money they are sure to leave behind them, and in stead of it, what bring
they home? A few Boxen beads sanctified by the Popes Benediction, or Copper
Meddals, Brouches, etc. A worthy bargain, for men to repuerascere; like
children to cry to go to Bartholmew Fair, that they may bring from thence,
Babies, and Rattles, and Hobbie-horses.

I think God has set England in a fair large distance from the head City
that bears dominion over the Nations, to keep us from gadding so far upon
trifling cause, but Horat.
Necquicquam Deus abscidit
Prudens Oceano dissociabili
Terras.


In vain has God by his wisdom divided kingdoms by the Sea. It seems Sea
nor Land cannot fetter some of our Nation from chafering in person at that
Money-Mart, which opens shortly.

I know some who lodged in the Suburbs of this City of late gone thitherward,
and are like to return home, purged more certainly of Silver, then of Sin. A
certain Jesuit, whom I could name, was within these few days preparing to
pack forward, and because he was loath to go empty or unladen out of England,
eagerly enticed a young youth (being a Scholar at a famous School within the
circuit of this City) to go with him, telling him, that now during the time
of Iubilee, Rome was open and free for any that would come thither.

I cannot omit to speak something of their Fantastic tricks, used to allure
admiration, and credulity of miraculous exployts. Of which cogging stamp, 6.
The Story of Father Lawrence.
is that Tale which one Father Laurence, a Jesuit, now or of late about
London, reports of himself, That he in his minority was by Miracle
transported to a Monastery in Spain, where he continued diverse years, and
neither himself, nor any other knew his name; till there appeared unto him as
he was at his Devotions, Saint Lawrence, who spoke unto him and said, Thy name
shall be called for ever hereafter, Father Lawrence: And so the Saint having
spoken thus, with other words unto him, departed. Afterward one of his
fellow-Iesuites, who lived in the Monastery with him, came to his chamber, and
by very instinct saluted him by the new name of Father Lawrence. Whereat this
beauen christened Father was much astonished, and marueiled how this other
Jesuit knew his name. But he presently spoke thus unto F. Lawrence, The same
Saint has appeared unto me also, and bade me go to your chamber, and salute
you by this name. This Father Lawrence was shortly after by the Superior of
his Order sent into England, where in the Person of Saint Lawrence he does
give Benedictions, and pretends to cure diseases, and do strange miracles.

Another like triffing trick is that which of late has been used by some
Jesuits, whose names I know better then the Monks of Spain knew Father
Lawrences. They upon S. Priests Valentines.
Valentines day, choosing some female Saint for their Valentine; one takes Saint
Agatha, another S. Clare, another S. Lucie, another S. Catherine, another S.
Cicely, etc. I asked them what they meant to choose such Va^lentines. They
answered me, that in respect of their Vow, they could have no Valentine that
lived here upon earth: and in regard of their Angelical life, they were to
choose Valentines in heaven. I asked them, whether they thought those Saints
knew that they had chosen them for their Valentines. Oh yes say they, we shall
be honored all this year by that Valentine we make choice off, and she will
intercede for us, and to some of us our Valentine does appear in visible
bodily shape, telling us what to do all the year after. And for my part, I
think as truly for seven years after.

Surely I was not very nimble of belief when they told me this; but since I
have thought that those great Fathers the Jesuits are not always so well
advised as they may, when they will thrust upon University Scholars and
Ecclesiastickes this and the like palpable fictions, which me thinks were
gross enough to put upon silly women and ignorant Rustickes.

To say nothing of the Maid with the glittering or flaming Apron, The Maid with
the flaming Apron.
who diverse years since was adored rather then admired by some in this City,
and yet remains in a Nunnery beyond the Seas, whither diverse repair to her
for Benediction, whose tricks if they were well examined, would prove little
better then those of the Nun dela Annuntiada in Spain condemned for
Imposture. I am beholding to another of that sex of whom I have formerly
related some iugling mirabiliarie tricks acted of late in this City, in
pretense of driving out Devils, who (least any should think that I have
wronged her in my narration) spinneth the same thread now beyond the Seas at
Saint Omers, usually spitting out pinnes, and reported also by the credulous to
cough out flames of fire. She thus repossessed is again to be dispossessed by
the mighty force of our Father Flood, The collapsed Lady repossessed.
and another Father Thunder, two potent English exorcists. In which action the
inhabiting Devil cries out at Thunders approach, Mark. 3.17.
as if Beanerges, the sons of Thunder were in presence, and made the Devils
to tremble with the Apostolical gift of miracles.

A more fresh and Domesticke example then this I have learned within these few
days, A young woman in London now possessed.
concerning a certain young woman in this City sometimes a Protestant, who
pretends to be vexed and possessed by a Devil. And thereupon by the
spiritual Masters diverse collections of Money have been made as intended for
her relief. And the better to draw on these Contributions, she is usually
brought to their Solemn Masses. And within these few weeks to show how the
Devil was vexed by those Romish gesticulations, she roared with a very loud
voice at the time of the elevation, to the wonder of many the gaping admiring
Spectators. She says she has been possessed with this Devil these four
years, namely a little after she turned Roman Catholic, and that the
inhabitant Devil does often now tempt her to go to Church, which as her
Masters teach her is to fall into present damnation.

It seems this is a very hungry Devil, which must be fed so insatiably with
new Contributions, (especially on great Saints days when there is the chiefest
concourse of people to those their solemn meetings) though somewhat, I make no
doubt, is intercepted by the Collectors. And that it is no politic Devil
some think, that chose rather to enter into her when she was a Roman
Catholic, then when she was a Protestant. And verily I think he is so
gentle, that if those contributio^s (so often made for her) cease, he will
easily be entreated to leave his habitation. But I leave the examination of
this to him that sits on our Throne, his Majesty, who has a happy gift in
discovery of such Impostures.

But I forget all this while another of their Engines, very profitable and
comfortable for their having and holding, which is, certain New Orders vpstart
in this age, fitting that vpstart Religion. Wherein is most remarkable a new
bred and new hatched Female Order of Iesuitesses, 7. Iesuitesses.
first undertaken by an English woman, called Mistress Ward: which society the
Holy Father though requested thereto, some few years ago, did not then think
fit upon some important reasons to allow. But now belike it is concluded, that
Masculine Iesuitisme will not be ouerclowded, but rather supported by this
^ssociation. And the Decree is passed, that it may be, and is an Order
established, and a Female College erected for them in Naples, whither diverse
of our English Iesuited women are gone to be engraffed into that new found
stock. And sure there is a suitable faireboding signification in the very name
of that place, it being (...) the new City, which well befits (...) these new
Nuns.

And as in masculine Iesuitisme, there are not only professed Votaries of
Chastity, but also Lay-brethren, married men, appendant to that Order; so in
this Female institution there are, and will be (no doubt) not only Virgins and
Widows, but also Lay sisters abiding still in state of Marriage. Of whom, if
any will needs be gadding beyond the Seas, I wish that they may not be called
home again ad cohabitandum. Then perhaps the Men-Iesuites in England shall
have less dominion over great Families in this Kingdom.

For all kind of Iesuitisme infusing such high spirits, why should not the Lay
sisters of that Seraphicall society think themselves wiser then their
husbands, and spurn against Saint Paul's precept, which binds them to learn
of their husbands as home, 1 Cor. 14.35.
especially when as the aim and end of this new Order is (as I am well
informed) that as some of them are to remain retired in a Nunnery: so others
of the more practicke strain are to continue an Oeconomicall life in England,
and partly at their own home, partly at other houses to employ themselves in
instructing, and Catechizing others in the Mysteries of the Roman doctrine.
Which Office of catechizing, The Iesuitesses in England are very Censorious and
bitter against those Romanists that take the Oath of Allegiance, or defend it.
I think, will have but a nominall difference from Preaching; and so we shall
have among them (that which they absurdly impute to some in Reformed Churches)
Women Preachers.

Nay further out of the grounds of Jesuitical Logic (according to which,
these Mistrisses must be bound to Catechize) it will follow that Saint Paul's
principle will fail, whereby the wife is (...), and bound by the Law to her
Husband so long as he lives. Romans 7.2.
For if Jesuitical exaltation does exempt a man from subjection to his lawful
King, why shall not (a paritate rationis) the imparting of this sacred Order to
a woman, exempt her from obedience to her Head the husband. And if once those
Prophetesses get head against their head, there will be no need to say to any
of them, Tene quod habes.

Lastly, to proceed ab imperfectioribus ad perfectiora; nay, ad perfectissima,
to the most exquisite and refined incroachers, the masculine Jesuits
themselves; and to omit whatsoever I have formerly by pen noted concerning
their late inventions and stratagems. I add concerning them in general, That
in England they do not only exceed perhaps in treble proportion of number all
other Orders and Priests, but also of late years here are grown to that
absoluteness among other Romanists, that they contemned the late newcoyned
Bishop of Chalcedon, and denied subjection to him, nor would appear at all
upon Citation before his Reverence, though he thought he came full fraught
with faculties from his Holiness, for Jurisdiction over all their Seculars and
Regulars.

I know not what Mystery there may be in the Court of Rome, in giving to diverse
men opposite Jurisdictions, and mutual exemptions; but I have seen a
Presentment that was made by the Churchwardens and sworn Officers of a Parish
within the circuit of this City, about Easter last, that a certain man there
named was a Jesuit, I have seen the Process against this man, by which he
was excommunicated.
and Keeper of the Popes Privy Signet. By which Title perhaps is intended some
transcendent faculty committed by the Court of Rome to that Jesuit, for which
authority some special new Seal might be appointed and appropriated, which
in semblance to the English phrase might be called, The privy Signet.

But to let pass these inwards of the Jesuits, and view them only in the
outside of their habit and apparel in England. I have formerly given the
character of them in their costly and ruffianly bravery; and then I considered
that kind of disguise as tending to the hiding them from the notice of
Magistrates, or to their more easy and unsuspected insinuation into all
companies, to draw Proselites to the Roman bent: but since I find, that it
moreover armeth them with boundless liberty against Civil and Moral laws.

1. Hence is taken better opportunity for professed solicitation of Chastity,
which if they went in grauer habit, would perhaps be checked by modesty.

I know a vigorous Jesuit, who being attired like a Gallant of none of the
lowest ruff, is said to have used the title of a Yorkshire Gentleman of some
hundreds yearly reuenew. He often repaired to a house within a Parish of the
Suburbs, Saint Giles Parish in the Fields.
where lodged a female Guest, to whom (notwithstanding his Vow against all
earthly Valentines) he became a Suitor, and promised her Marriage: and for the
better assuring her that he would marry her, pretended he had gotten a License
to that purpose from the Ordinary; which License he showed to diverse of that
family, the more to work upon the woman's credulity. In fine, he got that he
came for, and then this Gentleman vanished.

2. As this incongruous habit imboldneth them against the seventh Commandment:
so does it much more against the sixth, Non occides. They that by their
Priesthood should bear about them Arma tantum spiritualia, change them in arma
militaria, the weapons of a Soldier; nay, sometimes of an Assasine, or
Cut-threat.

The care of this concerns them in authority: but me it concerns nearely,
in regard of danger undergone, and future protection, which I implore.

Not above three months since, when I passed along the open street in this
City, about the middle of the afternoon, walking in Gods peace and the Kings,
after a slight salutation I was set upon by one of that Jesuitical brood, well
known to me, and then attired in colored Clothes, white Boots, with a head
of long shag hair, armed with a long narrow Sword, visible, and innisible, a
Stilletto, a weapon I trow condemned in foreign Nations, but ordinary
furniture for the Yeomen of the Popes Guard here in England, (I mean the
Jesuits, as well Clerick as Laick:) With this weapon, being made so poinant
and deadly, that it would pearce, as is thought, reasonable good armor, he
assaulted me: but by Gods help I evaded. And for his commitment, I had the aid
of the justice of this honorable City, by the authority of the right worthy
the late Lord Mayor, Sir Martin Lumbley.
who is by me to be acknowledged, not only for my private protection upon this
danger, but in regard of the public, for the good estimation and honor which
he has got by the faithful discharge of his Office, and the good government
of this honorable City, to have well begun, continued, and ended the Circle
of his now finished year.

And as the Poet speaks of a Tree bearing golden fruit: -- Vno avulso non
deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo. Virg. Aeneid. 6



One golden bough being pulled away, there buds out another of the same
metal. So for auspication of his Honorable Successor, Alderman Gore.
I doubt not to say, that he will branch forth with the same fruit of care for
Religion and Justice.

Too long have I tired your Christian patience in tracking out the bypath of
wandering Romish ways, which have somewhat led me out of my direct way; your
further permission I will use modestly in reaching at, 2. Part. Behold, I come
quickly.
but scarce touching the upper branch of my Text, Behold I come quickly.

These words represent unto us such a glorious spectacle, as is fit for us to
step out of our doors and throngingly to behold, not as a transitory Pageant
for a day, but as possessing and employing the most piercing eyes of our soul
as long as we can open them and hold forth our heads with expectation, even all
the days of our life.

Here have we, first the Precursor, John Baptist, going before and giving
warning, Ecce, Behold one is coming, who has been long foretold and
expected: himself that comes, Christ the only begotten Son of the Father,
Venio, I come; though he seem long absent, yet will he be evidently present,
He comes. Thirdly, manner or pase of his coming; not leasurely as he rode
into Jerusalem upon a slow beast, but riding upon a swift, running horse, or
rather upon the wings of the wind, Cito, I come quickly.

1. Ecce, Behold.] This Ecce as a watchword of premonition is perfixed to all
the commings of Christ mentioned in Scripture. As

Ecce Virgo pariet, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Child.
Esa. 7.14.

Ecce Euangelizo vobis gaudium magnum etc. Behold I bring you good tidings of
great joy which shall be to all people. Luke 2.10.

Ecce venit tibi Rex tuus mitis, asino insidens, etc. Behold thy King comes
unto thee meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt the fool of an Ass. Mat.
21.5.

Ecce venit cum nubibus, Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see
him. etc. Apoc. 1.7.

Ecce sto ad ostium et pulto, Behold I stand at the door and knock. Apoc. 3.20.

Whence we learn that God has set this Centinell to keep us watching and
ready to rise when he shall call on the sudden to us. Secondly that the
Matter and Person requires our Attention, our Admiration, our Acceptance of
so great and glorious a Guest.

John the Baptists Office we know was to prepare the way of the Lord, Mat. 3.3.
to make the paths straight, fit for the entertainment of the Messiah; so was
this Ecce to that Church of Philadelphia, and to the Angel thereof: So must it
be to us a call for due preparation to receive and meet the Messiah, to adore
and obey him. And verily the way of the Lord is never sufficiently prepared in
us, unless we entertain and obey the Doctrine of the Precursor, Mat. 3.2.
Repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Without compunction for our sinful
lives, and bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, we are still but
deaf, though this Trumpet Ecce, sound never so loud in our ears.

2. Venio, I come.
The diverse commings of Christ are dispersedly set down in the Scriptures
forementioned: I will reduce them to a brief.

His first coming was Virtuall, 1. Virtuall.
from the beginning of the world in vigor and power of Redemption, as he was
agnus occisus ab origin mundi, a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world.
So Abraham saw him as come, and his day as present.

His other Commings are Actual. 2. Actual.
And first in carne, when he came to man by assuming his nature, when he came
adsuos, to the Jews, and they received him not. This Coming was in humility
and embasement, in forma serui, in the form of a servant, to make us free by
suffering bondage.

His coming to Jerusalem was Local, 3. Local.
both a preparatiue to his Passion, and a prefiguration of his exaltation. Venit
Rex, thy King comes, and the royal acclamation of Hosanna was sung to him:
Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

There is his Spiritual Coming inuisibly, 4. Spiritual.
and into our souls by grace and the power of his holy Spirit, to raise us from
the grave of sin and spiritual death. This coming is in misericordia, in
mercy.

His last Coming is Judicial in Justice, 5. Judicial.
in Majesty and Glory to judge the quick and dead; to render to every one as
his works shall be; to transform the Church Militant into Triumphant. And
this his coming is called by Saint Paul, Titus. 2.
the glorious appearance of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ. And our
Savior himself foretells that he the son of man shall come in a triple
glory, in his own glory, and in his Fathers, Luke. 9.26.
and of the holy Angels.

Of these Commings, some are past, and not here intended at all, otherwise then
by presupposition. That other which is present and daily, namely him coming to
his chosen by moving and changing their hearts, by renewing their spirit, by
comforting and instructing their souls, is not here meant otherwise then by
analogy and application. The last and most universal coming is that which is
here promised, Behold I come. And this is usually called his second coming,
namely, visible and proper, wherein it is suitable to his coming by
Incarnation, and sensible conversation; but much diverse from it.

First, in Manner, that being in the depth of humiliation, this in the height
of exaltation; that in reproach and infirmity, this in beauty and glory.

Secondly, in the End and complement, that being to undergo Death, this to
bring a crown of life; that to be despited and spit on by his enemies, Psalm. 2.
this to bruise his enemies like a Potters vessel, and to make his foes his
footstool.

Thirdly, in Time, that being in the fullness of time when the veil of
Mosaicall Types and Ceremonies was to vanish, Gal. 4.4.
and yield to the substance; this future in another most absolute fullness of
time, when the whole frame of this Earth is to be taken asunder, and the
curtain of the Heavens to be withdrawn and pass away like a scrowle.

This glorious and final coming of our Savior, as it is the Epilogue and
consummation of this present World, is by diverse handled by way of declaring
the foregoing signs of it, and aiming at the exact time thereof. Both which I
utterly forbear, lest I should incur curiosity, and offend against brevity
in speaking of an hour to come, with neglect of the hour now past. I only
propound a brief touch of plain Instruction, This triple Instruction was for
brevity omitted.
easy for the meanest, out of a mystery of the highest: which I reduce to
these three terms, Fides, Spes, Charitas, Faith, Hope, and Charity.

First, Faith. That we must firmly believe, Fides.
that Christ will come and call us all to Judgment. A needless note, some
will say, this being one of the Articles of the Creed, and a maine principle of
Religion. I acknowledge it, and so Saint Paul better knew, that he had taught
the Resurrection, and yet in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 15.
such Atheism crept in, that he was feign to spend a long Chapter, and
inculcate many Arguments, to hold up staggering believers, and refute
misbeleeuers.

Nay, natural reason does without Scripture prove, that there must needs be
a future final Judgment, to recompense good and evil, which in this world
many times are thwarted so preposterously. I will mention but one ground, and
that touched by Saint Paul there; If there were no hope, but in this life, then
pious and honest men were omnium miserrimi, Curlonis male sit, and malis been
etc. Sen.
of all others the most miserable. And yet such is our weakness, such the
strength of Satan's suggestions against the Truth, that we need to have this
foundation daily more strongly settled and rammed in our hearts, Veniet Christus
ad iudicandum vinos and mortuos: Christ Jesus shall come to judge both the
quick and the dead. This is the sure Anchor of our Faith, which fasteneth and
secureth our wauing and floating vessel amidst the storms of the tempestuous
warfare in this mortal life, and keeps us from splitting upon the Rocks of
Desperation, whereat many suffer Shipwreck.

Secondly, 2. Spes.
it supporteth us by Hope, and expectation of the comfortable performance of
Gods promises. For with small joy shall we acknowledge a second coming of
Christ unto Judgment, if we apprehend it only as it is bent contra homines,
to take vengeance upon sinful men: so even the Devils believe it, Iam. 2.19.
and tremble at it. But we look for it with the expectation of Hope, and the
object of Hope, is bonum futurum, a good and ample reward which we are to
receive. So Saint Paul, Tit. 2. upon declaration of the appearing of the grace
of God which brings salvation to all men, Tit. 2.13.
adioyneth thereto our good use of it, Expectantes beatam illam spem, Looking
for that blessed hope of the coming of our Lord and Savior. And here in my
Text, it is the insoluble bond, which connecteth the Precept, which formerly I
handled with this comfortable Motive. For why should we strive against the
world, ad tenendum quod habemus, to hold the Faith and Sanctity which by Gods
grace we have, unless he who is the Author and finisher of this Faith would
certainly come with the Crown in his hand to reward our constancy. Nay, the
same Apostle, Romans 8. reueileth to us, that the very stupid creature is endued
with hope of this kind, Romans 8.19.
as expecting the revelation of the glory of the Sons of God. And therefore
in the mean time, though with grief and groaning, yet with patience, bears
a subjugation unto servitude. How much more shall the Sons of God themselves,
bear their own burden patiently for a time, till the restoration of all
things come.

The third duty hence drawn, 3. Charitas.
is our love to God, and to our brethren; which follows upon our desire of
this coming, and loving the same. 1. Tim. 4. A Crown of righteousness laid
up for me, and for all that love his coming. And surely, if we love this his
coming, we cannot love sin, nor the world, nor our flesh as it is sinful;
and we cannot but love our brethren, who shall be knit together with us in
one bundle, by the Angels that shall gather up Gods harvest.

The last thing we are to consider, is the celeritie of this coming; 3. Cito.
Vento cito, I come quickly. This expectation is not long, our deliverance is
near at hand. Venio, not veniam; not I will come, but I am now coming, I
come, and that quickly.

Here the Epicure and worldling obiecteth, Object.
where is this cito, quickly? How quickly, when as so many ages have passed
since his promise was uttered, and yet he is not come. Of these Saint Peter
prophecieth, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3.
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? Nay, but they arm themselves
with a pretended reason from experience: For since the Fathers slept, all
things continue as they were. Our Fathers have run their race, and other
generations have succeeded, and yet the world indures, yet no dissolution of it
by any such coming of the Son of man to judgment.

That God may be justified, Resp.
and men found liars, hereto we answer.

First, to the Persons. Mark what those obiectors are, Scoffers, and men
walking after their own lusts. The cloud of lust has darkened in them the
light, not only of religion, but also of reason; They are willingly ignorant.

Secondly, to the matter it self. 2 Pet. 2.9.
There can be no slacknesse in God, such as men account slacknesse. Men make a
false reckoning of those times and seasons which God has kept in his own
bosom. To Gods eternity such times can make no difference; with him a
thousand years are as a day, and a day as a thousand years. Nouissimi dies
are to him all the time of grace after the first coming of the Son of man in
the flesh.

Lastly, we must interpret Judgment, not only as general to the whole world,
but also as particular to every singular man. In the first, Christ's coming
has depended many large reuolutions of natural time, and how long it shall,
he only knows that comes. In the second acception Christ comes to every
of us Cito, very quickly in a proper sense.

First, in regard of the shortness of their lives: For even those that live
unto decrepid age, yet pass away Cito, quickly. The life of man is but a span
long; our days pass like a Weauers Shuttle, nimbly; our life ends like a tale
that is told.

Secondly, our own luxuries fill us full of diseases, which yet more shorten
this our short day of life, and set our Clock forward that it strikes dead
before the time of our natural circle is gone about. Nay where moderation and
care is used for preservation of health; yet God for our sins sends common
scourges and calamities of ranging public diseases by the distemper of the
Air and seasons, or otherwise. Hereof at this present we feel a taste, not
only in this City, but also generally through this Land by strange new feauers.
God give us the grace to be true Physicians to see the cause thereof in our
selves, namely our common sins which make diseases so common amongst us, and
to apply the true cure, Repentance. And withal to give him thanks that in
this great and populous City, he spares the fearful Rod of the Plague in
this sickly season.

Lastly, hereto I add that means of particular dissolution whereby in most
proper sense, God may be said to come Cito, quickly, and call us before we be
aware, unless we remain in perpetual actual preparation, and that is by
sudden unexpected death: whether by inward unknown and unfelt diseases, which
sometimes extinguish our Lamp in a moment, when we think our selves in best
health and strength; or outwardly by inundation of Deluge, as Noah's Flood, When
men were eating and drinking, the Flood came; or by casualtie, as by Thunder
from Heaven, by Earthquakes, such as have swallowed up even whole Cities, Eusebius.
and some near the place whereto my Text is written; I mean in Greece and
some parts of Asia; or by ruin of those houses which we inhabit for a shelter
to us, so Jobs Children feasted their last, when a mighty wind unjointed the
house and their bodies.

Beloved Christians, here remembrance both doleful and joyful, bids me
stand still and look nearer home. This place, but much more this time wherein
I speak, bids me recount the works of God. This day wherein I speak stands
in center and equal balance between two days which I must never forget. The
one of public danger, intended by men, but prevented by God; the other of
danger and damage, not intended by men, but permitted and disposed by God. The
one by common gratulation ye are to celebrate in this place five days hence,
being the fifth of our November; the other is fit for me to record in my
personal thanksgiving, being past five days since, namely the six and
twentieth of October, I will not say the fifth of the Roman November. In both of
these the case has a Venio cito, a most sudden unexpected dissolution. The
one intended of our whole State represented in a public solemn Assembly; the
other undergone of some private persons in a concealed Conuention. In the one,
Gunpowder Treason.
the Agents were Romish plotters and pioners, Antichristian Molewarps, working
a most prodigious and never paralelled Treason in a subterraneous Vault; when
with one sulpherous blast there had been like to have been brought a general
destruction upon Moses and Aaron, Princes and Peers, Commanders and Commoners,
yea Church and Commonwealth; neither wanted there any thing to the ripeness
and perfection thereof, but the last hand to act it. In the other were Patients
some Romishly seduced: but God forbid that I should entertain so uncharitable
a thought as to compare the one to the other, in intentions or affections. God
ouertooke the one in their own snare, and brought them to punishment for their
barbarous attempts; the other gasped their last in the place and act of their
Devotions. The fall of the house at the Blacke-Fryers, where perished about an
hundred persons, being present at a Jesuits Sermon.
In what manner or measure of chastisement or punishment God came to these,
when he cut off their days tam cito, by such a sudden downfall, I cannot, I
may not judge: their persons I leave to him that shall come to judge them and
us all.

But as for my self, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I do
not incessantly acknowledge Gods special mercy to me, who spared me from this
Veni cito, as if he had vouchsafed me a privilege of longer time of
repentance; which surely in that case I was of corporal and spiritual danger,
I could not expect much less deserve. I ran with others into errors; nay,
deeper then others, in respect of my Vocation and Profession: Math. 9.13.
yet he that calls not the just, but sinners to repentance, preserved this
my life, when I was overwhelmed with the ruins and rubbish of that doleful
house in this City, not far from this place.

He that says to every of us, Behold, I come quickly, by the approach of
corporal dissolution, says now to me, Behold, when I came quickly to many
others round about thee, I came not then to thee by untimely death, that that
thou may come to me by timely repentance, and due thankfulness.

What now remains for me, but with the Prophet David, to say from my heart,
The Lord has inclined his ear unto me, Psalm. 116.
therefore will I call upon him so long as I live. The snares of death
compassed me round about, and the pains of hell gate hold upon me. I was in
misery, and he helped me. I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the
Name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord in the sight of his people,
even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.

The God of Peace, who has redeemed and sanctified his Church, by the
everlasting Covenant of his most precious blood, sanctify us all throughout,
in Soul, Body, and Spirit, that we holding fast that holy Faith which we
have received, may with hope and joy hear that blessed voice, Behold, I come
quickly: Even so Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.

