ONOTESSAPON. THE EVANGELICALL HARMONY, Reducing the four Evangelists into
one continued context; and in it the entire history of the acts and sayings,
life and death of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST: duly ordered according to
the distinction of times. By HENRY GARTHWAIT.

Printed by THOMAS BUCK and ROGER DANIEL, Printers to the University of
CAMBRIDGE. MDCXXXIIII.

TO THE REVEREND AND RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, JOHN BARKHAM, Doctor of Divinity, and
Dean of BOCKING.
SIR,
HAving had the honor and happiness for some years to live under your roof,
I have often observed your constant love and respectfull care to advance and
further any thing tending to public good. The desired imitation of this
pattern first kindled in me the sparks of an ambitious resolution to exercise
my self (besides my ordinary sacred task) in some such labor, as might, if not
in the event prove beneficial to all, yet at least show my willingness to
employ my utmost ability to that end. I fastened therefore upon this Harmony,
and by Gods assistance have finished it, in this form, wherein none was ever
yet extant in our own language, nor (to my knowledge) in any other. Yet because
the best things, published with the best intent, seldom escape the lash of
censorious readers; these my first fruits, as by right due to the Church, I
present to your self; that under the shelter of your name I may adventure. them
to the view of these curious times. You have the patronage of the father: this
his infant therefore, having been conceived in your house, and brought forth by
your advice, now stepping first into public, craves the privilege of your
protection: and that as you were a daily encourager of my proceeding, a
witness of my care and faithfulness in the work, and pleased to commend it to
the Professors in the Universitie, who have the examination of what is made
public: so this way also you would please to commend it to the world. And
besides (which is the chief) having no other means to express my grateful
remembrance of your continual favors, accept, I beseech you, this dedication
of my labors to the memory of your lasting name: for if the gods (as Pliny
says) accept a plain cake of meal and salt offered in pure devotion by such as
have no better incense, then I doubt not you will accept of this, as the free
oblation of him who has dedicated and devoted himself

Your worships ever obliged to do you service, HENRY GARTHWAIT.

To the Reader.
THough the sun shine in its full brightness, yet if either the eye be
defective, or the medium unfit, or the object too remote, we see but
imperfectly: So though truth be most resplendent in it self, yet if either we
be incapable in apprehending, or tho means unapt to convey, or the truth to be
known too far distant either in place or time, it seems not to be such to us
as it is indeed in it own nature. The God of truth, willing to acquaint us with
that truth which it most concerns us to know, has provided his Spirit to
enlighten our understanding; his Son and ministry, the means to convey it;
and his written word, to bring those things which were done many ages before
our time, and in places far distant from us, Galat. 3.1.
so near, as if we had seen them acted before our eyes. To this end our
Savior Christ did choose from among the Jews certain men, Luke 1.2.
which had known his life and doctrine from the beginning, to be witnesses
thereof, to the Jews and Gentiles; and selected two from among his apostles,
and from his disciples other two, to commit them to writing, Deuteronomy. 17.6. and
19.15.
and transmit them to posterity: That if in other cases the witness of two or
three were sufficient, this of four might abundantly satisfy any that should
doubt of that truth, which in times past did shine full bright among the Jews.
Especially having received what they deliver, not only by their own knowledge
and experience; 2. Pet. 1.21.
but writing, as they spoke, the dictates of the Spirit of God. The writings
therefore of one of these whom we call Evangelists, 2. Tim. 3.16.
being the testimony of the holy Spirit ((...)) is of more value, and ought
rather to be credited, then the testimony of many, nay, of all men: but all of
them agreeing in one and the same truth, their testimony is so much the more
enforcing, as implying so many several acts of one and the same Spirit,
producing in diverse subjects one and the same effect, even The mystery of our
Salvation by Jesus Christ. For though every one of them follow his own peculiar
method and order in the context of his history, and sometimes deliver the same
thing in the same or other words, or add some circumstance to that which
another had written, or new matter altogether omitted by the rest, and now and
then seem not so much to respect order and method, as faithfully to record
things done: yet in the undoubted truth both of Christ's speeches and actions,
there is admirable consent and celestial harmony.

For the more clear demonstration of this, the learned (from the very
primitive times through all ages to this of ours) have bestowed much labor and
extraordinary industry in comparing of their testimonies together: as,
Tatianus the scholar of Justin Martyr; Ammonius, Origens master; Theophilus,
Antiochenus, Epiphanius contra Alogos, S. Augustine in his four books of the
consent of the Evangelists: After them, Petrus Comestor, Bonaventura, Ludolphus
de Saxonia, Joannes Gerson: And of late, Andreas Osiander, Codomannus,
Molineus, Jansenius, Barrhadius, Calvinus, Selmatterus, and many others: by
whose labors in that kind the Church of God has been much enlightened and
adorned. Yet this, as it was performed by several men, so was it done in a
diverse manner. Some of them reduced all the four Evangelists into the method
and text of one: the manner whereof appears by those Canons yet remaining and
extant in S. Hierome. Tom. 6. in initio.
Others placed the several texts collaterally in one page; leaving it to the
reader to judge, what was added, or delivered otherwise by any one of them. And
this order the most of later times have followed, Calvin excepted, who
harmonizeth only the three first, placing S. John by himself, as hardly
reducible to the other three. Others again have reduced all the four into one
continued context, bringing in every one in his due place and own words,
delivering his part of the history of Christ. Of this sort, among the Roman
Catholics, Jansenius; among the Catholic Protestants, that incomparable
Divine Dr. Chemnitius, Helvic. chron.
who departing this life in the year 1588, when he had only finished the two
first books, it was continued by Lyserus: but he likewise leaving it
unfinished, there was not any found that durst put his hand to the perfecting
of that table of Apelles; till after fifteen years it was undertaken, and in
few years made complete, by the incessant labors of the learned and famous
Dr. John Gerhard in the year 1626. Which being so exactly performed, and
received with such general applause by the best; I thought it the most fit and
most worthy to be the rule and square (for order ratio (...)) by which I might
guide my self in this Harmony which I have published: some few chapters only
excepted, which they left as indifferent. If any man therefore shall require a
reason of the placing of any part of this History, why this or that precedes
or follows; I doubt not but if he consult what they have written of that
particular, he shall receive abundant satisfaction. What has been my part
herein, with the reason of this new form in which I have placed it, shall
appear in the following direction.

The benefit which will accrue to the intelligent reader by this kind of
harmony, will be infinitely more then I can acquaint him with. For there is no
one word or sentence of any of the Evangelists omitted, nor any redundant in
this; but a perpetual and continued connection of the history in their own
words: save only such, as in all translations be inserted to make complete the
sense of the author. If any phrase or word did explicate the rest, though it
were to the same sense, there both be put in. Whence to unforestalled
judgments these things will easily appear: 1. What speeches or actions of
Christ go before, what follow and succeed. 2. In what year of Christ's life or
ministry every thing was spoken or done. 3. The circumstances of any actions
omitted by one or two of the Evangelists, are in this reduced to their due
place, and that history perfected. 4. Many places of the Evangelists, which
seem to a heedlesse reader to contradict one another, are by this connection
more commodiously reconciled, then by any gloss whatsoever. 5. The joint
consent of them four in one testimony concerning Christ, appears more
illustrious. 6. And lastly, from the whole thus compacted, arises a most
complete history of our Saviors life and death, with the whole foundation of
Evangelicall doctrine: which is not so clearly pourtraicted by one, two, or
three of the Evangelists, as by them all together. Mine intention in this work
(if any shall desire to know it) was first mine own information; then the help
of the weak; and lastly the benefit of all that would make use of it. Which if
any shall hereby receive, let God have the glory, me their prayers.


H. G.

A direction for the use of this Harmony.
THis Harmony is divided into five books:

The first contains the history of Christ's private life. Books.


The second, the history of the first year of his public Ministry.

The third, the history of the second year of his public Ministry.

The fourth, the history of the third year of his public Ministry.

The fifth, the history of the fourth year of his public Ministry,
together with his Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension.

It is also divided from the beginning to the end into 212 chapters, Chapters.
(which divisions come nearer those of the Greeks, then our own) not beginning
to number them again at the beginning of every book; that (if there be
occasion) it might the more easily be compared with Chemnitius.

Every page in the title, Pages.
shows in what year every thing was done; and has its margent divided into
four columns: every of which does severally contain the name, chapter, and
verse of every Evangelist: that the margent might show in what chapter and
verse every part of the Context is to be found: that the text of any one of
them might be viewed; or, where they all speak of the same thing, they might
(if it be thought requisite) the more fitly be compared.

The Roman letters inserted, Letters.
signify that there begin the words of that Evangelist, which continue till
the next: M. signifying the words of S. Matthew; Mr. Mark; L. Luke; J. John.
Words added to the text, are printed in a smaller letter.

The Asterisk referres to places which be like, Asterisk.
and might seem to some to be the same; though indeed they be not: or if the
same words, yet used at another time, and upon other occasion.

The translation which I have followed strictly, Translation.
is the last of our own (allowed by authority) as being the best, and most
exact. Where we had but one English word to express two or more in the Greek;
there the Greek is placed in the margent.

The Table at the end, Table.
shows in what chapter of the Harmony any chapter, verse, or sentence of any
of the Evangelists may be found; which being known, it will thence appear, at
what time it was done or spoken. And know that Chapter stands for the chapter of
the Evangelist, and C. H. for the chapter of the Harmony: As for example, If
you desire to know in what chapter of the Harmony, the first of Matthew, from
the beginning to the end of the 17 verse, is handled, you shall find it in the
third chapter of the Harmony; and from the beginning of the 18 verse, to the
25 and last verse, in the 7 chapter of the Harmony. And so in the rest.

Aliorum labores vituperare, levis est labor. The Contents of the first book,
containing The history of Christ's private life.
CHAP. 1 THe Preface and Argument of the Gospel. page 1 CHAP. 2 Of the
conception of John the Baptist. page 2 CHAP. 3 The genealogy of Christ. page 4
CHAP. 4 The history of the conception of Christ. page 5 CHAP. 5 The blessed
Virgin visits Elisabeth. page 6 CHAP. 6 The nativitie of the Baptist, and
prophecy of Zachary. page 7 CHAP. 7 The Angel makes known to Joseph the
mystery of Christ's conception. page 8 CHAP. 8 The nativitie of Christ. page 9
CHAP. 9 The circumcision of Christ. page 10 CHAP. 10 The wise men come from the
east by the direction of a star, to adore the child Jesus. page 11 CHAP. 11
The purification of the Virgin Mary. Christ is presented in the temple. page 12
CHAP. 12 The flight of Joseph and Mary with Jesus into Egypt. page 13 CHAP. 13
The slaughter of the infants by Herod. ibid. CHAP. 14 Christ's return out of
Egypt. page 14 CHAP. 15 Christ's education and life from the fifth year of his
age, to the thirtieth. ibid. CHAP. 16 The beginning and progress of the
ministry of John the Baptist. page 15
The Contents of the second book, containing The history of the first year of
Christ's public Ministry.
CHAP. 17 CHrist is baptized of John in Jordan. page 18 CHAP. 18 Christ's age
and genealogy from Adam. page 19 CHAP. 19 Christ is led into the wilderness,
and there tempted of the Devil. page 21 CHAP. 20 The first testimony of John
Baptist concerning Christ now manifested, but as yet in the wilderness. page
22 CHAP. 21 The message sent from Jerusalem to John Baptist, containing his
second testimony of Christ now manifested. ibid. CHAP. 22 The third testimony
of John Baptist concerning Christ manifested, when he was returned from the
wilderness to him at Jordan. page 23 CHAP. 23 The history of the second day,
after the return of Christ from the wilderness, and of the two disciples of
John Baptist following Christ. page 24 CHAP. 24 Simon Peter is first brought
unto Christ, the day after the calling of Andrew. ibid. CHAP. 25 The calling of
Philip and Nathanael, which was done the last day before Christ's return from
Jordan into Galilee. ibid. CHAP. 26 The beginning of the miracles of Jesus.
Water is changed into wine at a marriage in Cana. page 25 CHAP. 27 The first
passover in the time of Christ's ministry; and what he then did at Jerusalem,
and in the temple. page 26 CHAP. 28 The discourse between Christ and Nicodemus.
page 27 CHAP. 29 Christ comes from Jerusalem into Judea, teaching and baptizing
there before John's imprisonment, who then baptized in Aenon. page 29 CHAP. 30
The dispute of John's disciples. His last testimony of Christ. ibid. CHAP. 31
The imprisonment of John Baptist. page 30 CHAP. 32 Christ's departure out of
Judea into Galilee: his discourse with the Samaritane woman, and the conversion
of many Samaritanes. ibid. CHAP. 33 The second return of Christ out of Judea
into Galilee: he heals the Rulers son. page 33
The Contents of the third book, containing The history of the second year of
Christ's public Ministry.
CHAP. 34 THe beginning of Christ's public preaching in the Synagogues of
Galilee: teaching in the Synagogue of Nazareth his own country, he is cast
out. page 35 CHAP. 35 Christ leaves Nazareth, and dwells in Capernaum. The
chief heads of his sermons in Galilee. page 37 CHAP. 36 The miraculous taking
of fishes. The calling of Peter, Andrew, James and John. ibid. CHAP. 37 An
unclean spirit is cast out in the Synagogue of Capernaum. page 38 CHAP. 38
Peter's wives mother is healed of a fever. page 39 CHAP. 39 Diverse sick persons
healed by Christ on the evening of that sabbath. page 40 CHAP. 40 What came to
pass the day after the former sabbath. ibid. CHAP. 41 Christ's peragration
through all Galilee. page 41 CHAP. 42 A leper healed in that peragration of
Galilee. ibid. CHAP. 43 Christ cures a man of the palsy. page 42 CHAP. 44 The
calling of S. Matthew. page 44 CHAP. 45 The history of the second passover,
which was in the second year of Christ's ministry. A diseased man is cured at
the pool of Bethesda. ibid. CHAP. 46 The first disputation of Christ with the
jews concerning the sabbath. His sermon upon that occasion at Jerusalem in the
second passcover. page 45 CHAP. 47 The history of the seventh and last day of
the feast. The disciples pull the ears of corn thence arises a dispute about
the sabbath. page 48 CHAP. 48 A man that had a withered hand, is healed on the
sabbath day. page 49 CHAP. 49 The Pharisees conspire with the Herodians against
Christ: his departure to the s;ea. page 50 CHAP. 50 The election of the
apostles. page 51 CHAP. 51 Christ's sermon in the mount after the choosing of
the apostles. Sect. I. Who are blessed, or (as they are called) the Beatitudes.
page 52 Sect. II. The duties of the apostles in their ministry. page 53 Sect.
III. The exposition of the Law. ibid. Sect. IV. Of Alms. page 56 Sect. V. Of
Prayer. ibid. Sect. VI. Of Fasting. page 57 Sect. VII. Against covetousness
and worldly cares. ibid. Sect. VIII. Against judging. Of brotherly reproof.
page 59 Sect. IX. Holy things are not to be given to dogs. ibid. Sect. X. Of
the strait gate, and narrow way. page 60 Sect. XI. Of false prophets. ibid.
Sect. XII. The conclusion of Christ's sermon in the mount. Against Hypocrisy.
An exhortation to true piety. page 61
CHAP. 52 A leper healed after the sermon on the mount. page 62 CHAP. 53 The
Centurion in Capernaum intercedes for his servant, that he might be cured of
the palsy. ibid. CHAP. 54 The widows son of Naim raised to life. page 64
CHAP. 55 Messengers are sent from John Baptist out of prison to Christ. ibid.
CHAP. 56 The sermon of Christ to the multitude, when the disciples of John
Baptist were departed. page 65 Sect. I. The Encomium given by Christ to John
Baptist. page 65 Sect. II. The parable of the children playing in the
marketplace. page 66 Sect. III. Christ upbraids and complains of Chorazin,
Bethsaida, and Capernaum. ibid. Sect. IV. Christ's thanksgiving. page 67 Sect.
V. The conclusion of Christ's sermon. ibid.
CHAP. 57 Mary Magdalene anointeth Christ's feet at the house of Simon the
Pharisee. ibid. CHAP. 58 Christ preaches through cities and villages. page 69
CHAP. 59 Christ returns to his house at Capernaum. The calumny of the Scribes.
The deliberation of his kindred, and a sharp dispute between him and the
Scribes. ibid. CHAP. 60 Christ's mother and brethren desire to speak with him.
page 72 CHAP. 61 Christ's parabolicall sermon to the multitude by the seaside
out of a ship. ibid. CHAP. 62 Christ returns from the sea. The parable of the
tares, and others. page 77 CHAP. 63 A lawyer offers to be Christ's disciple.
Another would first bury his father. page 78 CHAP. 64 Christ passes over into
the country of the Gergesenes. page 79 CHAP. 65 Christ heals the possessed of
devils in the country of the Gergesenes. page 80 CHAP. 66 Christ returns to
Capernaum. Matthews feast, and the disputations there moved. page 82 CHAP. 67
Christ raises from death the daughter of Jairus, and heals a woman of her
bloody issue. page 84 CHAP. 68 Two blind men restored to sight. page 86 CHAP.
69 A dumb man possessed of a devil is healed. page 87 CHAP. 70 Christ's second
return to Nazareth. ibid.
The contents of the fourth book, containing The history of the third year of
Christ's public Ministry.
CHAP. 71 WHat Christ did in the third-yeare of his ministry: and first of
his general visitation of Galilee. page 89 CHAP. 72 Christ's first sending out
of the apostles to preach the coming of the Messiah, and to confirm their
doctrine with miracles. page 90 CHAP. 73 The history of Christ's and his
apostles preaching in their first going out. page 93 CHAP. 74 John Baptist is
beheaded. ibid. CHAP. 75 Christ's fame is spread abroad. The judgment of Herod
and his courtiers concerning Christ. page 94 CHAP. 76 Christ goes into a
solitary place. The miracle of the five loaves, with which he fed five
thousand. page 95 CHAP. 77 Christ walks upon the sea: and what then happened.
page 98 CHAP. 78 Christ's sermon of the spiritual eating of his flesh, and
drinking of his blood. page 99 CHAP. 79 Christ disputes with the Pharisees
about the traditions of the elders. page 103 CHAP. 80 The daughter of the woman
of Canaan healed by Christ. page 105 CHAP. 81 Christ returns to the sea of
Galilee, cures one that was deaf and dumb. page 106 CHAP. 82 The miracle of
feeding four thousand with seven loaves. page 107 CHAP. 83 Christ disputes
with the Pharisees about a sign from heaven. The leaven of the Pharisees to be
shunned. page 108 CHAP. 84 A blind man healed at Bethsaida. page 109 CHAP. 85
Peter's confession of Christ. page 110 CHAP. 86 Christ begins to preach of his
passion, and exhorts his hearers to suffer the cross. page 111 CHAP. 87
Christ's transfiguration before three of his disciples. page 112 CHAP. 88 Christ
descends from the mountain, and returns to his Apostles. page 113 CHAP. 89
Christ casts a devil out of a lunatic man, which the disciples could not
cast out. page 114 CHAP. 90 Christ goes secretly through Galilee. His sermon
of his passion. page 116 CHAP. 91 Christ pays toll for himself and Peter in
Capernaum. ibid. CHAP. 92 Christ's sermon of humility, of shunning scandal, how
to reprove our brother, etc. page 117 CHAP. 93 Christ teaches Peter how often
we ought to forgive our brethren. page 120 CHAP. 94 The last half year of
Christ's ministry. His kinsfolk persuade him to go up to Jerusalem to the
feast of tabernacles. page 121 CHAP. 95 Christ goes to Jerusalem to the feast
of tabernacles. ibid. CHAP. 96 Three several men would follow Christ; every of
which were deficient in something. page 122 CHAP. 97 Christ sends out seventie
disciples. ibid. CHAP. 98 Christ teaches in the temple at Jerusalem at the
feast of tabernacles. page 124 CHAP. 99 What was done the last day of the feast
of tabernacles. page 125 CHAP. 100 An adulteress is brought unto Christ by the
Pharisees. page 126 CHAP. 101 Christ's sermon of his own person and office. page
127 CHAP. 102 The repetition of the doctrine of the person of Christ, and of
the corruption of the Jews. page 128 CHAP. 103 Christ's third sermon in the
temple to the believers, and a sharp disputation with the Pharisees. page 129
CHAP. 104 The seventie disciples return. Christ's spiritual joy, and the
beatitude of the disciples. page 131 CHAP. 105 Christ's dispute with a lawyer.
The parable of the Samaritane. ibid. CHAP. 106 Christ is entertained by Martha.
page 132 CHAP. 107 Christ teaches his disciples a form of prayer. The
efficacy of prayer. page 133 CHAP. 108 Christ casts out a devil; and confirms
it to be done by divine power. page 134 CHAP. 109 Christ dines with a Pharisee.
The disputations there arising. page 136 CHAP. 110 A large sermon of Christ's to
his disciples and to the people. Sect. I. Of shunning hypocrisy. page 137
Sect. II. Of the constant confession of the truth and of Christ. page 138 Sect.
III. A dehortation from covetousness and care. ibid. Sect. IV. An exhortation
to a vigilant expectation of the kingdom of heaven. page 140 Sect. V. The
office of the Apostles, and of ministers that are set over others. The effect
of the Gospel preached. ibid.
CHAP. 111 An exhortation to repentance, because of Gods patience. The parable
of the barren fig tree. page 142 CHAP. 112 A crooked woman healed on the
sabbath day. page 143 CHAP. 113 Christ goes to Jerusalem. One born blind is
healed by the way. page 144 CHAP. 114 Christ preaches himself to be the door,
the good shepherd. page 146 CHAP. 115 The feast of the dedication at Jerusalem,
in which Christ expressly professed himself to be the Messiah. page 148
The contents of the fifth book, containing The history of the fourth year of
Christ's public Ministry, together with his Passion and Resurrection.
CHAP. 116 CHrist goes from Jerusalem beyond Jordan where John had baptized.
page 150 CHAP. 117 Christ teaches that the way to heaven is strait. page 151
CHAP. 118 The Pharisees tell Jesus of Herod's seeking to kill him. ibid. CHAP.
119 Christ eats in the Pharisees house, and there heals one of the dropsy on
the sabbath day. page 152 CHAP. 120 Christ's sermon in the way, showing who is
fit to be his disciple. page 154 CHAP. 121 The parables of the lost sheep, of
the piece of silver, of the prodigal son. page 155 CHAP. 122 The parable of
the unjust steward. page 157 CHAP. 123 The parable of the rich glutton and
poor Lazarus. page 158 CHAP. 124 Christ's sermon of shunning of scandal: Of
brotherly reconciliation. The nature of faith, and duty of believers. page 159
CHAP. 125 Christ goes through Samaria into Galilee, and heals ten lepers by the
way. page 160 CHAP. 126 Christ's sermon of the coming of the kingdom of God.
page 161 CHAP. 127 The parable of the unjust judge; which teaches us to pray
without fainting. page 162 CHAP. 128 The parable of the Pharisee and the
Publicane. page 163 CHAP. 129 Christ goes into Berea; disputes with the
Pharisees concerning divorcement. ibid. CHAP. 130 Little children are brought
unto Christ; upon whom he lays his hands, and blesses them. page 165 CHAP.
131 The history of the young man that enquired how to attain eternal life.
ibid. CHAP. 132 Peter desires to know the reward of his apostleship. The
parable of the laborers in the vineyard. page 167 CHAP. 133 Mary and Martha
send unto Christ to tell him that Lazarus their brother was sick. page 169
CHAP. 134 Christ ascending to Jerusalem, foretells his passion to his
apostles. page 170 CHAP. 135 James and John (by their mother) desire to sit on
the right and left hand of Christ. ibid. CHAP. 136 A blind man healed by the
way, before he entered into Jericho. page 171 CHAP. 137 The conversion of
Zacheus. page 172 CHAP. 138 The parable of ten pieces of money delivered to ten
servants. page 173 CHAP. 139 Blind men healed by Christ at his departure from
Jericho. page 174 CHAP. 140 Lazarus is raised from death. page 175 CHAP. 141
The chief priests and Pharisees take counsel to put Christ to death. Caiaphas
prophesies of the fruit of Christ's death. page 177 CHAP. 142 Christ goes aside
into the little city Ephraim. The Pharisees decree to enquire him out, and to
apprehend him. page 178 CHAP. 143 Christ is anointed at a feast in Bethanie.
The counsel of the priests, to put to death both Christ and Lazarus. ibid.
CHAP. 144 Christ prepares himself for his kingly entrance into Jerusalem. page
180 CHAP. 145 Christ drawing nigh to Jerusalem, foretells with tears the
destruction thereof. page 182 CHAP. 146 Christ enters into Jerusalem and
purges the temple. ibid. CHAP. 147 Certain Greeks desire to see Christ: upon
which occasion, he preaches of the fruit of his death. page 183 CHAP. 148 The
cursing of the fig tree. The temple again cleansed: and Christ's farewell sermon
concerning his office. page 185 CHAP. 149 Christ's speech to his disciples of
the power of faith; upon occasion of the cursing of the withered fig tree. page
186 CHAP. 150 Christ questions the chief priests, Scribes, and elders about
John's baptism. page 187 CHAP. 151 The parable of the two sons that were
commanded by their father to go into the vineyard. page 188 CHAP. 152 The
parable of the vineyard let out to unthankful husbandmen. ibid. CHAP. 153 The
parable of the wedding of the kings son; and of the wedding garment. page 190
CHAP. 154 Christ's answer to the Pharisees question about paying tribute to
Caesar. page 191 CHAP. 155 Christ answers the arguments of the Sadduces about
the resurrection of the dead. page 192 CHAP. 156 Christ's answer to the Scribe,
concerning the greatest commandment of the Law. page 194 CHAP. 157 Jesus
propounds a question to the Pharisees concerning Christ, whose son he should
be. page 195 CHAP. 158 Christ sharply inveighs against the Scribes and
Pharisees, taxes their vices, and denounces heavy punishments against them.
page 196 CHAP. 159 Christ praises the widow that cast two mites into the
treasury. page 199 CHAP. 160 Christ foretells the destruction of the temple
and of Jerusalem. ibid. CHAP. 161 Christ's prophetical sermon concerning his
second coming, and the signs that are to precede it. page 203 CHAP. 162 Christ
informs the godly how they are to prepare for his second coming. page 204 CHAP.
163 Christ propounds to his Apostles the parable of the ten virgins. page 206
CHAP. 164 Christ propounds to his Apostles the parable of the talents
distributed among the servants. page 207 CHAP. 165 Christ describes to his
Apostles the acts and proceedings of the last judgment. page 208 CHAP. 166
Christ foretells that after two days he shall be betrayed to death. page 209
CHAP. 167 The chief priests, Scribes, and elders consult, how by craft they may
take Christ, and put him to death. page 210 CHAP. 168 The treacherous bargain
of Judas Iscariot with the high priests. ibid. CHAP. 169 The preparation to the
last passover; and the celebration of it. page 211 CHAP. 170 Christ washes
the feet of the disciples. page 212 CHAP. 171 Christ institutes the sacrament
of the Eucharist. page 213 CHAP. 172 A peculiar action of Christ with Judas the
traitor. page 214 CHAP. 173 Christ makes a friendly composition of the
contention raised among the Apostles about the primacie. page 215 CHAP. 174
Christ exhorts them to mutual love, and foretells Peter's denial. page 216
CHAP. 175 Christ foretells the imminent danger, and admonishes them to prepare
spiritual armor against it. ibid. CHAP. 176 Christ comforts his disciples who
were sorrowful, because he had foretold them of his departure. page 217 CHAP.
177 Christ exhorts his disciples to perseverance in the faith, and to mutual
love. page 219 CHAP. 178 Christ arms his disciples against the hatred and
persecution of the world. page 221 CHAP. 179 Christ again comfort his
disciples being sorrowful for the prediction of his departure. page 222 CHAP.
180 Christ prays ardently for his own glorification, and the conservation of
the church. page 224 CHAP. 181 The history of the passion, crucifying, death,
and burial of Christ. His departure out of Jerusalem into mount Olivet, with
his prophecy of the flight of the disciples. page 226 CHAP. 182 Christ's agony
in the garden, and prayers, while his disciples slept. page 227 CHAP. 183
Christ is treacherously taken in the garden. page 228 CHAP. 184 The bold
rashness of the Apostles preparing to defend with the sword, turns to
shameful flight. page 229 CHAP. 185 Christ being taken, is brought bound
before Caiaphas the high priest. Peter's first denial. page 231 CHAP. 186 The
examination of Christ concerning his doctrine and disciples. Peter's second
denial. False witnesses accuse Christ of blasphemy. Peter's third denial, and
tears. page 232 CHAP. 187 Christ is mocked, spit upon, smitten, and his
condemnation repeated. page 234 CHAP. 188 Christ is brought into the judgment
hall. The desperation of Judas. page 235 CHAP. 189 Christ is accused before
Pontius Pilate of sedition and affecting the kingdom. His excellent
confession. Public testimony of innocence given unto him by Pilate. page 236
CHAP. 190 Christ is led unto Herod, and mocked. page 237 CHAP. 191 Christ is
compared with Barabbas, whipped, and condemned to be crucified. page 238 CHAP.
192 Christ is brought out of the city Jerusalem to the place of his suffering.
page 241 CHAP. 193 Christ is crucified. Wine mingled with myrrh is given him
to drink. page 242 CHAP. 194 Christ's prayers. The title written on the cross.
The division of his garments. page 243 CHAP. 195 An enumeration of the
blasphemies against Christ crucified. The conversion of one of the thieves
crucified with him. page 244 CHAP. 196 Christ commends the care of his mother
to John. The sun is darkened. Christ complains that he is forsaken of God.
page 245 CHAP. 197 They give vinegar to Christ being athirst. He says, All
things are sinished; and gives up his spirit, which he first commended to his
Father. ibid. CHAP. 198 The miracles that followed Christ's death. page 246
CHAP. 199 Christ's burial. page 247 CHAP. 200 The history of the resurrection
and ascension of our Savior. The women which followed Christ from Galilee,
come to the sepulcher. page 249 CHAP. 201 Christ's resurrection is first
manifested to the women by the empty sepulcher and testimony of angels. page
250 CHAP. 202 Peter and John run to the sepulcher. page 251 CHAP. 203 Christ's
first apparition after he was dead, to Mary Magdalene. ibid. CHAP. 204 The
speech of the angel to the women returning to the sepulcher. page 252 CHAP. 205
The testimony of the watch concerning Christ's resurrection. page 253 CHAP. 206
Christ's apparition to the two disciples going to Emmaus. page 254 CHAP. 207
Christ appears to his disciples the evening after his resurrection, Thomas
being absent. page 255 CHAP. 208 Christ appears to his disciples the eighth
day after his resurrection, when Thomas was present. page 257 CHAP. 209 Christ
shows himself to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. ibid. CHAP. 210 Christ's
discourse with Peter in this apparition. page 259 CHAP. 211 Christ appears to
his disciples in a mountain of Galilee. page 260 CHAP. 212 Christ ascends
into heaven. ibid.
THE HISTORY OF CHRIST'S PRIVATE LIFE.
CHAP. I. The Preface and Argument of the Gospel.
Luke Chapter 1 V. 1
FOrasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of
those things which are most surely believed among us, Even as they delivered
them unto us, Luke Chapter 1 V. 2
which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word: It
seemed good to me also, Luke Chapter 1 V. 3
having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to write
unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, That thou might know the
certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed. Luke Chapter 1 V. 4


1. In the beginning was the word, John Chapter 1 V. 1
and the word was with God, and the word was God. The same was in the beginning
with God. John Chapter 1 V. 2, 3
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made. John Chapter 1 V. 4
In him was life, and the life was the light of men. John Chapter 1 V. 5
And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.

Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 1
There was a man sent from God, John Chapter 1 V. 6
whose name was John. The same came for a witness, John Chapter 1 V. 7
to bear witness of the light, that all men through him might believe. He was
not that light, John Chapter 1 V. 8
but was sent to bear witness of that light. John Chapter 1 V. 9
That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world.
He was in the world, John Chapter 1 V. 10
and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his
own, John Chapter 1 V. 11
and his own received him not. But as many as received him, John Chapter 1 V. 12
to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe
on his name: Which were born, not of blood, John Chapter 1 V. 13
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And the word
was made flesh, John Chapter 1 V. 14
and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
onely-begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth.

CHAP. II. Of the conception of John the Baptist.
Luke Chapter 1 V. 6
THere was in the days of Herod the king of Judea, a certain priest named
Zacharias, Luke Chapter 1 V. 5
of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her
name was Elisabeth. And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless. And they had no child,
Luke Chapter 1 V. 7
because that Elisabeth was barren, and they both were now well stricken in
years. And it came to pass, Luke Chapter 1 V. 8
that while he executed the priests office before God in the order of his
course, Luke Chapter 1 V. 9
According to the custom of the priests office, his lot was to burn incense
when he went into the temple of the Lord. And the whole multitude of the people
were praying without, at the time of incense. Luke Chapter 1 V. 10
And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord, Luke Chapter 1 V. 11
standing on the right side of the altar of incense. Luke Chapter 1 V. 12
And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him. But the
angel said unto him, Luke Chapter 1 V. 13
Fear not, Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elisabeth shall
bear thee a son, and thou shall call his name John. Luke Chapter 1 V. 14
And thou shall have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth:
Luke Chapter 1 V. 15
For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine
nor strong drink, and he shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his
mothers womb. Luke Chapter 1 V. 16
And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he
shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, Luke Chapter 1 V. 17
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. Luke Chapter 1
V. 18
And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old
man, and my wife well stricken in years. And the angel answering said unto
him, Luke Chapter 1 V. 19
I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto
thee, and to show thee these glad tidings. And behold, thou shall be dumb,
Luke Chapter 1 V. 20
and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed,
because thou beleevest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.
And the people waited for Zacharias, Luke Chapter 1 V. 21
and marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple. And when he came out,
Luke Chapter 1 V. 22
he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in
the temple: for he beekened unto them, and remained speechless. Luke Chapter 1 V.
23
And it came to pass that as soon as the days of his ministration were
accomplished, he departed to his own house. Luke Chapter 1 V. 24
And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid her self five
months, saying, Luke Chapter 1 V. 25
Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to take
away my reproach among men.

CHAP. III. The genealogy of Christ.
Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 1
Luke Chapter 3 V. 23
THe book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 2
and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren. And Judas begat
Pharez and Zara of Thamar, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 3
and Pharez begat Esrom, and Esrom begat Aram. And Aram begat Aminadab, Matthew.
Chapter 1 V. 4
and Aminadab begat Naasson, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 5
and Naasson begat Salmon. And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab, and Booz begat Obed
of Ruth, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 6
and Obed begat Jesse. And Jesse begat David the king, and David the king begat
Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias. And Solomon begat Roboam,
Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 7
and Roboam begat Abia, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 8
and Abia begat Asa. And Asa begat Josaphat, and Josaphat begat Joram, and
Joram begat Ozias. Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 9
And Ozias begat Joatham, and Joatham begat Achaz, and Achaz begat Ezekias. And
Ezekias begat Manasses, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 10
and Manasses begat Amon, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 11
and Amon begat Josias. And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the
time they were carried away to Babylon. Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 12
And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel, and
Salathiel begat Zorobabel. Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 13
And Zorobabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor.
Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 14
And Azor begat Sadoe, and Sadoc begat Achim, Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 15
and Achim begat Eliud. And Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and
Matthan begat Jacob. Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 16
And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Marie, of whom was born Jesus, Matthew.
Chapter 1 V. 17
who is called Christ. So all the generations from Abraham to David, are
fourteen generations: and from David until the carrying away into Babylon, are
fourteen generations: and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ, are
fourteen generations.

CHAP. IIII. The history of the conception of Christ.
Luke Chapter 1 V. 26
ANd in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God, unto a city of
Galilee, named Nazareth, Luke Chapter 1 V. 27
To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David;
and the virgins name was Marie. Luke Chapter 1 V. 28
And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail thou that art highly favored,
the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. And when she saw him, Luke
Chapter 1 V. 29
she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of
salutation this should be. And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Marie: Luke
Chapter 1 V. 30
for thou have found favor with God. Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 21
And behold, Luke Chapter 1 V. 31
thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his
name Jesus. Luke Chapter 1 V. 32
He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the Highest, and the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of his father David. And he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever, Luke Chapter 1 V. 33
and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Then said Marie unto the angel, How
shall this be, Luke Chapter 1 V. 34
seeing I know not a man? And the angel answered and said unto her, The holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, Luke Chapter 1 V. 35
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy
thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the son of God. Luke Chapter 1
V. 36
And behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she has also conceived a son in her old
age, and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. Luke Chapter 1 V.
37
For with God nothing shall be unpossible. Luke Chapter 1 V. 38
And Marie said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to
thy word: and the angel departed from her.

CHAP. V. The blessed Virgin visits Elisabeth.
Luke Chapter 1 V. 39
ANd Marie arose in those days,and went into the hill-countrey with haste,
into a city of Judah, And entered into the house of Zacharias, Luke Chapter 1 V. 40
and saluted Elisabeth. Luke Chapter 1 V. 41
And it came to pass, that when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Marie, the
babe leaped in her womb: and Elisabeth was saled with the holy Ghost. Luke Chapter
1 V. 42
And she spoke out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And whence is this to me, Luke Chapter 1 V.
43
that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For lo, Luke Chapter 1 V. 44
as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped
in my womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed, Luke Chapter 1 V. 45
for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the
Lord. And Marie said, Luke Chapter 1 V. 46
My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke Chapter 1 V. 47
And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. Luke Chapter 1 V. 48
For he has regarded the low estate of his hand-maiden: for behold, from
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. Luke Chapter 1 V. 49
For he that is mightic has done to me great things, and holy is his Name.
Luke Chapter 1 V. 50
And his mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to generation. He
has showed strength with his arm, Luke Chapter 1 V. 51
he has scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. Luke Chapter 1 V.
52
He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.
Luke Chapter 1 V. 53
He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away. Luke Chapter 1 V. 54
He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy, As he spoke
to our fathers, Luke Chapter 1 V. 55
to Abraham and to his seed for ever. Luke Chapter 1 V. 56
And Marie abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.

CHAP. VI. The nativitie of the Baptist, and prophecy of Zachary.
Luke Chapter 1 V. 57
NOw Elisabeths full time came, that she should be delivered, and she brought
forth a son. Luke Chapter 1 V. 58
And her neighbors and her cousins heard how the Lord had showed great mercy
upon her, and they rejoiced with her. Luke Chapter 1 V. 59
And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the
child, and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father. Luke Chapter 1
V. 60
And his mother answered and said, Not so, but he shall be called John. And
they said unto her, Luke Chapter 1 V. 61
There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name. Luke Chapter 1 V. 62
And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called. And he asked
for a writing-table, Luke Chapter 1 V. 63
and wrote, saying, His name is John: and they marvelled all. And his mouth was
opened immediately, Luke Chapter 1 V. 64
and his tongue loosed, and he spoke, and praised God. Luke Chapter 1 V. 65
And fear came on all that dwelt round about them, and all these sayings were
noised abroad throughout all the hill-countrey of Judea. And all they that had
heard them, Luke Chapter 1 V. 66
laid them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be? and
the hand of the Lord was with him. Luke Chapter 1 V. 67
And his father Zacharias was filled with the holy Ghost, and prophesyed,
saying, Luke Chapter 1 V. 68
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people, Luke Chapter 1 V. 69
And has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant
David; Luke Chapter 1 V. 70
As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world
began. Luke Chapter 1 V. 71
That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate
us. Luke Chapter 1 V. 72
To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
covenant: Luke Chapter 1 V. 73
The oath which he swear to our father Abraham, That he would grant unto us,
Luke Chapter 1 V. 74
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear, Luke Chapter 1 V. 75
In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life. Luke
Chapter 1 V. 76
And thou child shall be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways; Luke Chapter 1 V. 77
To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their
sins, Luke Chapter 1 V. 78
Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high has
visited us, Luke Chapter 1 V. 79
To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to
guide our feet into the way of peace. Luke Chapter 1 V. 80
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts, till
the day of his showing unto Israel.

CHAP. VII. The Angel makes known to Joseph the mystery of Christ's conception.
Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 18
NOw the Luke Chapter 1 V. 25
birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused
to Joseph (before they came together) she was found with child of the holy
Ghost. Matthew Chapter 1 V. 19
Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privily. Matthew Chapter 1 V. 20
But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared
unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto
thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her, is of the holy Ghost.
Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 21
And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: for he
shall save his people from their sins. Matthew Chapter 1 V. 22
(Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
Lord by the prophet, Matthew Chapter 1 V. 23
saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son,
and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted, is, God with
us) Then Joseph being raised from sleep, Matthew Chapter 1 V. 24
did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: Matthew
Chapter 1 V. 25
And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son; and he
called his name Jesus.

CHAP. VIII. The nativitie of Christ.
Luke Chapter 2 V. 1
ANd it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. Luke Chapter 2 V. 2
(And this taxing was first made, when Cyrenius was governor of Syria) And all
went to be taxed, Luke Chapter 2 V. 3
every one into his own city. Luke Chapter 2 V. 4
And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into
Judea, unto the John Chapter 7 V. 42
city of David, which is called Bethlehem (because he was of the house and
lineage of David) To be taxed with Marie his espeused wife, being great with
child. Luke Chapter 2 V. 5
And so it was, that while they were there, Luke Chapter 2 V. 6
the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. Luke Chapter 2 V. 7
And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the
inn. Luke Chapter 2 V. 8
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping
watch over their flock by night. And lo, Luke Chapter 2 V. 9
the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round
about them, and they were fore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not:
for behold, Luke Chapter 2 V. 10
I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto
you is born this day, Luke Chapter 2 V. 11
in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Luke Chapter 2 V. 12
And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in
swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. Luke Chapter 2 V. 13
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, Luke Chapter 2 V. 14
and on earth peace, good will toward men. Luke Chapter 2 V. 15
And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the
shepherds said one to an other, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this
thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. Luke Chapter
2 V. 16
And they came with haste, and found Marie and Joseph, and the babe lying in a
manger. And when they had seen it, Luke Chapter 2 V. 17
they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child.
Luke Chapter 2 V. 18
And all they that heard it, wondered at those things which were told them by
the shepherds. Luke Chapter 2 V. 19
But Marie kept all these things, and pondred them in her heart. Luke Chapter 2 V.
20
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things
that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

CHAP. IX. The circumcision of Christ.
Luke Chapter 2 V. 21
ANd when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his
name was called Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 21
Jesus, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb.

CHAP. X. The wise men come from the east by the direction of a star, to
adore the child Jesus.
Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 1
NOw when Luke Chapter 2 V. 6
Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold,
there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, Saying, Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 2
Where is he that is born king of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the
east, and are come to worship him. Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 3
When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him. Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 4
And when he had gathered all the chief priests and Scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 5
And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea: Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 6
for thus it is written by the Prophet; And John Chapter 7 V. 42
thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of
Juda: for out of thee shall come a governor, that shall rule my people Israel.
Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 7
Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them
diligently what time the star appeared. Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 8
And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go, and search diligently for the
young child, and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come
and worship him also. Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 9
When they had heard the king, they departed; and lo, the star which they saw
in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young
child was. Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 10
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. Matthew. Chapter 2
V. 11
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Marie
his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their
treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.
Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 12
And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not return to Herod, they
departed into their own country another way.

CHAP. XI. The purification of the Virgin Marie. Christ is presented in the
temple.
Luke Chapter 2 V. 22
ANd when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were
accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord, Luke
V. 23
(As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that opens the womb,
Luke V. 24
shall be called holy to the Lord) And to offer a sacrifice according to that
which is said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves or two young
pigeons. And behold, Luke V. 25
there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon, and the same man was just
and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the holy Ghost was upon
him. Luke V. 26
And it was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, that he should not see death,
before he had seen the Lords Christ. Luke V. 27
And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the
child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law, Then took he him up
in his arms, Luke V. 28
and blessed God, and said, Lord, Luke V. 29
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word. For mine
eyes have seen thy salvation: Luke V. 30
Which thou have prepared before the face of all people: A light to lighten the
Gentiles, Luke V. 31
and the glory of thy people Israel. Luke V. 32
Luke V. 33
And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him.
And Simeon blessed them, Luke V. 34
and said unto Marie his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and
rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against:
(Yea, Luke V. 35
a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also) that the thoughts of many
hearts may be revealed. And there was one Anna a prophetess, Luke V. 36
the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser; she was of a great age, and had
lived with an husband seven years from her virginity: Luke Chapter 2 V. 37
And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not
from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. Luke
V. 38
And she coming in that instant, gave thanks likewise to the Lord, and spoke of
him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

CHAP. XII. The flight of Joseph and Marie with Jesus into Egypt.
Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 13
ANd when they were departed, Luke V. 39
and when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord,
Matthew. V. 14
Behold, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise,
and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou
there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy
him. When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and
departed into Egypt: Matthew. V. 15
And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.

CHAP. XIII. The slaughter of the infants by Herod.
Matthew. V. 16
THen Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time
which he had diligently enquired of the wise men. Matthew. V. 17
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremie the prophet, Matthew. Chapter 2
V. 18
saying, In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because
they are not.

CHAP. XIIII. Christ's return out of Egypt.
Matthew. V. 19
BUt when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to
Joseph in Egypt, Matthew. V. 20
Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land
of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young childs life. Matthew. V. 21
And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land
of Israel. Matthew. V. 22
But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea, in the room of his
father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God
in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee. Matthew. V. 23
And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.

CHAP. XV. Christ's education and life from the fifth year of his age, to the
thirtieth.
Luke Chapter 2 V. 39
THey returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth. And the child grew,
Luke V. 40
and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon
him. Luke V. 41
Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year, at the feast of the Passover.
And when he was twelve years old, Luke V. 42
they went up to Jerusalem, after the custom of the feast. And when they had
fulfilled the days, Luke V. 43
as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem, and Joseph
and his mother knew not of it. Luke Chapter 2 V. 44
But they supposing him to have been in the company, went a days journey, and
they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And when they found him
not, Luke V. 45
they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him. Luke V. 46
And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
questions. Luke V. 47
And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers. And
when they saw him, Luke V. 48
they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why have thou thus
dealt with us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing. Luke V. 49
And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be
about my Fathers business? Luke V. 50
And they understood not the saying which he spoke unto them. And he went down
with them, Luke V. 51
and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his mother kept all these
sayings in her heart. And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, Luke V. 52
and in favor with God and man.

CHAP. XVI. The beginning and progress of the ministry of John the Baptist.
Mark Chapter 1 V. 1
THe beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God, Mark V. 2
As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face,
which shall prepare thy way before thee. Mark V. 3
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight. Luke Chapter 3 V. 1
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate
being governor of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother
Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the
Tetrarch of Abilene, Luke Chapter 3 V. 2
Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the
son of Zacharias in the wilderness. Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 1
In those days came John the Baptist, Mark Chapter 1 V. 4
and he was baptizing, and preaching in the wilderness of Judea. Luke V. 3
And he came into all the countries about Jordan, preaching the baptism of
repentance, for the remission of sins: Matthew. V. 2
And saying, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Luke V. 4
As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet: Matthew. V. 3
For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, The voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight. Luke V. 5
Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought
low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made
smooth. Luke V. 6
And all flesh shall see the salvation of God. Matthew. V. 4
And the same John had his raiment of camels hair, and a leathern girdle about
his loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey. Mark V. 5
And Matthew. V. 5
then went out to him Jerusalem, and all the land of Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan, and were Mark V. 5
all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins. Matthew. V.
7
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his baptism, he
said unto them, and Luke V. 7
to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, O generation of
vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth
therefore fruits worthy of repentance, Matthew. V. 8
and think not, or Luke V. 8
begin not to say within your selves, John Chapter 8 V. 39
We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these
stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Luke V. 9
And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the trees: Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 19
every tree therefore which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire. And the people asked him, saying, Luke Chapter 3 V. 10
What shall we do then? He answers and says unto them, Luke V. 11
He that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none; and he that has
meat, let him do likewise. Then came also Publicanes to be baptized, Luke V. 12
and said unto him, Master, what shall we do? Luke V. 13
And he said unto them, Exact no more then that which is appointed you. Luke V.
14
And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And
he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages. And as the people were in expectation, Luke V. 15
and all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not:
Luke V. 16
John answered saying unto them all, Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 11
I John Chapter 1 V. 26
indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that comes after me is
mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear. Mark Chapter 1 V. 6
And John was clothed with camels hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his
loins, Mark V. 7
and he did eat locusts and wild honey: And preached, saying, There comes one
mightier then I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop
down and unloose. Mark V. 8
I indeed have baptized you with water, but he shall haptize you with the holy
Ghost, Matthew. V. 12
and with fire. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
floor, and gather his wheat into the garner, but will burn up the chafe with
unquenchable fire. Luke V. 18
And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.

THE SECOND BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE FIRST YEAR OF CHRIST'S PUBLIC MINISTRY.
CHAP. XVII. Christ is baptized of John in Jordan.
Mark Chapter 1 V. 9
ANd it came to pass in those days Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 13
then Mark Chapter 1 V. 9
Jesus came from Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 13
Galilee, that is, Mark Chapter 1 V. 9
from Nazareth of Galilee, Matthew. V. 14
and came to Jordan, to John, to be baptized of him. But John forbad him,
saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, Matthew. V. 15
and come thou to me? And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so
now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered
him, Mark Chapter 1 V. 9
and was baptized of John in Jordan. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up
straightway out of the water, and lo, the heavens were opened unto him. Luke
Chapter 3 V. 21
For it came to pass when all the people were baptized, and that Jesus also
being baptized and praying, the heaven was opened; Luke Chapter 3 V. 22
And, the holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him. Mark Chapter
1 V. 10
And straightway coming out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the
Spirit like a dove deseending upon him. Mark V. 11
And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved son, Luke
(...)
in thee I am well pleased. Mark (...)
Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 16
And he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him.
Matthew. V. 17
And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased.

CHAP. XVIII. Christ's age and genealogy from Adam.
Luke V. 23
ANd Matthew. Chapter 1 V. 23
Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was supposed)
the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli, Which was the son of
Matthat, Luke V. 24
which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was the
son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph, Which was the son of
Mattathias, Luke V. 25
which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son
of Esli, which was the son of Nagge, Luke V. 26
Which was the son of Maath, which was the son of Mattathias, which was the
son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda,
Which was the son of Joanna, Luke V. 27
which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the
son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri, Which was the son of Melchi,
Luke V. 28
which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the son
of Elmodam, which was the son of Er, Luke V. 29
Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the
son of Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi,
Which was the son of Simeon, Luke Chapter 3 V. 30
which was the son of Judah, which was the son of Joseph, which was the
son of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim, Luke V. 31
Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menam, which was the
son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,
Which was the son of Jesse, Luke V. 32
which was the son of Obed, which was the son of Boos, which was the son
of Salmon, which was the son of Naasson, Which was the son of Aminadab,
Luke V. 33
which was the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom, which was the son
of Phares, which was the son of Juda, Luke V. 34
Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the
son of Abraham, which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor,
Luke V. 35
Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the
son of Phalee, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,
Which was the son of Cainan, Luke V. 36
which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which was the
son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech, Which was the son of Mathusala,
Luke V. 37
which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the
son of Maleleel, which was the son of Cainan, Luke V. 38
Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son
of Adam, which was the son of God.

CHAP. XIX. Christ is led into the wilderness, and there tempted of the Devil.
Mark Chapter 1 V. 12
ANd immediately the spirit drives him into the wilderness. Luke Chapter 4 V. 1
And Jesus being full of the holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, Matthew. Chapter 4 V. 2
and then was led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the
Devil. Mark V. 13
And he was there in the wilderness forty days, Luke V. 2
and was tempted forty days Mark V. 13
of Satan Luke V. 2
the Devil, Mark V. 13
and he was with the wild beasts: Luke V. 2
and in those days he did eat nothing: and when they were ended, Matthew. Chapter 4
V. 2
when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered. And when the tempter came unto him, Matthew. V. 3
Luke V. 2
the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, Luke V. 3
Matthew. V. 4
command that these stones be made bread. But Luke V. 4
Jesus answered him saying, It is written that man shall not live by bread
alone, Matthew. V. 5
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Then the devil
takes him up into the holy city, Luke V. 9
and brought him to Jerusalem, and serteth him on a pinnacle of the temple,
Matthew. V. 6
and says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self from hence, For
it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee Luke V. 10
to keep thee. And in their hands they shall bear thee up, Luke V. 11
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. And Jesus answering said
unto him, Matthew. V. 7
again Luke V. 12
It is said and Matthew. V. 8
written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Again, the devil takes him up
into an exceeding high mountain, and shows him all the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them Luke V. 5
in a moment of time; Matthew. V. 9
And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me: Luke V. 6
all this power will I give thee, and the glory of them; for that is delivered
unto, me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. If thou therefore wilt worship
me, all shall be thine. Luke Chapter 4 V. 7
And Matthew. Chapter 4 V. 10
then Luke V. 8
Jesus answered and said unto him, Matthew. V. 11
Get thee hence, Luke V. 8
behind me Satan: for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. And when the devil had ended all the temptation,
Matthew. V. 11
he leaves him and Luke V. 13
departed from him for a season. Matthew. V. 11
And behold, angels came and ministered unto him.

CHAP. XX. The first testimony of John Baptist, concerning Christ now
manifested, but as yet in the wilderness.
John Chapter 1 V. 15
JOhn bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spoke, He
that comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me. And of his
fullness have all we received, John V. 16
and grace for grace. For the law was given by Moses, John V. 17
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John V. 18
No man has seen God at any time; the onely-begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

CHAP. XXI. The message sent from Jerusalem to John Baptist, containing his
second testimony of Christ now manifested.
John V. 19
ANd this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from
Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? And he confessed, John V. 20
and denied not; but confessed, I am not the Christ. And they asked him, What
then? Art thou Elias? John V. 21
And he says, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. Then said
they unto him, John Chapter 1 V. 22
Who art thou, that we may give an answer to them that sent us? what say
thou of thy self? Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 3
He said, John V. 23
I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the
Lord, as said the prophet Esaias. And they which were sent, John V. 24
were of the Pharisees. And they asked him, John V. 25
and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor
Elias, neither that prophet? John V. 26
John answered them, saying, I baptize with water, but there stands one among
you, whom ye know not. Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 11
He it is who coming after me, John V. 27
is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose. John
V. 28
These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.

CHAP. XXII. The third testimony of John Baptist concerning Christ manifested,
when he was returned from the wilderness to him at Jordan.
John V. 29
THe next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold the Lamb of
God, which takes away the sin of the world. John V. 30
This is he of whom I said, After me comes a man which is preferred before me:
for he was before me. And I knew him not: John V. 31
but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing
with water. Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 16
And John bare record, saying, John V. 32
I saw the Spirit descending from heaven, like a dove, and it abode upon him.
John V. 33
And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said
unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the holy Chost. And I saw, John V. 34
and bare record that this is the Son of God.

CHAP. XXIII. The history of the second day, after the return of Christ from
the wilderness, and of the two disciples of John Baptist following Christ.
John Chapter 1 V. 35
AGain, the next day after John stood, and two of his disciples. John V. 36
And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he says, Behold the Lamb of God. And
the two disciples heard him speak, John V. 37
and they followed Jesus. Then Jesus returned, John V. 38
and saw them following, and says unto them, What seek ye? They said unto him,
Rabbi (which is to say being interpreted, Master) where dwell thou? He says
unto them, Come and see. John V. 39
They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it was
about the tenth hour.

CHAP. XXIIII. Simon Peter is first brought unto Christ, the day after the
calling of Andrew.
John V. 40
ONe of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon
Peter's brother. He first finds his own brother Simon, John V. 41
and says unto him, We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted,
the Christ. John V. 42
And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art
Simon the son of Jona, thou shall be called Cephas, which is by
interpretation, a stone.

CHAP. XXV. The calling of Philip and Nathanael, which was done the last day
before Christ's return from Jordan into Galilee.
John V. 43
THe day following, Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and finds Philip, and
says unto him, Follow me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, John Chapter 1 V. 44
the city of Andrew and Peter. John V. 45
Philip finds Nathanael, and says unto him, We have found him of whom Moses
in the law, and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
And Nathanael said unto him, John V. 46
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come and
see. John V. 47
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him, Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile. John V. 48
Nathanael says unto him, Whence know thou me? Jesus answered and said unto
him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw
thee. Nathanael answered and says unto him, John V. 49
Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Jesus answered
and said unto him, John V. 50
Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the figtree, beleevest thou? Thou
shall see greater things then these. And he says unto him, John V. 51
Verily verily I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the
angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.

CHAP. XXVI. The beginning of the miracles of Jesus. Water is changed into wine
at a marriage in Cana.
John Chapter 2 V. 1
ANd the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of
Jesus was there. And both Jesus was called, John V. 2
and his disciples, to the marriage. John V. 3
And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saithunto him, They have no
wine. Jesus says unto her, Woman, John V. 4
what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. His mother says unto
the servants, John V. 5
Whatsoever he says unto you, do it. John V. 6
And there were set there six water-pots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece. Jesus says unto
them, John Chapter 2 V. 7
Fill the water-pots with water. And they filled them up to the brimme. And he
says unto them, John V. 8
Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare it. John
V. 9
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and knew
not whence it was, (but the servants which drew the water knew) the governor
of the feast called the bridegroom, And says unto him, John V. 10
Every man at the beginning does set forth good wine, and when men have well
drunk, then that which is worse: but thou have kept the good wine until now.
John V. 11
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth
his glory, and his disciples believed on him.

CHAP. XXVII. The first passover in the time of Christ's ministry, and what
he then did at Jerusalem, and in the Temple.
John V. 12
AFter this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren,
and his disciples, and they continued there not many days. And the Jews
passover was at hand, John V. 13
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, John V. 14
And found in the temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the
changers of money, sitting. John V. 15
And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the
temple, and the sheep and the oxen, and poured out the changers money, and
overthrew the tables: John V. 16
And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence, make not my
Fathers house an house of merchandise. John V. 17
And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house has
eaten me up. John Chapter 2 V. 18
Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign show thou unto us,
seeing that thou do these things? Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 61
Jesus answered and said unto them, John V. 19
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. John V. 20
Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and
will thou rear it up in three days? But he spoke of the temple of his body.
John V. 21
When therefore he was risen from the dead, John V. 22
his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them: and they believed the
scripture, and the word which Jesus had said. John V. 23
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast day, many believed
in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did. John V. 24
But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men, John V. 25
And needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man.

CHAP. XXVIII. The discourse between Christ and Nicodemus.
John Chapter 3 V. 1
THere was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews: John
V. 2
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou
art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou do,
except God be with him. John V. 3
Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily verily I say unto thee, Except a man
be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus says unto him,
John V. 4
How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his
mothers womb, and be born? Jesus answered, John V. 5
Verily verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh; John V. 6
and that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit. John Chapter 3 V. 7
Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. John V. 8
The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof; but
can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is
born of the Spirit. John V. 9
Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be? John V. 10
Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and know not
these things? John V. 11
Verily verily I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify that we
have seen; and ye receive not our witness. If I have told you earthly things,
John V. 12
and ye believe not: how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things?
John V. 13
And no man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even
the Son of man which is in heaven. John V. 14
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son
of man be lifted up: John V. 15
That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
For God so loved the world, John V. 16
that he gave his onely-begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life. John Chapter 12 V. 17/47
For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the
world through him might be saved. John V. 18
He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the
onely-begotten Son of God. John V. 19
And this is the condemnation, John Chapter 1 V. 4
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light,
because their deeds were evil. For every one that does evil, John V. 20
hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved. But he that does truth, John V. 21
comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God.

CHAP. XXIX. Christ comes from Jerusalem into Judea, teaching and baptizing
there before John's imprisonment, who then baptized in Aenon.
John Chapter 3 V. 22
AFter these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea, and
there he tarried with them, John Chapter 4 V. 1/23
and baptized. And John also was baptizing in Aenon, near to Salim, because
there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized: John V. 24
For John was not yet cast into prison.

CHAP. XXX. The dispute of John's disciples. His last testimony of Christ.
John V. 25
THen there arose a question between some of John's disciples, and the Jews,
about purifying. And they came unto John, John V. 26
and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, John Chapter 1 V.
7, 14
to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to
him. John V. 27
John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from
heaven. John V. 28
Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, John Chapter 1 V. 20
I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. John V. 29
He that has the bride, is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom,
which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegrooms
voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, John V. 30
but I must decrease. He that comes from above, John V. 31
is above all: he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth:
he that comes from heaven is above all. And what he has seen and heard, John
V. 32
that he testifies, and no man receives his testimony. He that has received
his testimony, John V. 33
has set to his seal, that God is true. John Chapter 3 V. 34
For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: for God gives not the
spirit by measure unto him. Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 27
John V. 35
The father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand. He that
believes on the Son, John V. 36
has everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son, shall not see
life: but the wrath of God abides on him.

CHAP. XXXI. The imprisonment of John Baptist.
Luke Chapter 3 V. 19
BUt Herod the Tetrarch, being reproved by John for Herodias his brother
Philips wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done, Luke V. 20
Added yet this above all, Mark Chapter 6 V. 17
that he sent forth, and took Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 3, 6
and bound Luke V. 20
and shut up John in prison Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 3, 6
for Herodias his brother Philips wife: Mark Chapter 6 V. 17
for he had married her. Mark V. 18
For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers
wife. Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, Mark V. 19
and would have killed him, but she could not. For Herod feared John, Mark V. 20
knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when he
heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly. Matthew. V. 5
And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they
counted him as a prophet.

CHAP. XXXII. Christ's departure out of Judea into Galilee: his discourse with
the Samaritane woman, and the conversion of many Samaritanes.
Matthew. Chapter 4 V. 12
NOw when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, and John Chapter 4 V. 1
when therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized more disciples then John, (Though Jesus himself baptized not, John Chapter
4 V. 2
but his disciples) He Matthew. (...)John (...)
left Judea, John V. 3
and departed again into Galilee, And he must needs go through Samaria. John V.
4
Then comes he to a city of Samaria, John V. 5
which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his
son Joseph. John V. 6
Now Jacobs well was there. Jesus therefore being wearied with his journey, sat
thus on the well: and it was about the sixth hour. John V. 7
There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus says unto her, Give me
to drink. John V. 8
For his disciples were gone away into the city to buy meat. John V. 9
Then says the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou being a Jew,
ask drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings
with the Samaritanes. Jesus answered and said unto her, John V. 10
If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to
drink; thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living
water. The woman says unto him, Sir, John V. 11
thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: from whence then have
thou that living water? Art thou greater then our father Jacob, John V. 12
which gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his
cattle? John V. 13
Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinks of this water shall
thirst again: John V. 14
But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst:
but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing
up into everlasting life. The woman says unto him, Sir, John V. 15
give me this water that I thirst nor, neither come hither to draw. Jesus says
unto her, Go, call thy husband, John V. 16
and come hither. The woman answered and said, John V. 17
I have no husband. Jesus says unto her, Thou have well said, I have no
husband: John V. 18
For thou have had five husbands, and he whom thou now have is not thy husband:
in that said thou truly. John Chapter 4 V. 19
The woman says unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. John V. 20
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the
place where men ought to worship. John V. 21
Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. John V. 22
Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for salvation is of the
Jews. But the hour comes, John V. 23
and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and
in truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, John V.
24
and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. The woman
says unto him, John V. 25
I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will
tell us all things. John V. 26
Jesus says unto her, I that speak unto thee, am he. John V. 27
And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the woman:
yet no man said, What seek thou? or, Why talkest thou with her? John V. 28
The woman then left her water-pot, and went her way into the city, and says
to the men, Come, John V. 29
see a man which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?
Then they went out of the city, John V. 30
and came unto him. John V. 31
In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, cat. John V. 32
But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. Therefore said
the disciples one to another, John V. 33
Has any man brought him ought to eat? Jesus says unto them, John V. 34
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. John V.
35
Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then comes harvest? Behold, I
say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the fields: Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 37
for they are white already to harvest. John V. 36
And he that reapeth receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life eternal:
that both he that sows, and he that reapeth, may rejoice together. And herein
is that saying true, John Chapter 4 V. 37
One sows, and another reapeth. John V. 38
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor: other men labored, and
ye are entered into their labors. And many of the Samaritanes of that city
believed on him, John V. 39
for the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did.
John V. 40
So when the Samaritanes were come unto him, they besought him that he would
tarry with them: and he abode there two days. John V. 41
And many more believed, because of his own word: John V. 42
And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not be cause of thy saying: for we
have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior
of the world.

CHAP. XXXIII. The second return of Christ out of Judea into Galilee: he heals
the Rulers son.
John V. 43
NOw after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee. John V. 44
For Jesus himself testified, that Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 57
a prophet has no honor in his own country. Then when he was come into
Galilee, John V. 45
the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did at
Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the feast. John V. 46
So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, John Chapter 2 V. 1
where he made the water wine. And there was a certain noble man, whose son
was sick at Capernaum. John V. 47
When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went unto him,
and besought him that he would come down and heal his son: for he was at the
point of death. Then said Jesus unto him, John V. 48
Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. The noble man says
unto him, Sir, John Chapter 4 V. 49
come down ere my child die. Jesus says unto him, John V. 50
Go thy way, thy son lives. And the man believed the word that Jesus had
spoken unto him, and he went his way. And as he was now going down, John V. 51
his servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy son lives. John V. 52
Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend: and they said unto
him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. So the father knew,
that it was at the same hour, John V. 53
in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son lives; and himself believed, and
his whole house. John V. 54
This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of Judea
into Galilee.

THE THIRD BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE SECOND YEAR OF CHRIST'S PUBLIC MINISTRY.
CHAP. XXXIIII. The beginning of Christ's public preaching in the Synagogues of
Galilee: teaching in the Synagogue of Nazareth his own country, he is cast out.
Mark Chapter 1 V. 14
NOw after that John was put in prison, Luke Chapter 4 V. 14
Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit, and Mark Chapter 1 V. 14
came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God: Luke Chapter 4 V.
14
and there went out a fame of him through all that region round about. And he
taught in their Synagogues, Luke V. 15
being glorified of all. Luke V. 16
And he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up; and as his custom was,
he went into the Synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read. Luke
Chapter 4 V. 17
And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias, and when he
had opened the book, he found the place where it was written, The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, Luke V. 18
because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me
to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,
Luke V. 19
To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And he closed the book, Luke V. 20
and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down: and the eyes of all them
that were in the Synagogue were fastened on him. Luke V. 21
And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your
ears. And all bare him witness, Luke V. 22
and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they
said, Is not this Joseph's son? And he said unto them, Luke V. 23
Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thy self: Whatsoever
we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country. And he said,
Luke V. 24
Verily I say unto you, Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 57
No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, Luke V.
25
many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up
three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land:
Luke V. 26
But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta a city of Sidon, unto
a woman that was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elizeus
the prophet: Luke V. 27
and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. Luke V. 28
And all they in the Synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with
wrath, And rose up, Luke V. 29
and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill
(whereon their city was built) that they might cast him down headlong. Luke V.
30
But he passing through the midst of them, went his way.

CHAP. XXXV. Christ leaves Nazareth, and dwells in Capernaum. The chief heads
of his sermons in Galilee.
Matthew. Chapter 4 V. 13
ANd Jesus leaving Nazareth, Mark Chapter 1 V. 21
went, and Matthew. Chapter 4 V. 13
came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of
Zabulon and Nephthali. Matthew. V. 14
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet saying,
Matthew. V. 15
The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali, by the way of the sea beyond
Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles: The people which sat in darkness, Matthew. V. 16
saw great light, and to them that sat in the region and shadow of death,
Matthew. V. 17
light is sprung up. From that time Mark V. 14
Jesus came into Galilee, and Matthew. V. 17
began to preach Mark V. 15
the Gospel of the kingdom of God, Matthew. V. 17
and to say, Mark V. 15
The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; Repent ye, and
believe the Gospel: Matthew. V. 17
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

CHAP. XXXVI. The miraculous taking of fishes. The calling of Peter, Andrew,
James and John.
Matthew. V. 18
ANd Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brothers, Simon which is
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea (for they were
fishers) Luke Chapter 5 V. 1
And it came to pass, that as the people preassed upon him to hear the word
of God, he stood by the lake of Genesareth, And saw two ships standing by the
lake: Luke V. 2
but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets. Luke V. 3
And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simons, and prayed him that he
would thrust out a little from the land: and he sat down, and taught the people
out of the ship. Luke V. 4
Now when he had left speakings he said unto Simon, Lanch out into the deep,
and let down your nets for a draught. Luke Chapter 5 V. 5
And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toyled all the night, and
have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net. And when
they had this done, Luke V. 6
they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their net brake. And they
beckened unto their partners, Luke V. 7
which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they
came and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink. Luke V. 8
When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying, Depart from me,
for I am a sinful man, O Lord. For he was astonished, Luke V. 9
and all that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken:
Luke V. 10
And so was also James and John the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with
Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch
men. Luke V. 11
And when they had brought their ships to land, Mark Chapter 1 V. 17
Jesus said unto them, Matthew. Chapter 4 V. 19
Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. Matthew. V. 20
And they straightway left their nets, Luke V. 11
and all things, Matthew. V. 20
and followed him. Mark V. 19
And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw other two brethren, James
the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their
father, mending their nets. Mark V. 20
And straightway he called them, Matthew. V. 21
and they straightway Mark V. 20
left their father Zebedee in the ship, with the hired servants, and went after
him, Matthew. V. 20
and followed him.

CHAP. XXXVII. An unclean spirit is cast out in the Synagogue of Capernaum.
Mark V. 21
ANd they went into Capernaum Luke Chapter 4 V. 31
a city of Galilee; Mark V. 21
and straightway on the sabbathday day he entered into the Synagogue, Luke Chapter 4
V. 32
and taught them. And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was
with power, Mark Chapter 1 V. 22
for Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 29
he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the Scribes. Mark V. 23
Luke V. 33
And there was in their Synagogue a man which had a spirit of an unclean devil,
and cried Luke V. 34
with a loud voice, Saying, Let us alone, what have we to do with thee, thou
Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the
holy one of God. Luke V. 35
And Jesus rebuked him, faying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when
the devil had thrown him in the midst, Mark V. 26
and when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he went
out of him, Luke V. 35
and hurt him not. Mark V. 27
And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, Luke
V. 36
and spoke among themselves, saying, Mark V. 27
What thing is this? Luke V. 36
What a word is this? Mark V. 27
What new doctrine is this? for with authority Luke V. 36
and power Mark V. 27
he commands even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him, Luke V. 36
and they come out. Mark V. 28
And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about
Galilee. Luke V. 37
And the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Peter's wives mother is healed of a sever.
Luke V. 38
ANd he arose out of the Synagogue, and entered into Simons house, Mark V. 29
and forthwith when they were come out of the Synagogue, they entered into the
house of Simon, and Andrew, with James and John. Mark V. 30
But Simons wives mother lay sick of a fever, for Luke V. 38
she was taken with a great fever, Mark V. 30
and anon they tell him of her, Luke V. 38
and besought him for her. Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 14
And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wives mother laid, and
sick of a fever. Mark Chapter 1 V. 31
And he came, Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 15
and touched her hand, Mark Chapter 1 V. 31
and took her by the hand, and lift her up. Luke Chapter 4 V. 39
And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever, Mark Chapter 1 V. 31
and it left her immediately, Luke Chapter 4 V. 39
and immediately she Matthew. (...).
arose, Luke. (...).
Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 15
and ministered unto them.

CHAP. XXXIX. Diverse sick persons healed by Christ on the evening of that
sabbath.
Matthew. V. 16
WHen the even was come, Mark V. 32
when the sun was setting, Luke V. 40
all they that had any sick with diverse diseases, brought them unto him. (...)
They Matthew. (...).
brought unto him all that were diseased, Matthew. V. 16
and many that were possessed with devils. Mark V. 33
And all the city was gathered together at the door. Matthew. V. 16
And he cast out the spirits with his word, Mark V. 34
and healed many that were sick of diverse diseases; Luke V. 40
and laid his hands on every one of them, Matthew. V. 17
and healed all that were sick. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our
sicknesses. Mark V. 34
And he cast out many devils, which Luke V. 41
came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God.
And he rebuking them, suffered them not to speak, Mark V. 34
because they knew him, Luke V. 41
that he was Christ.

CHAP. XL. What came to pass the day after the former sabbath.
Mark V. 35
ANd in the morning rising up a great while before day, Luke V. 42
when it was day, Mark V. 35
he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. Mark Chapter 1
V. 36
And Simon, and they that were with him, followed after him. Mark V. 37
And when they had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for thee. And he
said unto them, Mark V. 38
Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for therefore
came I forth. Luke Chapter 4 V. 43
And the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he should
not depart from them. And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God
to other cities also, for therefore am I sent.

CHAP. XLI. Christ's peragration through all Galilee.
Mark V. 39
ANd Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching
the Gospel of the kingdom, Luke V. 44
in the Synagogues of Galilee, Mark V. 39
throughout all Galilee, Matthew. Chapter 4 V. 23
and healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the
people, Mark V. 39
and casting out devils. Matthew. V. 24
And his fame went throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him all sick
people, that were taken with diverse diseases, and torments, and those which
were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatic, and those that had
the palsy; and he healed them. Matthew. V. 25
And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from
Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan.

CHAP. XLII. A leper healed in that peragration of Galilee.
Luke Chapter 5 V. 12
ANd it came to pass when he was in a certain city, behold, Mark V. 40
a leper, Luke Chapter 5 V. 12
a man full of leprosy Matthew. V. 25
came to him, Luke Chapter 5 V. 12
who seeing Jesus, and kneeling down to him, fell on his face, and besought
him, saying unto him, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Mark Chapter 1
V. 41
And Jesus moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, Mark V.
42
and says unto him, I will, be thou clean. Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 2
And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and
he was cleansed. And he straightly Mark (...). Luke (...).
Mark V. 43
charged him to tell no man, Mark V. 44
and forthwith sent him away; And says unto him, See thou say nothing to any
man, but go thy way, show thy self to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing
those things according as Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them. Mark V.
45
But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter,
Luke Chapter 5 V. 15
and so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: Mark V. 45
insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without
in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter, Luke Chapter 5 V. 15
and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their
infirmities. And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, Luke V. 16
and prayed.

CHAP. XLIII. Christ cures a man of the palsy.
Mark Chapter 2 V. 1
ANd again he entered into Capernaum after some days, and it was noised that he
was in the house. Mark V. 2
And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no room
to receive them, no not so much as about the door. Luke V. 17
And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were
Pharisees and Doctors of the Law sitting by, which were come out of every town
of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem: Mark V. 2
and he preached the word unto them, Luke V. 18
and the power of the Lord was present to heal them. And behold, men Mark Chapter 2
V. 3
come unto him, bringing Luke V. 18
in a bed Mark Chapter 2 V. 3
one sick of the palsy, which was born of four, Luke V. 18
a man which was taken with a palsy: and they sought means to bring him in,
and to lay him before him. Mark V. 4
And when they could not come nigh unto him for preasse, Luke Chapter 5 V. 19
and when they could not find by what way they might bring him in, because of
the multitude, they went upon the house top, Mark V. 4
uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down
Luke Chapter 5 V. 19
through the tiling Mark V. 4
the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay; Luke Chapter 5 V. 19
him with his couch they let down into the midst before Jesus: and thus Matthew.
Chapter 9 V. 2
Mark V. 4
they brought unto him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed. Mark V. 5
And when Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son,
Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 2
be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. And behold Mark V. 6
certain of the Scribes were sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,
Matthew. V. 3
said within themselves, This man blasphemeth. Luke V. 21
And the Scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Mark V. 7
Why does this man thus speak blasphemies? Luke V. 21
Who is this which speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?
And immediately when Jesus Matthew. V. 4
knew Luke V. 22
and perceived Mark V. 8
in his spirit Matthew. V. 4
their thoughts, Mark V. 8
that they so reasoned within themselves, Luke V. 22
he answering said unto them, Mark V. 8
Why reason ye these things in your hearts? Matthew. V. 4
Wherefore think you evil in your hearts? For Mark V. 9
whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Matthew. V. 5
Thy sins be forgiven thee? or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and walk?
Mark V. 10
But that ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive
sins ( Matthew. V. 6
then says he to the sick of the palsy) Mark V. 11
I say unto thee, Arise, take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house. Luke
V. 25
And immediately be arose up before them, and took up Mark Chapter 2 V. 12
the bed Luke V. 25
whereon he lay, Mark Chapter 2 V. 12
and went forth before them all, insomuch that they were all amazed: Matthew. V. 6
and he departed to his own house, Luke V. 25
glorifying God. Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 8
But when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, Luke Chapter 5 V. 26
and were all amazed; Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 8
and they glorified God which had given such power unto men, Luke Chapter 5 V. 26
and were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to day, Mark
Chapter 2 V. 12
we never saw it on this fashion.

CHAP. XLIIII. The calling of S. Matthew.
Luke V. 27
ANd after these things, Matthew. V. 9
as Jesus passed forth from thence, Mark V. 13
he went forth again by the seaside, and all the multitude resorted unto him;
and he taught them. Mark V. 14
And as he passed by, he saw Matthew. V. 9
a man, Luke V. 27
a publicane, named Levi, Mark V. 14
the son of Alpheus, sitting at the receipt of custom, Matthew. V. 9
which was named also Matthew: and he said unto him, Follow me. Luke V. 27
And he left all, rose up, Luke V. 28
and followed him.

CHAP. XLV. The history of the second passover, which was in the second year
of Christ's ministry. A diseased man is cured at the pool of Bethesda.
John Chapter 5 V. 1
AFter this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. John
V. 2
Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep- market a pool, which is called in the
Hebrew tongue, Bethesda, having five porches. John V. 3
In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered,
waiting for the moving of the water. John V. 4
For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the
water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in, was
made whole of whatsoever disease he had. John Chapter 5 V. 5
And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years.
When Jesus saw him lie, John V. 6
and knew that he had been now a long time in that case, he says unto him,
Will thou be made whole? John V. 7
The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man when the water is troubled,
to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another steppeth down before
me. Jesus says unto him, Rise, John V. 8
take up thy bed and walk. John V. 9
And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked: and
on the same day was the sabbath. The Jews therefore said unto him that was
cured, John V. 10
It is the sabbath day, it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. He
answered them, John V. 11
He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy bed and walk. Then
asked they him, John V. 12
What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed and walk? And he that
was healed, John V. 13
wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in
that place. John V. 14
Afterward Jesus finds him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art
made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. The man departed,
John V. 15
and told the Jews that it was Jesus which had made him whole.

CHAP. XLVI. The first disputation of Christ with the Jews concerning the
sabbath. His sermon upon that occasion at Jerusalem in the second Passover.
John V. 16
ANd therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he
had done these things on the sabbath day. John Chapter 5 V. 17
But Jesus answered them, My Father works hitherto, and I work. John V. 18
Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had
broken the sabbath, but said also, that God was his father, making himself
equal with God. John V. 19
Then answered Jesus, and said unto them, Verily verily I say unto you, The
Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do: for what
thing soever he does, these also does the Son likewise. For the Father loves
the Son, John V. 20
and shows him all things that himself does: and he will show him greater
works then these, that ye may marvel. For as the Father raises up the dead,
John V. 21
and quickens them: even so the Son quickens whom he will. John V. 22
For the Father judges no man: but has committed all judgment unto the
Son: that all men should honor the Son, John V. 23
even as they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not
the Father which has sent him. Verily verily I say unto you, John V. 24
He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed from death unto life.
Verily verily I say unto you, John V. 25
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God: and they that hear, shall live. For as the Father has life in
himself: John V. 26
so has he given to the Son to have life in himself; John V. 27
And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the
Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, John V. 28
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come
forth, Matthew. Chapter 25 V. 46
John V. 29
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. I can of mine own self do
nothing; John V. 30
as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just, because I seek not mine own
will, but the will of the Father which has sent me. John Chapter 5 V. 31
John Chapter 8 V. 14
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 17
John V. 32
There is another that bears witness of me; and I know that the witness
which he witnesses of me, is true. John Chapter 17 V. 33
Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. But I receive not
testimony from man: John V. 34
but these things I say, that ye might be saved. John V. 35
He was a burning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a season to
rejoice in his light. John V. 36
But I have greater witness then that of John: for the works which the Father
has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that
the Father has sent me. Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 5
John V. 37
And the Father himself which has sent me, has born witness of me. Ye have
neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. John V. 38
And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he has sent, him ye believe
not. Search the scriptures, John V. 39
for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me. And ye will not come to me, John V. 40
that ye might have life. I receive not honor from men. John V. 41
But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. John V. 42
I am come in my Fathers name, John V. 43
and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will
receive. John Chapter 12 V. 44 45
How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? John V. 45
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that accuses
you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. John V. 46
For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. John
V. 47
But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?

CHAP. XLVII. The history of the seventh and last day of the feast. The
disciples pull the ears of corn: thence arises a dispute about the sabbath.
Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
ANd it came to pass Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 1
at that time, Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
that Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 1
Jesus Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
went through the corn fields on the sabbath day, that is, Luke Chapter 6 V. 1
on the second sabbath after the first, Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 1
and his disciples were an hungered. Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
And they began as they went, to pluck the ears of corn, Luke V. 2
and did eat, rubbing them in their hands. And certain of the Pharisees said
unto them, Why doye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath-dayes?
Matthew. V. 2
But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, Behold, Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
why do Matthew. V. 2
thy disciples Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
on the sabbath day, Matthew. V. 2
that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath day? Luke V. 3
And Jesus answering them Matthew. V. 2
said unto them, Have ye Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
never read Luke V. 3
so much as this, Mark Chapter 2 V. 23
what David did when he had need, and was an hungered, he, and they that were
with him? Mark V. 26
How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest,
Luke V. 3
and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them that were with him,
Matthew. V. 2
which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them that were with him,
Matthew. V. 5
but only for the priests alone? Or have ye not read in the law, how that on
the sabbath-dayes the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, Matthew. V. 6
and are blameless? But I say unto you, that in this place is one greater then
the temple. But if ye had known what this means, Matthew. V. 7
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the
guiltless. Mark V. 27
And he said unto them, The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
sabbath. Mark V. 28
Therefore the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.

CHAP. LXVIII. A man that had a withered hand, is healed on the sabbath day.
Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 9
ANd after he was departed thence, he went into their Synagogue. Luke Chapter 6 V. 6
And it came to pass on another sabbath, that he entered into the Synagogue,
and taught: And Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 9
behold, Mark V. 28
there was a man which had a withered hand, for Luke V. 7
his right hand was withered. And the Scribes and Pharisees watched him,
whether he would heal him on the sabbath, that they might find an accusation
against him, Mark V. 28
that they might accuse him. Matthew. V. 10
And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath-dayes? that
they might accuse him. Luke V. 8
But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand,
Rise up, and stand forth in the mids. And he arose, and stood forth. Then said
Jesus unto them, Luke V. 9
I will ask you one thing, Is it lawful on the sabbath-dayes to do good, or to
do evil? to save life, or to destroy it, and Mark V. 28
kill? Matthew. V. 11
But they held their peace. And he said unto them, What man shall there be
among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the
sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, Matthew. V. 12
and lift it out? How much then is a man better then a sheep? Wherefore it is
lawful to do well on the sabbath-dayes. Mark Chapter 3 V. 5
And when he had looked round about on them all with anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, Matthew. V. 13
Then says he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand: Luke V. 9
and he did so, Mark Chapter 3 V. 5
and stretched it forth, and his hand was restored whole as the other.

CHAP. XLIX. The Pharisees conspire with the Herodians against Christ: his
departure to the sea.
Luke Chapter 6 V. 11
ANd they were filled with madness, and communed one with another, what they
might do to Jesus. Mark Chapter 3 V. 6
And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 14
held a council Mark Chapter 3 V. 6
with the Herodians, Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 14
and took counsel against him, how they might destroy him. Matthew. V. 15
But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence Mark V. 7
with his disciples to the sea, Matthew. V. 15
and great multitudes followed him: Mark V. 8
for a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judea, And from
Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Jordan, and they about Tire and
Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, Mark V.
9
came unto him. And he spoke to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on
him, because of the multitude, lest they should throng him. Mark V. 10
For he had healed many, insomuch that they preassed upon him for to touch him,
as many as had plagues; Matthew. V. 15
and he healed them all. Mark V. 11
And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried,
saying, Thou art the Son of God. Mark V. 12
And he straightly charged them, that they should not make him known: Matthew. V. 17
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,
Matthew. V. 18
Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is well
pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles. Matthew. V. 19
He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets. Matthew. V. 20
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till
he send for th judgment unto victory. Matthew. V. 21
And in his name shall the Gentiles trust.

CHAP. L. The election of the Apostles.
Luke Chapter 6 V. 12
ANd it came to pass in those days, Mark Chapter 3 V. 13
that he went out, Matthew. V. 21
and goes up into a mountain, Luke V. 13
to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 1
And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples Mark Chapter 3 V. 13
whom he would, and they came unto him: Luke V. 13
and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles. Mark V. 14
And he ordained twelve that they should be with him, and that he might send
them forth to preach: Mark V. 15
And to have power to heal sicknesses, Mark V. 16
and to cast out devils. And Simon, Luke V. 14
whom he also Mark V. 16
surnamed Peter, Luke V. 14
and Andrew his brother, Mark V. 17
And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James (and he surnamed
them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder) Luke V. 15
Philip and Bartholomew, Matthew, and Thomas, James the son of Alpheus, and
Simon Mark V. 17
the Canaanite, Luke V. 15
called Zelotes; And Judas the brother of James, surnamed Mark V. 17
Thaddeus, Luke V. 16
and Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor, Mark V. 17
which betrayed him. Luke V. 17
And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company of his
disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and
from the seacoast of Tire and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed
of their diseases: And they that were vexed with unclean spirits: Luke V. 18
and they were healed. Luke V. 19
And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him,
and healed them all.

CHAP. LI. Christ's sermon in the mount after the choosing of the apostles.
Sect. I. Who are blessed, or (as they are called) the Beatitudes.
Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 1
ANd seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set,
his disciples came unto him. Luke Chapter 6 V. 20
And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, Matthew. V. 2
And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Luke Chapter 6 V. 20
Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Matthew. V. 3
Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Luke V.
21
Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Matthew. V. 4
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Matthew. V. 5
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Luke Chapter 6 V. 21
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Matthew. V. 6
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled. Matthew. V. 7
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Matthew. V. 8
Blessed are the pure in heart: Matthew. V. 9
for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called
the children of God. Matthew. V. 10
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. Luke V. 22
Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and shall separate you from their
company, and shall revile you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son
of man's sake; Matthew. V. 11
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake. Luke V. 23
Rejoice ye in that day, Matthew. V. 12
and be exceeding glad, Luke V. 23
and leap for joy, for behold, Matthew. V. 12
for great is your reward in heaven: Luke V. 23
for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets, Matthew. V. 12
for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. Luke V. 24
But woe unto you that are rich: for ye have received your consolation. Woe unto
you that are full: for ye shall hunger. Luke Chapter 6 V. 25
Woe unto you that laugh now: for ye shall mourn and weep. Luke V. 26
Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you: for so did their fathers to
the false prophets.

Sect. II. The duties of the apostles in their ministry.
Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 13
Ye are the Mark Chapter 9 V. 50 Luke Chapter 14 V. 34
salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be
salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, Matthew. V. 14
and to be trodden under foot of men. Ye are the light of the world. A city
that is set on an hill, Matthew. V. 15
cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel; but
on a candlestick: and it gives light unto all that are in the house. Let your
light so shine before men, Matthew. V. 16
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Sect. III. The exposition of the Law.
Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets: Matthew. V. 17
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Matthew. V.
18
Luke Chapter 16 V. 18
Till heaven and earth pass, oncjote or one tittle shall in no wise pass from
the law, Matthew. V. 19
till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do, and teach them, the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. V. 20
For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Matthew. V. 21
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill: and
whosoever shall kill, Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 22
shall be in danger of the judgment. But I say unto you, that whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment:
and whosoever shall say to his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the
council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
Matthew. V. 23
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee; Matthew. V. 24
Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to
thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Matthew. V. 25
Luke Chapter 12 V. 58
Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him: lest
at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver
thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily, Matthew. V. 26
I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid
the uttermost farthing. Matthew. V. 27
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Matthew. V. 28
Thou shall not commit adultery. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on
a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart. Matthew. V. 29
And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it
is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell. Matthew. V. 30
And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it
is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell. Matthew. V. 31
It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a
writing of divorcement. Matthew. V. 32
But I say unto you, that Luke Chapter 16 V. 18
whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication,
causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is
divorced, Matthew. V. 33
commits adultery. Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of
old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord
thine oaths. Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 34
But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods
throne: Matthew. V. 35
Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
city of the great King. Matthew. V. 36
Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black. Matthew. V. 37
But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then
these, comes of evil. Matthew. V. 38
Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, Matthew. V. 39
and a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but
whosoever shall Matthew. (...) Luke (...)
smite thee on thy right cheek, Luke Chapter 6 V. 29
offer Matthew. V. 39
and turn to him the other also: Luke Chapter 6 V. 29
and him that takes away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also. Matthew.
V. 39
And if any will sue thee at the law, Matthew. V. 40
and take away thy coat, Matthew. V. 41
let him have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go
with him twain. Matthew. V. 42
Give to him that asks thee; and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not
thou away: Luke V. 30
and of him that takes away thy goods, ask them not again. Luke V. 31
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. Ye
have heard that it has been said, Matthew. V. 43
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. Luke V. 27
But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them that hate
you. Luke V. 28
Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you,
Matthew. V. 45
and persecute you: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven: for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just and on the unjust. Luke V. 32
For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? Matthew. V. 46
what reward have ye? do not even the Publicanes the same? Luke V. 32
for sinners also love those that love them. Matthew. V. 47
And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more then others? do not
even the Publicanes so? Luke Chapter 6 V. 33
And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye? for
sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to
receive, Luke V. 34
what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, that they may receive as
much again. Luke V. 35
But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again: and
your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the highest: for he
is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, Luke
V. 36
as your Father also is merciful. Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 48
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

Sect. IIII. Of Alms.
Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 1
to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in
heaven. Matthew. V. 2
Therefore, when thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as
the hypocrites do, in the Synagogues, and in the streets, that they may have
glory of men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward. Matthew. V. 3
But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does:
Matthew. V. 4
That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which sees in secret,
himself shall reward thee openly.

Sect. V. Of Prayer.
And when thou prayest, Matthew. V. 5
thou shall not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the
Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men.
Verily, I say unto you, Matthew. V. 6
they have their reward. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and
when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy
Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 7
But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Matthew. V. 8
Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knows what things ye
have need of, Matthew. V. 9
before ye ask him. After this manner therefore pray ye: Luke Chapter 11 V. 2
Our Father which art in heaven, Matthew. V. 10
Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. Matthew. V. 11/12
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power,
and the glory, Matthew. V. 14
for ever. Amen. Mark Chapter 11 V. 25
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you. Matthew. V. 15
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your trespasses.

Sect. VI. Of Fasting.
Moreover, Matthew. V. 16
when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they
disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily, I say
unto you, they have their reward. But thou, Matthew. V. 17
when thou fastest, anoint thine head, Matthew. V. 18
and wash thy face: That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father
which is in secret: and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee
openly.

Sect. VII. Against covetousness and worldly cares.
Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, Matthew. V. 19
where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.
Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 20
Luke Chapter 12 V. 33
But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. Matthew. V. 21
where your treasure is, Matthew. V. 22
there will your heart be also. Luke Chapter 11 V. 34
light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light. Matthew. V. 23
But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!
Matthew. V. 24
Luke Chapter 16 V. 13
No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. Matthew. V. 25
Therefore I say unto you, Luke Chapter 12 V. 22
Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor
yet for your body what ye shall put on: Is not the life more then meat, and
the body then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air: Matthew. V. 26
for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your
heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much better then they? Matthew. V. 27
Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature? Matthew. V.
28
And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field how they
grow; they toil not, neither do they spinne. Matthew. V. 29
And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these. Matthew. V. 30
Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, Matthew. V. 31
Oye of little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or
what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed? Matthew. V. 32
(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these things. Matthew. V. 33
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 34
Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought
for the things of it self. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

Sect. VIII. Against judging. Of brotherly reproof.
Judge not, Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 1 2
Mark Chapter 4 V. 24
For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again. Luke Chapter 6 V. 37
Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: Give, Luke V. 38
and it shall be given unto you: good measure, pressed down, and shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into you bosom. For with the same
measure that ye mete withal, it shall be measured to you again. Luke V. 39
And he spoke a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind? shall they
not both fall into the ditch? Luke V. 40
The disciple is not above his master; but every one that is perfect shall be
as his master. Matthew. V. 3
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest
not the beam that is in thine own eye? Matthew. V. 4
Or how will thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye; and behold, a beam is in thine own eyes? Luke V. 42
when thou thy self beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou
hypocrite, Matthew. V. 5
cast out first the beam out of thine own eye; and then shall thou see clearly
to cast out the mote that is in thy brothers eye.

Sect. IX. Holy things are not to be given to dogs.
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, Matthew. V. 6
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their
feet, and turn again and rent you. Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 21 22
Mark Chapter 11 V. 24
Luke Chapter 11 V. 9
John Chapter 16 V. 24
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek and ye shall find: knock, and it shall
be opened unto you. Matthew. V. 8
For every one that asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him
that knocks, Matthew. V. 9
it shall be opened. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread,
will he give him a stone? Matthew. V. 10
Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? Matthew. V. 11
If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that
ask him? Matthew. V. 12
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Sect. X. Of the strait gate, and narrow way.
Matthew. V. 13
Luke Chapter 13 V. 24
Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Matthew. V. 14
Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leads unto life,
and few there be that find it.

Sect. XI. Of false prophets.
Beware of false prophets, Matthew. V. 15
which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
Matthew. V. 16
Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit. Matthew. V. 17
Luke Chapter 6 V. 43
For a good tree brings not forth corrupt fruit: neither does a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit. For every tree is known by his own fruit: Luke V. 44
for of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramblebush gather they grapes.
Matthew. V. 18
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit. Matthew. Chapter 7/3 V. 19/10
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. Matthew. V. 20
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Luke Chapter 6 V. 45
A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that which
is good: and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. Luke
V. 46
And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Matthew. V. 21
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will
say to me in that day, Lord, Matthew. V. 22
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out
devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? Matthew. V. 23
Luke Chapter 13 V. 27
And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that
work iniquity.

Sect. XII. The conclusion of Christ's sermon in the mount. Against Hypocrisy.
An exhortation to true piety.
Therefore Luke V. 47
whosoever comes to me, and hears Matthew. V. 24
these sayings of mine, and does them, Luke V. 47
I will show you to whom he is like; Matthew. V. 24
I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock. For Luke
V. 48
he is like a man which built an house, and dug deep, and laid the
foundation on a rock. Matthew. V. 25
And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, Luke V. 48
and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and
could not shake it, Matthew. V. 26
and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that hears
these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man
which built his house upon the sand, Luke V. 49
without a foundation upon the earth. Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 27
And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, Luke V. 48
against which the stream did beat vehemently; and immediately it fell, and the
ruin of that house was great. Matthew. V. 28
And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings, Mark Chapter 1 V. 22 Luke
Chapter 4 V. 32
the people were astonished at his doctrine. For he taught them as one having
authority, Matthew. V. 29
and not as the Scribes.

CHAP. LII. A leper healed after the sermon on the mount.
Luke Chapter 7 V. 1
NOw when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people, and
Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 1
when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him. Matthew.
V. 2
Mark Chapter 1 V. 40 Luke Chapter 5 V. 12
And behold, there came a leper, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, Matthew. V. 3
thou can make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him,
saying, I will, be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
Matthew. V. 4
And Jesus says unto him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, show thy self
to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto
them.

CHAP. LIII. The Centurion in Capernaum intercedes for his servant, that he
might be cured of the palsy.
Luke Chapter 7 V. 1 2
ANd he entered into Capernaum. And a certain Centurions servant, who was dear
unto him, was sick and ready to die. Luke V. 3
And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews,
beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant. Luke V. 4
And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying, that he was
worthy for whom he should do this. Luke Chapter 7 V. 5
For he loves our nation, and has built us a Synagogue. Then Jesus went with
them. Luke V. 6
And when he was now not far from the house, the Centurion sent friends to
him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof. Wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to
come unto thee: Luke V. 7
but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed. Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 5
And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, the Centurion came unto him,
beseeching him, And saying, Matthew. V. 6
Lord, my servant lies at home sick of the palsy, Matthew. V. 7
grievously tormented. And Jesus says unto him, Matthew. V. 8
I will come and heal him. The Centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not
worthy that thou should come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my
servant shall be healed. Luke V. 8
For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say
unto one, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes: and to my
servant, Do this, and he does it. When Jesus heard these things, Luke V. 9
he marvelled at him, and turned him about, and said unto the people that
followed him, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in
Israel. Matthew. V. 11
And I say unto you, that many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. V. 12
But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew. V. 13
And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have believed, so
be it unto thee. And his servant was healed in the self same hour. Luke V. 10
And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole that
had been sick.

CHAP. LIIII. The widows son of Naim raised to life.
Luke Chapter 7 V. 11
ANd it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Naim; and
many of his disciples went with him, and much people. Now when he came neigh to
the gate of the city, Luke V. 12
behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and
she was a widow: and much people of the city was with her. Luke V. 13
And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep
not. Luke V. 14
And he came and touched the biere, (and they that bare him stood still) and he
said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was dead, sat up, Luke V.
15
and began to speak: and he delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear
on all, Luke V. 16
and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us, and
that God has visited his people. And this rumor of him went forth throughout
all Judea, Luke V. 17
and throughout all the region round about.

CHAP. LV. Messengers are sent from John Baptist out of prison to Christ.
Luke V. 18
ANd the disciples of John showed him all these things. Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 2
Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, Luke V. 19
calling unto him two of his disciples, he sent them to Jesus, Matthew. V. 3
And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?
Luke V. 20
When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist has sent us unto
thee, saying, Art thou he that should come, or look we for another? Luke V. 21
And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of
evil spirits, and unto many that were blind he gave sight. Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 4
Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and show John again those things which
ye do hear and see: Matthew. V. 5
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed,
and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel
preached unto them. Matthew. V. 6
And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.

CHAP. LVI. The sermon of Christ to the multitude, when the disciples of John
Baptist were departed.
Sect. I. The Encomium given by Christ to John Baptist.
Luke Chapter 7 V. 24
ANd when the messengers of John were departed, Matthew. V. 7
Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into
the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? Matthew. V. 8
But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, Luke
V. 25
they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, Matthew. V. 9
are in kings houses. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea I say
unto you, and more then a prophet. Matthew. V. 10
For this is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. Luke V. 28
For Matthew. V. 11
verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women, there has not risen
a greater Luke V. 28
prophet Matthew. V. 11
then John the Baptist: notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of
heaven, is greater then he. Matthew. V. 12
Luke Chapter 16 V. 16
And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Matthew. V. 13
For all the prophets and the Law prophesied until John. Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 14
And if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come. Luke Chapter 7 V.
29
And all the people that heard him, and the publicanes justified God, being
baptized with the baptism of John. Luke V. 30
But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves,
being not baptized of him. Matthew. V. 15
He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Sect. II. The parable of the children playing in the marketplace.
Luke V. 31
And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation?
and to what are they like? Luke V. 32
They are like unto children sitting in the marketplace, Matthew. V. 16
and calling unto their fellows, Matthew. V. 17
And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced: we have mourned
unto you, and ye have not lamented, nor Luke V. 33
wept. For John the Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine; and
ye say, He has a devil. Luke V. 34
The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold, a gluttonous
man, and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicanes and sinners. Luke V. 35
But wisdom is justified of all her children.

Sect. III. Christ upbraids and complains of Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum.
Matthew. V. 20
Then began be to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were
done, Luke Chapter 10 V. 13
because they repented not. Matthew. V. 21
Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which
were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes. Matthew. V. 22
But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the day
of judgment, Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 23
then for you. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shall be
brought down to hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in thee,
had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto
you, Matthew. V. 24
that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of
judgment, then for thee.

Sect. IIII. Christ's thanksgiving.
Matthew. V. 25
Luke Chapter 10 V. 21
At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them unto babes. Even so Father, Matthew. V. 26
for so it seemed good in thy sight.

Sect. V. The conclusion of Christ's sermon.
Matthew. V. 27
John Chapter 3 V. 35
All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knows the Son
but the Father: John Chapter 6 V. 46
neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the
Son will reveal him. Matthew. V. 28
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, Matthew. V. 29
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. Matthew. V. 30
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

CHAP. LVII. Mary Magdalene anointeth Christ's feet at the house of Simon the
Pharisee. Mark Chapter 14 V. 3

Luke Chapter 7 V. 36
ANd one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him, and he went
into the Pharisees house, and sat down to meat. Luke Chapter 7 V. 37
And behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus
sat at meat in the Pharisees house, brought an alabaster box of ointment; And
stood at his feet behind him weeping, Luke V. 38
and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. Luke V. 39
Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him, saw it, he spoke within himself,
saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who, and what manner
of woman this is that touches him: for she is a sinner. And Jesus answering,
Luke V. 40
said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he says, Master,
say on. Luke V. 41
There was a certain creditour, which had two debtors: the one ought five
hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they had nothing to pay, Luke V.
42
he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him
most? Simon answered and said, Luke V. 43
I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou have
rightly judged. Luke V. 44
And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, See thou this woman? I
entered into thine house, thou gave me no water for my feet: but she has
washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Luke V. 45
Thou gave me no kiss: but this woman, since the time I came in, has not
ceased to kiss my feet. Luke V. 46
Mine head with oil thou did not anoint: but this woman has anointed my feet
with ointment. Luke V. 47
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she
loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. Luke V. 48
And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. Luke V. 49
And they that sat at meat with him, began to say within themselves, Who is
this that forgiveth sins also? Luke V. 50
And he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace.

CHAP. LVIII. Christ preaches through cities and villages.
Luke Chapter 8 V. 1
ANd it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city and
village preaching, and showing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God: and the
twelve were with him. Luke V. 2
And certain women which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary
called Magdalene, Mark Chapter 16 V. 9
Luke V. 3
out of whom went seven devils; And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's steward,
and Susanna, and many others which ministered unto him of their substance.

CHAP. LIX. Christ returns to his house at Capernaum. The calumny of the
Scribes. The deliberation of his kindred, and a sharp dispute between him and
the Scribes.
Mark Chapter 3 V. 19 20
ANd they went into an house. And the multitude comes together again, so that
they could not so much as eat bread. Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 22
Luke Chapter 11 V. 14
Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb: and he
healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. And all the
people were amazed, Matthew. V. 23
and said, Is this the son of David? Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 24/34
But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow does not cast out
devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.

Mark V. 21
And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on him: for they
said, He is beside himself. Mark V. 22
And the Scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He has Beelzebub, and by
the prince of the devils casts he out devils. Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 25
And Jesus knew their thoughts, Mark Chapter 3 V. 23
and he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, How can Satan
cast out Satan? Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 25
Mark Chapter 3 V. 23
Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation: and every
city or house divided against it self, shall not stand. Mark V. 26
And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but
has an end. Matthew. V. 26
And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; Matthew. V. 27
how shall then his kingdom stand? And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.
Matthew. V. 28
But if I cast out devils by the spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is
come unto you. Matthew. V. 29
Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil his house. Matthew.
V. 30
He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad. Wherefore Mark V. 28
verily I say unto you, Matthew. V. 31
Luke Chapter 12 V. 10
All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith
soever they shall blaspheme: Matthew. V. 32
but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And
whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him:
but whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come, Mark V. 29
for ever, but is in danger of eternal damnation: Mark V. 30
Because they said, He has an unclean spirit. Matthew. V. 33
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit. Matthew. V. 34 Matthew.
Chapter 3 V. 7
O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Matthew. V. 35
A good man, out of the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things:
and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 36
brings forth evil things. But I say unto you, That every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. Matthew. V.
37
For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned. Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 38/1
Luke Chapter 11 V. 29
Then certain of the Scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we
would see a sign from thee. Matthew. V. 39
But he answered and said to them, An evil and adulterous generation seeks
after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it, Matthew. V. 40
but the sign of the prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three days and three
nights in the whales belly: so shall the Son of man be three days and three
nights in the heart of the earth. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment
with this generation, Matthew. V. 41
and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and
behold, a greater then Jonas is here. Matthew. V. 42
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation,
and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to
hear the wisdom of Solomen; and behold, a greater then Solomon is here.
Matthew. V. 43
Luke Chapter 11 V. 24
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
Matthew. V. 44
seeking rest, and finds none. Then he says, I will return into my house
from whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept,
Matthew. V. 45
and garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself, and they enter in and
dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse then the first. Even so
shall it be also unto this wicked generation.

CHAP. LX. Christ's mother and brethren desire to speak with him.
Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 46
ANd while he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren
Luke Chapter 8 V. 19
came to him, and Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 46
stood without, desiring to speak with him, Luke Chapter 8 V. 19
and could not come at him for the preasse, Mark Chapter 3 V. 31
and standing without, sent unto him, calling him. Matthew. V. 47
Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to speak with thee. Matthew. V. 48
But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are
my brethren? Mark V. 32
And the multitude sat about him, and they say unto him, Behold, thy mother and
thy brethren Luke V. 20
stand without, Mark V. 33
they seek for thee, for thee, Luke V. 20
desiring to see thee. Mark V. 34
And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren? And he looked
round about on them which sat about him, Matthew. V. 49
and he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my
mother, and my brethren. For whosoever shall do the will of Mark V. 35
God Matthew. V. 50
my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, Mark V. 35
and my sister and mother. Luke V. 21
My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it.

CHAP. LXI. Christ's parabolicall sermon to the multitude by the seaside out of
a ship.
Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 1
THe same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the seaside. Luke Chapter 8
V. 4
And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of every
city, Mark Chapter 4 V. 1
he began again to teach by the seaside. Matthew. V. 2
And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a
ship, Mark Chapter 4 V. 2
and sat in the sea; Matthew. V. 2
and the whole multitude stood on the shore, Mark Chapter 4 V. 2
and was by the sea, on the land. Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 3
And he spoke unto them, Mark Chapter 4 V. 2
and taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine
Luke Chapter 8 V. 4
by a parable, Mark V. 3
Hearken, Behold, there went out a sower to sow Luke Chapter 8 V. 4
his seed. Mark V. 4
And it came to pass as he sowed, some fell by the way side, Luke V. 5
and it was trodden down, Mark V. 4
and the fowls of the air came, and devouted it up. And Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 5
(...). Mark. Chapter 4 V. 5(...). 5
some fell upon stony ground, where it had not much earth; and immediately it
sprang up, because it had not depth of earth. But when the sun was up, Luke
V. 6
and as soon as it was sprung up, Matthew. V. 6
it was scorched, because it lacked moisture; Mark V. 6
and because it had no root, it withered away. Luke V. 6
And some fell among thorns, Luke V. 7
and the thorns sprange up with it, and choked it, Luke V. 8
Mark V. 7
and it yielded no fruit. Luke V. 6
And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit Mark V. 8
that sprang up and increased, and brought forth, some thirty, Mark V. 9
and some sixty, and some an hundred. Luke V. 6
And when he said these things, he cried Mark V. 10
and said unto them, He that has ears to hear, let him hear. And when he
was alone, Matthew. V. 10
the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speak thou unto them in
parables? Luke V. 9
And his disciples, Mark V. 10
they that were about him, with the twelve, asked of him the parable, Luke V. 9
saying, What might this parable be? Matthew. V. 11
Mark V. 11
And he answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; but to them, Luke V. 10
others Mark V. 11
that are without, Matthew. V. 11
it is not given, Mark V. 12
but all these things are done in parables: That seeing they may see, and not
perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any time they
should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. Matthew. V. 12
For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance:
but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he has. Matthew.
Chapter 13 V. 13
Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and
hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. Matthew. V. 14
And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which says, By hearing ye
shall hear, Matthew. V. 15
and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For
this people heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and
their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should
be converted, and I should heal them. Matthew. V. 16
But blessed are your eyes, for they see; Matthew. V. 17
and your ears, for they hear. Luke Chapter 10 V. 24
For yerily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men have desired
to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those
things which ye hear, and have not heard them. Mark Chapter 4 V. 13
And he said unto them, Know ye not this parable? and how then will you know
all parables? Matthew. V. 18
Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. Luke Chapter 8 V. 11
Now the parable is this: Mark V. 14
The sower sows the word. Luke Chapter 8 V. 11
The seed is the word of God. Mark V. 15
And these are they by the way side, Luke V. 12
that hear, Mark V. 15
where the word is sown: but when they have heard, Luke V. 12
then Mark V. 15
Satan comes immediately, and takes away the word that was sown in their
hearts, Luke V. 12
our of their hearts, lest they should believe, and be saved. Matthew. V. 19
When any one hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it not, then
comes the wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in his heart: this
is he which received seed by the way side. Mark V. 16
And these are they likewise Matthew. V. 20
that received the seed into stony places, Mark V. 16
who when they have heard the word, immediately they receive it, Luke Chapter 8 V.
13
the word Mark Chapter 4 V. 16
with gladness: Mark Chapter 4 V. 17
And Luke Chapter 8 V. 13
these Mark Chapter 4 V. 17
have no root in themselves, and so endute but for a time, Luke Chapter 8 V. 13
which for a while believe; Mark Chapter 4 V. 17
afterward, when affliction or persecution arises for the words sake,
immediately they are offended, Luke Chapter 8 V. 13
and in the time of temptation fall away. Mark Chapter 4 V. 17
And these are they which Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 22
received seed among the thorns, Luke Chapter 8 V. 13
which when they have heard the word, Luke V. 14
go forth, Mark V. 19
And the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, Luke V. 14
and the pleasures of this life, Mark V. 19
and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becomes
unfruitful, Luke V. 14
and they bring no fruit to perfection. Mark V. 20
Matthew. V. 23
And these are they which Matthew. V. 23
rectived seed into the good ground, Mark V. 20
such as hear the word, and receive it, and Luke V. 15
in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, Matthew. V. 23
and understand it, Luke V. 15
and bring forth fruit with patience, Mark V. 21
some thirty fold, some sixty, and some an hundred. And he said unto them, Is
a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed and not to be set on
a candlestick? Luke V. 16
No man, when he has lighted a candle, covers it with a vessel, or puts
it under a bed: but sets it on a candlestick, that they which enter in may
see the light. Mark V. 22
For there is nothing hid, which shall not be manifested: neither was any thing
kept sceret, Luke V. 17
that shall not be known, and come abroad. Mark V. 23
If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. And he said unto them, Luke V.
18
Take heed therefore Mark V. 23
what and Luke V. 18
how ye hear. Mark V. 24
With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you: and unto you that
hear shall more be given. Luke V. 18
Luke V. 19
For whosoever soever has, to him shall be given: and whosoever has not, from
him shall be taken even that which be soometh to have. Mark V. 26
And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the
ground, Mark Chapter 4 V. 27
And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow
up, he knows not how. Mark V. 28
For the earth brings forth fruit of her self; first the blade, then the
ear, after that the full corn in the ear. Mark V. 29
But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he puts in the sickle,
because the harvest is come. Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 24
Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field: Matthew. V. 25
But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, Matthew.
V. 26
and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit,
then appeared the tares also. Matthew. V. 27
So the servants of the householder came, and said unto him, Sir, did not thou
sow good seed in thy field? from whence then has it tares? Matthew. V. 28
He said unto them, An enemy has done this. The servants said unto him, Will thou then that we go and gather them up? Matthew. V. 29
But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat
with them. Matthew. V. 30
Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I will
say to the reapers, Gather ye together frist the tares, and bind them in
bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn. Matthew. V. 31
Luke Chapter 13 V. 19
Another parable put he forth unto them, Mark V. 30
and said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what
comparison shall we compare it? Mark V. 31
The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took
and sowed in his field; Mark V. 32
Which, when it is sown in the earth, is Matthew. V. 32
indeed Mark V. 32
less then all the seeds that be in the earth: But when it is sown, it grows
up; Matthew. V. 32
and when it is grown, Mark V. 32
it becomes greater then all herbs, Matthew. V. 32
and becomes a tree, Mark V. 32
and shoots out great branches, Matthew. V. 32
so that the birds of the air come and Mark V. 32
lodge under the shadow of it, Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 33
and in the branches thereof. Luke Chapter 13 V. 20
Another parable spoke he unto them, The kingdom of heaven is like unto
leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole
was leavened. Matthew. V. 34
All these things spoke Jesus unto the multitude in parables. Mark Chapter 4 V. 33
Mark V. 34
And with many such parables spoke he the word unto them, as they were able to
hear it. But without a parable spoke he not unto them: and when they were
alone, he expounded all things to his disciples: Matthew. V. 35
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will
open my mouth in parables, I will utter things which have been kept secret from
the foundation of the world.

CHAP. LXII. Christ returns from the sea. The parable of the tares, and others.
Matthew. V. 36
THen Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his disciples
came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field.
Matthew. V. 37
He answered and said unto them, He that sows the good seed, is the Son of
man: Matthew. V. 38
The field is the world: the good seed are the children of the kingdom: but
the tares are the children of the wicked one: Matthew. V. 39
The enemy that sowed them, is the devil: the harvest is the end of the world:
Matthew. V. 40
and the reapers are the angles. As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt
in the fire; Matthew. V. 41
so shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his
angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend,
Matthew. V. 42
and them which do iniquity: And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there
shall be wailing, Matthew. V. 43
and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in
the kingdom of their Father. Who has ears to hear, let him hear. Matthew.
Chapter 13 V. 44
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field: the which
when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof goes and sells all
that he has, and buyeth that field. Again, Matthew. V. 45
the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, Matthew. V. 46
seeking goodly pearls: Who when he had found one pearl of great price, he went
and sold all that he had, and bought it. Again, Matthew. V. 47
the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast into the sea, and
gathered of every kind: Matthew. V. 48
Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the
good into vessels, Matthew. V. 49
but cast the bad away. So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels
shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just; Matthew. V. 50
And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth. Matthew. V. 51
Jesus says unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him,
Matthew. V. 52
Yea, Lord. Then said he unto them, Therefore every Scribe which is instructed
unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man that is an householder, which
brings forth out of his treasure things new and old.

CHAP. LXIII. A lawyer offers to be Christ's disciple. Another would first bury
his father.
Matthew. V. 53
ANd it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed
thence. Mark Chapter 4 V. 35
And the same day when the even was come, he says unto them, Let us pass over
unto the other side. Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 18
Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to depart
part unto the other side. Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 19
Luke Chapter 9 V. 57
And a certain Scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou go. Matthew. V. 20
And Jesus says unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay his head. Matthew. V. 21
And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and
bury my father. Matthew. V. 22
But Jesus said unto him, Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead.

CHAP. LXIIII. Christ. passes over into the country of the Gergesenes.
Luke Chapter 8 V. 22
NOw it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship. Matthew. V. 23
And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. Mark Chapter 4 V.
36
And when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as he was in the
ship: Luke Chapter 8 V. 22
and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake; and
they lanched forth: Mark Chapter 4 V. 36
and there were also with them other little ships. Luke V. 23
But as they sailed, he fell asleep. Matthew. V. 24
And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, Luke V. 23
and there came down Matthew. V. 24
a great storm of wind Luke V. 23
on the lake, Mark V. 37
and the waves beat into the ship, Matthew. V. 24
insomuch that the ship was covered with waves, Mark V. 37
so that it was now full, Luke V. 23
and they were filled with water, and were in jeopardie. Mark V. 38
And he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow. Matthew. V. 25
And his disciples came to him, Luke V. 24
and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we perish: Mark V. 38
Master, earest thou not that we perish? Matthew. V. 26
Lord, save us; we perish. And he says unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea, Luke V. 24
and theraging of the water, Mark V. 39
and said unto the sea; Peace, be still: and the wind allayed, Luke V. 24
and they ceased, Mark Chapter 4 V. 40
and there was a great calm. And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful?
how is it that ye have not faith? Luke Chapter 8 V. 25
where is your faith? Mark V. 41
And they feared exceedingly: Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 27
but the men marvelled, saying Luke Chapter 8 V. 25
one to another, What manner of man is this? for he commands even the winds
and water, Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 27
that even the winds and the sea obey him.

CHAP. LXV. Christ heals the possessed of devils in the country of the
Gergesenes.
Luke Chapter 8 V. 26
ANd they (...).
sailed, Mark Chapter 5 V. 1
and came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of the
Gadarenes, Luke Chapter 8 V. 26
which is over against Galilee. Matthew. V. 28
And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes,
Mark V. 2
And when he was come out of the ship Luke Chapter 8 V. 26
to land, Matthew. V. 28
there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding
fierce, so that no man might pass by that way. Matthew. V. 29
And behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou
Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time? Mark V. 2
Immediately, I say, there met him out of the tombs, a man with an unclean
spirit, Luke V. 27
a certain man out of the city, which had devils long time, and ware no
clothes, neither abode in any house, but Mark V. 3
had his dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no not with
chains: Mark V. 4
Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains
had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces: neither
could any man tame him. Mark V. 5
And always night and day he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying
and cutting himself with stones. Mark V. 6
But when he saw Jesus afar off, Mark Chapter 5 V. 7
he came and worshipped him, And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I
to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? Luke Chapter 8 V. 28
I beseech thee, Mark Chapter 5 V. 7
I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not. Luke V. 29
For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man: Mark V. 8
For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit. Luke V. 29
For oftentimes it had caught him, and he was kept bound with chains, and in
fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil into the
wilderness. And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name? Luke V. 30
Mark V. 9
And he answered, saying, My name is Legion: for we are many, Luke V. 30
because many devils were entered into him. Mark V. 10
And he besought him much, that he would not send them away out of the
country, and Luke V. 31
that he would not command them to go out into the deep. Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 30
And there was a good way off from them, Mark V. 11
nigh unto the mountains, a great herd Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 30
of many Luke V. 31
swine feeding on the mountain. Mark V. 12
And all the devils besought him, Luke V. 32
saying, Matthew. V. 31
If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine. Mark V. 13
And forthwith Jesus gave them leave, and he said unto them, Go. Mark V. 13
And the unclean spirits, Luke V. 33
devils, went out of the man, Mark V. 13
and entered into the swine, Matthew. V. 32
into the herd of swine: and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down
a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters: Mark V. 13
they were about two thousand, and were choked in the sea. Luke V. 34
When they that fed Mark V. 13
the swine Luke V. 34
saw what was done, they fled, Matthew. V. 33
and went their ways into the city, Mark V. 14
and told it in the city, and in the conntrey, Matthew. V. 34
and what was befallen to the possessed of devils. And behold, the whole city
came out to meet Jesus, Mark V. 15
and they went out to see what it was that was done. And they come to Jesus,
and see him that was possessed with the devil, Luke Chapter 8 V. 35
and found the man out of whom the devils were departed, Mark V. 15
and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind, Luke Chapter 8
V. 35
at the feet of Jesus: Mark Chapter 5 V. 16
and they were afraid. And they that saw it, told them how it befell to him
that was possessed with the devil, Luke V. 36
by what means he was made whole, Mark Chapter 5 V. 16
and also concerning the swine. Matthew. V. 34
And when they saw him, Luke V. 37
then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about Mark V.
17
began to pray him Matthew. V. 34
that he would depart out of their coasts; Luke V. 37
for they were taken with great fear: and he went up into the ship, and
returned back again. Mark V. 18
And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the devil,
Luke V. 38
the man out of whom the devils were departed, besought him that he might be
with him. Mark V. 19
Howbeit, Jesus suffered him not, Luke V. 39
but sent him away, saying, Return to thine own house, Mark V. 19
to thy friends, and show them how great things the Lord Luke V. 39
God Mark V. 19
has done for thee, and has had compassion on thee. Luke V. 39
And he went his way, and published throughout the whole city, Mark V. 20
and began to publish in Decapolis, how great things Jesus had done for him:
and all men did marvel.

CHAP. LXVI. Christ returns to Capernaum. Matthews feast, and the disputations
there moved.
Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 1
ANd he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city. Luke
V. 40
And it came to pass, that when Jesus was returned, the people gladly received
him, for they were all waiting for him. Mark V. 21
And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people
gathered unto him, and he was nigh unto the sea. Luke Chapter 5 V. 29
And Levi made him a great feast in his own house. Mark Chapter 2 V. 15
And it came to pass, that as Jesus sat at meat in his house, Matthew. Chapter 9 V.
10
behold, many Publicanes and sinners came and sat down Mark Chapter 2 V. 15
together with Jesus and his disciples; for there were many, and they followed
him. Mark V. 16
And when the Scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with Publicanes and sinners,
they said unto his disciples, How is it that Matthew. V. 11
your master Mark V. 16
eats and drinks with Publicanes and sinners? Luke V. 30
But their Scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do
ye eat and drink with Publicanes and sinners? Matthew. V. 12
But when Jesus heard that, he Luke V. 31
answering said unto them, They that are whole need not a physician, but they
that are sick. Matthew. V. 13
But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice:
for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Mark V. 18
And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast. Matthew. V. 14
Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees
fast often, Luke V. 33
and make prayers; Mark V. 18
but thy disciples fast not, Luke V. 33
but eat and drink? Mark V. 19
And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bride-chamber Matthew. V. 15
mourn, and Mark V. 19
fast, while the bridegroom is with them? Luke V. 34
Can ye make the children of the bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is
with them? Luke V. 35
But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them;
and then shall they fast in those days. Luke V. 36
And he spoke also a parable unto them, No man puts a piece of a new garment
upon an old: if otherwise, then both the new makes a rent, and the piece that
was taken out of the new, agrees not with the old. Mark V. 21
No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece
that filled it up, takes away from the old, and the rent is made worse. And no
man puts new wine into old bottles; Mark Chapter 2 V. 22
else the new wine does burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the
bottles will be marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles, Matthew. Chapter 9
V. 17
and both are preserved. Luke Chapter 5 V. 38
No man also having drunk old wine, straightway desires new: for he says, The
old is better.

CHAP. LXVII. Christ raises from death the daughter of Jairus, and heals a
woman of her bloody issue.
Matthew. V. 18
WHile he spoke these things unto them, Luke Chapter 8 V. 41
behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the Synagogue,
Mark Chapter 5 V. 22
one of the rulers of the Synagogue: and when he saw him, Luke Chapter 8 V. 41
he fell down at Jesus feet, and besought him that he would come into his
house: For he had one only daughter, Luke V. 42
about twelve years of age, and she lay a dying: Mark V. 23
And he besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter lies at the point of
death, I pray thee come and lay thy hands on her that she may be healed; and
she shall live. Matthew. V. 19
And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so did his disciples. Mark V. 24
And Jesus went with him, and much people followed him. Luke V. 42
But as he went, the people Luke (...).
thronged him Mark V. 24
and Mark (...).
preassed him. Matthew. V. 20
And behold, Mark V. 25
a certain woman Luke V. 43
having an issue of blood, Matthew. V. 20
which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, Mark V. 26
And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she
had, and Luke V. 43
which had spent all her living upon physicians, Mark V. 27
and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, When she had heard of Jesus,
came in the preasse behind, and touched his garment. Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 21
For she said within her self, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be
whole. Mark Chapter 5 V. 29
And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her
body that she was healed of that plague. Mark V. 30
And Jesus immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him,
turned him about in the preasse, and said, Who touched my clothes? Luke Chapter 8
V. 45
And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter, and they that were
with him, said, Master, the multitude throng thee, and preasse thee, and say
thou, Who touched me? And Jesus said, Luke V. 46
Some body has touched me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me. Mark
V. 32
And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing: Matthew. V. 22
and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort. Luke V. 47
And when the woman saw that she was not hid, Mark V. 33
fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, she came, Luke V. 47
and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people, for
what cause she had touched him, Mark V. 33
and told him all the truth, Luke V. 48
and how she was healed immediately. And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good
comfort; thy faith has made thee whole, Mark V. 34
go in peace, and be whole of thy plague: Matthew. V. 22
and the woman was made whole from that hour. Mark V. 35
While he yet spoke, there came from the ruler of the Synagogues house certain
which said, Thy daughter is dead; why troublest thou the Master any further?
Luke V. 49
Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Master. Luke V. 50
But Mark V. 36
as soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he says unto the ruler of the
Synagogue, Be not afraid; only believe, Luke V. 50
and she shall be made whole. Mark V. 37
And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, Mark V. 38
and James, and John the brother of James. And he comes to the house of the
ruler of the Synagogue. Luke Chapter 8 V. 52
And all wept and bewailed her. Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 23
And when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw the minstrels, and the
people making a noise, Mark Chapter 5 V. 39
and them that wept, and wailed greatly; And when he was come in, he says unto
them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? Matthew. V. 24
give place, Luke Chapter 8 V. 52
weep not; Matthew. V. 24
for the maid is not dead, but sleeps. Luke V. 53
And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. Mark V. 40
But when he had put them all out, he takes the father and the mother of the
damsel, and them that were with him, and enters in where the damsel was lying.
Mark V. 41
And he took the damsel by the hand, and Luke V. 54
called, Mark V. 41
and said unto her, Talitha-cumi, which is being interpreted, Damsel (I say
unto thee) arise. Luke V. 55
And her spirit came again, Mark V. 42
and straightway the damsel arose, and walked, for she was of the age of twelve
years: Luke V. 56
and her parents were astonished Mark V. 43
with a great astonishment. And he charged them straightly, that no man should
know it, and Luke V. 56
that they should tell no man what was done, Mark V. 43
and commanded that something should be given her to eat. Matthew. V. 26
And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.

CHAP. LXVIII. Two blind men restored to sight.
Matthew. V. 27
ANd when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and
saying, Thou Son of David, have mercy on us. And when he was come into the
house, Matthew. V. 28
the blind men came to him: and Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that I am
able to do this? they said unto him, Matthew. V. 29
Yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith, be it
unto you. And their eyes were opened, Matthew. V. 30
and Jesus straightly charged them, saying, See that no man know it. But they,
Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 31
when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country.

CHAP. LXIX. A dumb man possessed of a devil is healed.
Matthew. V. 32
Luke Chapter 11 V. 14
AS they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a
devil. And when the devil was cast out, Matthew. V. 33
the dumb spoke, and the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in
Israel. Matthew. V. 34
Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 24 Mark Chapter 3 V. 22
But the Pharisees said, He casts out the devils, through the prince of the
devils.

CHAP. LXX. Christ's second return to Nazareth.
Mark Chapter 6 V. 1
ANd he went out from thence, and came into his own country, and his disciples
follow him. Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 54
And when he was come into his own country, Mark V. 2
and when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 54
them in their Synagogue: Mark V. 2
and many hearing him were astonished, saying, From whence has this man these
things? Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 54
this wisdom, and these mighty works? Mark V. 2
and what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works
are wrought by his hands? Mark V. 3
Is not this the carpenter, Matthew. V. 55
the carpenters son, Mark V. 3
the son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon?
Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 55
Is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joses, and Simon;
and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all Mark V. 3
here with us? Matthew. V. 56
whence then has this man all these things? Mark V. 4
And they were offended at him. But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not
without honor, but in his own country, and among his own kindred, and in his
own house. And he could there do no mighty work, Mark Chapter 6 V. 5
save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them. Matthew. Chapter
13 V. 58
And he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief. Mark V. 6
And he marvelled because of their unbelief.

THE FOURTH BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE THIRD YEAR OF CHRIST'S PUBLIC MINISTRY.
CHAP. LXXI. What Christ did in the third year of his ministry: and first of
his general visitation of Galilee.
Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 35
Luke Chapter 13 V. 22
ANd Jesus went about all the cities and villages, Mark Chapter 6 V. 6
round about the villages, teaching Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 35
in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing
every sickness, Matthew. V. 36
and every disease among the people. Mark Chapter 6 V. 34
But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because
they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. Matthew. V.
37
Then says he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the
laborers are few. Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 38 Luke Chapter 10 V. 2
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers
into his harvest.

CHAP. LXXII. Christ's first sending out of the apostles to preach the coming of
the Messiah, and to confirm their doctrine with miracles.
Mark Chapter 6 V. 7
ANd he called unto him the twelve, and began to send them out by two and two.
Luke Chapter 9 V. 1
Then he called the twelve disciples together, and gave them power and
authority Mark Chapter 6 V. 7
over unclean spirits, and Luke Chapter 9 V. 1
over all devils, Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 1
to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of
disease. Matthew. V. 2
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these, The first, Simon, who is
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, Matthew. V. 3
and John his brother, Philip, and Bartholomew, Thomas, and Matthew the
Publicane, James the son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus,
Matthew. V. 4
Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. These twelve
Jesus sent forth, Matthew. V. 5
Mark V. 8
Mark V. 9
and commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, save a
staff only: no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse: But be shod with
sandals, and not put on two coats. Luke V. 2
And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. Luke V. 3
And he said unto them, Mark V. 9
and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any
city of the Samaritanes enter ye not. But go rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. Matthew. V. 6
And as ye go, Matthew. V. 7
preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Matthew. V. 8
Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye
have received, Matthew. V. 9
freely give. Provide neither gold, nor silver, Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 10
nor brass in your purses: Nor scrip for your journey, Luke Chapter 9 V. 3
neither bread, neither money, neither have two coats apiece, Matthew. V. 11
neither shoes, nor yet staves: ( Luke Chapter 10 V. 7
for the workman is worthy of his meat) And into whatsoever city or town ye
shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy. Mark Chapter 6 V. 10
In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from
that place. Matthew. V. 12
And when ye come into an house, salute it. Matthew. V. 13
And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not
worthy, Matthew. V. 14
let your peace return to you. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear
your words; Mark V. 11
when ye depart thence, Matthew. V. 14
out of that house, or city, shake off Luke Chapter 9 V. 5
the very dust Mark V. 11
under your feet, for a testimony against them. Matthew. V. 15
Verily, I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and
Gomorrha, in the day of judgment, Matthew. V. 16
then for that city. Luke Chapter 10 V. 3
Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise
as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men; Matthew. V. 17
for they will deliver you up to the councels, and they will scourge you in
their Synagogues. Matthew. V. 18
And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony against them and the Gentiles. Matthew. V. 19
Mark Chapter 13 V. 11 Luke Chapter 12 V. 11
But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for
it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. Matthew. V. 20
For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father which speaks in
you. Matthew. V. 21
Luke Chapter 21 V. 16
And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the
child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to
be put to death. Matthew. V. 22
Mark Chapter 13 V. 13
And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake: but he that endures to
the end, Matthew. V. 23
shall be saved. But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into
another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of
Israel, till the Son of man be come. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 24
Luke Chapter 6 V. 40 John Chapter 15 V. 20 Chapter 13 V. 16
The disciple is not above his master, Matthew. V. 25
nor the servant above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as
his master, and the servant as his lord: if they have called the Master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household? Matthew. V.
26
Fear them not therefore: Mark Chapter 4 V. 22 Luke Chapter 8 V. 17
for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall
not be known. Matthew. V. 27
What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: Matthew. V. 28
and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the house tops. Luke Chapter 12
V. 4
And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Matthew. V.
29
Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on
the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Matthew. V. 30
Fear ye not therefore; Matthew. V. 31
ye are of more value then many sparrows. Matthew. V. 32
Luke Chapter 12 V. 8
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in heaven. Matthew. V. 33
Mark Chapter 8 V. 38 Luke Chapter 9 V. 26
But whosoever shall deny me before men, Matthew. V. 34
him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. Luke Chapter 12 V. 51
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace,
Matthew. V. 35
but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in
law. Matthew. V. 36
And a man's foes shall be they of his own household. Matthew. V. 37
Luke Chapter 14 V. 26
He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and he that
loves son or daughter more then me, Matthew. V. 38
is not worthy of me. Mark Chapter 8 V. 34 Luke Chapter 9 V. 23
And he that takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of
me. Matthew. V. 39
John Chapter 12 V. 25
He that finds his life, shall lose it: and he that loses his life for my
sake, shall find it. Matthew. V. 40
Luke Chapter 10 V. 16 John Chapter 13 V. 20
He that receives you, receives me: and he that receives me, receives him
that sent me. He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, Matthew. Chapter
10 V. 41
shall receive a prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the
name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. Matthew. V. 42
Mark Chapter 9 V. 41
And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no
wise lose his reward.

CHAP. LXXIII. The history of Christ's and his apostles preaching in their
first going out.
Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 1
ANd it came to pass when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve
disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities. Luke Chapter
9 V. 6
And they departed and went through the towns, preaching the Gospel, and Mark
Chapter 6 V. 12
that men should repent, Luke Chapter 9 V. 6
and healing every where. Mark V. 13
And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and
healed them.

CHAP. LXXIIII. John Baptist is beheaded.
Mark V. 21
ANd when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper
to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee: Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 6
But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before
them, and pleased Herod. Matthew. V. 7
Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her whatsoever she would ask. Mark
V. 22
And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased
Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me
whatsoever thou will, and I will give it thee. Mark Chapter 6 V. 23
And he swear unto her, Whatsoever thou shall ask of me, I will give it thee,
unto the half of my kingdom. Mark V. 24
And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? and she said,
Mark V. 25
The head of John the Baptist. And she came in straightway with haste unto the
king, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger, the
head of John the Baptist. And the king was exceeding sorry. Mark V. 26
Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 8
And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John
Baptists head in a charger. Matthew. V. 9
And the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oaths sake, and them which sat
with him at meat, Mark V. 26
he would not reject her, but Matthew. V. 9
commanded it to be given her. Mark V. 27
And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be
brought; and he went, Matthew. V. 10
and beheaded John in the prison. And his head was brought in a charger, Matthew.
V. 11
and given to the damsel: and she brought it, Mark V. 28
and gave it to her mother. Mark V. 92
And when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and laid
it in a tomb, Matthew. V. 12
and buried it, and went and told Jesus.

CHAP. LXXV. Christ's fame is spread abroad. The judgment of Herod and his
courtiers concerning Christ.
Mark V. 14
ANd Matthew. V. 1
at that time Mark V. 14
king Herod Luke Chapter 9 V. 7
the Tetrarch Matthew. V. 1
heard of the fame of Jesus, Luke Chapter 9 V. 7
and of all that was done by him: ( Mark V. 14
for his name was spread abroad) Matthew. V. 2
And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the
dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him. Mark V. 15
Others said, That it is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or as
one of the prophets. Mark Chapter 6 V. 16
But when Herod heard thereof, he said, It is John whom I beheaded, he is risen
from the dead. Luke Chapter 9 V. 7
And he was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen
from the dead: And of some, that Elias had appeared: Luke Chapter 9 V. 8
and of others, that one of the old prophets was risen again. And Herod said,
John have I beheaded: Luke V. 9
but who is this of whom I hear such things? And he desired to see him.

CHAP. LXXVI. Christ goes into a solitary place. The miracle of the five
loaves, with which he fed five thousand.
Luke V. 10
ANd the apostles, when they were returned, Mark V. 30
gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what
they had done, and what they had taught. Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 13
When Jesus heard of it, Mark V. 31
he said unto them, Come ye your selves apart into a desert place, and rest a
while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as
to eat. Mark V. 32
And John Chapter 6 V. 1
after these things Jesus Luke V. 10
took them and Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 13
departed thence, and John Chapter 6 V. 1
went Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 13
by ship John Chapter 6 V. 1
over the sea of Galilee, which is the sea of Tiberias, Luke V. 10
privately into a desert place, belonging to the city called Bethsaida. Mark
V. 33
And the people saw them departing, and many knew him: Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 13
and when the people had heard thereof, Luke V. 10
and knew it, they followed him. John V. 2
And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did
on them that were diseased, Mark V. 34
and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together
unto him. And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with
compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd. John
Chapter 6 V. 3
And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples. And
the passover, a feast of the Jews, John V. 4
was nigh. Luke Chapter 9 V. 11
And he received them, and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, Mark Chapter 6
V. 34
and he began to teach them many things, Luke Chapter 9 V. 11
and healed them that had need of healing, Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 14
and he healed their sick. Luke V. 12
And when the day began to wear away, Mark V. 35
was now far spent, Matthew. V. 15
and when it was evening, Mark V. 35
his disciples, Luke V. 12
the twelve, Mark V. 35
came to him, Luke V. 12
and said unto him, Mark V. 36
This is a desert place, and now the time is far passed. Send Luke V. 12
the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about,
and lodge, Matthew. V. 15
and buy themselves Mark V. 36
bread and Matthew. V. 15
victuals, Luke V. 12
and get victuals; Mark V. 36
for they have nothing to eat, Luke V. 12
for we are here in a desert place. Matthew. V. 16
But Jesus Mark V. 37
answered and said unto them, Matthew. V. 16
They need not depart, give ye them to eat. Mark V. 37
And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred penie-worth of bread,
and give them to eat? John V. 5
When Jesus then lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he
says unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat? John V. 6
(And this he said to prove him, for he himself knew what he would do) Philip
answered him, John V. 7
Two hundred penie-worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one
might take a little. Mark V. 38
He says unto them, How many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew,
John V. 8
one of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, says unto him, There is a
lad here, John V. 9
which has five barley loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among
so many? Matthew. V. 17
They say unto him, We have here Luke V. 13
no more but five loaves and two fishes, except we should go and buy meat for
all this people. Luke V. 14
For they were about five thousand men. Matthew. V. 18
He said, Bring them hither to me. Mark Chapter 6 V. 39
And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass.
John Chapter 6 V. 10
And Jesus said Luke V. 14
unto his disciples, John Chapter 6 V. 10
Make the men sit down, Luke Chapter 9 V. 15
make them sit down by fifties in a company. And they did so. John Chapter 6 V. 10
Now there was much grass in the place. Luke Chapter 9 V. 15
And they made them all sit down: Mark V. 40
And they sat down in ranks by hundreds, and by fifties, John Chapter 6 V. 10
in number about five thousand. Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 19
And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and took the five
loaves and two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed Luke V. 16
them, John V. 11
and when he had given thanks, Mark V. 41
he brake the loaves, Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 19
and gave the loaves to the disciples Luke V. 16
to set before the multitude, Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 19
and the disciples to the multitude John V. 11
that were set down; and likewise of the fishes, as much as they would: Mark V.
41
and the two fishes divided he among them all. Matthew. V. 20
And they did all eat, Luke V. 17
and were all filled. John V. 12
When they were filled, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments
that remain, John V. 13
that nothing be lost. Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve
baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and
above, unto them that had eaten. Mark V. 43
And they took up Matthew. V. 20
of the fragments that remained Luke V. 17
to them, Matthew. V. 20
twelve baskets full, Mark V. 43
and of the fishes. Matthew. V. 21
And they that had eaten, were about five thousand men, beside women and
children. John V. 14
Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is
of a truth that prophet that should come into the world. John V. 15
When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force, to
make him a king, Mark V. 45
straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to go to
the other side before Matthew. V. 22
him, Mark V. 45
unto Bethsaida, while he sent Matthew. V. 23
the multitudes away. And when he had sent the multitudes away, John V. 15
he departed again and Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 23
went up into a mountain John V. 15
himself alone, Mark Chapter 6 V. 46
to pray.

CHAP. LXXVII. Christ walks upon the sea: and what then happened.
John Chapter 6 V. 16
ANd when even was now come, his disciples went down unto the sea, John V. 17
And entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum: and it was
now dark, and Jesus was not come to them. And the sea arose, John V. 18
by reason of a great wind that blew. Mark V. 47
And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, Matthew. V. 24
and he was there alone Mark V. 47
on the land. Matthew. V. 24
But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves. Mark V. 48
And he saw them toyling in rowing, (for the wind was contrary unto them) and
about the fourth watch of the night Matthew. V. 25
Jesus went unto them and Mark V. 48
comes unto them, walking upon the sea. John V. 19
So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they see
Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship, Mark V. 49
and would have passed by them. But when they, Matthew. V. 26
the disciples, Mark V. 49
saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, John V. 19
and they were afraid, Mark V. 49
and cried out, (for they all saw him, and were troubled) Matthew. V. 27
saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear. But straightway Jesus
spoke unto them, Mark V. 50
and says unto them, Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid. Matthew. V. 28
And Peter answered him, and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee
on the water. And he said, Matthew. V. 29
Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water to
go to Jesus. Matthew. V. 30
But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid, and beginning to sink, he
cried, Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 31
saying, Lord, save me. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and
caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou
doubt? John Chapter 6 V. 21
And they willingly received him into the ship, Mark Chapter 6 V. 51
and he went up unto them into the ship. Matthew. V. 32
And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased: John Chapter 6 V. 21
and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went. Matthew. V. 33
Then they that were in the ship, came and worshipped him, saying, Of a
truththou art the Son of God: Mark Chapter 6 V. 51
and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, Mark V. 52
and wondered. For they considered not the miracle of the loaves, for their
heart was hardened. Mark V. 53
And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Genesareth, and drew
to the shore. Mark V. 54
And when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew him. Matthew. V.
35
And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out, Mark V. 55
and ran through that whole region round about, and began to carry about in
beds those that were sick, where they heard he was. Mark V. 56
And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they laid
the sick in the streets, Matthew. V. 36
and brought unto him all that were diseased, and besought him that they might
only touch, Mark V. 56
if it were but the border of his garment: and as many as touched him, Matthew.
V. 36
were made perfectly whole.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Christ's sermon of the spiritual eating of his flesh, and
drinking of his blood.
John V. 22
THe day following, when the people which stood on the other side of the sea,
saw that there was none other boat there, save that one whereinto his disciples
were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the boat, but that
his disciples were gone away alone: (Howbeit there came other boats from
Tiberias, John Chapter 6 V. 23
nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given
thanks) When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, John V. 24
neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking
for Jesus. John V. 25
And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him,
Rabbi, when came thou hither? Jesus answered them and said, John V. 26
Verily verily I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled. John V. 27
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: Matthew. Chapter 3 V. 17
for him has God the Father sealed. Then said they unto him, John V. 28
What shall we do, that we might work the works of God? Jesus answered and said
unto them, John V. 29
This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. They said
therefore unto him, John V. 30
What sign show thou then, that we may see, and believe thee? what do
thou work? John V. 31
Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it is written, He gave them bread
from heaven to eat. Then Jesus said unto them, John V. 32
Verily verily I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but
my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. John V. 33
For the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto
the world. Then said they unto him, Lord, John V. 34
evermore give us this bread. John V. 35
And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that comes to me, shall
never hunger; and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. But I said unto
you, John V. 36
that ye also have seen me, and believe not. John V. 37
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out. John Chapter 6 V. 38
For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me. John V. 39
And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
John V. 40
And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up
at the last day. The Jews then murmured at him, John V. 41
because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven. And they said,
Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 55
John V. 42
Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is
it then that he says, I came down from heaven? John V. 43
Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmr not among your selves.
John V. 44
No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him; and I
will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the prophets, John V. 45
And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that has heard, and
has learned of the Father, comes unto me. John V. 46
Not that any man has seen the Father, Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 27
save he which is of God, he has seen the Father. John V. 47
Verily verily I say unto you, He that believes on me, has everlasting life.
I am that bread of life. John V. 48/49
Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. John V. 50
This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof,
and not die. John V. 51
I am the living bread, which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. John V. 52
The Jews therefore strove amongst themselves, saying, How can this man give us
his flesh to eat? John V. 53
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily verily I say unto you, Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. John
Chapter 6 V. 54
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, John V. 55
and my blood is drink indeed. He thabeateth my flesh, John V. 56
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. John V. 57
As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats
me, even he shall live by me. John V. 58
This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat
manna, and are dead: he that eats of this bread, shall live for ever. These
things said he in the Synagogue, John V. 59
as he taught in Capernaum. John V. 60
Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is an
hard saying, who can hear it? John V. 61
When Jesus knew in himself, that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto
them, Does this offend you? John Chapter 6 V. 62 Chapter 3 V. 13
What and If ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? John
V. 63
It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words that
I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. But there are some of you
that believe not. John V. 64
For Jesus knew from the beginning, who they were that believed not, and who
should betray him. And he said, Therefore said I unto you, John V. 65
that no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. John
V. 66
From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him.
Then said Jesus unto the twelve, John V. 67
Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him, John V. 68
Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. Matthew. Chapter 16
V. 16
And we believe, John V. 69
and are sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God. Jesus
answered them, John V. 70
Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? John V. 71
He spoke of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that should
betray him, being one of the twelve.

CHAP. LXXIX. Christ disputes with the Pharisees about the traditions of the
elders.
John Chapter 7 V. 1
AFter these things, Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in Jurie,
because the Jews sought to kill him. Mark Chapter 7 V. 1
Then came together unto Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 1
Jesus Mark Chapter 7 V. 1
the Pharisees, and certain of the Scribes, Mark V. 2
which came from Jerusaiem. And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread
with defiled (that is to say, with unwashen) hands, they found fault. Mark V. 3
For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat
not, holding the tradition of the elders. Mark V. 4
And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many
other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups
and pots, Mark V. 5
brazen vessels, and of tables. Then the Pharisees and Scribes asked him,
Matthew. V. 2
saying, Mark V. 5
Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders? Matthew. V.
2
why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash
not their hands when they eat bread, Mark V. 5
but eat bread with unwashen hands. Matthew. V. 3
But he answered and said unto them, Why do you also transgress the
commandment of God by your tradition? Mark V. 6
Well has Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people
honors me with their lips, Mark V. 7
but their heart is far from me. Howbeit, in vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Mark V. 8
For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as the
washing of pots and cups: and many other such like things ye do. Mark V. 9
And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may
keep your own tradition. Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 4
For God commanded, saying, ( Mark Chapter 7 V. 10
for Moses said) Honor thy father, and thy mother: and whosoever curses father or
mother, let him die the death. Mark V. 11
But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, It is Corban, that is
to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me: Mark V. 12
he shall be free. And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his
mother, Matthew. V. 6
and honor not his father or his mother. Thus have ye made the commandment of
God of none effect by your tradition, Mark V. 13
which ye have delivered: and many such like things do ye. Matthew. V. 7
Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of you, Matthew. V. 8
saying, This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me
with their lips: but their heart is far from me. Matthew. V. 9
But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men. Mark V. 14
And when he had called all the people unto him, he said unto them, Hearken
unto me every one of you, and understand. Matthew. V. 11
Not that which goes into the mouth defiles a man: but that which comes out
of the mouth, this defiles a man. Mark V. 15
There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him: but
the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man. Mark V. 16
If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. Matthew. V. 12
Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Know thou that the Pharisees
were offended after they heard this saying? Matthew. V. 13
But he answered and said, John Chapter 15 V. 2
Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.
Matthew. V. 14
Let them alone: Luke Chapter 6 V. 39
they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall into the ditch. Matthew. V. 15
Then answered Peter and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable. Mark Chapter
7 V. 17
And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples asked him
concerning the parable. Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 16
And Jesus said Mark V. 18
unto them, Are ye so Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 16
yet Mark V. 18
without understanding also? Matthew. V. 17
Do not ye yet understand, Mark V. 18
that whatsoever thing from without enters into the man, it cannot defile him,
Because it enters not into his heart, Mark V. 19
but Matthew. V. 17
goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught, Mark V. 20
purging all meats? And he said, That which comes out of the man, that
defiles the man. For from within, Mark V. 21
out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders, Thefts, covetonsnesse, Matthew. V. 19
false witness, Mark V. 22
wickedness, deceit, laseiviousnesse, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, Mark V.
23
foolishness: All these evil things come from within, and Matthew. V. 20
these are the things which defile a man: but to eat with unwashen hands,
defiles not a man.

CHAP. LXXX. The daughter of the woman of Canaan healed by Christ.
Mark V. 24
ANd from thence he arose, Matthew. V. 21
then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sidon, Mark
V. 24
and entered into an house, and would have no man know it; but he could not be
hid. For Matthew. V. 22
behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, Mark V. 25
whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at
his feet: Mark V. 26
(The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation) and she besought him that
he would east forth the devil out of her daughter, Matthew. V. 22
and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David; my
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. Matthew. V. 23
But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him,
saying, Send her away, for she cries after us. Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 24
But he answered and said, Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 6
I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came she
and worshipped him, Matthew. V. 25
saying, Lord, help me. Matthew. V. 26
But he answered and Mark Chapter 7 V. 27
said unto her, Let the children first be filled: for it is not meet to take
the childrens bread, and to cast it unto the dogs. And she answered and said
unto him, Yes, Matthew. V. 27
Truth, Lord: Mark V. 28
yet the dogs under the table eat of the childrens erummes, Matthew. V. 27
which fall from their masters table. Matthew. V. 28
Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto
thee even as thou will. Mark V. 29
For this saying, go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter. Matthew. V.
28
And her daughter was made whole from that very hour. Mark V. 30
And when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her
daughter laid upon the bed.

CHAP. LXXXI. Christ returns to the sea of Galilee, cures one that was deaf and
dumb.
Matthew. V. 29
ANd Jesus departed from thence, Mark V. 31
and again departing from the coasts of Tire and Sidon, he came unto the sea of
Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. Mark V. 32
And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his
speech: and they beseech him to put his hand upon him. Mark V. 33
And he took him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears,
and he spit, and touched his tongue. Mark V. 34
And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and says unto him, Ephphatha, that is,
Be opened. Mark V. 35
And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
loosed, and he spoke plain. Mark V. 36
And he charged them that they should tell no man: but the more he charged
them, so much the more a great deal they published it. Matthew. V. 29
And he went up into a mountain, and sat down there. Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 30
And great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that were lame,
blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus feet,
Matthew. V. 31
and he healed them: Insomuch that the multitude wondered when they saw the
dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to
see: Mark Chapter 7 V. 37
And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He has done all things well: he
makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak. Matthew. V. 31
And they glorified the God of Israel.

CHAP. LXXXII. The miracle of feeding four thousand with seven loaves.
Mark Chapter 8 V. 1
IN those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat,
Jesus called his disciples unto him, Mark V. 2
and says unto them, I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now
been with me three days, and have nothing to eat: Matthew. V. 32
and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. Mark V. 3
And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the
way: for diverse of them came from far. And his disciples answered him, Matthew.
V. 33
and say unto him, Mark V. 4
From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness?
Matthew. V. 34
whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a
multitude? Mark V. 5
And Matthew. V. 34
Jesus Mark V. 5
asked them, and Matthew. V. 34
says unto them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few
little fishes. Matthew. V. 35
And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground. Mark V. 6
And he took the seven loaves, Matthew. V. 36
and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his disciples
Mark V. 6
to set before them, and Matthew. V. 36
the disciples Mark V. 6
set them before the people. Mark Chapter 8 V. 7
And they had a few small fishes: and he blessed, and commanded to set them
also before them. Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 37
And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken meat
that was left, seven baskets full. Mark V. 9
And they that had eaten, were about four thousand Matthew. V. 38
men, beside women and children: Mark V. 9
and he sent them away. Matthew. V. 39
And Mark V. 10
straightway Matthew. V. 39
he sent away the multitude, and Mark V. 10
entered into a ship with his disciples, Matthew. V. 39
and came into the coasts of Magdala, Mark V. 10
into the parts of Dalmanutha.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Christ disputes with the Pharisees about a sign from heaven.
The leaven of the Pharisees to be shunned.
Mark V. 11
ANd the Pharisees came forth, and began to question with him, seeking of him a
sign from heaven. Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 1
The Pharisees also with the Sadduces, came, and tempting, desired him that he
would show them a sign from heaven. Matthew. V. 2
He answered and said unto them, Luke Chapter 12 V. 54
When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather: for the sky is red. And
in the morning, Matthew. V. 3
It will be foul weather to day: for the sky is red and lowering. O ye
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the
signs of the times? Mark V. 12
And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and says; Why does this generation seek
after a sign? Matthew. V. 4
A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no
sign be given unto it: Mark V. 12
verily I say unto you, There shall no sign be given unto this generation,
Matthew. V. 4
but the sign of the prophet Jonas. Mark V. 13
And he left them, and entering into the ship again, departed to the other side.
Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 5
And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to take
bread, Mark Chapter 8 V. 14
neither had they in the ship with them more then one loaf. Matthew. V. 6
Then Jesus Mark V. 15
charged them, saying, Matthew. V. 6
Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces, Mark
V. 15
and of the leaven of Herod. Matthew. V. 7
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have taken no
bread. Matthew. V. 8
Which when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little faith, why
reason ye among your selves, because ye have brought no bread? Mark V. 17
Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened? Mark
V. 18
Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not
remember Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 9
Matthew. Chapter 14 V. 17
the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? Matthew.
Chapter 16 V. 10
Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 31
Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took
up? Mark V. 19
When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up? They say unto him, Twelve. Mark V. 20
And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments
took ye up? Mark V. 21
And they said, Seven. And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not
understand, Matthew. V. 11
that I spoke it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces? Matthew. V. 12
Then understood they how that he bad them not beware of the leaven of bread,
but of the doctrine of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces.

CHAP. LXXXIIII. A blind man healed at Bethsaida.
Mark V. 22
ANd he comes to Bethsaida, and they bring a blind man unto him, and besought
him to touch him. Mark Chapter 8 V. 23
And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the town; and when
he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw
ought. Mark V. 24
And he looked up, and said, Mark V. 25
I see men as trees, walking. After that, he put his hands again upon his eyes,
and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly. Mark V.
26
And he sent him away to his house, saying, Neither go into the town, nor tell
it to any in the town.

CHAP. LXXXV. Peter's confession of Christ.
Mark V. 27
ANd Jesus went out, and his disciples, Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 13
into the coasts, Mark V. 27
into the towns of Cesarea Philippi. Luke Chapter 9 V. 18
And it came to pass as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him:
Mark V. 27
and by the way he asked Luke Chapter 9 V. 18
them, Mark V. 27
his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men, Luke Chapter 9 V. 18
the people, say Matthew. V. 14
that I the Son of man am? And they Luke Chapter 9 V. 18
answering said, Matthew. V. 14
Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, Mark
V. 28
and others one of the prophets, Luke V. 19
that one of the old prophets is risen again. He said unto them, Luke V. 20
But whom say ye that I am? Matthew. V. 16
And Simon Peter answered, Mark V. 29
and says unto him, Luke V. 20
The Christ of God; for Matthew. V. 16
John Chapter 6 V. 69
thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Matthew. V. 17
And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona: for
flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven. Matthew. V. 18
And I say also unto thee, that John Chapter 1 V. 42
thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church: and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. Matthew. V. 19
John Chapter 20 V. 23
And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 20
Then charged he his disciples, Luke Chapter 9 V. 21
and he straightly charged them and commanded them to tell no man that thing Mark
Chapter 8 V. 30
of him, Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 20
that he was Jesus the Christ.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Christ begins to preach of his passion, and exhorts his hearers
to suffer the cross.
Matthew. V. 21
FRom that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples and Mark V. 31
to teach them, Luke V. 22
saying, Matthew. V. 21
how that he, Luke V. 22
the Son of man, Matthew. V. 21
must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things, Mark V. 31
and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief Priests and Seribes, and be
killed, and after three days rise again. Mark V. 32
And he spoke that saying openly. Matthew. V. 22
Then Peter took him and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee,
Lord: this shall not be unto thee. Mark V. 33
But when he had turned about, and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter,
saying, Get thee behind me, Satan: Matthew. V. 23
thou art an offense unto me: Mark V. 33
for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of
men. And Matthew. V. 24
then Jesus, Mark V. 34
when he had called the people unto him, with his disciples also, Luke V. 23
he said unto them all, Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 38
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
daily, and follow me. Luke V. 24
For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his
life for my sake, Mark V. 35
and the Gospels, the same Matthew. V. 25
shall find it, and Luke V. 25
save it. For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, Mark V. 36
and lose his own soul, Matthew. V. 25
and lose himself, or be cast away? Mark V. 37
Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Mark V. 38
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, Luke Chapter 9 V. 26
when he shall come in his own glory, and in his Fathers, and of the holy
angels. Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 27
For the Some of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels:
and then he shall reward every man according to his works. Mark Chapter 9 V. 1
And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, Luke V. 27
of a truth, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till
they see the kingdom of God Mark Chapter 9 V. 1
come with power, Matthew. V. 28
the Son of man coming in his kingdom.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Christ's transfiguration before three of his disciples.
Mark V. 2
ANd after six days, Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John Matthew.
Chapter 17 V. 1
his brother, Mark V. 2
and leads them up into an high mountain apart by themselves. Luke V. 28
And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter,
and John, and James, and went up into a mountain to pray. And as he prayed,
Luke V. 29
the fashion of his countenance was altered, Mark V. 2
and he was transfigured before them. Matthew. V. 2
And his face did shine as the sun, Mark V. 3
and his raiment became shining, exceeding white, Matthew. V. 2
as the light, Mark V. 3
as snow, Matthew. V. 2
and glistering; Mark V. 3
so as no fuller on earth can white them. Matthew. V. 3
And behold, there appeared unto them Luke V. 30
two men, which were Moses and Elias: Mark V. 4
and they were talking with Jesus; Luke V. 31
who appeared in glory, and spoke of his decease which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. But Peter, Luke V. 32
and they that were with him, were heavy with sleep: and when they were awake,
they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him. Luke V. 33
And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Matthew. V. 4
Peter answered and said to Jesus, Mark V. 4
Master, Matthew. V. 4
Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou will, let us make here three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. Mark Chapter 9 V. 6
For he wist not what to say, for they were sore afraid. Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 5
While he yet Luke Chapter 9 V. 34
thus spoke, Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 5
behold, Luke Chapter 9 V. 34
there came Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 5
a bright Luke Chapter 9 V. 34
cloud, and overshadowed them, and they feared as they entered into the cloud:
Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 5
and behold, Luke V. 35
there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, Matthew.
Chapter 17 V. 5
in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. Matthew. V. 6
And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces, and were sore
afraid. Luke V. 36
And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. Matthew. V. 7
And Jesus came and touched them, Matthew. V. 8
and said, Arise, and be not afraid. And when they had lift up their eyes, Mark
V. 8
and suddenly when they had looked round about, they saw no man any more, save
Jesus only with themselves.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Christ descends from the mountain and returns to his apostles.
Matthew. V. 9
ANd as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them Mark V. 9
that they should tell no man what things they had seen, till the Son of man
were risen from the dead, Matthew. V. 9
saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from
the dead. Luke V. 36
And they kept it close, Mark V. 10
and they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what
the rising from the dead should mean, Luke V. 36
and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen. Matthew.
V. 10
And his disciples asked him, saying, Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 14
Why then say the Scribes, that Elias must first come? Matthew. V. 11
And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, Mark V. 12
Elias verily comes first, Matthew. V. 11
and shall restore all things, Mark V. 12
and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many things,
and be set at naught. Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 12
But I say unto you, that Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but
have done unto him whatsoever they listed, Mark Chapter 9 V. 13
as it is written of him: Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 12
likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them. Then the disciples
understood that he spoke to them of John the Baptist. Matthew. V. 13


CHAP. LXXXIX. Christ casts a devil out of a lunatic man, which the
disciples could not cast out.
Luke Chapter 9 V. 37
ANd it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come down from the
hill, Mark V. 14
and when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and
the Scribes questioning with them. Mark V. 15
And straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed and
Luke Chapter 9 V. 37
much people met him, Mark V. 15
and running to him, saluted him. Matthew. V. 14
And when they were come to the multitude, Mark V. 16
he asked the Scribes, What question ye with them? Luke V. 38
And behold, Matthew. V. 14
there came to him a certain man Luke V. 38
of the company, Matthew. V. 14
kneeling down to him, and he Mark V. 17
answered, and Luke V. 38
cried out, saying, Matthew. V. 15
Lord, Mark V. 17
Master, I have brought unto thee my son, which has a dumb spirit: Luke V.
38
I beseech thee look upon my son, for he is mine only child: Matthew. V. 15
have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic, and sore vexed: for often times he
falls into the fire, and often into the water. Luke V. 39
And lo, a spirit takes him; Mark V. 18
and wheresoever he takes him, Luke V. 39
he suddenly cries out, and he teareth him, that he someth again; Mark V. 18
and he fometh, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away; Luke V. 39
and bruising him, hardly departs from him. Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 16
And I brought him to thy disciples, Luke Chapter 9 V. 40
and I besought thy disciples to cast him out, Mark V. 18
and I spoke to thy disciples, that they should cast him out; and they could
not Matthew. V. 17
cure him. Then Jesus answered Mark Chapter 9 V. 19
him, Matthew. V. 17
and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you?
Luke V. 41
and Matthew. V. 17
how long shall I suffer you? bring him, Luke V. 41
thy son hither Mark V. 20
unto me. And they brought him unto him: Luke V. 41
and as he was yet a coming, Mark V. 20
and when he saw him, straightway Luke V. 41
the devil threw him down, and tare him; Mark V. 20
and he fell on the ground, Mark V. 21
and wallowed foming. And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this
came unto him? Mark V. 22
And he said, Of a child. And often times it has cast him into the fire, and
into the waters to destroy him: but if thou can do any thing, have compassion
on us, Mark V. 23
and help us. Jesus said unto him, If thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes. Mark V. 24
And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord,
Mark V. 25
I believe, help thou mine unbelief. When Jesus saw that the people came
running together, Matthew. V. 17
Jesus Mark V. 25
rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge
thee come out of him, and enter no more into him. And the spirit cried, Mark V.
26
and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he was as one dead, insomuch that
many said, Mark V. 27
He is dead. But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up, Luke V. 42
and healed the child, Mark V. 27
and he arose: Matthew. V. 18
and the child was cured from that very hour, Luke V. 42
and he delivered him again to his father. Luke V. 43
And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. Mark V. 28
And when he was come into the house, Matthew. V. 19
then came Mark V. 28
his disciples Matthew. V. 19
to Jesus apart, Mark V. 28
and asked him privately, Matthew. V. 20
and said, Why could not we cast him out? And Jesus said unto them, Because of
your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, Luke Chapter 17 V. 6
If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain,
Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove; and nothing shall be
unpossible unto you. Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 21
Howbeit this kind Mark Chapter 9 V. 29
can come forth by nothing but by prayer and fasting.

CHAP. XC. Christ goes secretly through Galilee. His sermon of his passion.
Mark V. 30
ANd they departed thence, and passed through Galilee, and he would not that
any man should know it. Mark V. 31
For he taught his disciples. Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 22
Matthew. Chapter 20 V. 17
And while they abode in Galilee, Luke Chapter 17 V. 6
but while they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, Matthew. Chapter 17
V. 22
Jesus Luke Chapter 9 V. 44
said unto his disciples, Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for the
Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men, Mark V. 31
and they shall kill him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third
day. Luke V. 45
But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they
perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying: Matthew. V. 23
and they were exceeding sorry. Mark V. 33
And he came to Capernaum.

CHAP. XCI. Christ pays toll for himself and Peter in Capernaum.
Matthew. V. 24
ANd when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute-money, came
to Peter, and said, Does not your master pay tribute? He says, Matthew. V. 25
Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What
think thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or
tribute? of their own children, Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 26
or of strangers? Peter says unto him, Of strangers. Jesus says unto him,
Then are the children free. Matthew. V. 27
Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an
hook, and take up the fish that first comes up: and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me
and thee.

CHAP. XCII. Christ's sermon of humility, of shunning scandal, how to reprove
our brother, etc.
Luke Chapter 9 V. 46
THen there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be greatest.
Luke V. 47
And Jesus perceiving the thought of their heart, Mark Chapter 9 V. 33
and being in the house, he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among your
selves, by the way? But they held their peace; Mark V. 34
for by the way they had disputed among themselves, who should be the greatest.
Mark V. 35
And he sat down, and called the twelve. Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 1
At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in
the kingdom of heaven? Mark V. 35
And he says unto them, If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last,
and servant of all. Matthew. V. 2
And Jesus called a little child unto him, Mark V. 36
and he took a child, Luke V. 47
and set him by him, Mark V. 36
in the midst of them: and when he had taken him in his arms, he said unto
them, Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 3
Verily I say unto you, Matthew. Chapter 19 V. 14
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. V. 4
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And Luke V. 48
whosoever shall receive this child, or Mark V. 37
one of such children in my name, receives me: and whosoever shall receive me,
receives not me, but him that sent me: Luke V. 48
for he that is least among you all, the same shall be great. Mark Chapter 9 V. 38
And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy
name, and he follows not us, and we forbad him, because he follows not us.
Luke Chapter 9 V. 50
And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not; Mark Chapter 9 V. 39
for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly
speak evil of me: Luke Chapter 9 V. 50
for he that is not against us, is for us. Mark V. 41
For whosoever shall give you a cut of water to drink, in my name, because ye
belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, Mark V. 42
he shall not lose his reward. And whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a mistone were hanged about
his neck, and he were cast, Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 6
and drowned in the depth of the sea. Matthew. V. 7
Luke Chapter 17 V. 1
Woe unto the world because of offenses come: but woe to that man by whom the
offense comes. Mark V. 43
Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 30
And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off, Matthew. V. 8
and cast it from thee: Mark V. 43
it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, then having two hands, Mark
V. 43
to go and Matthew. V. 8
to be cast Mark V. 43
into hell, Matthew. V. 8
into everlasting fire, Mark V. 44
that never shall be quenched: Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. Mark V. 45
And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off, Matthew. V. 8
and cast it from thee: Mark V. 45
it is better for thee to enter halt into life, then having two feet, to be
cast into hell, Matthew. V. 8
everlasting fire Mark V. 45
that never shall be quenched: Mark V. 46
Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Mark V. 47
And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, Matthew. V. 9
and cast it from thee: Mark V. 47
it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, then
having two eyes, to be cast into hell fire: Mark V. 48
Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Mark V. 49
For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted
with salt. Mark V. 50
Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will you
season it? Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another. Matthew.
Chapter 18 V. 10
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you,
that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven. Matthew. V. 11
Luke Chapter 19 V. 10
For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost. Matthew. V. 12
Luke Chapter 15 V. 4
How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray,
does he not leave the ninety and nine, and goes into the mountains, and
seeks that which is gone astray? Matthew. V. 13
And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoices more of
that sheep, then of the ninety and nine which went not astray. Matthew. V. 14
Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of
these little ones should perish. Matthew. V. 15
Moreover, Luke Chapter 17 V. 3
if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, Matthew. V. 16
thou have gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with
thee one or two more, John Chapter 8 V. 17
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
Matthew. V. 17
And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he
neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a
Publicane. Verily I say unto you, Matthew. V. 18
John Chapter 20 V. 23
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Again I say unto you,
Matthew. V. 19
that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall
ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven. Matthew. V. 20
For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them.

CHAP. XCLIII. Christ teaches Peter how often we ought to forgive our brethren.
Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 21
THen came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin against
me, Matthew. V. 22
and I forgive him? Luke Chapter 17 V. 4
till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven
times; Matthew. V. 23
but, until seventie times seven. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened
unto a certain king which would take account of his servants. And when he had
begun to reckon, Matthew. V. 24
one was brought unto him which ought him ten thousand talents. Matthew. V. 25
But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his
wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. Matthew. V. 26
The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have
patience with me, Matthew. V. 27
and I will pay thee all. Then the lord of that servant was moved with
compassion, and loosed him, Matthew. V. 28
and forgave him the debt. But the same servant went out, and found one of his
fellow servants, which ought him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him,
and took him by the throat, Matthew. V. 29
saying, Pay me that thou owe. And his fellow servants fell down at his feet,
and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
Matthew. V. 30
And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the
debt. So when his fellow servants saw what was dove, they were very sorry,
Matthew. V. 31
and came and told unto their lord all that was done. Matthew. V. 32
Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked
servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me: Matthew. V. 33
Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I
had pity on thee? Matthew. V. 34
And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentours, till he should
pay all that was due unto him. Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 35
So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

CHAP. XCIIII. The last half year of Christ's ministry. His kinsfolk persuade
him to go up to Jerusalem to the feast of tabernacles.
John Chapter 7 V. 2
NOw the Jews feast of tabernacles was at hand. His brethren therefore said
unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judea, John V. 3
that thy disciples also may see the works that thou do. For there is no man
that does any thing in secret, John V. 4
and he himself-seeketh to be known openly: If thou do these things, show thy
self to the world. For neither did his brethren believe in him. John V. 5 6
Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come: but your time is always
ready. John V. 7
The world cannot hate you; but me it hates, because I testify of it, that
the works thereof are evil. John V. 8
Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this feast, John Chapter 8 V. 20
for my time is not yet full come. John Chapter 7 V. 9
When he had said these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee.

CHAP. XCV. Christ goes to Jerusalem to the feast of tabernacles.
Luke Chapter 9 V. 51
ANd it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he
steadfastly set-his face to go to Jerusalem, Luke V. 52
And sent messengers before his face, and they went, and entered into a village
of the Samaritanes to make ready for him. And they did not receive him, Luke
V. 53
because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem. Luke Chapter 9 V. 54
And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, will thou
that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias
did? Luke V. 55
But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of. Luke V. 56
For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. And
they went to another village. John Chapter 7 V. 10
But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast, not
openly, but as it were in secret.

CHAP. XCVI. Three several men would follow Christ; every of which were
desicient in something.
Luke V. 57
Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 19
ANd it came to pass that as they went in the way, a certain man said unto
him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. And Jesus said unto
him, Foxes have holes, Luke V. 58
and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay
his head. Matthew. Chapter 8 V. 21
Luke V. 59
And he said unto another, Follow me: but he said, Lord, suffer me first to go
and bury my father. Luke V. 60
Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead; but go thou and preach the
kingdom of God. Luke V. 61
And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee: but let me first go bid them
farewell which are at home at my house. And Jesus said unto him, Luke V. 62
No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is sit for the
kingdom of God.

CHAP. XCVII. Christ sends out seventie disciples.
Luke Chapter 10 V. 1
Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 1
AFter these things, the Lord appointed other seventie also, and sent them two
and two before his face into every city, and place, whither he himself would
come. Luke Chapter 10 V. 2
Therefore said he unto them, Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 37
The harvest truly is great, but the labors are few: pray ye therefore the
Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his harvest. Go
your ways: Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 16
behold, Luke V. 3
I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Luke V. 4
Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes, and salute no man by the way.
Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 11
And into whatsoever house ye enter, Luke V. 5
first say, Peace be to this house. Luke V. 6
And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it
shall turn to you again. Luke V. 7
And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give:
for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. Luke V. 8
And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as
are set before you. Luke V. 9
And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 7
The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. Luke V. 10
But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways
out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city
which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against you: Luke V. 11
notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh
unto you. Luke V. 12
But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom,
then for that city. Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 21
Luke V. 13
Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works had
been done in Tire and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great
while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. Luke V. 14
But it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the judgment, then for
you. And thou Capernaum, Luke V. 15
which art exalted to heaven, shall be thrust down to hell. He that hears
you, Luke V. 16
hears me: and he that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me.

CHAP. XCVIII. Christ teaches in the temple at Jerusalem at the feast of
tabernacles.
John Chapter 7 V. 11
THen the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he? John V. 12
And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said,
He is a good man: others said, Nay, but he deceives the people. Howbeit, John
V. 13
no man spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews. John V. 14
Now about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple, and taught.
And the Jews marvelled, John V. 15
saying, How knows this man letters, having never learned? Jesus answered
them, John V. 16
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. John V. 17
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self. He that speaks of himself, John V. 18
seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same
is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. Did not Moses give you the Law,
John V. 19
and yet none of you keeps the Law? John Chapter 5 V. 18
why go ye about to kill me? The people answered and said, John V. 20
Thou have a devil: who goes about to kill thee? Jesus answered and said unto
them, John V. 21
I have done one work, and ye all marvel. John V. 22
Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision, (not because it is of Moses, but
of the fathers) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man. John V. 23
If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses should
not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole
on the sabbath day? Judge not according to the appearance, John V. 24
but judge righteous judgment. John V. 25
Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he whom they seek to kill?
But lo, he speaks boldly, John V. 26
and they say nothing unto him: do the rulers know indeed that this is the very
Christ? John Chapter 7 V. 27
Howbeit we know this man whence he is: but when Christ comes, no man knows
whence he is. John V. 28
Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye
know whence I am; and I am not come of my self, but he that sent me is true,
whom ye know not. But I know him, for I am from him, John V. 29
and he has sent me. John V. 30
Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because his hour
was not yet come. John V. 31
And many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ comes, will he
do more miracles then these which this man has done? John V. 32
The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning him: and
the Pharisees and the chief Priests sent officers to take him. Then said Jesus
unto them, John V. 33
Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go unto him that sent me. John V.
34
John Chapter 13 V. 33
Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot
come. Then said the Jews among themselves, John V. 35
Whither will he go, that we shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed
among the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles? John V. 36
What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not
sinde me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come?

CHAP. XCIX. What was done the last day of the feast of tabernacles.
John V. 37
IN the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying,
If any man thirst, John V. 38
let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture
has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. John V. 39
(But this spoke he of the spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: for the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified) Many of-the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of
a truth, this is the prophet. John Chapter 7 V. 40
Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, John V. 41
Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Matthew. Chapter 2 V. 5
John V. 42
Has not the scripture said, That Christ comes of the seed of David, and out
of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? John V. 43
So there was a division among the people because of him. John V. 44
And some of them would have taken him, but no man laid hands on him. Then came
the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees, and they said unto them, John
V. 45
Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, John V. 46
Never man spoke like this man. John V. 47
Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived? John V. 48
Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? But this people
who knows not the Law are cursed. John V. 49
Nicodemus says unto them( John V. 50
John Chapter 3 V. 2
he that came to Jesus by night, John V. 51
being one of them) Does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know
what he does? John V. 52
They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search and look:
for out of Galilee arises no prophet. John V. 53
And every man went unto his own house.

CHAP. C. An adulteress is brought unto Christ by the Pharisees.
John Chapter 8 V. 1 2;
JEsus went unto the mount of Olives: And early in the morning he came again
into the temple, and all the people came unto him, and he sat down, and taught
them. John V. 3
And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery; and
when they had set her in the mids, They say unto him, Master, John V. 4
this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. John Chapter 8 V. 5
Now Moses in the Law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what say
thou? This they said, John V. 6
tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus stouped down, and
with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not. John V. 7
So when they continued asking him, he lift up himself, and said unto them, He
that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. John V. 8
And again hestouped down, and wrote on the ground. And they which heard it,
John V. 9
being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the
eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in
the midst. When Jesus had lift up himself, John V. 10
and saw none but the woman, be said unto her, Woman, where are those thine
accusers? has no man condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. John V. 11
And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.

CHAP. CI. Christ's sermon of his own person and office.
John V. 12
THen spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, John Chapter 1 V. 5 Chapter 9 V. 5
I am the light of the world: he that follows me, shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. John V. 13
The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bear record of thy self, thy
record is not true. John V. 14
Jesus answered and said unto them, John Chapter 5 V. 31
Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true: for I know whence I
came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go. Ye
judge after the flesh, John V. 15
I judge no man. And yet if I judge, John V. 16
my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.
Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 16
It is also written in your law, John V. 17
that the testimony of two men is true. John Chapter 8 V. 18
I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me, bears
witness of me. John V. 19
Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know
me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also.
John V. 20
These words spoke Jesus in the treasury as he taught in the temple: and no
man laid hands on him, for his hour was not yet come.

CHAP. CII. The repetition of the doctrine of the person of Christ, and of the
corruption of the Jews.
John V. 21
THen said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall
die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come. John V. 22
Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? because he says, Whither I go, ye
cannot come. John V. 23
And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath, I am from above: ye are of this
world, I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, John V. 24
that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
die in your sins. John V. 25
Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus says unto them, Even the
same that I said unto you from the beginning. I have many things to say, John
V. 26
and to judge of you: but he that sent me, is true, and I speak to the world
those things which I have heard of him. John V. 27
They understood not that he spoke to them of the Father. John V. 28
Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lift up the Son of man, then shall
ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self: but as my Father has
taught me, I speak these things. And he that sent me, John V. 29
is with me: the Father has not left me alone: for I do always those things
that please him. As he spoke these words, John Chapter 8 V. 30
many believed on him.

CHAP. CIII. Christ's third sermon in the temple to the believers, and a sharp
disputation with the Pharisees.
John V. 31
Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my
word, then are ye my disciples indeed. John V. 32
And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. They answered
him, We be Abraham's seed, John V. 33
and were never in bondage to any man: how say thou, Ye shall be made free?
John V. 34
Jesus answered them, Verily verily I say unto you, Whosoever commits sin,
is the servant of sin. John V. 35
And the servant abides not in the house for ever: but the Son abides ever.
John V. 36
If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. John V. 37
I know that ye are Abraham's seed, but ye seek to kill me, because my word has
no place in you. John V. 38
I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye have
seen with your father. They answered and said unto him, John V. 39
Abraham is our father. Jesus says unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye
would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, John V. 40
a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not
Abraham. John V. 41
Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of
fornication, we have one Father, even God. Jesus said unto them, John V. 42
If God were your Father, ye would love me, for I proceeded forth, and came
from God; neither came I of my self, but he sent me. John V. 43
Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye
are of your father the devil, John V. 44
and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a murderer from the beginning,
and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks
a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it. And
because I tell you the truth, John Chapter 8 V. 45
ye believe me not. John V. 46
Which of you convinces me of sin? and if I say the truth, why do ye not
believe me? He that is of God, John V. 47
hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.
Then answered the Jews, John V. 48
and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritane, and have a
devil? Jesus answered, John V. 49
I have not a devil: but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me. And I seek
not mine own glory; John V. 50
there is one that seeks and judges. John V. 51
Verily verily I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he he shall never see
death. John V. 52
Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou have a devil. Abraham is
dead, and the prophets, and thou say, If a man keep my saying, he shall
never taste of death. Art thou greater then our father Abraham, John V. 53
which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom make thou thy self? Jesus
answered, John V. 54
If I honor my self, my honor is nothing: it is my Father that honors me,
of whom ye say, that he is your God: Yet ye have not known him, John V. 55
but I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a liar like
unto you: but I know him and keep his saying. John V. 56
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad. John
V. 57
Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou
seen Abraham? John V. 58
Jesus said unto them, Verily verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.
John V. 59
Then took they up stons to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of
the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.

CHAP. CIIII. The seventie disciples return. Christ's spiritual joy, and the
beatitude of the disciples.
Luke Chapter 10 V. 17
ANd the seventie returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are
subject unto us through thy name. Luke V. 18
And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning, fall from heaven. Luke V.
19
Behold, I give unto you power to tread on scrpents and scorpions, and over all
the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, Luke V. 20
that the spirits are subject unto you: but rather rejoice because your names
are written in heaven. Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 25
Luke V. 21
In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes: even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. Luke V. 22
All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knows who the Son
is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the
Son will reveal him. Luke V. 23
And he turned him unto his disciples, and said privately, Blessed are the eyes
which see the things that ye see. Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 17
For I tell you that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things
which ye see, Luke V. 24
and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them.

CHAP. CV. Christ's dispute with a lawyer. The parable of the Samaritane.
Luke Chapter 10 V. 25
ANd Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 35
behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what shall
I do to inherit eternal life? He said unto him, Luke V. 26
What is written in the Law? how read thou? And he answering, said, Luke Chapter
10 V. 27
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thy
self. Luke V. 28
And he said unto him, Thou have answered right: this do, and thou shall live.
But he willing to justify himself, Luke V. 29
said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbor? Luke V. 30
And Jesus answering, said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho,
and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and
departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there came down a certain priest
that way; and when he saw him, Luke V. 31
he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, Luke V. 32
when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other
side. But a certain Samaritane, Luke V. 33
as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on
him, And went to him, and bound up his wounds, Luke V. 34
pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an
inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow when he departed, Luke V. 35
he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care
of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again I will repay thee.
Which now of these three, Luke V. 36
think thou was neighbor unto him that fell among the thieves? And he said,
Luke V. 37
He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou
likewise.

CHAP. CVI. Christ is entertained by Martha.
Luke V. 38
NOw it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain village: and
a certain woman named Martha, received him into her house. And she had a sister
called Mary, Luke Chapter 10 V. 39
which also sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word. Luke V. 40
But Martha was cumbred about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord,
do thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? bid her
therefore that she help me. Luke V. 41
And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and
troubled about many things: Luke V. 42
But one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that good part, which shall
not be taken away from her.

CHAP. CVII. Christ teaches his disciples a form of prayer. The efficacy of
prayer.
Luke Chapter 11 V. 1
ANd it came to pass, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he
ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his disciples. Luke V. 2
And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 9
Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done as in heaven, so in earth. Give us day by day our daily bread.
Luke V. 3
And forgive us our sins; Luke V. 4
for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. Luke V. 5
And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him
at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves; Luke V. 6
For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set
before him: Luke V. 7
And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not, the door is now
shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. I say
unto you, Luke V. 8
Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend: yet because of
his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as be needs. Matthew. Chapter 7
V. 7
Luke Chapter 11 V. 9
And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find:
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives:
Luke V. 10
and he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.
Luke V. 11
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a
stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a ferpent? Or if he
shall ask an egg, Luke V. 12
will he offer him a scorpion? If ye then, Luke V. 13
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?

CHAP. CVIII. Christ casts out a devil; and confirms it to be done by divine
power.
Luke V. 14
Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 22
ANd he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass when
the devil was gone out, the dumb spoke: and the people wondered. But some of
them said, Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 34 Chapter 12 V. 24
Luke V. 15
He casts out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the devils. And other
tempting him, Luke V. 16
sought of him a sign from heaven. Luke V. 17
But he knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against
it self is brought to desolation: and a house divided against a house, falls.
Luke V. 18
If Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand?
because ye say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub. Luke V. 19
And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out?
therefore shall they be your judges. Luke V. 20
But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God
is come upon you. Luke V. 21
When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace. Luke Chapter
11 V. 22
But when a stronger then he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes
from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils. He that is
not with me, Luke V. 23
is against me: and he that gathers not with me, scatters. Matthew. Chapter 12 V.
43
Luke V. 24
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest: and finding none, he suith, I will return unto my house whence I
came out. Luke V. 25
And when he comes, he finds it swept and garnished. Luke V. 26
Then goes he, and takes to him seven other spirits more wicked then himself,
and they enter in, and dwell there, and the last state of that man is worse
then the first. Luke V. 27
And it came to pass as he spoke these things, a certain woman of the company
lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and
the paps which thou have sucked. But he said, Yea, Luke V. 28
rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Matthew. Chapter 12
V. 38
And when the people were gathered thick together, Luke V. 29
he began to say, This is an evil generation, they seek a sign, and there
shall no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. Luke V. 30
For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be
to this generation. Luke V. 31
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this
generation, and condemn them for she came from the utmost parts of the earth
to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, a greater then Solomon is here.
Luke V. 32
The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and
shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and behold, a
greater then Jonas is here. Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 15
Luke V. 33
Luke Chapter 8 V. 16
No man when he has lighted a candle, puts it in a secret place, neither
under a bushel; but on a candlestick, that they which come in may see the
light. Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 22
Luke V. 34
The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy
whole body also is full of light: but when thine eye is evil, thy body also
is full of darkness. Take heed therefore, that the light which is in thee be
not darkness. Luke Chapter 11 V. 35
If thy whole body therefore be full of light having no part dark, Luke V. 36
the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle does
give thee light.

CHAP. CIX. Christ dines with a Pharisee. The disputations there arising.
Luke V. 37
ANd as he spoke, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: and he went
in and sat down to meat. And when the Pharisee saw it, Luke V. 38
he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner. Matthew. Chapter 23 V. 25
And the Lord said unto him, Luke V. 39
Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter: but
your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. Ye fools, Luke V. 40
did not he that made that which is without, make that which is within also?
Luke V. 41
But rather give alms of such things as you have: and behold, all things are
clean unto you. But woe unto you Pharisees: Luke V. 42
for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment
and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
undone. Matthew. Chapter 23 V. 6
Woe unto you Pharisees: Luke V. 43
for ye love the uppermost seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the
markets. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: Luke V. 44
for ye are as graves which appear not; and the men that walk over them, are
not aware of them. Then answered one of the lawyers, Luke V. 45
and said unto him, Master, thus saying, thou reproachest us also. And he said,
Luke V. 46
Woe unto you also ye lawyers: for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be born,
and ye your selves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers. Matthew. Chapter
23 V. 29
Woe unto you: Luke Chapter 11 V. 47
for ye build the sepulchers of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
Luke V. 48
Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for they
indeed killed them, and ye build their sepulchers. Luke V. 49
Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and
apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: Luke V. 50
That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the
world, may be required of this generation. From the blood of Abel unto the
blood of Zacharias, Luke V. 51
which perished between the altar and the temple: verily I say unto you, it
shall be required of this generation. Matthew. Chapter 23 V. 13
Woe unto you lawyers: Luke V. 52
for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in your selves; and
them that were entering in, ye hindered. Luke V. 53
And as he said these things unto them, the Scribes and the Pharisees began to
urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things: Laying wait
for him, Luke V. 54
and secking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.

CHAP. CX. A large sermon of Christ's to his disciples and to the people.
Sect. I. Of shunning hypocrisy.
Luke Chapter 12 V. 1
IN Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 6
the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of
people, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began to say unto his
disciples first of all, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 26
For there is nothing covered, Luke V. 2
that shall not be revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known. Luke Chapter 12
V. 3
Therefore whatsoever yet have spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the
light: and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets, shall be
proclaimed upon the house tops.

Sect. II. Of the constant confession of the truth and of Christ.
And I say unto you my friends, Luke V. 4
Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that, have no more that
they can do. Luke V. 5
But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he has
killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him. Matthew. Chapter
10 V. 29
Luke V. 6
Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten
before God? Luke V. 7
But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore; ye
are of more value then many sparrows. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 32
Luke V. 8
Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the
Son of man also confess before the angels of God. Luke V. 9
But he that denies me before men, shall be denied before the angels of God.
Matthew. Chapter 12 V. 31
Luke V. 10
And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 19
Luke V. 11
And when they bring you unto the Synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers,
take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say:
Luke V. 12
For the holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.

Sect. III. A dehortation from covetousness and care.
And one of the company said unto him, Master, Luke V. 13
speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me. And he said unto
him, Luke V. 14
Man, who made me a judge, or a divider over you? Luke Chapter 12 V. 15
And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses. Luke V. 16
And he spoke a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man
brought forth plentifully. And he thought within himself, saying, Luke V. 17
What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he
said, This will I do, Luke V. 18
I will pull down my barns and build greater, and there will I bestow all my
fruits, and my goods. Luke V. 19
And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years;
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him, Luke V. 20
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? Luke V. 21
So is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.
Luke V. 22
And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 25
Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat, neither for the body what ye
shall put on. Luke V. 23
The life is more then meat, and the body is more then raiment. Consider the
ravens, Luke V. 24
for they neither sow nor reap, which neither have storehouse nor barn, and God
feeds them. How much more are ye better then the fowls! Luke V. 25
And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit? Luke
V. 26
If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought
for the rest? Consider the lilies how they grow; they toil not, Luke V. 27
they spinne not: and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory, was
not arrayed like one of these. If then God so clothe the grass, Luke V. 28
which is to day in the field, and to morrow is cast into the oven: how much
more will he clothe you, O ye of little faith! And seek not ye what ye shall
eat, Luke V. 29
or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. Luke Chapter 12 V. 30
For all these things do the nations of the world seek after: and your Father
knows that ye have need of these things. Luke V. 31
But rather seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added
unto you. Fear not, little flock; Luke V. 32
for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye
have, and give alms: Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 20
Luke V. 33
provide your selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that
fails not, where no thief approaches, neither moth corrupts. Luke V. 34
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Sect. IIII. An exhortation to a vigilant expectation of the kingdom of heaven.
Let your loins be girded about, Luke V. 35
and your lights burning, Luke V. 36
And ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return
from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately. Luke V. 37
Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching:
verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to
meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if he shall come in the second
watch, Luke V. 38
or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.
Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 43
And this know, Luke V. 39
that if the good man of the house had known what hour the thief would come,
he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through. Be
ye therefore ready also: Luke V. 40
for the Son of man comes at an hour when ye think not.

Sect. V. The office of the apostles, and of ministers that are set over
others. The effect of the Gospel preached.
Then Peter said unto him, Lord, Luke V. 41
speak thou this parable unto us, or even to all? Luke Chapter 12 V. 42
And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his lord
shall make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due
season? Blessed is that servant, Luke V. 43
whom his lord when he comes shall find so doing. Luke V. 44
Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he has.
Luke V. 45
But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to beat the menservants, and the maidens, and to eat and drink,
and to be drunken: Luke V. 46
The lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for him, and
at an hour when he is not ware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint
him his portion with the unbeleevers. And that servant which knew his lords
will, Luke V. 47
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes. Luke V. 48
But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.
Luke V. 49
I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be already
kindled? Luke V. 50
But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straightened, till it be
accomplished! Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 34
Luke V. 51
Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather
division. Luke V. 52
For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against
two, and two against three. Luke V. 53
The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the
father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother;
the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against
her mother in law.

Sect. VI.
And he said also to the people, Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 2
Luke Chapter 12 V. 54
When ye see a cloud rise out of the west, straightway ye say, There comes a
shower; and so it is. Luke V. 55
And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it
comes to pass. Ye hypocrites, Luke V. 56
ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth: but how is it, that ye
do not discern this time? Yea, Luke V. 57
and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right? Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 25
Luke V. 58
When thou go with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the
way, give diligence that thou may be delivered from him; lest he hale thee
to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast
thee into prison. I tell thee, Luke V. 59
Thou shall not depart thence, till thou have paid the very last mite.

CHAP. CXI. An exhortation to repentance, because of Gods patience. The parable
of the barren fig tree.
Luke Chapter 13 V. 1
THere were present at that season, some that told him of the Galileans, whose
blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. Luke V. 2
And Jesus answering, said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were
sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you,
Nay: Luke V. 3
but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those eighteen, upon
whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, Luke V. 4
think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell
you, Nay: but except ye repent, Luke V. 5
ye shall all likewise perish. He spoke also this parable: Luke V. 6
A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came and sought
fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard,
Luke Chapter 13 V. 7
Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find
none: cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? And he answering, Luke V. 8
said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about
it, and dung it: Luke V. 9
And if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.

CHAP. CII. A crooked woman healed on the sabbath day.
Luke V. 10
ANd he was teaching in one of the Synagogues on the sabbath. And behold, Luke
V. 11
there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was
bowed together, and could in no wife lift up her self. Luke V. 12
And when Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her, Woman, thou
art loosed from thine infirmity. And he laid his hands on her, Luke V. 13
and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God. Luke V. 14
And the ruler of the Synagogue answered with indignation, because that Jesus
had healed on the sabbath day, and said unto the people, There are six days in
which men ought to work: in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the
sabbath day. The Lord then answered him, and said, Luke V. 15
Thou hypocrite, does not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his
ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering? Luke V. 16
And ought not this woman being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound,
lo these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day? Luke V.
17
And when he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and all
the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him. Luke V.
18
Then said, he Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I
resemble it? Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 31
Luke V. 19
It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and cast into his garden,
and it grew, and waxed a great tree: and the fowls of the air lodged in the
branches of it. And again he said, Luke Chapter 13 V. 20
Whereunto shall I like the kingdom of God? Matthew. Chapter 13 V. 33
Luke V. 21
It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till
the whole was leavened.

CHAP. CXIII. Christ goes to Jerusalem. One born blind is healed by the way.
Luke V. 22
Matthew. Chapter 9 V. 35
ANd he went through the cities and villages, teaching and journeying toward
Jerusalem. John Chapter 9 V. 1
And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth. John V. 2
And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his
parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned,
John V. 3
nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.
John V. 4
I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night comes
when no man can work. John V. 5
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. John V. 6
When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle,
and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, John V. 7
And said unto him, Go wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by interpretation,
Sent) He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing. John V. 8
The neighbors therefore, and they which before had seen him, that he was
blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? Some said, This is he: others
said, John V. 9
He is like him; but he said, I am he. Therefore said they, John V. 10
unto him, How were thine eyes opened? John V. 11
He answered and said, A man that is called Jesus, made clay, and anointed mine
eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and
washed, and I received sight. John Chapter 9 V. 12
Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not. John V. 13
They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind. John V. 14
and it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes. John
V. 15
Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He said
unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see. Therefore said
some of the Pharisees, John V. 16
This man is not of God, because he keeps not the sabbathday. Others said,
How can a man that is asinner, do such miracles? and there was a division among
them. They say unto the blind man again, John V. 17
What say thou of him, that he has opened thine eyes? He said, He is a
prophet. John V. 18
But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and
received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had received his
sight. John V. 19
And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind?
how then does he now see? His parents answered them and said, We know that this
is our son, John V. 20
and that he was born blind: But by what means he now sees, John V. 21
We know not, or who has opened his eyes we know not: he is of age, ask him,
he shall speak for himself. These words spoke his parents, John V. 22
because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man
did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue.
Therefore said his parents, He is of age, ask him. John V. 23
Then again called they the man that was blind, John V. 24
and said unto him, Give God the praise, we know that this man is a sinner. He
answered and said, John V. 25
Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I know, that whereas I was
blind, now I see. Then said they to him again, John V. 26
What did he to thee? how opened he thine eyes? John V. 27
He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear: wherefore
would you hear it again? will ye also be his disciples? Then they reviled him,
John Chapter 9 V. 28
and said, Thou art his disciple, but we are Moses disciples. We know that God
spoke unto Moses: John V. 29
as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is. The man answered and said
unto them, John V. 30
Why herein is a mavelous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet
he has opened mine eyes. John V. 31
Now we know that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of
God, and does his will, him he hears. John V. 32
Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one
that was born blind. John V. 33
If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. John V. 34
They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether. born in sins, and
do thou teach us? And they cast him out. John V. 35
Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he said
unto him, Do thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, Who is
he, Lord, John V. 36
that I might believe on him? And Jesus said unto him, John V. 37
Thou have both seen him, and it is he that talks with thee. And he said,
Lord, I believe: John V. 38
and he worshipped him.

CHAP. CXIIII. Christ preaches himself to be the door, the good shepherd.
John V. 39
ANd Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see
not, might see; and that they which see, might be made blind. John v. 40
And some of the Pharisees which were with him, heard these words, and said
unto him, Are we blind also? Jesus said unto them, John V. 41
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see: therefore
your sin remains. Verily verily I say unto you, John Chapter 10 V. 1
He that enters not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some
other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that enters in by the
door, John V. 2
is the shepherd of the sheep. John V. 3
To him the porter opens: and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his
own sheep by name, and leads them out. And when he puts forth his own
sheep, John V. 4
he goes before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. John
V. 5
And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not
the voice of strangers. John V. 6
This parable spoke Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they
were which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, John V. 7
Verily verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. John V. 8
All that ever came before me, are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not
hear them. I am the door; John V. 9
by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and
find pasture. John V. 10
The thief comes not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come
that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. John V.
11
I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd gives his life for the sheep. John
V. 12
But he that is an hireling and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not,
sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flees: and the wolf catches
them, and scatters the sheep. The hireling flees, John V. 13
because he is an hireling, and cares not for the sheep. John V. 14
I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father
knows me, John V. 15
even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other
sheep I have, John V. 16
which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. John V. 17
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might
take it again. No man takes it from me, John Chapter 10 V. 18
that I might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my
self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This
commandment have I received of my Father. John V. 19
There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings. And
many of them said, John V. 20
He has a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him? Others said, John V. 21
These are not the words of him that has a devil: can a devil open the eyes of
the blind?

CHAP. CXV. The feast of the dedication at Jerusalem, in which Christ
expressly professed himself to be the Messiah.
John V. 22
ANd it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter. John
V. 23
And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. John V. 24
Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long do thou make
us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. John V. 25
Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in
my Fathers name, they bear witness of me. But ye believe not, John V. 26
because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. John V. 27
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto
them eternal life, John V. 28
and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
John V. 29
My Father which gave them me, is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers hand. John V. 30
I and my Father are one. John V. 31
Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. Jesus answered them, John V.
32
Many good works have I showed you from my Father; for which of those works do
ye stone me? John V. 33
The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not, but for
blasphemy, and because that thou, being a man, make thy self God. John Chapter 10
V. 34
Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he
called them gods, John V. 35
unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be broken: Say ye of
him, John V. 36
whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest,
because I said, I am the Son of God? If I do not the works of my Father, John
V. 37
believe me not. But if I do, John V. 38
though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know and believe that
the Father is in me, and I in him. Therefore they sought again to take him:
John V. 39
but he escaped out of their hand.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE FOURTH YEAR OF CHRIST'S PUBLIC MINISTRY, Together with
his Passion and Resurrection.
CHAP. CXVI. Christ goes from Jerusalem beyond Jordan where John had baptized.
John Chapter 10 V. 40
ANd he went away again beyond Jordan, into the place where John at first
baptized, and there he abode. John V. 41
And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle: but all things that
John spoke of this man, were true. John V. 42
And many believed on him there.

CHAP. CXVII. Christ teaches that the way to heaven is strait.
Luke Chapter 13 V. 23
THen said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto
them, Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 13
Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, Luke V. 24
I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Luke V. 25
When once the master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and
ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are:
Then shall ye begin to say, Luke V. 26
We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets.
Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 23
But he shall say, I tell you, Luke V. 27
I know you not whence you are; depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.
Luke V. 28
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. And they shall come from the east, Luke V. 29
and from the west, and from the north, and from the south, and shall sit down
in the kingdom of God. Luke V. 30
And behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are first which
shall be last.

CHAP. CXVIII. The Pharisees tell Jesus of Herod's seeking to kill him.
Luke V. 31
THe same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get thee
out, and depart hence: for Herod will kill thee. Luke V. 32
And he aid unto them, Go ye and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and
I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected. Luke
V. 33
Nevertheless, I must walk to day and to morrow, and the day following: for it
cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. O Jerusalem, Luke Chapter 13 V. 34
Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen does
gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left
unto you desolate: Luke V. 35
and verily I say unto you, ye shall not see me, until the time come when ye
shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. CXIX. Christ eats in the Pharisees house, and there heals one of the
dropsy on the sabbath day.
Luke Chapter 14 V. 1
ANd it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees
to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched him. And behold, Luke V. 2
there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy. Luke V. 3
And Jesus answering, spoke unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it
lawful to heal on the sabbath day? Luke V. 4
And they held their peace. And he took him and healed him, and let him go: And
answered them, saying, Luke V. 5
Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not
straightway pull him out on the sabbath day? Luke V. 6
And they could not answer him again to these things. Luke V. 7
And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he marked how they
chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them, Luke V. 8
When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest
room, lest a more honorable man then thou be bidden of hm: And he that bad
thee and him, Luke V. 9
come and say to thee, Give this man place: and thou begin with shame to take
the lowest room. Luke V. 10
But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room, that when he
that bad thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher: then shall
thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee. Matthew.
Chapter 23 V. 12
Luke Chapter 14 V. 11
For whosoever exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that humbles himself,
shall be exalted. Luke V. 12
Then said he also to him that bad him, When thou make a dinner or a supper,
call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich
neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But
when thou make a feast, Luke V. 13
call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind: Luke V. 14
And thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just. Luke V. 15
And when one of them that sat at meat with him, heard these things, he said
unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God. Matthew. Chapter
22 V. 2
Then said he unto him, Luke V. 16
A certain man made a great supper, and bad many: And sent his servant at
supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come, Luke V. 17
for all things are now ready. Luke V. 18
And they all with one consent began to make excuse: the first said unto him, I
have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: I pray thee have
me excused. And another said, Luke V. 19
I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thee have me
excused. Luke V. 20
And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. So that
servant came, Luke V. 21
and showed his lord these things. Then the master of the house being angry,
said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city,
and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.
And the servant said, Lord, Luke V. 22
it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is room. And the lord said
unto the servant, Luke V. 23
Go out into the high ways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my
house may be filled. Luke Chapter 14 V. 24
For I say unto you, that none of these men which were bidden, shall taste of
my supper.

CHAP. CXX. Christ's sermon in the way, showing who is fit to be his disciple.
Luke V. 25
ANd there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto them,
Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 37
Luke V. 26
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple. And whosoever does not bear his cross, Luke V. 27
and come after me, cannot be my disciple. Luke V. 28
For which of you intending to build a tower, sits not down first, and
counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Luke V. 29
Lest happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it,
all that behold it, begin to mock him, Saying, Luke V. 30
This man began to build, and was not able to finish. Luke V. 31
Or what king going to make war against another king, sits not down first,
and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that comes
against him with twenty thousand? Luke V. 32
Or else while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an embassage, and
desires conditions of peace. So likewise, Luke V. 33
whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my
disciple. Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 13
Salt is good: Luke V. 34
but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is
neither fit for the land, Luke V. 35
not yet for the dunghill, but men cast it out. He that has ears to hear,
let him hear.

CHAP. CXXI. The parables of the lost sheep, of the piece of silver, of the
prodigal son.
Luke Chapter 15 V. 1
THen drew near unto him all the Publicanes and sinners for to hear him. Luke
V. 2
And the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This man receives sinners,
and eats with them. Luke V. 3
And he spoke this parable unto them, saying, Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 12
Luke V. 4
What man of you having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not
leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost,
until he find it? And when he has found it, Luke V. 5
he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing. Luke V. 6
And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors,
saying unto them, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.
Luke V. 7
I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, which need no
repentance. Luke V. 8
Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, does not
light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And
when she has found it, Luke V. 9
she calls her friends and her neighbors together, saying, Rejoice with me,
for I have found the piece which I had lost. Likewise I say unto you, Luke V. 10
There is joy in the presence of the angels of God, over one sinner that
repents. And he said, Luke V. 11
A certain man had two sons: Luke V. 12
And the younger of them said to his Father, Father, give me the portion of
goods that falls to me. And he divided unto them his living. And not many
days after, Luke V. 13
the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a far
country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living. Luke V. 14
And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land, and he
began to be in want. Luke Chapter 15 V. 15
And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country, and he sent him
into his fields to feed swine. Luke V. 16
And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did
eat, and no man gave unto him. And when he came to himself, he said, Luke V. 17
How many hired servants of my fathers have bread enough, and to spare, and I
perish with hunger! Luke V. 18
I will arise, and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, Luke V. 19
And am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired
servants. And he arose and came to his father. Luke V. 20
But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion,
and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. And the son said unto him,
Father, Luke V. 21
I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son. Luke V. 22
But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on
him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. Luke V. 23
And bring hither the fatted ealf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry.
For this my son was dead, Luke V. 24
and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.
Luke V. 25
Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the
house, he heard music and dancing. Luke V. 26
And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant. And he
said unto him, Thy brother is come, Luke V. 27
and thy father has killed the fatted calf, because he has received him safe
and sound. Luke V. 28
And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out, and
entreated him. And he answering, Luke V. 29
said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither
transgressed I at any time thy commandment, and yet thou never gave me a kid,
that I might make merry with my friends: Luke V. 30
But as soon as this thy son was come, which has devoured thy living with
harlots, thou have killed for him the fatted calf. And he said unto him, Luke
Chapter 15 V. 31
Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. Luke V. 32
It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was
dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.

CHAP. CXXII. The Parable of the unjust steward.
Luke Chapter 16 V. 1
ANnd he said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man which had a
steward, and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods. And he
called him, Luke V. 2
and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee? give an account of thy
stewardship: for thou may be no longer steward. Luke V. 3
Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my lord takes away
from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed. Luke V. 4
I am resolved what to do, that when I am put out of the stewardship, they may
receive me into their houses. Luke V. 5
So he called every one of his lords debtors unto him, and said unto the first,
How much owe thou unto my lord? And he said, Luke V. 6
An hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down
quickly, and write fifty. Luke V. 7
Then said he to another, And how much owe thou? And he said, An hundred
measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and write fourscore.
Luke V. 8
And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely: for the
children of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of
light. And I say unto you, Luke V. 9
Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye
fail, they may-receive you into everlasting habitations. Luke Chapter 16 V. 10
He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: and he
that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. Luke V. 11
If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will
commit to your trust the true riches? Luke V. 12
And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall
give you that which is your own? Matthew. Chapter 6 V. 24
Luke V. 13
No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love
the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot
serve God and Mammon. And the Pharisees also who were covetous, Luke V. 14
heard all these things: and they derided him. Luke V. 15
And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but
God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is
abomination in the sight of God. Matthew. Chapter 11 V. 12
Luke V. 16
The Law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of God
is preached, and every man preasseth into it. Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 18
Luke V. 17
And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, then one tittle of the Law to
fail. Matthew. Chapter 5 V. 32
Whosoever puts away his wife, Luke V. 18
and marries another, commits adultery: and whosoever marries her that is
put away from her husband, commits adultery.

CHAP. CXXIII. The parable of the rich Glutton and poor Lazarus.
Luke V. 19
THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and
fared sumptuously every day. Luke V. 20
And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full
of sores, Luke V. 21
And desiring to be fed with the crummes which fell from the rich man's table:
moreover, the dogs came and licked his sores. And it came to pass that the
beggar died, Luke Chapter 16 V. 22
and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died and
was buried. Luke V. 23
And in hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his bosom. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, Luke V.
24
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in
water and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame. Luke V. 25
But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented. And besides all this, Luke V. 26
between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that they which would pass
from hence to you, cannot, neither can they pass to us, that would come from
thence. Then he said, I pray thee therefore father, Luke V. 27
that thou would send him to my fathers house: For I have five brethren;
Luke V. 28
that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of
torment. Abraham says unto him, Luke V. 29
They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them. And he said, Nay,
father Abraham: Luke V. 30
but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent. And he said unto
him, Luke V. 31
If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead.

CHAP. CXXIIII. Christ's sermon of shunning of scandal: Of brotherly
reconciliation. The nature of faith, and duty of believers.
Luke Chapter 17 V. 1
THen said he unto the disciples, Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 7
It is impossible but that offenses will come, but woe unto him through whom
they come. Luke V. 2
It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast
into the sea, then that he should offend one of these little ones. Luke Chapter 17
V. 3
Take heed to your selves: Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 21
if thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive
him. Luke V. 4
And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a
day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shall forgive him. Luke V. 5
And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith. Matthew. Chapter 17 V. 20
Luke V. 6
And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say
unto this sycamine-tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in
the sea; and it should obey you. Luke V. 7
But which of you having a servant plowing, or feeding cattle, will say unto
him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat? Luke V.
8
And will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird
thy self, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken: and afterward thou shall
eat and drink. Luke V. 9
Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him?
I trow not. So likewise ye, Luke V. 10
when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.

CHAP. CXXV. Christ goes through Samaria into Galilee, and heals ten lepers by
the way.
Luke V. 11
ANd it came to pass, as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the
midst of Samaria and Galilee. Luke V. 12
And as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men that were
lepers, which stood afar off. Luke V. 13
And they lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus Master, have mercy on us.
And when he saw them, he said unto them, Luke V. 14
Go show your selves unto the priests. And it came to pass that as they went,
they were cleansed. And one of them when he saw that he was healed, Luke Chapter 17
V. 15
turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God, And fell down on his face at
his feet, Luke V. 16
giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritane. Luke V. 17
And Jesus answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?
Luke V. 18
There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger.
And he said unto him, Arise, Luke V. 19
go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole.

CHAP. CXXVI. Christ's sermon of the coming of the kingdom of God.
Luke V. 20
ANd when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should
come; he answered them and said, The kingdom of God comes not with
observation. Luke V. 21
Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there: for behold, the kingdom of God
is within you. Luke V. 22
And he said unto the disciples, The days will come when ye shall desire to
see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it. Matthew. Chapter
24 V. 23
Luke V. 23
And they shall say to you, See here, or see there: go not after them, nor
follow them. Luke V. 24
For as the lightning that lightneth out of the one part under heaven, shines
unto the other part under heaven: so shall also the Son of man be in his day.
Luke V. 25
But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation. And
as it was in the days of Noe, Luke V. 26
so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. Luke V. 27
They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage,
until the day that Noe entered into the ark: and the flood came and destroyed
them all. Luke V. 28
Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they
bought, they sold, they planted, they builded: Luke Chapter 17 V. 29
But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from
heaven, and destroyed them all: Luke V. 30
Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. In that
day, Luke V. 31
he which shall be upon the house top, and his stuff in the house, let him not
come down to take it away: and he that is in the field, let him likewise not
return back. Remember Lots wife. Matthew. Chapter 16 V. 25
Luke V. 32
Whosoever shall seek to save his life, shall lose it; Luke V. 33
and whosoever shall lose his life, shall preserve it. I tell you, Luke V. 34
in that night there shall be two men in one bed; the one shall be taken, the
other shall be left. Luke V. 35
Two women shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken, and the other
left. Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 40
Luke V. 36
Two men shall be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left. And
they answered and said unto him, Where, Luke V. 37
Lord? And he said unto them, Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 28
Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered together.

CHAP. CXXVII. The parable of the unjust judge; which teaches us to pray
without fainting.
Luke Chapter 18 V. 1
ANd he spoke a parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray,
and not to faint, saying. There was in a city a judge, Luke V. 2
which feared not God, neither regarded man. And there was a widow in that
city, Luke V. 3
and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would not
for a while: Luke V. 4
but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man;
Luke V. 5
Yet because this widow troubles me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual
coming she weary me. And the Lord said, Luke V. 6
Hear what the unjust judge says. Luke V. 7
And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him,
though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.
Luke Chapter 18 V. 8
Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?

CHAP. CXXVIII. The parable of the Pharisee and the Publicane.
Luke V. 9
ANd he spoke this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they
were righteous, and despised others: Luke V. 10
Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a
Publicane. Luke V. 11
The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee, that I am
not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
Publicane. Luke V. 12
I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the
Publicane standing afar off, Luke V. 13
would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, Luke V. 14
this man went down to his house justified rather then the other: for every one
that exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that humbles himself, shall be
exalted.

CHAP. CXXIX. Christ goes into Berea; disputes with the Pharisees concerning
divorcement.
Matthew. Chapter 19 V. 1
ANd it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed
from Galilee. Mark Chapter 10 V. 1
And he arose from thence, and comes into the coasts of Judea by the farther
side of Jordan. Matthew. V. 2
And great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there: Mark Chapter 10 V. 1
and the people resort unto him again; and, as he was wont, he taught them
again. Mark V. 2
And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Matthew. V. 2
tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his
wife for every cause? Mark Chapter 10 V. 3
And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you? And they said,
Mark V. 4
Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away. Matthew. Chapter
19 V. 4
And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them
at the beginning, made them male and female? Matthew. V. 5
And said. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave
to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh. Matthew. V. 6
Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God has
joined together, let not man put asunder. Matthew. V. 7
They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away? Mark V. 5
And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your heart he
wrote you this precept, and Matthew. V. 8
suffered you to put away your wives: Mark V. 6
But from the beginning of the creation, Matthew. V. 8
it was not so, but Mark V. 7
God made them male and female. For this cause shall a man leave his father and
mother, and cleave to his wife, Mark V. 8
And they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one
flesh. Mark V. 9
What therefore God has joined together, let not man put asunder. Matthew. V. 9
And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery: and whosoever marries
her which is put away, does commit adultery. Mark V. 10
And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter. Mark V. 11
And he says unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another,
commits adultery against her. Mark V. 12
And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she
commits adultery. Matthew. V. 10
His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, Matthew.
Chapter 19 V. 11
it is good not to marry. But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this
saying, Matthew. V. 12
save they to whom it is given. For there are some eunuchs which were so born
from their mothers womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs
of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the
kingdom of heavens sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.

CHAP. CXXX. Little children are brought unto Christ; upon whom he lays his
hands, and blesses them.
Mark Chapter 10 V. 13
ANd Matthew. V. 13
then Mark Chapter 10 V. 13
they brought young children, Luke Chapter 18 V. 15
infants, Mark Chapter 10 V. 13
to him, that he should touch them, and Matthew. V. 13
that he should put his hands on them, and pray: Mark Chapter 10 V. 13
and his disciples rebuked Matthew. V. 13
them, Mark V. 14
those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and
Luke V. 16
called them, the children unto him, and said, Suffer little children to come
unto me, Matthew. V. 14
and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
Luke V. 17
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a
little child, shall in no wise enter therein. Mark V. 16
And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them,
Matthew. V. 15
and departed thence.

CHAP. CXXXI. The history of the young man that enquired how to attain
eternal life.
Matthew. V. 16
ANd behold, Mark V. 17
when he was gone forth into the way, there came running Luke Chapter 18 V. 18
a certain ruler, Mark V. 17
and kneeled to him, and asked him, Matthew. V. 16
and said unto him, Luke Chapter 18 V. 18
saying, Good master, Matthew. V. 16
what good thing shall I do that I may Mark V. 17
inherit eternal life? Mark Chapter 10 V. 18
And Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me good? there is no man good but
one, that is, God: Matthew. Chapter 19 V. 17
but if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. Matthew. V. 18
He faith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Mark V. 19
Thou know the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not
steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy father, Matthew. V. 19
and thy mother: and, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Luke V. 21
And he, Matthew. V. 20
the young man says unto him, Mark V. 20
Master, Matthew. V. 20
all these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet? Luke V. 22
Now when Jesus heard these things, Mark V. 21
then beholding him, he loved him. Matthew. V. 21
And Jesus said unto him, Luke V. 22
Yet lackest thou one thing: Matthew. V. 21
if thou will be perfect, Mark V. 21
go thy way, Luke V. 22
sell all that thou have, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come, Mark V. 21
take up thy cross, and follow me. Matthew. V. 22
But when the young man heard that saying, Luke V. 23
he was very sorrowful, Mark V. 22
and sad at that saying and Matthew. V. 22
went away sorrowful: Luke V. 23
for he was very rich, Matthew. V. 22
for he had great possessions. Luke V. 24
And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, Mark V. 23
and Jesus when he had looked round about, Luke V. 24
he said Mark V. 23
unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the
kingdom of God! Matthew. V. 23
Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Mark V. 24
And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answers again, and
says unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to
enter into the kingdom of God! Matthew. V. 24
And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. Matthew. Chapter 19 V.
25
When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed. Luke Chapter 18 V. 26
And they that heard it, said, Mark Chapter 10 V. 26
saying among themselves, Luke Chapter 18 V. 26
Who then can be saved? Mark V. 27
And Jesus looking upon them, says Matthew. V. 26
unto them, unto them, With men this is unpossible, Mark V. 27
but not with God; for Matthew. V. 26
all things Luke V. 27
which are unpossible with men, are possible with God.

CHAP. CXXXII. Peter desires to know the reward of his apostleship. The parable
of the laborers in the vineyard.
Mark V. 28
ANd Matthew. V. 27
then answered Peter, and Mark V. 28
began to say, Matthew. V. 27
and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall
we have therefore? Mark V. 29
And Jesus answered and said Matthew. V. 28
unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye
also shall sit upon twelve thrones, Matthew. V. 30
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that has forsaken houses,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands
for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting
life. Mark V. 29
Verily I say unto you, Luke V. 29
that Mark V. 29
there is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the Gospels, and Luke V.
29
for the kingdom of Gods sake, Mark V. 30
But he shall receive Luke V. 30
manifold more, Mark V. 30
now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.
Mark V. 31
But many that are first, shall be last; and the last first. Matthew. Chapter 20 V. 1
For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which
went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. Matthew. Chapter
20 V. 2
And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into
his vineyard. Matthew. V. 3
And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the
marketplace, And said unto them, Matthew. V. 4
Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right, I will give you. And
they went their way. Matthew. V. 5
Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, Matthew. V. 6
and did likewise. And about the eleventh hour, he went out, and found others
standing idle, and says unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle? Matthew.
V. 7
They say unto him, Because no man has hired us. He says unto them, Go ye
also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right, Matthew. V. 8
that shall ye receive. So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard says
unto his steward, Call the laborers, and give them their hire, Matthew. V. 9
beginning from the last unto the first. And when they came that were hired
about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny. But when the first
came, Matthew. V. 10
they supposed that they should have received more, and they likewise received
every man a penny. Matthew. V. 11
And when they had received it, they murmured against the good man of the
house, Matthew. V. 12
Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal
unto us, which have born the burden and heat of the day. Matthew. V. 13
But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: did not
thou agree with me for a penny? Matthew. V. 14
Take that thine is, and go thy way; I will give unto this last, even as unto
thee. Matthew. V. 15
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? is thine eye evil
because I am good? Matthew. V. 16
Matthew. Chapter 19 V. 30
So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be called, but few
chosen.

CHAP. CXXXIII. Mary and Martha send unto Christ to tell him that Lazarus their
brother was sick.
John Chapter 11 V. 1
NOw a certain man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethanie, the town of Mary and
her sister Martha. ( Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 7
John V. 2
It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet
with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick) Therefore his sister sent unto
him, saying, Lord, John V. 3
behold, he whom thou love, is sick. John V. 4
When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the
glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. John V. 5
Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. John V. 6
When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the
same place where he was. John V. 7
Then after that says he to his disciples, Let us go into Judea again. His
disciples say unto him, Master, John V. 8
the Jews of late sought to stone thee, and go thou thither again? Jesus
answered, John V. 9
Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this world. John V. 10
But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in
him. These things said he, and after that, John V. 11
he says unto them, Our friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may awake him
out of sleep. John V. 12
Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. John V. 13
Howbeit Jesus spoke of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of
taking of rest in sleep. John V. 14
Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. John V. 15
And I am glad for your sakes, that I was not there (to the intent ye may
believe) nevertheless, let us go unto him. Then said Thomas, John V. 16
which is called Didymus, unto his fellow disciples, let us also go, that we
may die with him.

CHAP. CXXXIIII. Christ ascending to Jerusalem, foretells his passion to his
apostles.
Mark Chapter 10 V. 32
ANd they were in the way going up to Jerusalem: and Jesus went before them,
and they were amazed, and as they followed, they were afraid. Matthew. Chapter 20 V.
17
And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart in the way,
Mark Chapter 10 V. 32
and he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things should happen
unto him, Matthew. Chapter 20 V. 17
and said unto them, Mark V. 33
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered unto
the chief priests, and unto the Scribes: and they shall condemn him to death.
Luke Chapter 18 V. 31
And all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man,
shall be accomplished. Matthew. V. 19
And they shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock and to scourge, and to
crucify him: Mark V. 34
And they shall mock him, Luke V. 32
and he shall be spitefully entreated; and they Mark V. 34
shall scourge him and shall spit upon him: Luke V. 33
And they shall scourge him, Mark V. 34
shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise again. Luke V. 34
And they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them,
neither knew they the things which were spoken.

CHAP. CXXXV. James and John (by their mother) desire to sit on the right and
left hand of Christ.
Matthew. V. 20
THen came to him the mother of Zebedees children, with her sons, worshipping
him, Matthew. V. 21
and desiring a certain thing of him. And he said unto her, What will thou? She
says unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right
hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom. Mark Chapter 10 V. 35
And James and John the sons of Zebedee come unto him, saying, Master, we
would that thou should do for us whatsoever we shall desire. Mark V. 36
And he said unto them, What would ye that I should do for you? Mark V. 37
They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and
the other on thy left hand, in thy glory. Matthew. Chapter 20 V. 22
But Jesus answered and said Mark V. 38
unto them, Matthew. Chapter 20 V. 22
Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink
of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto
him, We are able. Mark V. 39
And Jesus said unto them, Matthew. V. 23
Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with: Mark V. 40
But to sit on my right hand and on my left hand, is not mine to give; but it
shall be given to them for whom it is prepared Matthew. V. 24
of my Father. And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation
against the two brethren, Mark V. 41
James and John. Mark V. 42
But Jesus called them to him, and says, Matthew. V. 25
Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them; and they
that are great, Matthew. V. 26
exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your minister. Mark V. 44
And whosoever of you will be the chiefest Matthew. V. 27
among you, Mark V. 44
shall be servant of all: Matthew. V. 28
Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and
to give his life a ransom for many.

CHAP. CXXXVI. A blind man healed by the way, before he entered into Jericho.
Luke Chapter 18 V. 35
Matthew. Chapter 20 V. 29
ANd it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind
man sat by the way side begging: Luke Chapter 18 V. 36
And hearing the multitude pass by, he asked what it meant. Luke V. 37
And they told him, that Jesus of Nazareth passes by. And he cried, saying
Jesus, thou Son of David, Luke V. 38
have mercy on me. And they which went before, Luke V. 39
rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: but he cried so much the more,
Thou Son of David, have mercy on me. Luke V. 40
And Jesus stood and commanded him to be brought unto him: and when he was come
near, he asked him, Saying, Luke V. 41
What will thou that I shall do unto thee? And he said, Lord, that I may
receive my sight. Luke V. 42
And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight, thy faith has saved thee. And
immediately he received his sight, Luke V. 43
and followed him, glorifying God: and all the people when they saw it, gave
praise unto God.

CHAP. CXXXVII. The conversion of Zacheus.
Luke Chapter 19 V. 1
ANd Jesus entered and passed through Jericho. And behold, Luke V. 2
there was a man named Zacheus, which was the chief among the Publicanes, and
he was rich. Luke V. 3
And he sought to see Jesus who he was, and could not for the preasse, because
he was little of stature. And he ran before, Luke V. 4
and climbed up into a sycomore-tree to see him; for he was to pass that way.
Luke V. 5
And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up and saw him, and said unto him,
Zacheus, make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at thy house. Luke
V. 6
And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully. And when they saw
it, they all murmured, Luke V. 7
saying, that he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner. And Zacheus
stood, Luke V. 8
and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the
poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I
restore him fourefold. And Jesus said unto him, Luke Chapter 19 V. 9
This day is salvation come to this house, for so much as he also is the Son of
Abraham. Matthew. Chapter 18 V. 11
Luke V. 10
For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. The parable of ten pieces of money delivered to ten servants.
Luke V. 11
ANd as they heard these things, he added, and spoke a parable, because he was
nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God should
immediately appear. He said therefore, Luke V. 12
A certain noble man went into a far country to receive for himself a
kingdom, and to return. And he called his ten servants, Luke V. 13
and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them, Occupy till I come. But
his citizens hated him, Luke V. 14
and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over
us. Luke V. 15
And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the kingdom,
then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had given
the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading. Then
came the first, Luke V. 16
saying, Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds. And he said unto him, Well,
thou good servant: Luke V. 17
because thou have been faithful in a very little, have thou authority over
ten cities. Luke V. 18
And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound has gained five pounds. And he
said likewise to him, Luke V. 19
Be thou also over five cities. And another came, saying, Luke V. 20
Lord, behold, here is thy pound which I have kept laid up in a napkin: Luke V.
21
For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou take up that thou
layedst not down, and reapest that thou did not sow. And he says unto him,
Luke Chapter 19 V. 22
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant: thou knew
that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that I
did not sow. Wherefore then gave not thou my money into the bank, Luke V. 23
that at my coming I might have received mine own with usury? Luke V. 24
And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give it to
him that has ten pounds. Luke V. 25
(And they said unto him, Lord, he has ten pounds) For I say unto you, Luke V.
26
that unto every one which has, shall be given; and from him that has not,
even that he has shall be taken away from him. Luke V. 27
But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me. Luke V. 28
And when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.

CHAP. CXXXIX. Blind men healed by Christ at his departure from Jericho.
Mark Chapter 10 V. 46
ANd they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples,
and a great number of people; blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, sat by the
highway side, begging. And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, Mark
V. 47
he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou Son of David, Mark V. 48
have mercy on me. And many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he
cried the more a great deal, Thou Son of David, Mark V. 49
have mercy on me. And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called: and
they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good comfort, Mark V. 50
rise, he calls thee. And he casting away his garment, rose, and came to
Jesus. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Mark V. 51
What will thou that I should do unto thee? The blind man said unto him, Lord,
that I might receive my sight. Mark Chapter 10 V. 52
And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole: and
immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way. Matthew. Chapter 20
V. 29
And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. Matthew. V. 30
And behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus
passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, Matthew. V. 31
O Lord, thou Son of David. And the multitude rebuked them, because they
should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O
Lord, thou Son of David. And Jesus stood still, Matthew. V. 32
and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you? Matthew. V. 33
They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. So Jesus had compassion
on them, Matthew. V. 34
and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they
followed him.

CHAP. CXL. Lazarus is raised from death.
John Chapter 11 V. 17
THen when Jesus came, he found that he had lien in the grave four days
already. (Now Bethanie was nigh unto Jerusalem, John V. 18
about fifteen furlongs off) And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, John
V. 19
to comfort them concerning their brother. Then Martha, John V. 20
as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him: but Mary sat
still in the house. John V. 21
Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not
died. But I know, John V. 22
that even now whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee. Jesus
says unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. John V. 23
Martha says unto him, John V. 24
Luke Chapter 14 V. 14 John Chapter 5 V. 29.
I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. John V. 25
Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the John Chapter 6 V. 35
life: he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And
whosoever lives, John V. 26
and believes in me, shall never die. Beleevest thou this? She says unto him,
Yea, Lord, John V. 27
I believe that thou art the Christ the Son of God which should come into the
world. And when she had so said, John V. 28
she went her way, and called Mary her sister secretly, saying, The master is
come and calls for thee. As Soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, John V.
29
and came unto him. John V. 30
Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where Martha
met him. John V. 31
The Jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when they
saw Mary that she rose up hastily, and went out, followed her, saying, She
goes unto the grave, to weep there. John V. 32
Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his
feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died.
John V. 33
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came
with her, he groned in the spirit, and was troubled, And said, John V. 34
Where have ye laid him? They say unto him, Lord, come and see. Jesus wept.
Then said the Jews, John V. 35 36
Behold hold how he loved him! And some of them said, John V. 37
Could not this man, John Chapter 9 V. 6
which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not
have died? John V. 38
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, comes to the grave. It was a cave,
and a stone lay upon it. Jesus said, John V. 39
Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was dead, says unto
him, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he has been dead four days. John V.
40
Jesus says unto her, Said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe,
thou should see the glory of God? John V. 41
Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid. And
Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me.
And I knew that thou hear me always: John Chapter 11 V. 42
but because of the people which stand by, I said it, that they may believe
that thou have sent me. John V. 43
And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth.
John V. 44
And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and
his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus says unto them, Loose him, and
let him go. John V. 45
Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which Jesus
did, believed on him. John V. 46
But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what things
Jesus had done.

CHAP. CXLI. The chief priests and Pharisees take counsel to put Christ to
death. Caiaphas prophesies of the fruit of Christ's death.
John V. 47
THen gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and said, What do
we? for this man does many miracles. John V. 48
If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him; and the Romans shall
come and take away both our place and nation. And one of them named Caiaphas,
John V. 49
being the high priest that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all,
John V. 50
John Chapter 18 V. 14
Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the
people, and that the whole nation perish not. And this spoke he not of himself:
John V. 51
but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that
nation: John V. 52
And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one
the children of God that were scattered abroad. Then from that day forth, John
V. 53
they took counsel together for to put him to death.

CHAP. CXLII. Christ goes aside into the little city Ephraim. The Pharisees
decree to enquire him out, and to apprehend him.
John Chapter 11 V. 54
JEsus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence unto a
country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there
continued with his disciples. John V. 55
And the Jews passover was nigh at hand, and many went out of the country up
to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify themselves. John V. 56
Then sought they for Jesus, and spoke among themselves, as they stood in the
temple, What think ye, that he will not come to the feast? John V. 57
Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that if
any man knew where he were, he should show it, that they might take him.

CHAP. CXLIII. Christ is anointed at a feast in Bethanie. The counsel of the
priests, to put to death both Christ and Lazarus.
John Chapter 12 V. 1
THen Jesus, six days before the passover, came to Bethanie, where Lazarus
was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead. There they made him a
supper, John V. 2
and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him.
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 6
Now when Jesus was in Bethanie, Mark Chapter 14. V. 3
in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman, John
V. 3
Mary, Mark Chapter 14. V. 3
having an alabaster box. John V. 3
Then she took a pound Matthew. V. 7
of very precious ointment, John V. 3
of spikenard, very costly, Matthew. V. 7
came unto him, John V. 3
and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair; Mark Chapter 14.
V. 3
and she brake the box, and poured it on his head, Matthew. V. 7
as he sat at meat: John V. 3
and the house was filled with the odor of the ointment. John Chapter 12 V. 4
Then says one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simons son, which should
betray him, John V. 5
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the
poor? Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 8
But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation Mark Chapter 14. V. 4
within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made? Matthew.
V. 9
For this ointment might have been sold for much, Mark V. 5
for more then three hundred pence, and have been given to the poor: and they
murmured against her. John V. 6
This he (Judas) said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a
thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. Matthew. V. 10
When Jesus understood it, John V. 7
then said Jesus, Let her alone: and Matthew. V. 10
he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? Mark V. 5
Let her alone, Matthew. V. 10
for she has wrought a good work upon me. Matthew. V. 11
For ye have the poor always with you, Mark V. 7
and whenever ye will ye may do them good: but me ye have not always. Mark
V. 8
She has done what she could; Matthew. V. 12
for in that she poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial:
John V. 8
against the day of my burying has she kept this: Mark V. 8
she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying. Mark V. 9
Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout
the whole world, this also that she has done shall be spoken of, for a
memorial of her. John V. 9
Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they came, not
for Jesus sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised
from the dead. John V. 10
But the chief priests consulted, that they might put Lazarus also to death:
John V. 11
Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on
Jesus.

CHAP. CXLIIII. Christ prepares himself for his kingly entrance into Jerusalem.
Luke Chapter 19 V. 29
ANd it came to pass John Chapter 12 V. 12
on the next day, Luke Chapter 19 V. 29
when he was come near, Mark Chapter 11. V. 1
when they came nigh to Jerusalem, Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 1
and were come to Bethphage Mark Chapter 11. V. 1
and Bethany, Luke Chapter 19 V. 29
at the mount called the mount of Olivers; Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 1
then Jesus Mark V. 2
sends forth two of his disciples, And says unto them, Luke V. 30
Go ye, Mark V. 2
Go your way into the village over against you, and as soon as ye be entered into
it, Matthew. V. 2
ye shall find an assetied, and a colt Mark V. 2
tied Mark V. 2
with her, Luke V. 30
whereon yet never man sat; loose him, and bring him hither. Matthew. V. 3
And if any man say ought unto you, and Luke V. 31
ask you, Mark V. 3
Why do ye this? Luke V. 31
Why do ye loose him? thus shall ye say unto him, Because the Lord has need of
Matthew. V. 3
them, Mark V. 3
him; and straightway he will send Matthew. V. 3
them, Mark V. 3
him hither. Matthew. V. 4
All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
Matthew. V. 5
saying, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King comes unto thee, meek,
and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass. Matthew. V. 6
And the disciples Luke V. 32
went their way, and found even as he had said unto them, Mark V. 4
and found the colt tied by the door without, in a place where two ways met:
and they loose him. Mark V. 5
Luke V. 33
And as they were loosing the colt, Mark V. 5
certain of them that stood there, said unto them, What do ye loosing the colt?
and Luke V. 33
the owners thereof said unto them, Why loose ye the colt? Mark V. 6
And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded, Luke V. 34
The Lord has need of him: Mark V. 6
and they let them go: Luke V. 34
and they that were sent, Matthew. V. 7
did as Jesus commanded them, And brought the ass, and the colt Mark V. 7
to Jesus, Matthew. V. 7
and put on them their clothes, and they set him thereon. Luke Chapter 19 V. 35
And they cast their garments upon the colt, and they set Jesus thereon. John
Chapter 12 V. 14
And Jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon, as it is written, Fear
not, daughter of Sion, behold, John V. 15
thy King comes, sitting on an asses colt. John V. 16
These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus was
glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that
they had done these things unto him. Luke V. 36
And as he went, Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 8
a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down
branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way. And John V. 12
much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming
to Jerusalem, Took branches of palm trees, John V. 13
and went forth to meet him. Luke V. 37
And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of Olives, the
whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud
voice, for all the mighty works that they had seen. John V. 17
The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his
grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record. John V. 18
For this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that he had done
this miracle. Matthew. V. 9
And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, John V.
18
Hosanna, Matthew. V. 9
Hosanna to the Son of David: Luke V. 38
Blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord, John V. 13
the King of Israel. Mark Chapter 11 V. 10
Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, that comes in the name of the
Lord; Matthew. V. 9
Hosanna in the highest, Luke V. 39
peace in heaven, and glory in the highest. And some of the Pharisees from
among the multitude said unto him, Master, rebuke thy disciples. Luke V. 40
And he answered and said unto them, I tell you, that if these should hold
their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

CHAP. CXLV. Christ drawing nigh to Jerusalem, foretells with tears the
destruction thereof.
Luke Chapter 19 V. 41
ANd when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying,
Luke V. 42
If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. Luke V. 43
For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, Luke V. 44
And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee: and
they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not
the time of thy visitation.

CHAP. CXLVI. Christ enters into Jerusalem and purges the temple.
Mark Chapter 11 V. 11
ANd Jesus entered into Jerusalem: Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 10
and when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, Matthew. V. 11
saying, Who is this? And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of
Nazareth, of Galilee. John Chapter 12 V. 19
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail
nothing? behold, the world is gone after him. Matthew. V. 12
And Jesus went into the temple of God: Mark Chapter 11 V. 11
and when he had looked round about upon all things, he Luke V. 45
began to cast out, Matthew. V. 12
and did cast out all them that sold Luke V. 45
therein, and them that bought, Matthew. V. 13
and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seats of them that
sold doves, And said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called and
Luke V. 46
is Matthew. V. 14
the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. And the blind and
the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them. Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 15
And when the chief priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he did,
and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of
David; they were sore displeased, And said unto him, Matthew. V. 16
Hear thou what these say? And Jesus says unto them, Yea; have ye never
read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise? Luke
Chapter 19 V. 47
And he taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the Scribes, and
the chief of the people sought to destroy him, Luke V. 48
And could not find what they might do: for all the people were very attentive
to hear him.

CHAP. CXLVII. Certain Greeks desire to see Christ: upon which occasion, he
preaches of the fruit of his death.
John Chapter 12 V. 20
ANd there were certain Greeks among them, that came up to worship at the
feast. John V. 21
The same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and
desired him, saying, Sir, John V. 22
we would see Jesus. Philip comes and tells Andrew: and again, Andrew and
Philip told Jesus. And Jesus answered them, saying, John V. 23
The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. Verily verily I
say unto you, John V. 24
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abides alone: but if
it die, it brings forth much fruit. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 39
He that loves his life, shall lose it: John V. 25
and he that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal.
If any man serve me, John V. 26
let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if any man
serve me, him will my Father honor. Now is my soul troubled, John V. 27
and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came
I unto this hour. Father, John Chapter 12 V. 28
glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again. John V. 29
The people therefore that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered:
others said, An angel spoke to him. John V. 30
Jusus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your
sakes. John V. 31
Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast
out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, John V. 32
will draw all men unto me. (This he said, John V. 33
signifying what death he should die) The people answered him, We have heard
out of the Law, John V. 34
that Christ abides for ever: and how say thou, The Son of man must be
lifted up? who is this Son of man? Then Jesus said unto them, John V. 35
Yet a little while is the light with you; walk while ye have the light, lest
darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness, knows not whither
he goes. While ye have light, John V. 36
believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. These things spoke
Jesus, Mark Chapter 11 V. 11
and now the eventide was come, Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 17
he left them, John V. 36
and departed, and did hide himself from them, Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 17
and went out of the city into Bethany, Mark Chapter 11 V. 11
with the twelve; Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 17
and he lodged there. John V. 37
But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on
him: John V. 38
That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? John V. 39
Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, Matthew. Chapter
13 V. 14
He has blinded their eyes, John V. 40
and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. John V.
41
These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.
Nevertheless, among the chief rulers also, John Chapter 12 V. 42
many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him,
lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. John Chapter 5 V. 44 Chapter 12 V. 43
For they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God.

CHAP. CXLVIII. The cursing of the fig tree. The temple again cleansed: and
Christ's farewell sermon concerning his office.
Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 18
NOw in the morning, Mark Chapter 11 V. 12
and on the morrow, Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 18
as he returned into the city, Mark Chapter 11 V. 12
when they were come from Bethanie, he was hungry. Matthew. V. 19
And when he saw a fig tree Mark Chapter 11 V. 13
afar off, Matthew. V. 19
in the way, Mark V. 13
having leaves, Matthew. V. 19
he came to it, Mark Chapter 11 V. 13
if happily he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he found
nothing Matthew. V. 19
thereon, but leaves only; Mark V. 14
for the time of figs was not yet. And Jesus answered and said unto it, Matthew.
V. 19
Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever, and Mark V. 14
no man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever. And his disciples heard tit.
Matthew. V. 19
And presently the fig tree withered away. Mark V. 15
Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 12
And they come to Jerusalem, and Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast
out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the
money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves: Mark V. 16
And would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the temple.
Mark V. 17
And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called
of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves. Mark
V. 18
And the Scribes and chief priests heard it. and sought how they might destroy
him: for they feared him, because all the people was astonished at his
doctrine. John V. 44
Jesus cried, and said, He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on
him that sent me. John Chapter 12 V. 45
And he that sees me, sees him that sent me. John Chapter 12 V. 46 Chapter 3 V. 19
I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me, should not
abide in darkness. John Chapter 12 V. 47 Chapter 3 V. 17
And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not; for I came
not to judge the world, but to save the world. John Chapter 12 V. 48
He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him:
Mark Chapter 16 V. 16
the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. John V.
49
For I have not spoken of my self; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. John V. 50
And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak
therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. Mark Chapter 11 V. 19
And when even was come, he went out of the city.

CHAP. CXLIX. Christ's speech to his disciples of the power of faith; upon
occasion of the cursing of the withered fig tree.
Mark V. 20
ANd in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the
roots. Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 20
And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying. How soon is the
fig tree withered away! Mark V. 21
And Peter calling to remembrance, says unto him, Master, behold, the fig tree
which thou cursedst, is withered away. Mark V. 22
And Jesus answering, says unto them, Mark V. 23
Have faith in God. For verily I say unto you, Matthew. V. 21
If ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to
the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and
be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done. Mark V. 23
And whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast
into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those
things which he says shall come to pass; Mark Chapter 11 V. 24
he shall have whatsoever he says. Therefore I say unto you, Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 7
What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them. Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 22
And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.
Mark V. 25
And when ye stand, praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your
Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses. But if you do
not forgive, Mark V. 26
neither will your Father which is in heaven, forgive your trespasses.

CHAP. CL. Christ questions the chief priests, Scribes, and elders about John's
baptism.
Mark V. 27
ANd they come again to Jerusalem. Luke Chapter 20 V. 1
And it came to pass that in one of those days, Matthew. V. 23
when he was come into the temple, Luke Chapter 20 V. 1
as he taught the people, and preached the Gospel, Mark V. 27
the chief priests and the Scribes, Matthew. V. 23
and the elders of the people came unto him, and Luke Chapter 20 V. 1
came upon him, And spoke unto him, saying, Tell us, Luke V. 2
By what authority do thou these things? Mark V. 28
and who gave thee, Luke V. 2
or who is he that gave thee this authority, Mark V. 28
to do these things? Matthew. V. 24
And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if
ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things:
Mark V. 29
answer me, Luke V. 3
and tell me. Matthew. V. 25
The baptism of John, whence was it? Mark V. 30
was it from heaven, or of men? answer me. Luke V. 5
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven, he
will say, Why then believed ye him not? Luke V. 6
But and if we say, Of men; Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 26
we fear the people, Luke Chapter 20 V. 6
all the people will stone us: for they be persuaded that John was a prophet:
for Mark Chapter 11 V. 32
they feared the people: for all men counted John, that he was a prophet
indeed. Luke V. 7
And they answered, that they could not tell whence it was. Mark V. 33
And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus answering,
says unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

CHAP. CLI. The parable of the two sons that were commanded by their father
to go into the vineyard.
Mark Chapter 12 V. 1
ANd Jesus began to speak unto them by parables. Matthew. V. 28
But what think you? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first,
and said, Matthew. V. 29
Son, go work to day in my vineyard. He answered and said, I will not: but
afterward he repented, Matthew. V. 30
and went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and
said, I go sir; Matthew. V. 31
and went not. Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto
him, The first. Jesus says unto them, Verily I say unto you, that the
Publicanes and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. Matthew. Chapter
21 V. 32 Chapter 3 V. 32/1
For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not:
but the publicanes and the harlots believed him. And ye, when ye had seen it,
repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.

CHAP. CLII. The parable of the vineyard let out to unthankful husbandmen.
Luke V. 9
THen began he to speak to the people this parable: Matthew. V. 33
Hear another parable, There was a certain Mark Chapter 12 V. 1
man, Matthew. V. 33
an householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, Mark Chapter
12 V. 1
and dug a place for the winefat, Matthew. V. 33
a winepresse in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went
into a far country Luke V. 9
for a long time. Matthew. V. 34
And when the time of the fruit drew near, Mark Chapter 12 V. 2
at the season, he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from
the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. Luke Chapter 20 V. 10
But the husbandmen Mark V. 3
caught him, and beat him, and sent him away empty. Mark V. 4
And again he sent unto them another servant; Luke V. 11
and they beat him also, Mark V. 4
Mark V. 3
and at him they cast stones, and wounded him in the head, Luke V. 11
and entreated him shamefully, and sent him away empty. Mark V. 5
And again he sent another, Luke V. 12
the third; and they wounded him also, and cast him out, Mark V. 5
and him they killed: and Matthew. V. 33
he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of
it. And the husbandmen took his servants, Matthew. V. 35
and beat one, Matthew. V. 36
and killed another, and stoned another. Again, he sent Mark V. 5
many Matthew. V. 36
other servants, more then the first; and they did unto them likewise, beating
some, and killing some. Luke V. 13
Then said the lord of the vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved
son. Mark V. 6
Having yet therefore one son, his welbeloved, he sent Matthew. V. 37
his son Mark V. 6
also last unto them, saying, Luke V. 13
It may be they will reverence him when they see him. Matthew. V. 38
But when Mark V. 7
these Matthew. V. 38
husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, Luke V. 14
they reasoned within themselves, saying, This is the heir, come, let us kill
him, that the inheritance may be ours, Matthew. V. 38
and let us seize on his inheritance, Mark V. 7
and the inheritance shall be ours. Matthew. V. 39
And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard. Luke V. 15
So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him. Matthew. V. 40
When the lord therefore of the vineyard comes, what will he do unto those
husbandmen? Matthew. Chapter 21 V. 41
They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let
out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in
their seasons. Matthew. V. 42
Jesus says unto them, Luke Chapter 20 V. 16
He shall come and destroy those husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to
others: and when they heard it, they said, God forbid. And he beheld them, and
said, Luke V. 17
Matthew. V. 42
Did ye never read in the scriptures, Mark Chapter 12 V. 10
this scripture? Luke V. 17
what is this then that is written, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner? Matthew. V. 43
This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Therefore I say
unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. Matthew. V. 44
And whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken; but on whomsoever it
shall fall, Matthew. V. 45
it will grind him to powder. And when the chief priests, Luke V. 19
and the Scribes, Matthew. V. 45
and Pharisees had heard his parables, Mark V. 12
they sought to lay hold on him, and Luke V. 19
the same hour to lay hands on him. Matthew. V. 46
But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared Mark V. 12
the people, Matthew. V. 46
the multitude, because they took him for a prophet: Mark V. 12
for they knew Matthew. V. 46
that he spoke of them, Luke V. 19
and that he had spoken this parable against them.

CHAP. CLIII. The parable of the wedding of the kings son; and of the wedding
garment.
Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 1
ANd Jesus answered Luke Chapter 14 V. 16
and spoke unto them again by parables, and said, Matthew. V. 2
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for
his son, Matthew. V. 3
And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and
they would not come. Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 4
Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden,
Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready: Matthew. V. 5
come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one
to his farm, another to his merchandise: Matthew. V. 6
And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spightfully, and slew
them. Matthew. V. 7
But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies,
and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city. Then faith he to his
servants, Matthew. V. 8
The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy. Matthew. V. 9
Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the
marriage. So those servants went out into the highways, Matthew. V. 10
and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good. And the
wedding was furnished with guests. Matthew. V. 11
And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not
on a wedding garment: Matthew. V. 12
And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding
garment? And he was speechless. Then said the king to the servants, Matthew. V.
13
Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness:
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 14 Chapter 20 V. 16
For many are called, but few are chosen.

CHAP. CLIIII. Christ's answer to the Pharisees question about paying tribute to
Caesar.
Mark Chapter 12 V. 12
ANd Matthew. V. 15
then the Pharisees Mark Chapter 12 V. 12
left him, and went their way, Matthew. V. 15
and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk. Luke Chapter 20 V. 20
And they watched him, and sent forth spies which should feign themselves just
men, Mark Chapter 12 V. 13
certain of the Pharisees, Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 16
their disciples, with the Herodians, Mark Chapter 12 V. 13
to catch him in his words, and Luke Chapter 20 V. 20
that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him unto
the power and authority of the governor. Mark V. 14
And when they were come, Luke Chapter 20 V. 21
they asked him, Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 16
saying Mark V. 14
unto him, Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 16
Master, we know that thou art true, Luke Chapter 20 V. 21
that thou say and teach rightly, Mark V. 14
and carest for no man; for thou regardest not the person of men, Luke Chapter 20
V. 21
neither acceptest thou the person, Mark V. 14
but teach the way of God in truth. Matthew. V. 17
Tell us therefore, What think thou? Luke V. 22
Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Caesar, or no? Mark V. 14
shall we give, or shall we not give? Matthew. V. 18
But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and Mark V. 14
knowing their hypocrisy, Luke V. 23
he perceived their craftiness, and said unto them, Matthew. V. 19
Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? Mark V. 15
bring and Matthew. V. 19
show me Mark V. 15
a penie, Matthew. V. 19
the tribute-money, Mark V. 15
that I may see it. Matthew. V. 20
And they brought unto him a penie. And he says unto them, Luke V. 24
Whose image and superscription has it? Matthew. V. 20
Whose is this image and superscription? Mark V. 16
And Luke V. 24
they answered and said Mark V. 16
unto him, Cesars. Matthew. V. 21
Then Mark V. 17
Jesus answering, said unto them, Matthew. V. 21
Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Cesars; and unto God, the
things that are Gods. Matthew. V. 22
Mark V. 17
And Matthew. V. 21
when they had heard these words, Mark V. 17
they marvelled at him, Luke V. 26
and they could not take hold of his words before the people, and they
marvelled at his answer, and held their peace, Matthew. V. 21
and left him, and went their way.

CHAP. CLV. Christ answers the arguments of the Sadduces about the resurrection
of the dead.
Matthew. V. 23
THe same day Luke V. 27
came to him certain of the Sadduces, Mark V. 18
which say there is no resurrection, Luke V. 27
which deny that there is any resurrection; and they asked him, Luke Chapter 20 V.
28
Saying, Master, Moses Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 24
said and Mark Chapter 12 V. 19
wrote unto us, Luke Chapter 20 V. 28
If any man's brother die, having a wife, Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 24
having no children, Mark Chapter 12 V. 19
and leave his wife behind him, and leave no children, that his brother should
take his wife, Matthew. V. 24
shall Matthew. (...).
marry her, and raise up seed unto his brother. Now there were Luke V. 29
therefore Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 25
with us seven brethren; and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased,
Mark V. 20
and dying, left no seed, Luke V. 29
and died without children, Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 25
and having no issue, left his wife unto his brother. Matthew. V. 26
Likewise the second also Mark V. 21
took her Luke V. 30
to wife, and he died childelesse, Mark V. 21
neither left he any seed: and the third likewise Luke V. 31
took her: and in like manner the seven also Mark V. 22
had her, and left no seed; for Luke V. 32
they left no children, and died. Matthew. V. 27
And last of all the woman died also. Therefore in the resurrection, Matthew. V.
28
when they shall rise, Mark V. 23
whose wife shall she be of them Matthew. V. 28
seven? for they all Mark V. 23
seven had her to wife. Mark V. 24
And Jesus answering, said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know
not the scriptures, neither the power of God? Luke V. 34
The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage: Luke V. 35
But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage. Matthew.
V. 30
For in the resurrection, Mark V. 25
when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage. Luke V. 35
Neither can they die any more, Matthew. V. 30
but are as the angels of God, Mark V. 25
which are in heaven: Luke V. 35
for they are equal unto the angels, and are the children of God, being the
children of the resurrection. Matthew. V. 31
But as touching the resurrection of the dead, Luke V. 37
that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he calls the
Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Mark Chapter
12 V. 26
Have ye not read in the book of Moses, Matthew. V. 31
that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, Mark Chapter 12 V. 26
how in the bush God spoke unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? Luke Chapter 20 V. 38
For Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 32
God is not the God of the dead, Mark V. 27
but the God of the living; Luke Chapter 20 V. 38
for all live unto him: Mark V. 27
ye therefore do greatly err. Matthew. V. 33
And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine. Luke
V. 39
Then certain of the Scribes answering, said, Master, thou have well said. And
after that, Luke V. 40
they durst not ask him any question at all.

CHAP. CLVI. Christ's answer to the Scribe, concerning the greatest commandment
of the Law.
Matthew. V. 34
BUt when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadduces to silence, they
were gathered together. Matthew. V. 35
Then one of them which was a lawyer, Mark V. 28
one of the Scribes, came, and having heard them reasoning together, and
perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him Matthew. V. 36
a question, tempting him, and saying, Master, which is Mark V. 28
the first Matthew. V. 36
great commandment Mark V. 28
of all Matthew. V. 36
in the Law? Mark V. 29
And Jesus answered and Matthew. V. 36
said unto him, Mark V. 29
The first of all the commandments is, Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one
Lord; Luke Chapter 10 V. 27
And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Mark V. 30
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this
is the first Matthew. V. 38 39
and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Mark V. 31
namely this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: there is no other
commandment greater then these. Matthew. V. 40
On these two commandments hang all the Law and the prophets. Mark Chapter 12 V. 32
And the Scribe said unto him, Well Master, thou have said the truth: for there
is one God, and there is none other but he. Mark V. 33
And to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with
all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself,
is more then all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices. Mark V. 34
And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not
far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him any
question.

CHAP. CLVII. Jesus propounds a question to the Pharisees concerning Christ,
whose son he should be.
Matthew. Chapter 22 V. 41
WHile the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them Mark V. 35
while he taught in the temple, Matthew. V. 42
Saying, What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him, The
son of David. Mark V. 35
And Jesus answered and said Matthew. V. 42
unto them, Mark V. 35
How say the Scribes that Christ is the son of David? Matthew. V. 43
How then does David in spirit call him Lord? Mark V. 36
For David himself said by the holy Ghost, Luke Chapter 20 V. 42
in the book of psalms, The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
Luke V. 43
Till I make thine enemies thy footstool. Mark V. 37
David therefore himself calls him Lord. Matthew. V. 45
If David then call him Lord, how, Mark V. 37
and whence Matthew. V. 46
is he his son? And no man was able to answer him a word; neither durst any
man (from that day forth) ask him any more questions. Mark V. 37
And the common people heard him gladly.

CHAP. CLVIII. Christ sharply inveighs against the Scribes and Pharisees,
taxes their vices, and denounces heavy punishments against them.
Sect. 1.
Matthew. Chapter 23 V. 1
THen spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples: Luke Chapter 20 V. 45
for then in the audience of all the people, he spoke to his disciples: Mark
Chapter 12 V. 38
And he said unto them in his doctrine, Matthew. V. 2
Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat. Matthew. V. 3
All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not
ye after their works: for they say, Matthew. V. 4
and do not. For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay
them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of
their fingers. Matthew. V. 5
But all their works they do, for to be seen of men: they make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, Luke Chapter 11 V. 43
And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, Matthew. V. 6
and the chief seats in the Synagogues, And greetings in the markets: Matthew. V.
7
Mark Chapter 12 V. 38
Beware of the Scribes, which love and Luke V. 46
desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the markets, and the
highest seats in the Synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts, Matthew. V. 8
and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is
your master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren. And call no man your father
upon the earth: Matthew. V. 9
for one is your father which is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters:
Matthew. V. 10
for one is your master, even Christ. Matthew. V. 11
But he that is greatest among you, Matthew. V. 12
shall be your servant. Luke Chapter 14 V. 11 Chapter 12 V. 14
And whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that shall humble
himself, shall be exalted.

Sect. 2.
Matthew. Chapter 23 V. 13
Luke Chapter 11 V. 52
But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye shut up the kingdom
of heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering, to go in. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. V. 14
hypocrites; for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long
prayers: therefore Mark Chapter 12 V. 40
these shall receive greater damnation. Matthew. V. 15
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye compass sea and land to
make one proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of
hell then your selves. Matthew. V. 16
Woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple,
it is nothing: but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, Matthew. V. 17
he is a debtor. Ye fools, and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the
temple that sanctifies the gold? Matthew. V. 18
And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing: but whosoever swears
by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty. Matthew. V. 19
Ye fools, and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that
sanctifies the gift? Matthew. V. 20
Whosoever therefore shall swear by the altar, swears by it, and by all things
thereon. And whoseo shall swear by the temple, Matthew. V. 21
swears by it, Matthew. V. 22
and by him that dwells therein. And he that shall swear by heaven, swears
by the throne of God, and by him that sits thereon. Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisces, Matthew. V. 23
hypocrites; for ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and have omitted
the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye
to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, Matthew. V. 24
which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. Matthew. V. 25
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye make clean the outside
of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and
excess. Matthew. Chapter 23 V. 26
Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter,
that the outside of them may be clean also. Matthew. V. 27
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye are like unto whited
sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of
dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear
righteous unto men, Matthew. V. 28
but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Matthew. V. 29
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because ye build the tombs of
the prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous, Matthew. V. 30
And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the prophets. Matthew. V. 31
Wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the children of them
which killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Matthew.
V. 32 33
Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?

Sect. 3.
Wherefore behold, Matthew. V. 34
I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and Scribes; and some of them ye shall
kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in your Synagogues, and
persecute them from city to city: Matthew. V. 35
That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the
blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom
ye slew between the temple and the altar. Matthew. V. 36
Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation. Luke
Chapter 13 V. 34
O Jerusalem, Matthew. V. 37
Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent
unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, Matthew. Chapter 23 V. 38
and ye would not I Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. Matthew. V. 39
For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. CLIX. Christ praises the widow that cast two mites into the treasury.
Mark Chapter 12 V. 41
ANd Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast money
into the treasury: and many that were rich, cast in much. Mark V. 42
And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a
farthing. Luke Chapter 21 V. 1
And he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury.
Luke V. 2
And he saw also a certain poor widow, casting in thither two mites. Mark V. 43
And he called unto him his disciples, and says unto them, Verily, Luke V. 3
of a truth Mark V. 43
I say unto you, that this poor widow has cast more in, then all they that
have cast into the treasury. Luke V. 4
For all these have of their abundance cast in unto the offerings of God; but
she of her penury has cast in all Mark V. 44
that she had, even all her living Luke V. 4
that she had.

CHAP. CLX. Christ foretells the destruction of the temple and of Jerusalem.
Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 1
ANd Jesus went out, and departed from the temple. Mark Chapter 13 V. 1
And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples says unto him, Master,
see what manner of stones and what buildings are here. Mark V. 2
And Jesus answering, said unto him, See thou these great buildings? there
shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. Matthew.
Chapter 24 V. 1
And his disciples came to him for to show him the buildings of the temple.
Luke Chapter 21 V. 5
And as some spoke of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones, and
gifts, Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 2
And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? verily I say unto you,
Luke V. 6
As for these things which ye behold, the days will come, in the which there
shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

Sect. 2.
Mark Chapter 13 V. 3
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, over against the temple, Matthew. V. 3
the disciples, Mark Chapter 13 V. 3
Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Matthew. V. 3
came unto him privately, Mark Chapter 13 V. 3
and asked him privately, Matthew. V. 3
saying, Luke V. 7
Master, Matthew. V. 3
Tell us, when shall these things be? Mark V. 4
and what shall be the sign when all these things Luke V. 7
shall come to pass, and Mark V. 4
shall be fulfilled? Matthew. V. 4
and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? And
Mark V. 5
Jesus answering them, began to say, Matthew. V. 4
and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you. Matthew. V. 5
For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; Luke V. 8
(and the time draws near) and shall deceive many: Luke V. 9
go ye not therefore after them. But when ye shall hear of wars, and
commotions, Matthew. V. 6
and rumors of wars, see that ye be not troubled, Luke V. 9
be not terrified: Matthew. V. 6
for all Luke V. 9
these things must first come to pass, Matthew. V. 6
but the end is not yet, Luke V. 9
by and by. Luke V. 10
Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: Luke V. 11
And great earthquakes shall be in diverse places, Matthew. V. 7
and there shall be famines, and pestilences, Mark V. 8
and troubles, Luke V. 11
and fearful sights, and great signs shall there be from heaven. Matthew. V. 8
All these are Mark V. 9
the beginnings of sorrows. But take heed to your selves: for Luke Chapter 21 V. 12
before all these they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you,
delivering you up to Mark V. 9
councels, and Luke Chapter 21 V. 12
to the Synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for
my names sake: Mark V. 9
ye shall be beaten, and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my
sake. Luke V. 13
And it shall turn to you for a testimony, and Mark V. 9
against them. Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 9
Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye
shall be hated of all nations for my names sake. Matthew. V. 10
And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate
one another. And many false prophets shall rise, Matthew. V. 11
and shall deceive many. Matthew. V. 12
And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. Mark Chapter
13 V. 10
And the Gospel must first be published among all nations. Matthew. V. 14
And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a
witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come. Mark V. 11
But when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand
what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given
you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the holy
Ghost. Luke V. 14
Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 19
Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before, what ye shall
answer. Luke V. 15
For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not
be able to gainsay, nor resist. Luke V. 16
And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and
friends, and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. Mark V. 12
Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son:
and children shall rise up against their parents, and shall cause them to be
put to death. Mark V. 13
And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 30
Luke V. 18
But there shall not an hair of your head perish. Luke V. 19
In your patience possess ye your souls. Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 13
But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

Sect. 3.
Luke Chapter 21 V. 20
And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the
desolation thereof is nigh. Matthew. V. 15
When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the prophet, Mark Chapter 13 V. 14
standing where it ought not, Matthew. V. 15
in the holy place, (whosoever reads, let him understand) Matthew. V. 16
Then let them which be in Judea, flee into the mountains; Luke V. 21
and let them which are in the midst of it, depart out; and let not them that
are in the countries, enter thereinto. Mark V. 15
And let him that is on the house top, not go down into the house, neither
enter therein, to take any thing out of his house. And let him that is in the
field, Mark V. 16
not turn back again for to take up his garment, or Matthew. V. 18
to take his clothes. Luke V. 22
For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be
fulfilled. Matthew. V. 19
And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those
days. Matthew. V. 20
But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day:
Matthew. V. 21
For then shall be great tribulation, and Luke V. 23
great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people. Mark V. 19
For in those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of
the creation which God created, unto this time, neither Matthew. V. 21
ever shall be. Luke V. 24
And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive
into all nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Matthew. V. 22
And except those days should be shortened, and Mark V. 20
the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved: but for the
elects sake, whom he has chosen, he has shortened the days, and Matthew. V. 22
those days shall be shortened. Mark Chapter 13 V. 21
And then, if any man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or lo, he is there:
believe him not. Mark V. 22
For false Christ's, and false prophets shall rise, Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 24
and shall show great signs and wonders, Mark V. 22
to seduce, Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 24
insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect. Mark V.
23
But take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things. Matthew. V. 26
Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not
forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers, Matthew. V. 27
believe it not. For as the lightning comes out of the east, and shines even
unto the west: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Matthew. V. 28
For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

CHAP. CLXI. Christ's prophetical sermon concerning his second coming, and the
signs that are to precede it.
Mark V. 24
BUt in those days, Matthew. V. 29
immediately after the tribulation of those days, Luke Chapter 21 V. 25
there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars: Mark
V. 25
the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light. And the
stars of heaven shall fall Matthew. V. 29
from heaven; Luke Chapter 21 V. 25
and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea and the
waves roaring, Luke V. 26
Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which
are coming on the earth; for the powers Mark V. 25
that are in heaven shall be shaken. Matthew. V. 30
And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and then shall
all the tribes of the earth mourn. Mark V. 26
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds Matthew. V. 30
of heaven, Mark V. 27
with great power, Matthew. V. 31
and great glory. Mark V. 27
And then shall he send his angels, Matthew. V. 31
with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from
the four winds, Mark V. 27
from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven, and
Matthew. V. 31
from one end of heaven to the other. Luke Chapter 21 V. 28
And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws nigh. Luke V. 29
And he spoke to them a parable, Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 32
Now learn a parable of the fig tree: When his branch is yet tender, and
puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh. Luke V. 30
Behold therefore the fig tree, and all the trees: When they now shoot forth,
ye see and know of your own selves, that summer is now nigh at hand. Luke V. 31
So likewise ye, Mark Chapter 13 V. 29
when ye see all these things come to pass, Luke V. 31
know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand, Mark Chapter 13 V. 29
even at the doors. Matthew. V. 34
Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things
be fulfilled. Matthew. V. 35
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. Matthew.
V. 36
But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels Mark V. 32
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but Matthew. V. 36
my Father only.

CHAP. CLXII. Christ informs the godly how they are to prepare for his second
coming.
Luke V. 34
ANd take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares. Luke V. 35
For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
earth. Matthew. V. 37
But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
Matthew. V. 38
For as in the days that were before the sloud, they were eating and drinking,
marrying, and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,
Matthew. Chapter 24 V. 39
And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away: so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be. Then shall two be in the field; Matthew. V. 40
the one shall be taken, Matthew. V. 41
and the other left. Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be
taken, and the other left. Mark Chapter 13 V. 33
Take ye heed Luke Chapter 21 V. 36
therefore; Mark Chapter 13 V. 33
watch and pray, Luke Chapter 21 V. 36
and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man: Mark Chapter 13 V.
33
for ye know not when the time is, and Matthew. V. 42
what hour your Lord does come. Matthew. V. 43
But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in what watch the
thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house
to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready: Matthew. V. 44
for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man comes. Mark V. 34
For the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house,
and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded
the porter to watch. Matthew. V. 45
Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over
his household, to give them meat in due season? Matthew. V. 46
Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, Matthew. V. 47
shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over
all his goods. Matthew. V. 48
But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, Matthew. V. 49
My Lord delayeth his coming; And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and
to eat and drink with the drunken: Matthew. V. 50
The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not ware of; And shall cut him asunder, Matthew. V. 51
and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Mark V. 35
Watch ye therefore, (for ye know not when the master of the house comes, at
even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning) Lest coming
suddenly, Mark Chapter 24 V. 36
he find you sleeping. Mark V. 37
And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.

CHAP. CLXIII. Christ propounds to his Apostles the parable of the ten virgins.
Matthew. Chapter 25 V. 1
THen shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took
their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise,
Matthew. V. 2
and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, Matthew. V. 3
and took no oil with them: Matthew. V. 4
But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. Matthew. V. 5
While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept. And at midnight
there was a cry made, Matthew. V. 6
Behold, the bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins
arose, Matthew. V. 7
and trimmed their lamps. Matthew. V. 8
And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil, Matthew. V. 9
for our lamps are gone out. But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there
be not enough for us and you, but go ye rather to them that sell, Matthew. V. 10
and buy for your selves. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came, and
they that were ready, went in with him to the marriage, Matthew. V. 11
and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord,
Lord, open to us. Matthew. V. 12
But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Matthew. Chapter 25
V. 13 Chapter 24 V. 42 Mark Chapter 13 V. 33
Watch therefore; for ye know neither the day nor the hour, wherein the Son
of man comes.

CHAP. CLXIIII. Christ propounds to his Apostles the parable of the talents
distributed among the servants.
Matthew. Chapter 25 V. 14
FOr the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country, who
called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods: And unto one he
gave five talents, Matthew. V. 15
to another two, and to another one, to every man according to his several
ability; and straightway took his journey. Then he that had received the five
talents, Matthew. V. 16
went and traded with the same, and made them other five talents. Matthew. V. 17
And likewise he that had received two, Matthew. V. 18
he also gained other two. But he that had received one, went and dug in the
earth, and hid his lords money. Matthew. V. 19
After a long time, the lord of those servants comes, and reckons with them.
And so he that had received five talents, Matthew. V. 20
came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me
five talents, behold, I have gained besides them five talents more. Matthew. V. 21
His lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy lord. Matthew. V. 22
He also that had received two talents, came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst
unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents besides them.
Matthew. V. 23
His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: Matthew. V.
24
enter thou into the joy of thy lord. Then he which had received the one
talent, came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping
where thou have not sown, and gathering where thou have not strawed: Matthew. V.
25
And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, Matthew. Chapter 25
V. 26
there thou have that is thine. His Lord answered and said unto him, Thou
wicked and slothful servant, thou knew that I reap where I sowed not,
Matthew. V. 27
and gather where I have not strawed. Thou ought therefore to have put my
money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own
with usurie. Matthew. V. 28
Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten
talents. Matthew. Chapter 25 V. 29 Chapter 13 V. 12 Mark Chapter 4 V. 25 Luke Chapter 8 V. 18
For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but
from him that has not shall be taken away, even that which he has. Matthew. Chapter
25 V. 30
And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

CHAP. CLXV. Christ describes to his Apostles the acts and proceedings of the
last judgment.
Matthew. V. 31
WHen the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, Matthew. V. 32
then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. And before him shall be
gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd divides his sheep from the goats. And he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, Matthew. V. 33
but the goats on the left. Matthew. V. 34
Then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Matthew. V. 35
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Matthew. V. 36
Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and
ye came unto me. Matthew. V. 37
Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a
stranger, Matthew. Chapter 25 V. 38
and took thee in? or naked, Matthew. V. 39
and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, Matthew. V. 40
or in prison, and came unto thee? And the king shall answer, and say unto
them, Verily I say unto you, In as much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Matthew. V. 41
Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 23
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels. Matthew. V. 42
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
no drink: Matthew. V. 43
I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick,
and in prison, and ye visited me not. Matthew. V. 44
Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or
athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, Matthew. V. 45
and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I
say unto you, In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, Matthew.
V. 46
ye did it not to me. Luke Chapter 5 V. 29
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into
life eternal. Luke Chapter 21 V. 37
And in the daytime he was teaching in the temple, and at night he went out,
and abode in the mount that is called the mount of Olives. And all the people
came early in the morning to him in the temple, Luke V. 38
for to hear him.

CHAP. CLXVI. Christ foretells that after two days he shall be betrayed to
death.
Luke Chapter 22 V. 1
NOw the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the passover.
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 1
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, Matthew. V. 2
he said unto his disciples, John Chapter 13 V. 1
Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the Son of
man is betrayed to be crucified. Mark Chapter 14 V. 1
And after two days is the feast of the passover, and of unleavened bread.

CHAP. CLXVII. The chief priests, Scribes, and elders consult, how by craft
they may take Christ, and put him to death.
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 3
John Chapter 11 V. 47
THen assembled together the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the elders of
the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, Matthew.
V. 4
And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtlety, and kill him. Mark Chapter
14 V. 1
And the chief priests and the Scribes fought how they might take him by craft,
Luke Chapter 22 V. 2
how they might kill him or Mark V. 2
put him to death. But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar
of the people: Luke Chapter 22 V. 2
for they feared the people.

CHAP. CLXVIII. The treacherous bargain of Judas Iscariot with the high priests.
Luke V. 3
THen entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the
twelve. Matthew. V. 14
Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests,
Mark V. 10
to betray him unto them. Luke V. 4
And he went his way, and communed with the chief priests and captains, how he
might betray him unto them. Mark V. 11
And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him money. Matthew.
V. 15
And he said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?
and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. Luke V. 6
And he promised: Matthew. V. 16
And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him, Mark V. 11
and how he might conveniently betray him Luke V. 6
unto them in the absence of the multitude.

CHAP. CLXIX. The preparation to the last passover; and the celebration of it.
Luke Chapter 22 V. 7
THen came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed.
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 17
Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, Mark Chapter 14 V. 12
when they killed the passover, Luke V. 8
he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the passover, that we may
eat. And Mark Chapter 14 V. 12
his Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 17
disciples came unto Jesus, saying unto him, Where will thou Mark Chapter 14 V. 12
that we go, and prepare Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 17
for thee to eat the passover? Mark V. 13
And he sends forth two of his disciples, and says unto them, Go ye into the
city, Matthew. V. 18
to such a man: Luke V. 10
and behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you,
bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he enters in. Mark
V. 14
And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye Matthew. V. 18
unto him, Mark V. 14
to the good man of the house, Luke V. 11
The Master says unto thee, Matthew. V. 18
My time is at hand, I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples:
Matthew. V. 18
where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?
Mark V. 15
And he will show you a large upper room furnished and prepared: there make
ready for us. Mark V. 16
And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, Luke V. 13
and they went and found as he had said unto them, Matthew. V. 19
and did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready the passover. Now
when the even was come, Matthew. V. 20
Mark V. 17
he comes with the twelve; Luke V. 14
And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him.
And he said unto them, Luke V. 15
With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer.
Luke Chapter 22 V. 16
For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in
the kingdom of God. Luke V. 17
And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among
your selves. Luke V. 18
For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the
kingdom of God shall come.

CHAP. CLXX. Christ washes the feet of the disciples.
John Chapter 13 V. 1
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 2
NOw before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was
come, that he should depart out of this world, unto the Father, having loved
his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. John V. 2
And supper being ended (the devil having now put into the heart of Judas
Iscariot, Simons son, to betray him) Jesus knowing that the Father had given
all things into his hands, John V. 3
and that he was come from God, and went to God; John V. 4
He rises from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towell and
girded himself. After that, John V. 5
he pours water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples feet, and to
wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girded. John V. 6
Then comes he to Simon Peter: and Peter says unto him, Lord, do thou wash
my feet? John V. 7
Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou know not now: but thou
shall know hereafter. Peter says unto him, John V. 8
Thou shall never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou
have no part with me. Simon Peter says unto him, Lord, John V. 9
not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. John V. 10
Jesus says to him, He that is washed, needs not, save to wash his feet, but
is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all. John V. 11
For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not all clean. So
after he had washed their feet, John Chapter 13 V. 12
and had taken his garments, and was set down again: he said unto them, Know ye
what I have done to you? John V. 13
Ye call me Master, and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. John V. 14
If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash
one another feet. For I have given you an example, John V. 15
that ye should do as I have done to you. John Chapter 13 V. 16 Chapter 15 V. 20 Matthew.
Chapter 10 V. 24
Verily verily I say unto you, The servant is not greater then his Lord;
neither he that is sent, greater then he that sent him. If ye know these
things, John Chapter 13 V. 17
happy are ye if ye do them. I speak not of you all, John V. 18
I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture may be fulfilled, He that
eats bread with me, has lift up his heel against me. John V. 19
Now I tell you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye may believe
that I am he. Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 40
Verily verily I say unto you, John V. 20
He that receives whomsoever I send, receives me: and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me.

CHAP. CLXXI. Christ institutes the sacrament of the Eucharist.
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 26
ANd as they were eating, Jesus took bread, Luke Chapter 22 V. 19
and gave thanks, Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 26
and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take,
eat, this is my body, Luke V. 20
which is given for you; this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also Matthew. V.
27
he took the cup Luke V. 20
after supper, Mark Chapter 14 V. 23
and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, Matthew. V. 28
saying, Drink ye all of it: For this is my blood of the new testament; Luke V.
20
this cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you, and Matthew.
V. 28
for many for the remission of sins: Mark Chapter 14 V. 23
and they all drank of it. Mark Chapter 14 V. 25
Verily I say unto you, Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 29
I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I
drink it new with you, Mark Chapter 14 V. 25
in the kingdom of God Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 29
my Father.

CHAP. CLXXII. A peculiar action of Christ with Judas the traitor.
Mark V. 18
ANd as they sat, and did eat, John Chapter 13 V. 21
when Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said,
Luke Chapter 22 V. 21
But behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the table. John
Chapter 13 V. 21
Verily verily I say unto you, that one of you, Mark V. 18
which eats with me, shall betray me. John V. 22
Then the disciples Mark V. 19
began to be sorrowful, and John V. 22
looked one on another, doubting of whom he spoke. Luke V. 23
And they began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should
do this thing. Matthew. V. 22
And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him Mark V. 20
one by one, Matthew. V. 22
Lord, is it I? Mark V. 20
And another said, Is it I? And he answered and said unto them, It is one of
the twelve, that dippeth Matthew. V. 23
his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me. Luke V. 22
And truly the Son of man goes as it was determined, Mark V. 21
as it is written of him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is
betrayed: good were it for that man if he had never been born. John V. 23
Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom, one of his disciples whom Jesus loved.
John V. 24
Simon Peter therefore beckened to him, that he should ask who it should be of
whom he spoke. John V. 25
He then lying on Jesus breast, says unto him, Lord, who is it? John V. 26
Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it.
And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot the son of
Simon. And after the sop, Satan entered into him. John Chapter 13 V. 27
Then said Jesus unto him, That thou do, do quickly. Now no man at the table
knew, John V. 28
for what intent he spoke this unto him. John V. 29
For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto
him, Buy those things that we have need of against the feast: or that he should
give something to the poor. Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 25
Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered, and said, Master, is it I? He said
unto him, Thou have said. John V. 30
He then having received the sop, went immediately out: and it was night.
Therefore when he was. gone out, John V. 31
Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.
John V. 32
If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall
straightway glorify him.

CHAP. CLXXIII. Christ makes a friendly composition of the contention raised
among the apostles about the primacie.
Luke Chapter 22 V. 24
ANd there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the
greatest. And he said unto them, Luke V. 25
The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise
authority upon them, are called benefactours. But ye shall not be so; Luke V.
26
but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is
chief, as he that does serve. Luke V. 27
For whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or he that serves? is not he
that sits at meat? but I am among you as he that serves. Luke V. 28
Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And I appoint unto
you a kingdom, Luke V. 29
as my Father has appointed unto me: Luke V. 30
That ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

CHAP. CLXXIIII. Christ exhorts them to mutual love, and foretells Peter's
denial.
John Chapter 13 V. 33
LIttle children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me, John Chapter
7 V. 34
and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say unto
you. John Chapter 7 V. 34 Chapter 15 V. 17
A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. John V. 35
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another. Simon Peter said unto him, John V. 36
Lord, whither go thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou can not
follow me now: but thou shall follow me afterward. John V. 37
Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will Matthew. Chapter 26
V. 33
lay down my life for thy sake. Luke Chapter 22 V. 31
And the Lord John V. 38
Jesus answered him and Luke Chapter 22 V. 31
said, John V. 38
Will thou lay down thy life for my sake? Luke Chapter 22 V. 31
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat: But I have prayed for thee, Luke V. 32
that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.
And he said unto him, Luke V. 33
Lord, I am ready to go with thee both into prison, and to death. Matthew. Chapter
26 V. 34
And he said, John V. 38
Verily verily Luke V. 34
I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before thou shall thrice
deny that thou know me.

CHAP. CLXXV. Christ fortells the imminent danger, and admonishes them to
prepare spiritual armor against it.
Luke V. 35
Matthew. Chapter 10 V. 9
ANd he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes,
lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing. Luke Chapter 22 V. 36
Then said he unto them, But now he that has a purse, let him take it, and
likewise his scrip: and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment, and
buy one. For I say unto you, that this that is written, Luke V. 37
must yet be accomplished in me, And he was reckoned among the transgressors:
for the things concerning me have an end. And they said, Lord, Luke V. 38
behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough.

CHAP. CLXXVI. Christ comforts his disciples who were sorrowful, because he
had foretold them of his departure.
Sect. I.
John Chapter 14 V. 1
LEt not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. John V.
2
In my Fathers house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told
you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you,
John V. 3
I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may
be also. John V. 4
And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. Thomas says unto him, Lord,
John V. 5
we know not whither thou go: and how can we know the way? Jesus says unto
him, I am the way, the truth, John V. 6
and the life: no man comes unto the Father but by me. If ye had known me,
John V. 7
ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have
seen him.

Sect. II.
Philip says unto him, Lord, show us the Father, John V. 8
and it suffices us. Jesus says unto him, John V. 9
Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? He
that has seen me, has seen the Father; and how say thou then, Show us the
Father? John Chapter 14 V. 10
Beleevest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self: but the Father that dwells in
me, he does the works. John V. 11
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me
for the very works sake. John V. 12
Verily verily I say unto you, He that believes on me, the works that I do,
shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do, because I go unto
my Father. Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 7
And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, John V. 13
that the Father may be glorified in the Son. John V. 14
If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. John V. 15
If ye love me, keep my commandments. John V. 16
And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever; Even the Spirit of truth, John V. 17
whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him:
but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. John V. 18
I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. John V. 19
Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more: but ye see me; because I
live, ye shall live also. John V. 20
At that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in
you. John V. 21
He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and
he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him.

Sect. III.
Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, John V. 22
Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the
world? John V. 23
Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and
my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. John Chapter 14 V. 24
He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings: and the word which you hear,
is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me. John V. 25
These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. John V. 26
But the Comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. John V. 27
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the world gives,
give I unto you: let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. John
V. 28
Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye
loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father
is greater then I. John V. 29
And now I have told you before it come to pass, that when it is come to
pass, ye might believe. John V. 30
Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this world comes,
and has nothing in me. John V. 31
But that the world may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me
commandment, even so I do: arise, let us go hence.

CHAP. CLXXVII. Christ exhorts his disciples to perseverance in the faith, and
to mutual love.
Sect. I.
John Chapter 15 V. 1 2
I Am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Matthew. Chapter 15 V. 13
Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away: and every branch
that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. John Chapter
15 V. 3 Chapter 13 V. 10
Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me,
John V. 4
and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in
the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. John Chapter 15 V. 5
I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. If a man
abide not in me, John V. 6
he is cast forth as a branch and is withered, and men gather them, and cast
them into the fire, and they are burned. John V. 7
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and
it shall be done unto you. John V. 8
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my
disciples. As the Father has loved me, John V. 9
so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. John V. 10
If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love: even as I have kept my
Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. John V. 11
These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that
your joy might be full.

Sect. II.
John Chapter 15 V. 12 Chapter 13 V. 34
This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. John V.
13
Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. Ye are my friends, John V. 14
if ye do whatsoever I command you. John V. 15
Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows not what his lord
does; but I have called you friends: for all things that I have heard of my
Father, I have made known unto you. John V. 16
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 19
ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may
give it you. These things I command you, that ye love one another. John V. 17


CHAP. CLXXVIII. Christ arms his disciples against the hatred and persecution
of the world.
John Chapter 15 V. 18
IF the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. John V. 19
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. John Chapter 15 V. 20 Chapter 13 V. 16
Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater then the
lord: if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: if they have
kept my saying, they will keep yours also. John V. 21
But all these things will they do unto you for my names sake, because they
know not him that sent me. John V. 22
If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they
have no cloak for their sin. John V. 23
He that hates me, hates my Father also. John V. 24
If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not
had sin: but now have they both seen, and hated both me and my Father. John
V. 25
But this comes to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in
their law, They hated me without a cause. John Chapter 15 V. 26 Chapter 14 V. 26 Luke
Chapter 14 V. 49
But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father,
even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify
of me. John Chapter 15 V. 27
And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the
beginning. John Chapter 16 V. 1
These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They
shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, John V. 2
will think that he does God service. John V. 3
And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, John V. 4
nor me. But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye
may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at
the beginning, because I was with you.

CHAP. CLXXIX. Christ again comfort his disciples being sorrowful for the
prediction of his departure.
Sect. I.
John Chapter 16 V. 5
BUt now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you asks me, Whither
go thou? But because I have said these things unto you, John V. 6
sorrow has filled your heart. John V. 7
Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away:
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I
will send him unto you. And when he is come, John V. 8
he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment.
Of sin, John V. 9
because they believe not on me. Of righteousness, John V. 10
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more. Of judgment, John V. 11
because the prince of this world is judged. John V. 12
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now: Howbeit,
John V. 13
when he the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he
shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak,
and he will show you things to come. John V. 14
He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you. John V. 15
All things that the Father has, are mine: therefore said I, that he shall
take of mine, and shall show it unto you.

Sect. II.
A little while and ye shall not see me: John V. 16
and again, a little while and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father.
John V. 17
Then said some of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he says
unto us, A little while and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while and
ye shall see me: and, Because I go to the Father? John Chapter 16 V. 18
They said therefore, What is this that he says, A little while? we cannot
tell what he says. John V. 19
Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye
enquire among your selves of that I said, A little while and ye shall not see
me: and again, a little while and ye shall see me? John V. 20
Verily verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world
shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy. John V. 21
A woman when she is in travail, has sorrow, because her hour is come: but
as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish,
for joy that a man is born into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow:
John V. 22
but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man
takes from you. John V. 23
And in that day ye shall ask me nothing: Matthew. Chapter 7 V. 7
Verily verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
John V. 24
he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be full. John V. 25
These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: the time comes when I shall
no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the Father.
John V. 26
At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray
the Father for you: For the Father himself loves you, John V. 27
because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. I came
forth from the Father, John V. 28
and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.
John V. 29
His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speak thou plainly, and speak no
proverb. John V. 30
Now are we sure that thou know all things, and need not that any man
should ask thee: by this we believe that thou came forth from God. Jesus
answered them, John Chapter 16 V. 31
Do ye now believe? Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 31
Behold, the hour comes, John V. 32
yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall
leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. These
things I have spoken unto you, John V. 33
that in me ye might have peace; in the world ye shall have tribulation: but be
of good cheer, I have overcome the world.

CHAP. CLXXX. Christ prays ardently for his own glorification, and the
conservation of the church.
Sect. I.
John Chapter 17 V. 1
THese words spoke Jesus and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the
hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee.
Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 18
As thou have given him power over all flesh, John V. 2
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. John V. 3
And this is life eternal, that they may know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. John V. 4
I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave
me to do. John V. 5
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which
I had with thee before the world was.

Sect. II.
I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world:
John V. 6
thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy word. John V.
7
Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of
thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, John Chapter 17 V.
8
and they have received them, John Chapter 16 V. 27
and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me. I pray for them, John V. 9
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are
thine. And all mine are thine, John V. 10
and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. John V. 11
And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to
thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou have given me,
that they may be one, as we are. John V. 12
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou
gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition:
that the scripture might be fulfilled. John V. 13
And now come I to thee, and these things I speak in the world, that they might
have my joy fulfilled in themselves. I have given them thy word, and the world
has hated them, because they are not of the world, John V. 14
even as I am not of the world. John V. 15
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should keep them from the evil. They are not of the world, even as I am not
of the world. John V. 16
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. As thou have sent me into
the world, John V. 17
even so have I also sent them into the world. John V. 18
And for their sakes I sanctify my self, John V. 19
that they also might be sanctified through the truth.

Sect. III.
Neither pray I for these alone; John V. 20
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word. That they all
may be one, John V. 21
as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that
the world may believe that thou have sent me. John V. 22
And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them: that they may be one,
even as we are one. John Chapter 17 V. 23
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the
world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved
me. John Chapter 17 V. 24 Chapter 12 V. 26
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world. John V. 25
O righteous Father, the world has not known thee, but I have known thee, and
these have known that thou have sent me. John V. 26
And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love
where with thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

CHAP. CLXXXI. The history of the passion, crucifying, death, and burial of
Christ. His departure out of Jerusalem into mount Olivet, with his prophecy of
the flight of the disciples.
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 30
ANd when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives. For
John Chapter 18 V. 1
when Jesus had spoken these words, Luke Chapter 22 V. 39
he came out, and went John Chapter 18 V. 1
with his disciples over the brook Cedron, Luke Chapter 22 V. 39
as he was wont, to the mount of Olives, and his disciples also followed him.
Matthew. V. 31
Then says Jesus unto them, Mark Chapter 14 V. 27
All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will
smite the shepherd, Matthew. V. 32
and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. But after I am risen
again, I will go before you into Galilee. Mark V. 29
But Peter Matthew. V. 33
answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee,
Mark V. 29
yet will not I, for Matthew. V. 33
I will never be offended. Mark Chapter 14 V. 30
And Jesus says unto him, Verily I say unto thee, that this day, even in this
night before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. But he, Matthew.
Chapter 26 V. 35
Peter, Mark V. 31
spoke the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will not deny thee:
Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 35
likewise also said all the disciples.

CHAP. CLXXXII. Christ's agony in the garden, and prayers, while his disciples
slept.
Mark V. 32
ANd Matthew. V. 36
then comes Jesus with them into a place called Gethsemane, John Chapter 18 V. 1
where was a garden, into the which he entered, and his disciples. And Judas
also which betrayed him, John V. 2
knew the place: for Jesus often times resorted thither with his disciples. Luke
Chapter 22 V. 40
And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Matthew. V. 36
to the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder; Luke Chapter 22 V. 40
Pray, that ye enter not into temptation. Matthew. V. 37
And he took with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee, Mark V. 33
James and John, and Matthew. V. 37
began to be sorrowful, and very heavy, Mark V. 34
to before amazed, and to be very heavy. And Matthew. V. 38
then says he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death;
tarry ye here, and watch with me. Luke V. 41
And he was withdrawn from them, Matthew. V. 39
and he went a little further, Luke V. 41
about a stones cast, and kneeled down, Mark V. 35
and fell on the ground Matthew. V. 39
on his face, Mark V. 35
and prayed, that if it were possible the hour might pass from him, Matthew. V.
39
and saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: Mark
V. 36
Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee, take away this cup from me:
nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou will; Matthew. V. 40
not as I will, but as thou will. And he comes unto the disciples, and finds
them asleep, and says unto Peter, Mark Chapter 14 V. 37
Simon, sleep thou? could not thou watch one hour? Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 41
What, could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray, that ye enter not
into temptation: Mark V. 38
the spirit truly is ready, Mark V. 39
but the flesh is weak. And again, Matthew. V. 42
the second time, Mark V. 39
he went away, and prayed, and spoke the same words, Matthew. V. 42
O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy
will be done. Mark V. 40
And when he returned, Matthew. V. 43
he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy, Mark V. 40
neither wist they what to answer, Matthew. V. 44
And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the
same words, Luke Chapter 22 V. 42
saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless,
not my will, but thine be done. Luke V. 43
And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And being
in an agony, Luke V. 44
he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling down to the ground. Luke V. 45
And when he rose up from prayer, Matthew. V. 45
then comes he to the disciples, Mark V. 41
the third time, and Luke V. 45
found them sleeping for sorrow, And said unto them, Luke V. 46
Matthew. V. 45
Sleep on now, and take your rest; Luke V. 46
Why sleep ye? Mark V. 41
it is enough: Luke V. 46
rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation: Matthew. V. 45
behold, the hour is at hand, Mark V. 41
is come; behold; the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Matthew. V. 46
Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that does betray me.

CHAP. CLXXXIII. Christ is treacherously taken in the garden.
Mark V. 43
ANd immediately, while he yet spoke, Luke V. 47
behold, he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, John Chapter 18 V. 3
having received a band of men, and officers from the chief priests and
Pharisees, Mark V. 43
comes, and John Chapter 18 V. 3
comes thither, Mark V. 43
and with him a great multitude, John Chapter 18 V. 3
with lanterns, and torches, Mark V. 43
with swords, and staves, John Chapter 18 V. 3
and weapons, Mark Chapter 14 V. 44
from the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the elders. And he that betrayed
him, had given them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he;
take him, and lead him away safely: and he Luke Chapter 22 V. 47
went before them. John Chapter 18 V. 4
Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and
said unto them, Whom seek ye? John V. 5
They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto them, I am he. And
Judas also which betrayed him, stood with them. John V. 6
As Soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward and fell to
the ground. John V. 7
Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? and they said, Jesus of Nazareth. John
V. 8
Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he. John V. 9
If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way, that the saying might be
fulfilled which he spoke, Of them which thou gave me, have I lost none. Mark
V. 45
And as soon as he, Judas, was come, Luke Chapter 22 V. 47
he drew near unto Jesus, to kiss him. Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 49
And Mark V. 45
he goes straightway to him, and says, Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 49
Hail Master; Mark V. 45
Master, Master, and kissed him. Matthew. V. 50
And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Luke V. 48
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Matthew. V. 50
Then came they, Mark V. 46
and laid their hands on Jesus, and took him.

CHAP. CLXXXIIII. The bold rashness of the apostles proparing to defend with
the sword, turns to shameful flight.
Luke V. 49
WHen they which were about him, saw what would follow, they said unto him,
Lord, shall we smite with the sword? Mark V. 47
And one of them that stood by, Matthew. V. 51
which were with Jesus, John Chapter 18 V. 10
Simon Peter, having a sword, Matthew. V. 51
stretched out his hand, John Chapter 18 V. 10
John (...).
drew it, Matthew. V. 51
and Matthew. (...) Mark (...).
took out his sword, Mark V. 47
and smote a servant of the high priest, John Chapter 18 V. 10
and cut off his right ear. The servants name was Malchus. Luke Chapter 22 V. 51
And Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 52
then Luke Chapter 22 V. 51
Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye thus far. John V. 11
Then said Jesus Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 52
unto him, John V. 11
unto Peter, Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 52
Put up again thy sword into his place, John V. 11
into the sheath; Matthew. V. 53
for all that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. Think thou that I
cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more then twelve
legions of angels? John V. 11
the cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Matthew. V. 54
But how then shall the scripture be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Luke Chapter
22 V. 51
And he touched his ear, and healed him. Matthew. V. 55
In that same hour, Mark Chapter 14 V. 48
Jesus answered and said unto Luke V. 52
the chief priests and captains of the temple,and the elders, Mark Chapter 14 V. 48
and unto them, Matthew. V. 55
the multitudes, Luke V. 52
which were come to him, Matthew. V. 55
Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? Mark
V. 49
I was daily with you, and Matthew. V. 55
I sat with you teaching in the temple: Luke V. 53
When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against
me. Mark V. 49
and ye took me not: Luke V. 53
but this is your hour, and the power of darkness: Mark V. 49
but the Scriptures must be fulfilled; Matthew. V. 56
But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.
Mark V. 50
And Matthew. V. 56
then all the disciples forsook him, and fled. Mark V. 51
And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about
his naked body, and the young men laid hold on him. Mark V. 52
And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.

CHAP. CLXXXV. Christ being taken, is brought bound before Caiaphas the high
priest. Peter's first denial.
John Chapter 18 V. 12
THen the band, and the captain, and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound
him. Luke Chapter 22 V. 54
Then took they him, and led him, Mark Chapter 14 V. 53
Jesus, John V. 13
And led him away to Annas first (for he was father in law to Caiaphas which
was the high priest that same year) Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 57
And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiaphas the high
priest. John V. 14
Now Caiaphas was he which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that
one man should die for the people. Luke Chapter 22 V. 54
And they brought him into the high priests house, Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 57
where Mark Chapter 14 V. 53
all the chief priests, and Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 57
Scribes, and the elders Mark Chapter 14 V. 53
with him were assembled. Matthew. V. 58
But John V. 15
Simon Peter followed Jesus Matthew. V. 58
afar off, unto the high priests palace; John V. 15
and so did another disciple: that disciple was known unto the high priest, and
went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest. John V. 16
But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple which
was known unto the high priest, and spoke unto her that kept the door, and
brought in Peter, Matthew. V. 58
and he went in. Luke V. 55
And when the servants had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were
set down together, Peter sat down among them, Mark V. 54
with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire, Matthew. V. 69
to see the end.Now Peter sat without in the palace: Mark V. 66
and as Peter was beneath in the palace, there comes one of the maids of the
high priest, John V. 16
the damsel that kept the door. Mark V. 67
And when she saw Peter, Luke V. 55
as he sat by the fire, Mark V. 67
warming himself, she looked on him, Luke V. 56
and earnestly looked upon him, and Matthew. V. 69
came unto him, saying John V. 17
unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? Mark V. 67
and thou also wast with Jesus Matthew. V. 69
of Galilee, Mark V. 67
of Nazareth, Luke Chapter 22 V. 57
and this man was also with him. And he denied him Matthew. V. 69
before them all, saying, Luke Chapter 22 V. 57
Woman, John V. 17
I am not; Luke Chapter 22 V. 57
I know him not, Mark Chapter 14 V. 68
I know not, neither understand I what thou say. And he went out into the
porch, and the cock crew. John Chapter 18 V. 18
And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals, (for
it was cold) and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed
himself.

CHAP. CLXXXVI. The examination of Christ concerning his doctrine and
disciples. Peter's second denial. False witnesses accuse Christ of blasphemy.
Peter's third denial, and tears.
John V. 19
THe high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine. John
V. 20
Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the
Synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always refort, and in secret
have I said nothing. Why ask thou me? John V. 21
ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I
said. John V. 22
And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by, stroke Jesus
with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? John V.
23
Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witnede of the evil: but if
well, why smitest thou me? John V. 24
Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest. Mark V. 69
And a maid saw him, Peter, again, and began to say to them that stood by, This
is one of them. Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 71
And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto
them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. Luke Chapter 22
V. 58
And after a little while another saw him, and said, Thou art also of them.
John Chapter 18 V. 25
And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself: they said therefore unto him, Art
not thou also one of his disciples? Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 72
And again he, Luke Chapter 22 V. 58
Peter, Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 72
denied with an oath, Luke Chapter 22 V. 58
and said, Man, I am not; Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 72
I do not know the man. Matthew. V. 59
Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council sought false witness
against Jesus to put him to death, Mark Chapter 14 V. 55
and found none: Matthew. V. 60
yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. Mark V. 56
For many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed not
together. Matthew. V. 60
At the last Mark V. 57
there arose certain Matthew. V. 60
two false witnesses, Mark V. 57
and Matthew. V. 60
coming, Mark V. 57
bare false witness against him, Mark V. 58
saying, We heard him say, and Matthew. V. 61
this fellow said, I am able to destroy; and Mark V. 58
I will destroy this temple Matthew. V. 61
of God, Mark V. 58
that is made with hands, Matthew. V. 61
and to build it in three days; Mark V. 58
I will build another made without hands. Mark V. 59
But neither so did their witness agree together. Mark V. 60
And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying Matthew. V. 62
unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against
thee? Matthew. V. 63
But Jesus held his peace, Mark V. 61
and answered nothing. Again the high priest Matthew. V. 63
answered and Mark V. 61
asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the blessed?
Matthew. V. 63
I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ
the Son of God. Mark V. 62
And Matthew. V. 64
Jesus says unto him, Thou have said; Mark V. 62
I am. Matthew. V. 64
Nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting
on the right hand of power, Matthew. V. 65
and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high priest rent his clothes,
saying, He has spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses?
behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy. Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 66
What think ye? Mark Chapter 14 V. 64
And they all condemned him to be guilty of death: and Matthew. Chapter 26 V. 66
they answered and said, He is guilty of death. Mark V. 70
And a little after, Luke Chapter 22 V. 59
about the space of one hour after, another confidently affirmed, saying to
Peter, Of a truth this fellow also was with him; for he is a Galilean. Mark V.
70
Again Matthew. V. 73
they that stood by came unto him, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one
of them; Mark V. 70
for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agrees thereto, and Matthew. V. 73
bewrays thee. John Chapter 18 V. 26
One of the servants of the high priest (being his kinsman whose care Peter cut
off) says, Did not I see thee in the garden with him? John V. 27
Peter then denied again, Luke V. 60
and said, Man, I know not what thou say. Matthew. V. 74
Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, Mark V. 71
I know not this man of whom ye speak.

Luke V. 60
And immediately while he yet spoke, the cock crew Mark V. 72
the second time. Luke V. 61
And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter; and Peter remembered the word of
the Lord, Mark V. 72
the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shall
deny me thrice. Matthew. V. 75
And he went out, Mark V. 72
and wept, Matthew. V. 75
and wept bitterly.

CHAP. CLXXXVII. Christ is mocked, spit upon, smitten, and his condemnation
repeated.
Mark V. 65
ANd some began to spit on him, and Matthew. V. 67
then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him. Luke V. 63
And the men that held Jesus,mocked him, and smote him, Mark V. 65
and they began to cover his face, and to buffet him. Luke V. 64
And when they had blindfolded him, they stroke him on the face, and asked him,
saying, Prophecy, who is it that smote thee? Matthew. V. 67
And others smote him with the palms of their hands: Mark V. 65
and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands, Matthew. Chapter 26
V. 68
saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee? Luke Chapter 22
V. 65
And many other things blasphemously spoke they against him. Mark Chapter 15 V. 1
And straightway in the morning, Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 1
when the morning was come, Luke V. 66
and as soon as it was day, the elders of the people came together, and the
chief priests Mark Chapter 15 V. 1
held a consultation with the elders and Scribes, and the whole council Matthew.
Chapter 27 V. 1
against Jesus, to put him to death, Luke V. 67
and led him into their council, saying, Art thou the Christ? tell us. And he
said unto them, If I tell you, you will not believe. And if I also ask you, you
will not answer me, Luke V. 68
nor let me go. Luke V. 69
Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.
Luke V. 70
Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye
say that I am. Luke V. 71
And they said, What need we any further witness? for we our selves have heard
of his own mouth.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII. Christ is brought into the judgment hall. The desperation of
Judas.
Luke Chapter 23 V. 1
ANd the whole multitude of them arose, and Matthew. V. 2
when they had bound Mark Chapter 15 V. 1
Jesus, they led him away, John Chapter 18 V. 28
from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment, Matthew. V. 2
and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor: John Chapter 18 V. 28
and it was early. Matthew. V. 3
Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and
elders, Matthew. V. 4
Saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they
said, What is that to us? see thou to that. Matthew. V. 5
And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went
and hanged himself. Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 6
And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for
to put them into the treasury, Matthew. V. 7
because it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and bought with them
the potters field, Matthew. V. 8
to bury strangers in. Wherefore that field was called the field of blood unto
this day. Matthew. V. 9
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremie the prophet, saying, And
they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom
they of the children of Israel did value: Matthew. V. 10
And gave them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me.

CHAP. CLXXXIX. Christ is accused before Pontius Pilate of sedition and
affecting the kingdom. His excellent confession. Public testimony of
innocence given unto him by Pilate.
John Chapter 18 V. 28
ANd they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be
defiled: but that they might eat the passover. John V. 29
Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring you against
this man? John V. 30
They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not
have delivered him up unto thee. Then said Pilate unto them, John V. 31
Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto
him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death: John V. 32
That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what
death he should die. Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 11
And Jesus stood before the governor, Luke Chapter 23 V. 2
and they began to accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the
nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is
Christ a king. John V. 33
Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him, Art thou the king of the Jews? John Chapter 18 V. 34
Jesus answered him, Say thou this thing of thy self, or did others tell it
thee of me? Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? thine own nation, John V. 35
and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what have thou done? Jesus
answered, John V. 36
My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then
would my servants sight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is
my kingdom not from hence. John V. 37
Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Matthew.
Chapter 27 V. 11
and said unto him, John V. 37
Thou say that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came
I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: every one that is
of the truth, hears my voice. John V. 38
Pilate says unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out
again unto the Jews, and says Luke Chapter 23 V. 4
to the chief priests and to the people, John V. 38
I find no fault at all, Luke Chapter 23 V. 4
no fault in this man. Mark Chapter 15 V. 3
And the chief priests accused him of many things: Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 12
and when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
Mark V. 4
And Pilate asked him again, saying Matthew. V. 13
unto him, Mark V. 4
Answerest thou nothing? Matthew. V. 13
hear thou not? Mark V. 4
behold how many things they witness against thee. Mark V. 5
But Jesus yet Matthew. V. 14
answered him to never a word, insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.

CHAP. CXC. Christ is led unto Herod, and mocked.
Luke V. 5
ANd they were the more fierce, saying, He stirs up the people, teaching
throughout all Jurie, beginning from Galilee unto this place. When Pilate heard
of Galilee, Luke V. 6
he asked whether the man were a Galilean. Luke Chapter 23 V. 7
And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him
to Herod, who himself was also at Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw
Jesus, Luke V. 8
he was exceeding glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season,
because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped to have seen some miracle
done by him. Luke V. 9
Then he questioned with him in many words, but he answered him nothing. Luke
V. 10
And the chief priests and Scribes stood and vehemently accused him. Luke V. 11
And Herod with his men of war set him at naught, and mocked him, and arrayed
him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate. Luke V. 12
And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together; for before they
were at enmity between themselves.

CHAP. CXCI. Christ is compared with Barabbas, whipped, and condemned to be
crucified.
Luke V. 13
ANd Pilate when he had called together the chief priests, and the rulers, and
the people, Said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that
perverteth the people; and behold, Luke V. 14
I having examined him before you, have found no fault in this man touching
those things whereof ye accuse him: No, nor yet Herod: Luke V. 15
for I sent you to him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him. I
will therefore chastise him, Luke V. 16
and release him. Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 15
Now at the feast the governor was wont ( Luke V. 17
for of necessity he must) Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 15
to release to the people, and Mark Chapter 15 V. 6
he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 15
they would and Mark Chapter 15 V. 6
desired. Matthew. V. 16
And they had then a notable prisoner, Mark Chapter 15 V. 7
named Barabbas, which lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him,
who had committed murder in the insurrection. Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 17
Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, John Chapter 18
V. 39
But ye have a custom that I should release unto you one at the passover.
Mark Chapter 15 V. 8
And the multitude crying aloud, began to desire him to do as he had ever done
unto them. Mark V. 9
But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the king of
the Jews? Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 17
Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called
Christ? ( Mark V. 10
For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy) Matthew. V. 19
When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying,
Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things
this day in a dream because of him. Matthew. V. 20
But the chief priests and elders persuaded and Mark V. 11
moved Matthew. V. 20
the multitudes, Mark V. 11
that he should rather release Barabbas unto them, Matthew. V. 20
that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. Matthew. V. 21
The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye that I
release unto you? Luke Chapter 23 V. 18
And they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man, and release unto
us Barabbas. Luke V. 20
Pilate therefore willing to release Jesus, Mark V. 12
answered and said again unto them, Matthew. V. 22
What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ, Mark V. 12
whom ye call the king of the Jews? And they Matthew. V. 22
all said, and Mark V. 13
cried out again, Luke V. 21
saying Matthew. V. 22
unto him, Let him be crucified, Luke V. 21
Crucify, crucify him. Mark V. 14
Then Pilate Matthew. V. 23
the governor Luke V. 22
said to them the third time, Why, what evil has he done? I have found no
cause of death in him; I will therefore chastise him, and let him go. Matthew. V.
23
But they cried out Mark V. 14
the more exceedingly, Matthew. V. 23
Let him be crucified, Mark V. 14
Crucify him. John V. 40
Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas
was a robber, Luke V. 19
who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder was cast into
prison. Luke Chapter 23 V. 23
And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified:
and the voices of them, and of the chief priests prevailed. John Chapter 19 V. 1
Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 27
Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, Mark Chapter
15 V. 16
called Pretorium, Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 27
and gathered, Mark Chapter 15 V. 16
and call together Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 27
unto him the whole band of soldiers. Matthew. V. 28
And they stripped him, and put on him a purple robe. Mark V. 17
And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it
about his Matthew. V. 29
head, and a reed in his right hand; and they bowed the knee before him, and
mocked him, Mark V. 18
And began to salute him, Matthew. V. 29
saying, Mark V. 18
Hail king of the Jews: John V. 3
and they smote him with their hands. Matthew. V. 30
And they spit upon him, and took the reed, Mark V. 19
and smote him on the head with a reed, and bowing their knees, worshipped him.
John V. 4
Pilate therefore went forth again, and faith unto them, Behold, I bring him
forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus
forth, wearing the crown of thorns, John V. 5
and the purple robe: and Pilate says unto them, Behold the man. John V. 6
When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out, saying,
Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Take ye him, and crucify
him: for I find no fault in him. The Jews answered him, We have a law, John V.
7
and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God. John
V. 8
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid: And went
again into the judgment hall, John V. 9
and says unto Jesus, Whence art thou? but Jesus gave him no answer. Then
says Pilate unto him, John V. 10
Speak thou not unto me? know thou not that I have power to crucify
thee, and have power to release thee? Jesus answered, John V. 11
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin. John
Chapter 19 V. 12
And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out,
saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend: whosoever makes
himself a king, speaks against Caesar. John V. 13
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down
in the judgment seat in a place that is called the pavement, but in the
Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was the preparation of the passover, John V. 14
and about the sixth hour: and he says unto the Jews, Behold your king. But
they cried out, John V. 15
Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Shall I
crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar.
Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 24
When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was
made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am
innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it. Matthew. V. 25
Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our
children. Matthew. V. 26
Then Mark Chapter 15 V. 15
Pilate willing to content the people, Luke Chapter 23 V. 24
gave sentence that it should be as they required. And he released unto them
Mark Chapter 15 V. 15
Barabbas, Luke V. 25
him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had desired:
Matthew. V. 26
and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him Luke V. 25
to their will, Matthew. V. 26
to be crucified.

CHAP. CXCII. Christ is brought out of the city Jerusalem to the place of his
suffering.
John V. 16
ANd they took Jesus, Matthew. V. 31
and after that they had mocked him, they took Mark V. 20
the purple robe off from him, Matthew. V. 31
and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify Mark V. 20
him: John Chapter 19 V. 17
And he bearing his cross, went forth. Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 32
And as they came out, Luke Chapter 23 V. 26
and as they led him away, Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 32
they found a man, Mark Chapter 15 V. 21
one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of
Alexander and Rufus: Luke Chapter 23 V. 26
and they laid hold upon Simon the Cyrenian, Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 32
him they compelled, Luke Chapter 23 V. 26
and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear it after Jesus. Luke V. 27
And there followed him a great company of people, and of women, which also
bewailed and lamented him. Luke V. 28
But Jesus turning unto them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for your selves, and for your children. For behold, the days are
coming, Luke V. 29
in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombes that never
bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Luke V. 30
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills,
Cover us. Luke V. 31
For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?
Luke V. 32
And there were also two other malefactors led with him to be put to death.

CHAP. CXCIII. Christ is crucified. Wine mingled with myrrh is given him to
drink
Mark V. 22
ANd they bring him: Matthew. V. 33
and when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, Mark V. 22
which is, being interpreted, the place of a scull, Mark V. 23
They gave him to drink, wine mingled with myrrh, Matthew. V. 34
vinegar mingled with gall: Mark V. 23
but he received it not, for Matthew. V. 34
when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink. Luke V. 33
And when they were come to the place which is called Calvarie, there they
crucified him, John V. 18
and two other Luke V. 33
malefactors John V. 18
with him; Luke V. 33
one on the right hand, and the other on the left, John V. 18
and Jesus in the midst. Mark Chapter 15 V. 26
And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. And Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 38
then Mark V. 27
with him they crucified two thieves; the one on his right hand, Mark V. 28
and the other on his left. And the scripture was fulfilled, which says, And
he was numbered with the transgressors.

CHAP. CXCIIII. Christ's prayers. The title written on the cross. The division
of his garments.
Luke Chapter 23 V. 34
THen said Jesus, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. John
Chapter 19 V. 19
And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross: Matthew. V. 37
And they set up over his head, his accusation written: Mark V. 26
and the superscription of his accusation was written Luke V. 38
over him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE
JEWS. John V. 21
Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The king of the
Jews, but that he said, I am king of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have
written, John V. 22
I have written. Then the soldiers, John V. 23
when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments (and made four parts, to
every soldier a part) and also his coat: Luke V. 34
and they parted his raiment, and cast lots Mark V. 24
upon them, what every man should take: John V. 23
now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. They said
therefore among themselves, John V. 24
Let us not rent it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the
scripture might be fulfilled Matthew. V. 35
which was spoken by the prophet, John V. 24
which says, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did
cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did. Matthew. V. 36
And sitting down, they watched him there. Luke V. 35
And the people stood beholding.

CHAP. CXCV. An enumeration of the blasphemies against Christ crucified. The
conversion of one of the thieves crucified with him.
Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 39
ANd they that passed by, reviled him, wagging their heads, Matthew. V. 40
And saying, Mark Chapter 15 V. 29
Ah thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, Matthew. V.
40
save thy self; if thou be the Son of God, Matthew. V. 41
come down from the cross. Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, Mark
V. 31
among themselves, Matthew. V. 41
with the Scribes and olders, said, Mark V. 31
He saved others, himself he cannot save: Matthew. V. 42
If he be Mark V. 32
the Christ Matthew. V. 42
the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, Mark V. 32
that we may see, and Matths. (...). Mark (...).
believe Matthew. V. 43
him, Luke Chapter 23 V. 35
let him save himself. Matthew. V. 43
He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him; for he said, I
am the Son of God. Luke V. 36
And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him vinegar,
And saying, Luke V. 37
If thou be the king of the Jews, save thy self. Matthew. V. 44
The thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.
Luke V. 39
And one of the malefactors, which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If thou
be Christ, save thy self and us. Luke V. 40
But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; Luke V. 41
for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man has done nothing
amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Luke V. 42
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him.
Luke V. 43
Verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in paradise.

CHAP. CXCVI. Christ commends the care of his mother to John. The sun is
darkened. Christ complains that he is forsaken of God.
John Chapter 19 V. 25
NOw there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers sister,
Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. John V. 26
When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he
loved, he says unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son. John V. 27
Then says he to the disciple, Behold thy mother. And from that hour, that
disciple took her unto his own home. Luke Chapter 23 V. 44
And it was about the sixth hour. Mark Chapter 15 V. 33
And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land
until the ninth hour. Luke V. 45
And the sun was darkened. Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 46
And about the ninth hour, Mark V. 34
and at the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, ELOI, ELOI,
LAMA SABACHTHANI, which is, being interpreted, MY GOD, MY GOD, WHY HAVE THOU
FORSAKEN ME? And some of them that stood by, Mark V. 35
when they heard it, said, Behold, Matthew. V. 47
this man calls for Elias.

CHAP. CXCVII. They give vinegar to Christ being athirst. He says, All things
are finished; and gives up his spirit, which he first commended to his Father.
John V. 28
AFter this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the
scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst. John V. 29
Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a sponge with
vinegar, and put it upon hyssope, and put it to his mouth. For Matthew. Chapter 27 V.
48
straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar,
and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, Mark Chapter 15 V. 36
saying, Let alone, let us see whether Elias will come to take him down. Matthew.
V. 49
The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him. John
Chapter 19 V. 30
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: Matthew.
V. 50
Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, Luke Chapter 23 V. 46
he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and having said thus,
Mark V. 37
and cried with a loud voice, John Chapter 19 V. 30
and bowed his head, Matthew. (...). Luke (...). John (...).
gave up the ghost.

CHAP. CXCVIII. The miracles that followed Christ's death.
Matthew. V. 51
ANd behold, the vail of the temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom, and the earth did quake, Matthew. V. 52
and the rocks rent, And the graves were opened, and many bodies of saints
which slept, Matthew. V. 53
arose, And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the
holy city, and appeared unto many. Luke V. 47
Now when the centurion, Mark V. 39
which stood over against him, Luke V. 47
saw what was done, Mark V. 39
that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, Luke V. 47
he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man, Mark V. 39
Truly this man was the Son of God. Matthew. V. 54
And when they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and
those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the
Son of God. Luke V. 48
And all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things
which were done, smote their breasts, and returned. Luke V. 49
And all his acquaintance stood afar off. Matthew. V. 55
And many women were there, beholding afar off; Mark V. 40
among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less, and of
Joses, and Salome, Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 56
the mother of Zebedees children: Mark Chapter 15 V. 41
Who also when he was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered unto him; and
many other women which came up with him Luke V. 49
from Galilee Mark Chapter 15 V. 41
unto Jerusalem, Luke V. 49
beholding these things. John Chapter 19 V. 31
The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not
remain upon the cross on the sabbath day (for that sabbath day was an high
day) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be
taken away. Then came the soldiers, John V. 32
and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified with
him. John V. 33
But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not
his legs. John V. 34
But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came
there out blood and water. And he that saw it, John V. 35
bare record, and his record is true: and he knows that he says true, that
ye might believe. John V. 36
For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of
him shall not be broken. And again another scripture says, John V. 37
They shall look on him whom they pierced.

CHAP. CXCIX. Christ's burial.
John V. 38
ANd after this, Mark V. 42
when now the even was come, (because it was the preparation, that is, the day
before the sabbath) Matthew. V. 57
there came a rich man, Luke Chapter 23 V. 51
of Arimathea a city of the Jews, Matthew. V. 57
named Joseph, Mark V. 43
an honorable counselor: Luke V. 50
and he was a good man, and a just. Luke V. 51
The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them, Matthew. V. 57
who also himself was Jesus disciple, John V. 38
but secretly, for fear of the Jews, Luke V. 51
who also himself waited for the kingdom of God. Luke V. 52
This man Mark V. 43
went in boldly unto Pilate, and Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 58
coming to Pilate, begged the body of Jesus: for John V. 38
he besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus. Mark Chapter 15 V.
44
And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead, and calling unto him the
Centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead. Mark V. 45
And when he knew it of the Centurion, John V. 38
Pilate gave him leave, and Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 58
commanded the body to be delivered, and Mark V. 45
he gave the body to Joseph: John V. 38
he came therefore and took the body of Jesus. Mark V. 46
And he bought fine linen, and took him down; Matthew. V. 59
and when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth.
John Chapter 19 V. 39
And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and
brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight. John V. 40
Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes, with the
spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. John V. 41
Now in the place where he was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden
a new sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid. Matthew. V. 60
And he laid it in his own new tomb, Luke Chapter 23 V. 53
that was hewn in stone, Matthew. V. 60
which he had hewn out of the rock, Luke Chapter 23 V. 53
wherein never man before was laid, Matthew. V. 60
and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher, and departed. Luke
V. 54
And that day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on. John V. 42
There laid they Jesus therefore, because of the Jews preparation day, for the
sepulcher was nigh at hand. Matthew. V. 61
And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary. Mark V. 47
the mother of Joses. Luke V. 55
And the women also which came with him from Galilee, followed after, Matthew. V.
61
sitting over against the sepulcher, Mark V. 47
beheld where he was laid, Luke V. 55
and beheld the sepulcher, and how his body was laid. And they returned, and
prepared spices, Luke V. 56
and rested the sabbath day, according to the commandment. Matthew. V. 62
Now the next day that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests
and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, Matthew. Chapter 27 V. 63
Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
Matthew. V. 64
After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulcher be
made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him
away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error
shall be worse then the first. Matthew. V. 65
Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch, go your way, make it as sure as you
can. Matthew. V. 66
So they went and made the sepulcher sure, scaling the stone, and setting a
watch.

CHAP. CC. The history of the resurrection and ascension of our Savior.
The women which followed Christ from Galilee, come to the sepulcher.
Mark Chapter 16 V. 1
ANd when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James,
and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him.
Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 1
In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the
week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulcher. Mark V. 2
And Mark (...)
very early in the morning, the first day of the week, John Chapter 20 V. 1
when it was yet dark, Luke Chapter 24 V. 1
Luke (...)
exceeding timely, Mark V. 2
they come unto the sepulcher at the rising of the sun, Luke Chapter 24 V. 1
bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain others with them.
Matthew. V. 2
And behold, there was a great earthquake, for the angel of the Lord descended
from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon
it. Matthew. V. 3
His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow. Matthew. Chapter
28 V. 4
And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.

CHAP. CCI. Christ's resurrection is first manifested to the women by the empty
sepulcher and testimony of angels.
Mark Chapter 16 V. 3
ANd they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the
door of the sepulcher? for it was very great. And when they looked, Mark V. 4
they saw that the stone was rolled away. Luke Chapter 24 V. 2
And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulcher. Luke V. 3
And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. John Chapter 20 V. 1
And Mary Magdalene sees the stone taken away from the sepulcher. Then she
runs. John V. 2
Luke V. 4
And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men
stood by them in shining garments. And as they were afraid, and bowed down
their faces to the earth, Luke V. 5
they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here,
Luke V. 6
but is risen: remember how he spoke unto you when he was yet in Galilee,
Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, Luke
V. 7
and be crucified, and the third day rise again. Luke V. 8
And they remembered his words, Luke V. 9
And returned from the sepulcher, and told all these things unto the eleven,
and to all the rest. It was Mary Magdalene, Luke V. 10
and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and other women that were with them,
which told these things unto the apostles. Luke V. 11
And their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.

CHAP. CCII. Peter and John run to the sepulcher.
Luke Chapter 24 V. 12
THen arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulcher, and stouping down, he beheld the
linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at that
which was come to pass. John Chapter 20 V. 2
And Mary Magdalene had come
comes to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and had said
says unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we
know not where they have laid him. John V. 3
Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the
sepulcher. So they ran both together, John V. 4
and the other disciple did outrunne Peter, and came first to the sepulcher.
John V. 5
And he stouping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying, John V. 6
yet went he not in. Then comes Simon Peter following him, and went into the
sepulcher, and sees the linen clothes lie, John V. 7
And the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but
wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also that other disciple
which came first to the sepulcher, and he saw, and believed. John V. 8
For as yet they knew not the scripture, John V. 9
that he must rise again from the dead. John V. 10
Then the disciples went away again unto their own home.

CHAP. CCIII. Christ's first apparition after he was dead, to Mary Magdalene.
John V. 11
BUt Mary stood without at the sepulcher, weeping: and as she wept, she stouped
down, and looked into the sepulcher, John V. 12
And sees two angels in white, sitting, the one at the head, and the other at
the feet, where the body of Jesus had layen: And they say unto her, John Chapter
20 V. 13
Woman, why weepest thou? She says unto them, Because they have taken away my
Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. John V. 14
And when she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing,
and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus says unto her, Woman, John V. 15
why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She supposing him to be the gardener,
says unto him, Sir, If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid
him, and I will take him away. Jesus says unto her, John V. 16
Marie: She turned her self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say,
Master. Jesus says unto her, John V. 17
Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren,
and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and
your God. Mark Chapter 16 V. 9
Now when Jesus was risen early, the first day of the week, he appeared first
to Marie Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils. Mark V. 10
And she, John V. 18
Marie Magdalene, came and told Mark V. 10
them, John V. 18
disciples, Mark V. 10
that had been with him, as they mourned and wept, John V. 18
that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her. Mark
V. 11
And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her,
beleeyed not.

CHAP. CCIIII. The speech of the angel to the women returning to the sepulcher.
Mark V. 5
ANd the women entering into the sepulcher, they saw a young man sitting on the
right side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were affrighted. Matthew.
Chapter 28 V. 5
And the angel answered and said Mark V. 6
unto them, Be not affrighted: Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 5
fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 5
of Nazareth, which was crucified. Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 6
He is not here: for he is risen, as he said: come, see the place where the
Lord lay, Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 5
behold the place where they laid him. But go your way, Matthew. V. 7
and go quickly, Mark Chapter 16 V. 7
tell his disciples and Peter, Matthew. V. 7
that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goes before you into Galilee,
there shall ye see him, Mark Chapter 16 V. 7
as he said unto you: Matthew. V. 7
lo, Matthew. V. 8
I have told you. And they departed quickly, Mark V. 8
and fled from the sepulcher, Matthew. V. 8
with fear and great joy, and did run to bring his disciples word: Mark Chapter 16
V. 8
for they trembled and were amazed, neither said they any thing to any man, for
they were afraid. Matthew. V. 9
And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All
hail. And they came, and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. Matthew. V. 10
Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren that they go
into Galilee, and there shall they see me.

CHAP. CCV. The testimony of the watch concerning Christ's resurrection.
Matthew. V. 11
NOw when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and
showed unto the chief priests all the things that were done. Matthew. V. 12
And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave
large money unto the soldiers, Matthew. V. 13
Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we
slept. Matthew. V. 14
And if this come to the governors ears, we will persuade him, and secure
you. Matthew. V. 15
So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is
commonly reported among the Jews until this day.

CHAP. CCVI. Christ's apparition to the two disciples going to Emmaus.
Mark Chapter 16 V. 12
AFter that, he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and
went into the country. Luke Chapter 24 V. 13
And behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus, which
was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs. Luke V. 14
And they talked together of all these things which had happened. Luke V. 15
And it came to pass, that while they communed together, and reasoned, Jesus
himself drew near, and went with them. But their eyes were holden, Luke V. 16
that they should not know him. And he said unto them, Luke V. 17
What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another as ye
walk, and are sad? And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas, Luke V. 18
answering, said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not
known the things which are come to pass there in these days? And he said unto
them, What things? Luke V. 19
And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet
mighty in deed and word before God, and all the people: Luke V. 20
And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to
death, and have crucified him. But we trusted that it had been he, Luke V. 21
which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all this, to day is the third
day since these things were done. Yea, Luke V. 22
and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which were early at
the sepulcher: And when they found not his body, they came, Luke V. 23
saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said that he was
alive. Luke V. 24
And certain of them which were with us, went to the sepulcher, and found it
even so as the women had said, but him they saw not. Then he said unto them,
Luke Chapter 24 V. 25
O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken: Luke
V. 26
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
And beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, Luke V. 27
he expounded unto them in all the scriptures, the things concerning himself.
Luke V. 28
And they drew nigh unto the village whither they went, and he made as though
he would have gone further. Luke V. 29
But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us, for it is toward evening,
and the day is far spent: and he went in to tarry with them. Luke V. 30
And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and blessed
it, and brake, and gave to them. Luke V. 31
And their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their
sight. And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, Luke V.
32
while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?
Luke V. 33
And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, Mark Chapter 16 V. 13
and went, Luke V. 33
and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, Saying,
Luke V. 34
The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon. Mark Chapter 16 V. 13
And they told unto the residue, Luke V. 35
what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of
bread: Mark Chapter 16 V. 13
neither believed they them.

CHAP. CCVII. Christ appears to his disciples the evening after his
resurrection, Thomas being absent.
Mark V. 14
AFterward he appeared unto the eleven, as they sat at meat: for Luke V. 36
as they thus spoke, John Chapter 20 V. 19
then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors
were shut, where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, Jesus Luke
Chapter 24 V. 37
himself John Chapter 20 V. 19
came and stood Luke (...). John (...)
in the midst Luke Chapter 24 V. 37
of them. But they were terrified, and affrighted, and supposed that they had
seen a spirit. Luke V. 38
And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your
hearts? Luke V. 39
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self: handle me, and see, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus
spoken, Luke V. 40
he showed them his hands and his feet, John Chapter 20 V. 20
and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord. Luke V. 41
And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have
ye here any meat? Luke V. 42
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an hony-combe. And he took
it, Luke V. 43
and did eat before them. Mark Chapter 16 V. 14
And he upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. Luke V. 44
And he said unto them, These are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was
yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the law
of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms concerning me. Then opened he
their understanding, Luke V. 45
that they might understand the scriptures, Luke V. 46
And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer,
and to rise from the dead the third day: And that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name, among all nations, Luke V. 47
beginning at Jerusalem. Luke V. 48
And ye are witnesses of these things. John V. 21
Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father has sent me,
even so send I you. John V. 22
And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive
ye the holy Ghost. John V. 23
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained.

CHAP. CCVIII. Christ appears to his disciples the eighth day after his
resurrection, when Thomas was present.
John Chapter 20 V. 24
BUt Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus
came. The other disciples therefore said unto him, John V. 25
We have seen the Lord: but he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands
the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and
thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. John V. 26
And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them:
then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace
be unto you. Then says he to Thomas, John V. 27
Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and
thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. John V. 28
And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God. Jesus says unto
him, Thomas, John V. 29
because thou have seen me, thou have believed: blessed are they that have not
seen, and yet have believed. John V. 30
John Chapter 21 V. 25
And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which
are not written in this book. But these are written, John V. 31
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
believing ye might have life through his name.

CHAP. CCIX. Christ shows himself to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias.
John Chapter 21 V. 1
AFter these things Jesus showed himself again to the disciples at the sea of
Tiberias: and on this wise showed he himself: John V. 2
There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of
Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.
Simon Peter faith unto them, I go a fishing. John Chapter 21 V. 3
They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and entered into a
ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing. John V. 4
But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: but the disciples
knew not that it was Jesus. Then Jesus says unto them, Children, John V. 5
have ye any meat? They answered him, No. John V. 6
And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye
shall find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes. John V. 7
Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved, says unto Peter, It is the Lord.
Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fishers coat unto
him (for he was naked) and did cast himself into the sea. John V. 8
And the other disciples came in a little ship (for they were not far from
land, but as it were two hundred cubits) dragging the net with fishes. John V. 9
As Soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and
fish laid thereon, and bread. John V. 10
Jesus says unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught. Simon Peter
went up, John V. 11
and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and
three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken. Jesus says
unto them, John V. 12
Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing
that it was the Lord. Jesus then comes and takes bread, John V. 13
and gives them, and fish likewise. John V. 14
This is now the third time that Jesus showed himself to his disciples, after
that he was risen from the dead.

CHAP. CCX. Christ's discourse with Peter in this apparition.
John Chapter 21 V. 15
SO when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon son of Jonas,
love thou me more then these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that
I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my lambs. John V. 16
He says to him again the second time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me?
He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee. He says unto him,
Feed my sheep. He said unto him the third time, John V. 17
Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? Peter was grieved, because he said unto
him the third time, Love thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou know
all things, thou know that I love thee. Jesus says unto him, Feed my sheep.
John V. 18
Verily verily I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self,
and walkedst whither thou would: but when thou shall be old, thou shall
stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither
thou would not. This spoke he, John V. 19
signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this,
he says unto him, Follow me. Then Peter turning about, John V. 20
sees the disciple John Chapter 12 V. 23 Chapter 10 V. 2
whom Jesus loved, following, which also leaned on his breast at supper, and
said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? John Chapter 21 V. 21
Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus
says unto him, John V. 22
If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.
Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, John V. 23
that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not
die: but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? John V. 24
This is the disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these things,
and we know that his testimony is true.

CHAP. CCXI. Christ appears to his disciples in a mountain of Galilee.
Matthew. Chapter 28 V. 16
THen the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus
had appointed them. Matthew. V. 17
And when they saw him, they worshipped him: Matthew. V. 18
but some doubted. And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All power is
given unto me in heaven and in earth. Matthew. V. 19
Go ye therefore Mark Chapter 16 V. 15
into all the world, Matthew. V. 19
and teach all nations, Mark Chapter 16 V. 15
and preach the Gospel to every creature, Matthew. V. 19
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: Matthew. V. 20
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. Mark V. 16
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
Mark V. 17
shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name
shall they cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, They shall take
up serpents, Mark V. 18
and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, they shall lay
hands on the sick, and they shall recover: Matthew. V. 20
and lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the world.

CHAP. CCXII. Christ ascends into heaven.
Mark V. 19
SO then the Lord Act. Ap. Chapter 1 Ap. V. 2
was taken up, after that he through the holy Ghost had given commandments unto
the apostles whom he had chosen. Act. Ap. V. 3
To whom also he showed himself alive after his passion, by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining
to the kingdom of God: Acts Chapter 1 Ap. V. 4
And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father. Luke Chapter 24 V. 49
And he said, Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you, Acts Chapter 1 Ap.
V. 4
which ye have heard of me: Luke Chapter 24 V. 49
but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from
on high. Act. Ap. V. 5
For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy
Ghost, Act. Ap. V. 6
not many days hence. When they therefore were come together, they asked of
him, saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?
Act. Ap. V. 7
And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons,
which the Father has put in his own power. But ye shall receive power after
that the holy Ghost is come upon you, Act. Ap. V. 8
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. Luke V. 50
And he led them out as far as to Bethanie, and he lift up his hands, and
blessed them. And it came to pass, Mark Chapter 16 V. 19
after the Lord had spoken unto them, Luke V. 51
while he blessed them, he was parted from them; Act. Ap. V. 9
and while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their
sight, Luke V. 51
and he was carried up, and Mark Chapter 16 V. 19
was received up into heaven. Act. Ap. V. 10
And while Luke V. 52
they worshipped him, and Act. Ap. V. 10
looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood by them
in white apparel, Which also said, Act. Ap. V. 11
Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus which
is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen
him go into heaven. Act. Ap. V. 12
Then returned they unto Jerusalem, Luke V. 52
with great joy, Act. Ap. V. 12
from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath-dayes journey.
And when they were come in, Acts Chapter 1 V. 13
they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John,
and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the son of
Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James. Acts V. 14
These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the
women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren; Luke Chapter 24 V. 53
And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Mark Chapter 16 V.
20
And they afterward went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with
them, and confirming the word with signs following. John Chapter 21 V. 25
John Chapter 20 V. 30
And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should
be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not contain
the books that should be written. Amen.

FINIS.
The Table.
Chapter Verses C.H. S. MATTHEW 1 1-17 3 18-25 7 2 1-12 10 13-15 12 16-18 13 19-23
14 3 1-12 16 13-17 17 4 1-12 19 13-17 35 18-22 36 23-25 41 5 1- 50 1-48 51 6
1-34 51 7 1-29 51 8 1-4 52 5-13 53 14-15 38 16-17 39 18-22 63 23-27 64 28-34 65
9 1- 66 2-8 43 9- 44 10-18 66 18-26 67 27-31 68 32-34 69 35-38 71 10 1-42 72 11
1- 73 2-6 55 7-30 56 12 1-8 47 9-13 48 14-21 49 22-45 59 46-50 60 13 1-35 61
36-52 62 53- 63 54-58 70 14 1-2 75 3-5 31 6-12 74 13-23 76 24-36 77 15 1-20 79
21-28 80 29-31 81 32-39 82 16 1-12 83 13-20 85 21-28 86 17 1-8 87 9-13 88 14-21
89 22-23 90 24-27 91 18 1-20 92 21-35 93 19 1-12 129 13-15 130 16-26 131 27-30
132 20 1-16 132 17-19 134 20-28 135 29-34 139 21 1-9 144 10-16 146 17- 147
18-19 148 20-22 149 23-27 150 28-32 151 33-46 152 22 1-14 153 15-22 154 23-33
155 34-40 156 41-46 157 23 1-39 158 24 1-18 160 29-36 161 37-51 162 25 1-13 163
14-30 164 31-46 165 26 1-2 166 3-5 167 6-13 143 14-16 168 17-20 169 21-25 172
26-29 171 30-35 181 36-46 182 47-50 183 51-56 184 57-58 185 59-66 186 67-68 187
69-70 185 71-75 186 27 1- 187 2-10 188 11-14 189 15-30 191 31-32 192 33-34 193
35-37 194 38- 193 39-44 195 45-47 196 48-50 197 51-56 198 57-66 199 28 1-4 200
5-10 204 11-15 205 16-20 211 S. MARK 1 1-8 16 9-11 17 12-13 19 14 34 14-15 35
16-20 36 21-28 37 29-31 38 32-34 39 35-38 40 39- 41 40-45 42 2 1-12 43 13-14 44
15-22 66 23-28 47 3 1-5 48 6-12 49 13-19 50 20-30 59 31-35 60 4 1-34 61 35- 63
36-41 64 5 1-20 65 21-22 66 22-43 67 6 1-6 70 6- 71 7-11 72 12-13 73 14-16 75
17-20 31 21-29 74 30-46 76 47-56 77 7 1-23 24-39 80 31-37 81 8 1-10 82 11-21 83
22-26 84 27-30 85 31-39 86 9 1- 86 2-8 87 9-13 88 14-29 89 30-33 90 33-50 92 10
1-12 129 13-16 130 17-27 131 28-31 132 32-34 134 35-45 135 42-52 139 11 1-10
144 11- 146.7 12-19 148 20-26 149 27-33 150 12 1- 151 1-12 152 12-17 154 18-27
155 28-34 156 35-37 157 38-49 158 41-44 159 13 1-23 160 24-32 161 33-37 162 14
1- 166 1-2 167 3-9 143 10-11 168 12-17 169 18-21 172 22-25 171 26-31 181 32-42
182 43-46 183 47-52 184 53-54 185 55-64 186 65- 187 66-68 185 69-72 186 15 1-
187.8 2-5 189 6-19 191 20-21 192 22-23 193 24- 194 25- 193 26- 194 27-28 193
29-32 195 33-35 196 36-37 197 38-41 198 42-47 199 16 1-2 200 3-4 201 5-8 204
9-11 203 12-13 206 14- 207 15-18 211 19-20 212 S. LUKE 1 1-4 1 5-25 2 26-38 4
39-56 5 57-80 6 2 1-20 8 21- 9 22-39 11 39-52 15 3 1-18 16 19-20 31 21-22 17
23-38 3, 18 4 1-13 19 14-30 34 31-37 37 38-39 38 40-41 39 42-43 40 44- 41 5
1-11 36 12-16 42 17-26 43 27-28 44 29-39 66 6 1-5 47 6-10 48 11- 49 12-19 50
20-49 51 7 1-10 53 11-17 54 18-23 55 24-35 56 36-50 57 8 1-3 58 4-18 61 19-21
60 22-25 64 26-39 65 40- 66 41-56 67 9 1-5 72 6- 73 7-9 75 10-17 76 18-21 85
22-27 86 28-36 87 36- 88 37-43 89 43-45 90 46-50 92 51-56 95 57-62 96 10 1-16
97 17-24 104 25-37 105 38-42 106 11 1-13 107 14-36 108 37-54 109 12 1-59 110 13
1-9 111 10-21 112 22- 113 23-30 117 31-35 118 14 1-24 119 25-35 120 15 1-32 121
16 1-18 122 19-31 123 17 1-10 124 11-19 125 20-37 126 18 1-8 127 9-14 128 15-17
130 18-27 131 28-30 132 31-34 134 35-43 136 19 1-10 137 11-28 138 29-40 144
41-44 145 45-48 146 20 1-8 150 9-19 152 20-26 154 27-40 155 41-44 157 45-47 158
21 1-4 159 5-24 160 25-33 161 34-36 162 37-38 165 22 1- 166 2- 167 3-6 168 7-18
169 19-20 171 21-23 172 24-30 173 31-34 174 35-38 175 39- 181 40-46 182 47-48
183 49-53 184 54-57 185 58-62 186 63-71 187 23 1- 188 2-4 189 5-12 190 13-25
191 26-32 192 33- 193 34-35 194 35-37 195 38- 194 39-43 195 44-45 196 46- 197
47-49 198 50-56 199 24 1- 200 2-11 201 12- 202 13-35 206 36-48 207 49-53 212 S.
JOHN. 1 1-14 1 15-18 20 19-28 21 29-34 22 35-40 23 41-43 24 44-52 25 2 1-11 26
12-25 27 3 1-21 28 22-24 29 25-36 30 4 1-42 32 43-54 33 5 1-15 45 16-47 46 6
1-15 76 16-21 77 22-71 78 7 1- 79 2-9 94 10- 95 11-36 98 37-53 99 8 1-11 100
12-20 101 21-30 102 31-59 103 9 1-38 113 39-41 114 10 1-21 114 22-39 115 40-42
116 11 1-16 133 17-46 140 47-53 141 54-57 142 12 1-11 143 12-18 144 19- 146
20-43 147 44-50 148 13 1-20 170 21-32 172 33-38 174 14 1-31 176 15 1-17 177
18-27 178 16 1-4 178 5-33 179 17 1-26 180 18 1- 181 1-2 182 3-9 183 10-11 184
12-18 185 19-27 186 28- 188 28-38 189 29-40 191 19 1-15 191 16-17 192 17-18 193
19-24 194 25-27 196 28-30 197 31-37 198 38-42 199 20 1- 200 1-2 201 2-10 202
11-18 203 19-23 207 24-31 208 21 1-14 209 15-24 210 25- 212

FINIS.

