NEW SHREDS OF THE OLD SNARE.

CONTAINING The Apparitions of two new female Ghosts. The Copies of diverse
Letters of late intercourse concerning Romish affairs. Special Indulgences
purchased at Rome, granted to diverse English gentle-beleeuing Catholics for
their ready money. A Catalogue of English Nuns of the late transportations
within these two or three years.


By JOHN GEE, Master of Arts, late of Exon-Colledge in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Mylbourne. 1624.

NEW SHREDDS OF THE OLD SNARE broken by the foot of J. G.
The Induction.
SOme have been said in the old time upon receiving of a wound to have been
healed by the rust of the weapon that gave the wound; and verily for my part,
after the spraine and dislocation which I have suffered by intanglement in
Popish Snares, nothing has bin more availeable to me for my perfect cure than
the view and search of those rotten ragged shredds of those cords of vanity
and illusion, which a while dia hold me captive in the time of my weakness
The best means therefore for the confirming of my self and arming others, is
and will be the further inquiring into the particular courses of the great
seducing Masters, especially the Jesuits; the viewing and handling whereof
upon bare Narration without inference or application, is sufficient to show the
weakeness of those twine-thred bonds and Cob-web netts which they cast over the
silly fry of their floating Disciples.

Since the inditing and publishing of my former Book, called, The Foot out of
the Snare, I have attained better information and knowledge of diverse
particulars, which I thought fit to commend to public view, for the better
unmasking of our Loiolan Mirabilaries, who as yet impudently persist to play
their pranckes amongst us. These are eiusdem fills of the same thread with the
former woofe of the old Snare.
Some snips of which their legerdemaine tricks, shufflingly twisted and deeply
died in grain, here I display in a new Web for the e^king out the Curtains
of the tyring house of their former stage in array and manner as follows.

All that can sing or say,
Come and hear a Jesuits play.

IN the Conclusion or appendant to my former Book, I made bold to acquaint my
Reader with Mary Wiltshire, sometime ensnared and cooped by a pack of Jesuits
or Priests, with the engine of personated Apparitions; as also I gave a touch
in general of Mris Bouchers daughter, which here according to my notice
follows in particular.

About some three years since Mary Boucher alias Butcher, daughter of Anne
Boucher of the City of London widow (and Gentlewoman of good sort) was
entertained in the service of the Lady A. a Papist. But before she went to
serve the said Lady, Mris Boucher her mother told the Lady A. that by no means
she would permit her daughter to live with her, if she thought she would be
diverted from her Religion, she being then a good Protestant. The Lady
promised that neither her self nor any other should have to do with her in
that particular. Yet there repairing often to this Ladies house Mr Fisher, Mr
Wainman, and Mr Ireland, Jesuits, they were still busy and laboring with
this Mary Boucher to become a Romish Catholic, telling her that she must be
damned if she did not embrace their Religion, and as for the Protestant
Religion they told her that it was the devils doctrine, brought in by Martin
Luther, who had conference with the devil and learnd of him every point of
that belief which the Protestants now retain. For proof hereof they showed
her a Printed Book wherein Luthers conference with the devil was at large
expressed. Upon reading whereof the young woman did seem to stagger, and was
much perplexed. And after a while these Jesuits came to her Mistress house
again and then began to tamper and deal with her as before, and Mr Fisher
told her that he knew better then her self what would become of her. We are
Gods Prophets (quoth he) we can do Miracles, and we are inspired with divine
Illuminations. It is revealed unto me that you must go beyond the Seas, and
become a Nun, which is to live an Angelical life, yea it is the most
excellent of all other kinds of living; A loud lewd Hyperbole.
For it obtains the same grace which is had in Baptism, and the entering into
that order does take away all sin, both the fault and punishment, and
restores to the first state of Innocence as Baptism does. For proof whereof
he alleged unto her diverse sentences pretended to be taken out of the
Fathers. This young woman much amazed at him, told him, that her Mother would
never yield she should become a Papist, much less to be a Nun and to leave
her Country. Mr Fisher and Mr Wainman both replied, You must not respect your
mother in these matters. She is an Heretic, and you shall be Gods child,
and we would advise you never to see her any more. These things troubling and
distempering the young woman's mind, she found her self scarce well, and then
went and laid her down upon her bed, where after she had rested her self a
while, there comes into the chamber one Mris Vause, a great Recusant, and asked
her how she did, and then came to her and did with somewhat stroke or rub her
forehead. After which time Mary Boucher felt her self very ill at ease and
distempered in her head. And about an half-houre after Mris Vause was departed
from her, she heard her chamber door open, and with that a great light flashed
into the room two or three times, which she thought some body did by way of
jest or merriment, to make her afraid. Whereupon she called on them not to
affright her, for that she was not well. But forthwith came into the room an
apparitio^ or shape as of a woman all in white, with countenance pale and
wanne, with long tresses of hair hanging down to her middle who still made
toward her; whereat this sick woman was much afraid. But this visible
approaching nearer to her, bad her not to fear; for that she came to her for
her eternal good and happiness. And with that the appearing woman began by
degrees to remove with her hand the hair from her face, and asked this Mary
whither she knew who she was; with that this distressed Mary looked earnestly
on her, and then cried out, Oh my God-mother, and would have gotten off from
her bed to have asked her blessing. But the other bad her lie still and not
stir. And then touching her with a hand cold as earth or iron, asked her
where is your mother, where is my husband, where are my children? And then told
her she was come from Purgatory, where she had long endured torture and
torment. And she came to tell her how she her God-daughter should escape the
same. And then began to question with her, what Religion she was of: Mary
Boucher told her, I am a Protestant. Oh then quoth this Preaching goodly ghost,
thou have no hope at all ever to see heaven. Then it asked her again, how many
Sacraments there were. She answered, two. A Cathechizing Ghost.
Nay quoth the Ghost, thou art deceived there are seven. Then it asked her the
third time, whether she did believe the point of Transubstantiation. She
answered, No. God-daughter quoth the Ghost, thou must believe that especially;
For, for not believing that point, there is daily many hundreds that are
damned. And in this manner did this familiar informing, conferring Ghost
continue for the space of an hour or two questioning with Mary Boucher, who
lay in great heat and agony, sweating and quaking upon her bed, no body all
this while coming near and disturbing them, which she says makes her since
the rather believe it was a plot devised and practiced by the Priests, with the
consent of her Mistress: For in this Chamber where she lay, there did use every
quarter-houre of the day to be some one or other coming in and out, being the
chamber where the children and Maidservants lay, and had often occasion
thither. When this Ghost had so long conferred with her, and was taking her
leave, it willed her in this manner. By all means see that you tell my children
what you have seen, and how their Mother appeared unto you, and what counsel
she has given you. And then it vanished away. Exit Ghost.


Shortly after the vanishing of this vision, there comes into Mary Bouchers
chamber Mris Vause, and asked her how she fared. She answered her not well,
but told her what had happened. Oh then quoth Mris Vause, It is time for thee
to become a good Catholic; For assure thy self it was a special favor and
mercy of God that thou should have such a warning. And so giving her more
instructions to this purpose, went away. Exit Vause. Intrat Godmother. Nimble
Actors know their Q.
And then appeared again the Ghost and spoke to her in this manner.
God-daughter thou may think I love thee well to come thus to thee and tell
thee what thou must do to be saved, and not rather to have spoken to one of my
own children. But I consider that thou art ordained for an extraordinary end,
to be a Nun, which is the happiest life of all other. For they that so live
are Saints upon earth. The vow that is made by those who enter into that order
deserves the plenary remission of all sins, and Justification before God.
Justification. Will the Jesuits justify this for ghostly doctrine? A bold
Ghost alluding to S. Paul's instruction by Ananias. Act. 22.
And therefore God-daughter if any holy man persuade thee to that course of
life, accept of it, and I would have thee to repair unto one Mr Ireland a
Priest, and he will direct thee in this course. Whatsoever he bids thee to
do, refuse it not. And so the Ghost vanished the second time. And in the whole
appeared unto her above a dozen times, which so amazed her, that she was not
her self a long time after.

Though this vision was privately Acted, yet the noise of it was bruted abroad
and came to the ear of Mris Boucher the Mother, who thereupon came to the
house of her Mistress to speak with her daughter, but being forsooth an
Heretic might not be admitted after long waiting to question with her own
child about this strange news. Nay the daughter her self upon fresh
apprehension hereof was persuaded by those in the house to estrange her self
toward her own mother, who notwithstanding pressing on, did at length speak
with her Mistress the Lady of the house, and in her daughters presence vpbrayded
them with these Collusions, and telling the Lady that she thought her to be of
better understanding then to put any belief in such devices, adding moreover,
that it was great wrong to the dead Lady to be thus acted as being in
Purgatory; when as she was a woman so virtuous and religious, that it is not to
be doubted but that she is in heaven. And though using great importunity to
have her daughter home, she could not obtain it, whereupon she used further
means by complaining unto some in high place and authority, for the rescuing
of her child out of the possession of those who had thus deluded her: But using
all the helps she could, it was more than half a year ere she could get
her daughter home to her. And within a week after her daughters being with
her, some of these ghostly Fathers that sent this ghost to her, did by the
conveiance of a private Letter call her off again, so that she made an escape
from her Mother and flew the second time to their lure. And to prevent her
Mothers recovering of her again, they determined to set her packing beyond the
Seas, there to be Nunnified. To which end they scratcht up by their
Catholicke-hookes the sum of threescore pounds to line this new Nun. This
coming to her Mothers notice, whetted her endeavors to regaine her child,
and accordingly she spoke to some who she knew had interest in those that
robbed her of her daughter, threatening that she would complain to the Highest,
and declare their deceitful lewd courses. This sharp ingredient wrought so
well, that the voyage was stayed and her daughter restored. Who since being in
her Mothers tuition and receiving due instruction, has by Gods blessing pulled
her Foot out of the Snare, well seeing and leaving the vanity of Popery. She
is now married and dwells near Bainards-Castle in London, where of late I
visited her to inform my self the better of the truth of these particulars.
And within these very few days she being demanded in my hearing, what means
she thinks to have been used to make those apparitions to her, and
disquiets in her, she says; She thinks in her conscience some of those
things could not be done without Witchcraft, or some strange help by the
devil. The particulars of this apparition are incntioned in my former Book.
In which opinion I must needs say she does concur with Mary Wiltshire, who
not long since in my hearing repeated such apparitio^s made to her to the same
end, did with great asseverance express that she verily thinks that they
who made the apparition of the Virgin Mary, dealt by Sorcery or such indirect
devilish means.

I doubt I shall now sure undergo the Ferula of our grand pedanticke Masters
the Jesuits, for telling so many tales out of the school: which their Anger
will be the more implacable, because they know my informations to be good, my
relations to be warrantable, and the very circumstances of them to trench upon
the reputation of those who would be thought so wise and uncontrollable, that
they deserve to hold the whole Christian world in pupillage and pillage. But
for my part I must spare them never a whit the more. The necessity of any
duty overcomes the weight of their menaces. As he that has been incited to
hold out a Castle mutinously against the lawful owners and governors thereof,
when he sees his fault and has slipped away from his fellow Mutiners, is in
duty bound not to favor those his quondam-Mates, but rather for the better
demonstration of his alleagiance, is to discover what he can the practices of
their combination, and to lead others on to the battery of that hold in such
places where he by experience knows it to lie weak and best assaileable: So I
am so far from repenting of the former declarations made by me, out of
conscience and truth against those that possess many a secret hold in the
Territories of his Majesty's Dominions, seasing upon the hearts and houses of
many, and captivating them within a combination, in opposition against our
Religion established, and discontent against the course of our civil estate
and Laws; that I cannot but go on in using my best memory to recollect what I
knew, and means to inquire what formerly I knew not, that might conduce to the
further display of their practices. I confess I speak stones, and lay ink
and gall on their tettars. But, Dicatur veritas, rumpatur invidia; Let the
Truth be spread, and their Envy burst it Gall.

The second Comodie of a Female Apparition, acted by the thrice honorable
Company of Jesuits, Players to the Popes Holiness.
Jesuits are in at all games.
ABout August last 1623. Mr Fisher and Mr Wainman, Jesuits, came to a Romish
Recusants house in Surrey, where soiourned a young Gentlewoman, one Mris
Francis Peard, whose parents being dead, she had her portion of goods in her
own hands, which portion (as I am credibly informed) was above a thousand
pounds. Mr Fisher and Mr Wainman labored to persuade this Gentlewoman to
become a Romish Catholic, and at length prevailed and perverted her; which
done Mr Fisher and Mr Wainman began to consider how they might work her out of
her moneys, which being so round a sum, they labored to get this fat Fish
into their Nett.

A Mountebankes Oration.
Master Wainman begins here to Act his part, and first comes to her by himself
and says; Oh Mistress Francis, what a glorious sight did I behold the last
night. At midnight being in my bed I lay awake and began to say over my
Breviary, The Breviary is attractiue of Virgins in the night as well as in the
day.
which I had no sooner done, but there appeared unto me a beautiful Virgin
like your self, all in white, glittering like an Angel, and said unto me,
Behold I am such a one, whom you being my ghostly Father persuaded to become a
Nun, and now I appear to give you thanks. For since my departure out of this
world, I reign in glory with the Virgin Mary. All the tongues in the world
cannot express that which I now possess. There is a Gentlewoman you lately
persuaded to become a Catholic, Mris Francis Peard: Oh persuade her to the
same life that I led in the heavenly Monastery at Bruxells: She will without
doubt be a good Saint. Oh thrice blessed Jesuit.
This visible having thus spoken unto Mr Wainman, It gave him (as he said) three
Benedictions and vanished away.

Mr Wainman the Precursor unto Fisher to beat game into his Nett.
After the narration of this vision made to Mris Peard, Mr Wainman began to
exhort her to Nunship, and used diverse Arguments for the alluring her to such
course of living. And so left the Gentlewoman for that time, who as yet was
vnresolved what to do. The week following Mr Fisher persuaded this
Gentlewoman to come to London, and appointed her to lodge in a Popish house in
Drury lane, and told her she should there hear a very excellent Sermon.
According to his direction she came to the appointed house in London, and the
day following heard a Sermon preached by a Jesuit, whose name she could not
learn; but his Text was taken out of 1 Cor. 7. And for Virgins a Commandment
of our Lord I have not, but Counsel I give* as having obtained mercy of our
Lord to be faithful etc.

In which Sermon he took occasion to handle the point of Vows, and said, that
to vow Chastity and to live unmarried, was an Angelical life upon earth,
resembling the state of the blessed in heaven, where they Math. 22.
neither marry nor be married, but are as the Angels of God in heaven. And
spoke particularly of Nuns, that as they sing in Gods quire here upon earth,
so they shall sing a song of joy in heaven which none can sing but they; and
shall be crowned with a special Crown of glory, which none can wear but they.

This Sermon much inflamed the Gentlewoman with zeal to become a Nun: which
Mr Fisher well perceived. And the night following after this Gentlewoman had
been in her bed some hour or two, there seemed to be a great light in her
Chamber, which at the first beholding thereof astonished her, and then
presently after appeared unto her, a shape like unto a woman all in white: from
her face seemed to come little streams of fire, or glittering light. This
Woman-shape first bad her not be afraid, for she came to her with a message
from heaven, and said her name was St Lucy, who being borne of honorable
Parents, and of a great Family, had great riches left unto her by her friends;
The fruitful useful part of a ghostly Sermon is in the Application.
which riches fearing least they should be an hinderance to her in the process
of godliness, she bestowed all upon the poor and lived a Monastical life, by
means whereof she is now one of the most glorious Saints in heaven. And then
said this crafty vision to the Gentlewoman, Do you also dispose of those
worldly things that you have to the poor, and toward religious Uses, and go
your ways and live a religious life amongst the good company of Virgins at
Bruxells, and so shall you be sure to be saved, and freed from the fire of
Purgatory, which otherwise you cannot escape. And so this vision left her.

Cogging were la^e, if dubbing did not follow.
The next morning came to visit her Mr Fisher and Mr Wainman, to whom she
presently began to relate what she had seen that night, and that St Lucy had
appeared to her and talked with her. The poor Protestant Heretics have no
such sweet visions.
Oh what a happy woman are you quoth Mr Fisher. You may see what it is to be a
Catholic and to be of our Church. Thus does God work his Miracles amongst us
daily, and by such visions does God commonly reveal himself unto us. What
will you now do then, said Mr Wainman? Will you not become a Nun? Yes
forsooth, said the Gentlewoman, I will be advised by you. So then they wished
her to get her moneys ready, and one of them would be her Conductor to
Bruxells. But, quoth Mr Wainman, you had best give an hundred pounds presently
to poor Catholics in thankfulness for St Lucyes good will toward you. The
fine which St Lucyes Tenants pay at entrance, an hundred pounds.
Yea, said Mr Fisher, that indeed will be a work meritorious. Then said Mr
Wainman, You had best put it into our hands, and we will distribute it where
we find most fit. Quisque sibi proximus. He is an ill Cook that licks not his
own fingers.
To all this the innocent Gentlewoman with little repine yielded, and within
few days after delivered them an hundred pounds. Shortly after they came to
her and told her, that they must have an hundred pounds more to send over to
the Nunnery before her, Hard Landlords that exact a second fine. Why should
they not be sued in Court of equity to restore it?
to make provision of some necesseries against her coming. The which hundred
pounds they likewise tugged out of her hands; and for the space of a quarter of
a year, these two Master- Jesuits, like two cunning old Gray-hounds that
could well serve one another turn for the catching the poor hare, with some
other Iourney-men of their trade, made great labor to and fro this
Gentlewoman, and every one of them began to pluck a feather from the plume of
her estate.

She seeing and plainly perceiving that they made Religion a stalking horse to
intend their own profit, began to take consideration thereof, and to meditate
on their practicing, assuring her self that they aimed at nothing more than to
cheat her of her moneys and goods. Experience dear bought.
And seriously weighing the particulars of the apparition presented to her in
Drury lane, she concluded it must needs be some iugling trick devised by
those Masters, and assisted by some in the house. In brief, she resolved to
shake off her gracious Grandfathers the Priests and Jesuits, and so to bid
her new Guest the Roman Religion farewell.

By the like Pageant or trick of legerdemaine was Elizabeth Powell of Holborne
within this tweluemoneth befopped with Visions and Revelations, and persuaded
to become a Nun, whom of late the Priests have packed over to some Monastery,
giving her belike not so long a time of deliberation to bethink her self; or
rather her ghostly Father Mr Musket is a man somewhat nimbler than his
Copes-mates. He was the Master-gamster (as I have heard) who fetched over this
said Elizabeth Powell, but in what manner he played his part upon the Stage, I
cannot yet learn.

As concerning their other Imposture and Cosenage of Mris Peard, I see no
reason but that these Jesuits should be sued; First upon an Action of Account,
how they have disposed these sums, being committed to them in trust, and
limited to others uses. Nor would I be the Advocate for them if they were sued
in the Star Chamber for Subornation, lewd practice and Cosenage, having
entered into such a combination, and executed the same by such cheating,
shuffling, and Comicall an Engine. I have heard that in that high Court within
these three years some combining cheating Companions, have been questioned
for stripping a simple credulous man out of his revennues, by setting up one of
their company in a Tavern to Act a Commanding part over the rest of that good
fellowship, who by their device should have such authority, that none of the
rest might disobey whatsoever he imposed on them. Mr K^a: befooled.
This Commander they styled by the mighty name of Captain Gogge, who upon
pretense of this power, made one of his silly Companions to set his hand to a
writing there brought, which proved a Release of right in certain Lands, which
for ought I hear could never be recovered again. But the Jesuits devices are
more refined* this only by the spirit of liquor and bond of roaring good
fellowshippe, but theirs by pretended divine inspirations, visible messengers,
and audible messages from heaven. And what perswasiue power is there between
the blustering Commands of any Gog or Magog in comparison of the sweet
insinuations of a Virgin-Saint, imitating in some sort the Angel Gabriell in
speaking to a Virgin and comforming her self to her own name in the manner of
her apparition, flashing out rays or beams of light. O Luciam lucidissimam,
or rather O luculentam fraudem, O lutulentum scelus! A bold, palpable, dirtie
Imposture. And if we consider this kind of knavery in the highest pitch of
it, me thinks these lewd pagenteeres should be questioned also in some
Ecclesiastical Court for Profanation of heaven and holy things, making them
by such devices little better than Theatricall and fabulous tricks to get money
and inescate poor deceived souls. I know not whither any of our Bishops
Courts, or high Commission do take cognizance of such kind of abuses, but if
they do, those holy, heavenly, Virginal, Monastical, fantastical,
sophistical Contrivers and Actors will cut out work for them to spend some
time in censure.

But now I bethink my self how deeply I am mistaken, I had forgotten that the
superexcellent, transcendent, exorbitant order of the Jesuits, is not subject
to any but their own seraphicall Superiors. What talk you of our Courts of
Justice in England? They have no more power over these exempts, than the King
of Kallecut has over the Virginian Toma-Coma. All Romish Priests forsooth are
exempt from secular hands, and Jesuits Exemptissimi from the secular Priests.
The Consistories of our Bishops can do no Acts but nullities against any of
these; For every thing they do is void ipso facto, quia per non Iudicem. Ours
are not Ecclesiastical Judges, nor have any Jurisdiction, because not derived
from the Wellhead at Rome, nor imparted by him who has the keys of all
Church-lockes at his girdle, and setting his hands by his side bravely says,
Data est mihi omnis potestas in Coelo and in terra. All power is given to me in
heaven and in earth.

But now for manner of cleanly conveyance of this business, nay, in these
manifold Pageants of heavenly visibles, I have thought with my self diverse
times to what kind of operation I should refer it. Somewhat I think may be
done this way by Paper Lanthornes or transparent Glasses to eradiate and
redouble light, and cast out painted shapes by multiplication of the species
visibiles, and artificial directing of refractions. And for the Actor that
puts life into this mimicall Artillery by motion and voice, that may be done by
some nimble handed and footed Nouice Iesuitable Boy, that can as easily put on
the person of St Lucy, or The virgin Mary, as a Play-boy can act winged
Mercury, or Eagle mounted Ganimedes.

But the Jesuits being or having Actors of such dexterity, I see no reason
but that they should set up a company for themselves, which surely will put
down The Fortune, Red-Bull, Cockpit, and Globe. Only three exceptions some
make against them which perhaps may make their Customers after a while some
what cool and thinly to frequent them.

1 Tautologie.
It seems by want of variety the Poet is drawn dry.
One is, that the plots of their Comedies twang all upon one string, apparitions
of the same kind, their Actors having little or no variety of disguise. In all
these three or four Plays, none comes in Acting but A Woman, A Woman, A
Woman, arrayed in white, white, white. I am so charitable to plead for them
without a Fee.
But I answer for them; That perhaps may be excused, because the spectators are
women, and so she likely to consort best with her own sex. Neither have they
much variety of apparel. One white robe and no other habit in three several
Plays. White from Heaven, and white from Purgatory. I will be so kind as to
answer for them in case of Tautologie, or want of variety, with that advice
which was once given to an Orator, who being to make an Oration before a
curious Auditory, and belabouring his memory with often co^ning it by heart, at
length loathed his own work by often hearing it, and therefore distrusted the
Auditories acceptance; Whereto his Friend made answer; Though you by often
repeating it are weary, yet to them it will be fresh enough, because they shall
hear it but once. So though themselves are guilty of the dulnes of the same
trick which they act often, yet their comfort is, that it is represented but
to one, and so the less spread, and every time of repetition it is presented to
a new spectator that never saw it before, to whom it may well be fresh and
welcome.

2. Incongruitie.
The second Objection is Incongruitie, the Poet seeming worthy to be quarrelled
with all for devising to send one in a white robe from the smoakie burning
Kitchen of Purgatory. The Tel-tale from that place should rather have come in a
scorched sheet all turned to tinder. But hereto I answer for our good Poets
the Jesuits. If the sheet had been burnt to tinder, it would not have hung
together, and so all the device had fallen in pieces.

But stay Sir Poet, one word more concerning the title of Incongruitie. What
Decorum is it to bring from Purgatory her that Acted God-mother, who was known
to the Spectatrix to have been a Protestant: whereas all those that build
Purgatory, do intend it for a hot Inn for the Roman Catholics only. But no
Heretic may have the honor to smell of those flames, but are beat down with
a Club to hell in post-hast with out baiting by the way. Hereto I answer, that
these Actors would give out that she dyed a Romanist, and hope they may
pretend so, because she lived and dyed a very virtuous life: Godliness being a
proper Privilege entailed to the Romanists, who seeing any Ship of great
burden, (any great learned man) passing to his Haven, give aim presently and
say, it is ours; Vid. The Jesuits Cathech. lib. 1. cap. 17.
thus dealt Puteanus the Provincial of the Jesuits with him, who was vere
Iesuit^-mastix, religious and renowned Mr Beza; and as cunningly or knavishly
dealt foul-mouthed Mr Musket, and doting Doctor Kellison, both Seculars, with
the late reverend and learned Bishop of London. But Fallitur cum sua tota cater
ua Diabolus. The devil and all his rout were much deceived. They dyed in a
constant belief, persuasion, and profession of that holy Truth of God, in
defense whereof they stood both by writing and speaking against the Church of
Rome.

Now to make up your mouth against all distaste of Incongruitie, I say the Poet
kept within his Circle. For he well knew that deep passions, especially
affright and astonishing admiration, do for the time bereave and suspend exact
inquiring discourse. Well might he presume that the spectator being a Woman
would not be too full of true Syllogism, and being possessed with admiration
of her revi^'d God-mother, would not be too busy in Theological Queres, how
she was capable of that place from whence she came to visit her God-daughter.

3. Dear price.
The third abatement of the honor and continuance of this Scenicall company is,
that they make their spectators pay to dear for their Income. Representations
and Apparitions from the dead might be s^ene far cheaper at other
Play Houses. As for example, the Ghost in Hamblet, Don Andreas Ghost in
Hieronimo. As for flashes of light, we might see very cheap in the Comedy of
Piramus and Thisbe, where one comes in with a Lantern and Acts Mooneshine.
But here for a Comedy consisting of one Scene, and one Actor, it is very dear
market to pay an hundred pounds for entrance, and besides that another hundred
pounds for sitting in a box near the Stage. But here I answer for them
(though I think I shall have little thank for my pains of them) that they
having but one Spectator, must have as much of that one as if they had an whole
Theater full. The Lawyer that pleads at Bar for his Client, will not
therefore abate any thing of his Fee because the Auditory is small or the
Judges few, his study and preparation being the same.

Moreover, though there be but one Actor appearing here upon the Stage, yet you
must consider that here are diverse others within the tyring-house, that take a
great deal of pains to project the plot, to instruct the Actor, and to
furnish him with habit and ornament. And who can tell how many sharers there
are that must take part of that which is paid? Wherein I hope that these two
Jesuits, F. Fisher, and F. Wainman, men of extraordinary action, have a treble
or quatriple share each of them, as being the principal overruling Masters.
Would any man think that Burbege should be content with a single share, who
was the flower and life of his company, the Loadstone of the Auditory, and the
Roseius of the Stage?

Another matter more troubled my curiosity, where and of what Master they
learned these tricks of legerdemaine. I always thought they had their
rudiments from some iugling Hocas Pocas in a quart pot. A man of great name and
fame.
At length I learnd that one of them, namely, Mr Wainman, alias Mr Wrightman,
alias Mr Wood, alias Mr Peacock, alias Mr Baker, alias Mr Read, alias Mr Frye,
alias Mr French (I think he takes eight names to answer to the eight
Beatitudines) had been heretofore the Auditor and Disciple of a grand Master,
notorious in the peoples reputation for strange feats. And besides I learned
that this said Wainman had long since some tricks of cleanly conveyance,
whereof he brought a whole waine-load from Bristow, where he made himself very
famous by professing that he could make the Philosophers stone, and turn any
metal into gold; But he so turned over the money of a Knight thereabouts by
Evaporation, Calcination, Proiection, and Cohobbation, that the Knight might
well have wished this Mountebank had studied less the Chimicall Trade, unless
he had left more fruit of his labors by proiection behind him. An Alchymist
usually answers his deluded scholar with expectation of Proiection, and tells
him the more his Materials be multiplied, the stronger will the Proiection be;
especially if it come to the mountenance of an hundred pounds. Vid. The Play of
the Alchymist.
And yet have I heard he was not utterly unfruitful there. For how soever his
Inventions proved abortiue concerning the Philosophers stone, yet he lest some
evidence of bringing forth some work of perfection, or rather imperfection by
other kind of stones; concerning which employment of Multiplication, I could
make a Quere how it agrees with his Priesthood, or with the sublimated
quintessence of his Jesuitical order. Whose holy function would be blasted and
cracked in sunder by any Matrimonial Conjunction? If himself were to answer,
he could easily put it off with some equivocating trick, Vid. Dr Sheldon of
the Miracles of Antichrist.
like his brother Ignatian, who being examined upon oath whether he were a
Priest, answered, No; and after said, he meant he was not a Priest of Baal. And
so ask this man whether it accord with his Father-hood to be as fruitful in
the flesh as in the spirit, he will have some sodering shift that will make all
sound, without urging the Text Crescite and multiplicamini and replete terram.
Genesis 1. 28.

That which I would now have you observe out of Mr Fisher and Mr Wainmans
pretty iugling practices is, with what creeping sly stealth the
Master-Gamesters the Jesuits do drive the female Partridges into their Nett
by the help of the setting Dog of sneaking Visions and Phantasmes. Or to
come nearer the habit of this Scene; When I consider their carriage and wily
beguiling conveyance, me thinks I behold the cunning Fowler, such as I have
known in the Fenne-Countries, and els-where, that do shoot at Woodcockes,
Snipes, and wild Foul, by sneaking behind a painted cloth which they carry
before them, having pictured in it the shape of a Horse, which while the silly
Foul gazeth on, she is knocked down with Hale-shot, and so put in the
Fowlers-budget. Oh the Artificial incomparable engine of Jesuitical Fowlers,
the painted Hobbyhorse of Saint-like Apparitions from Heaven or Purgatory!
Whilst the silly Bird gazeth with rapting admiration; Bounce says the Jesuits
Gunne, Thou art mine, and takes them by the Coxcombe, and packes them by dozens
to send by the Poulterers to be put in Coopes at Bruxells, and elsewhere. Quo
pulchrius E^ charius.
Wherein I commend their skill in their Trade, that they choose as near as they
can those foul that are fat and fair of feather. If a lean one come in the
way, the fatter shall bear it out. In the one they have a pretense of
Wisdom, in the other of Charity.

But oh, the profound Policy which our Ignatians use for the confirmation and
establishment of their Religion, consisting in these superlatiue proiects and
practices, wherein they go as far beyond their fellow Priests, as Master
Stevens galloping Cross beyond a penny Palm Cross; Vid. The Foot out of the
Snare. page 70.
or F. Garnets little straw beyond all the Wheat-sheaues in England. What
infallible arguments are these strange Apparitions to uphold Faith? The
Sorbonites in truth vpbraid the Jesuits with a Doctrine, that they hold it
lawful to forge a Miracle for the furtherance of their Religion: Why should
not I think, that they hold it as lawful sometimes to forge a vision, for the
better maintenance of their Catholic cause? I remember how the Sorbon
concluded by a Decree of the year 1554. and 1564. The Sorbons censure of the
Jesuits.
Hac societas periculosa in negotio fidei, vana, nugax, mendax, pacis Ecclesiae
perturbatiua, Monastica Religionis euersura, and magis in destructionem quam in
edificationem ordinata, etc. Surely if brethren of the same seame censure thus
hardly of them for their loud lying, let none wonder if I begin to sentence
them for the only Cogging Impostors of these times, scandalizing the name of
Christian with most impious inventions, unbefitting any though desperate
Heretic, and arguing little less than Atheistical prophanes. As for their
visions, and such like ayery Mountebanke Hobgoblin-stuffe, I say (...), Fools
may be frighted with Hagges, and Fairies; men of understanding know it is but
knavery.

THE COPPIES OF DIVERSE LETTERS OF Late Intercourse concerning Romish Affairs.
The Coppie of a Letter (the Original whereof is in my hands) sent from Rome
to F. COLLETON, Archpriest, alias Archdeacon of LONDON.
FAther Colleton we received your Letters dated the xxixth of March, wherein
you write of Prince CHARLES his going for Spain. The news was here before
your Letters, and there is no doubt but we shall now work all things to our
own content. Father Pitts is sent from his Holiness with Letters to the King of
Spain, upon his return we shall hear more. His Holiness has created 3 new
Bishops: Dr Bishop is Bishop of Calcedon, and comes shortly into England: Dr
Bath and F. John Roch are made Bishops, the one of Gortyna, the other of
Cydonea, and are to be sent into Ireland. If matters succeed well, there will
be other new Bishops and an Archbishop sent over for the propagating of true
discipline in your Kingdom: and for those who have now endured the heat of the
day will be the freer passage to Ecclesiastical dignity. His Holiness would
have you advise those who are subordinate to you, that they walk warily, to be
as secret as formerly, the easier (as he says) may they work their own ends.
He would have none puffed up, or swell with sensual delights, but remain yet
mortified, that humility, charity, obedience, contemplation, zeal of souls
may be most observed. As water does more inflame the Smiths forge, as
repugnance does animate the Lions courage, as tartnes eggeth the languishing
appetite: so will it imbolden and strengthen the Heretics, if they know they
are to find opposition to their natural inclinations, and sensuality.
Religion (says the Divinest of all Divines S. Thomas of Aquin) I had thought
St Augustine, St Bernard and some other of the Fathers had been as divine as
He.
must have neighborhood of Policy, Tunc enim piae suae observantiae ex maiori
discretione ordinatae sunt ad finem religionis. For then her pious
observantio^s through more discretion are directed to the end of Religion.

Our Colledge-money from the Catholics of England comes in slowly: There is
three hundred pounds of what we accustomed to receive behind. We must entreat
you to call upon them, and if T. M. be in England, acquaint him with it. I have
written hereof to Mr Wright, and have desired him to send us an hundred pounds
from his stock: he knows where to receive it again. Father Spencer I hear
has lain sick this great while at Bordeaux, I pray God send him lusty
again good man. We hear that Mr Daniell (whom Father Sweet knows well) has
an ancient Manuscript called the History of S. Gertrude; desire F. Sweet if it
be possible to get it for us, and send it to Rome, or else to Lovaine or
Tournay. There are the Histories of St Columban, St Rumuld, and St Fursius,
which his Holiness has given order shall be translated into English for the
good and benefit of the lay- Catholics. I believe the Heretics droope and
begin to hold down their heads of late* it is not possible they should hold up
long, either in England, France, or Germany, they have lost their plumes. Let
me know what the old Block says; you know my meaning. Send us over if you can
six or ten young Scholars to Rome, Let not Dr Kellison admit any more at
Doway, till there be supply made here. There was one Mr Harelcot an English
Gentleman here of late, and is travailed hence to the Holy Land, he had Letters
of commendation from F. Fisher. Write to us as often as you can hereafter, that
we may hear how things succeed. Have among you Cor vnum and animam vnam. And
so praying to our Lady and All Saints for the extirpatio^ of Heresy among you,
with commendations to my kindred, you know whom I love best, not forgetting G.
Smith, who will wonder he had no Letter from me. I Rest.

Your brother in H. Flood.
Rome. March 27. 1623.

A short Comment upon Master Floods long Letter.
INdorsed, To Father Colleton Archdeacon of London] To another Letter
following, Father Colleton has subscribed himself, Vicarius generalis
orientalis Angliae, Vicar general of the East of England Promotion comes very
fast on him. For I hear moreover that of late, he is made Deane of Chalcedon;
which I do not see by what dispensation he can hold, being so far remote as
London is from Constantinople; yet I will try whether I can likewise get him a
faculty to be Deane of Dunstable.

His Holiness has made three new Bishops.] It is questioned whether his Holiness
be a Bishop himself, for that since Gregory the thirteenth, there has been
no true Pope: but all that have succeeded him have been mere Intruders into
the Papacy. vide. A Book Entitled, The New man, translated into English by
William Crashaw, Bachelor in Divinity, according to the Latin Copy sent
from Rome into England, Printed 1622.

Dr Bishop is Bishop of Chalcedon and comes shortly into England.] I will
believe him another time. For according to his promise true it is, that the
Bishop of Chalcedon is come into England, and has laid about him in
Pontificalibus, having confirmed many, and ordained some. When I was their
child, they would have had me receive Confirmation from him. It Is strange I
refusd it, when so many gaping, gazing gulls flockt after him (as after a Lord
at Whitson) with desire to kiss but the very ground where he had stood.
Asperges me Domine says the Holy mighty man, Mundati estis says his
Chaplain Mr Ouerton.
Oh blessed they that were asperged but with the least drop of his thrice
hallowed Holy water. Mundati sunt, they were purged from all sin. But what
shall I say of those who had the livery and hansell of his sacred
Crozier-staffe, when his Lordship lorded it with his taper-bearers of each
side, and one with a Censor burning Incense before him? Oh surely those that
had this Benediction (as Fr. Leech said upon another occasion) Peccare non
possint si maxim velint, it was almost impossible for them to commit any more
sin.

Dr Bath and F. John Roch are made Bishops, the one of Gortyna, the other of
Cydonea, and are to be sent into Ireland.] Were I in Ireland and there wanted a
Bishops Benediction or Confirmation, I might I think run over a great deal of
ground, and leave many a merry old Town behind me, before I should find the
several Seas of these two new-stampt Bishops; but casting mine eyes upon the
Globe of the whole earth, I find that Gortyna and Cydonea are two renowned
Cities of the I Will of Creete or Candy, which Island (as Strabo writes) is
compassed with the Aegean, Affrican, Egilan, and Cytheran Seas. So that by the
next packet that comes from Rome to the Popes Council in Ireland, I desire to
be resolved whether per mortem or else per lapsum these two new Bishops came to
their Seas. Secondly, I would be satisfied concerning the largenes of those two
Diocesses Gortyna and Cydonea; and how long the Kingdom of Ireland (divided
from the Continent of Creete by a great many lakes and gulfes) has been
within their precints. Thirdly I desire to know what revennewes are annexed or
appendant to those said Bishoprics, that the Bishops choose rather to be
commorant at their manner houses in Ireland, than at their ancient Palaces at
home.

If matters succeed well, there will be other new Bishops and an Archbishop
sent over.] They must wait for another wind before they cross the Seas. It Is
a dangerous storm; many of their Mates are like to suffer ship-wracke. But I
perceive they make account that their Hierarchy shall blow away ours.

Our Colledge-money from the Catholics of England comes in slowly.] I
perceive according to the old Proverb, The English Catholics are still the
Popes Asses. But he is beholding to his Ianizaries the Jesuits, who will whip
them soundly if they bear not their accustomed loads. Yet I hear that in the
Northern parts, their Mules backs are almost bursten with over-riding.

There is three hundred pounds to receive behinde] It were a fit Quere what
they have received, so many of their Customers being observed of late to be
turned Bankrupts.

Let Mr Wright send an hundred pounds from his stock.] It were good grafting
upon this stock that bears so fruitful branches.

There are the Histories of St Columban, St Rumuld, St Fursius, which his
Holiness has given order to be translated etc.] I warrant you there be good
husks in this trough to feed Roman Catholic Piggs of devouring belief.

The Catholics droop, they cannot hold up long, etc.] See how they have cast
the dye to make us loosers and Bankrupts.

Let me know what the old Block says.] We are such Block-heads that we do
not yet understand who this Block is. The Jesuits Cabala must help us.

Praying for the extirpation of heresy.] Extirpation? The zeal of this Prayer
may kindle an Invasion of Gunpowder, if need be.

The Letter subscribed by H. Flood.
I Have heard there are three Floods, notorious proiecting proditorious
Jesuits beyond the Seas, all of them well studied in Machiauell. One of them
caused the Jesuits at Lisbon to spend a great deal of money upon Powder on a
Festival day a little before the Powder Treason in England should have been
effected, thereby to make experience of the force thereof. And also persuaded
one John How (a Merchant whom he had perverted) and diverse other Catholics to
go over into England, and to expect their Redemption there (as he called it) a
while. He is much honored by the State-Papists of this Kingdom. Some I have
heard give a large testimony of his Wisdom and Worth. I believe it is he that
was the Father of this pestilent LETTER.

A Letter sent from one Mr VVorthington a Priest, to a kinsman of his living in
Lancashire.
The Coppie of this Letter I have from Worthingtons friend, who will justify
the truth of it.
WOrthy and well-beloued Cosen, you fhall please to understand, that at my late
being at Toulouse I received your Letter, and returned an answer thereunto
again, though (as I hear) it never came to your hands. Since have I been at
Roan, where I met with another Letter of yours, which I had not time to answer
from thence, neither would the answering of it there have been convenient.
Since am I come to Hage in Holland, where I can scarce endure to hear the
lavish and vile speeches which a sort of base unbridled people daily disgorge
against the Majesty of the King of Spain. For singularity among the people I
have noted, that they are generally so bred up to the Bible, that almost every
Cobbler is a Dutch Doctor of Divinity, and by inward illumination of spirit,
understands the Scripture as well as he that wrote it. Those of Holland and
the adjacent parts term themselves of the United Provinces; but never people
in this world lived in a more disunited unity; so great a confusion has this
freedom brought among them of every Idiots babbling out of the Bible. There are
not more different languages at the Tower of Babel, then there are different
beliefes in Holland. But I leave them to their differences and inward
illuminations, borrowed from Martin Luther the New-Religion-maker of Germany,
and desire you let me hear so soon as may be what news in England, whether
the Proclamation be yet come forth for Toleration, that we may make us merry at
home in our Kingdom without control. I was told by one Mr Hinslow some two
or three days since, that there is three or four Churches building in London
for Catholics, and that the King has appointed the Bishop of Chalcedon to
Preach at Pauls-Crosse, and that Mr Fisher has Preached before his Majesty
twice already. If this be true I will be with you within this month. I hear
the Prince was married upon Easter day last, a Gentleman told me who was then
at Madrid. I could acquaint you with all the solemnity, but that I know you
hear the news in England as soon as it is with us. F. Mason is lately dead,
and much lamented at Bruxells. I was in good hope my sister Joan would have
come over to me before this time. I spoke to the Lady Abbess for her, who
has promised she shall be presently admitted, and will accept of eightscore
pounds. I pray you to pay ten pounds for me to my Cosen Maxfield in London,
which I sent unto him for, and I have received it. I wish his brother Henry and
we could agree as well in mind and judgment, as we do in ancient amity. I
could write some other news hence, but for reasons I spare, till I be departed
hence, and then I shall make you laugh. For this time in have I leave you to
God, and in all kind affection I take of you my leave, desiring you to
remember me to all those to whom in duty and love I am bounden, I need not
name them all, but rest

Your loving kinsman I. Worthington.
Hage, this 4th of May. 1623.

The Comment.
AS for the former part of his Letter which concerns the Hollanders, they are
of age to answer for themselves.

What news in England, whether the Proclamation be yet come forth for
Toleration.] The hope of a Toleration is the Wine that seasons all their merry
Feasts; but I hope their Wine is turned to Vinegar by another Proclamation,
though some (I hear) make but a jest of it.

Three or four Churches building in London for Catholics.] Risum teneatis
amici? Belike they are like those Churches builded upon the sand, a flood came
and washd them away. I wonder to which of their new Canonizd rubricall Saints
those new Churches must be dedicated: Oh I remember, to St Nicholas Nemo, and
the Parish where they stand is Nullibi in the Metropolis of Eutopia. Go ask
Sr Thomas Moore on which end of those Churches the Weather-cocke shall stand.

The King has appointed the Bishop of Chalcedon to Preach at Pauls-Crosse.]
Yes very true, and his Text must be Act. 1.20. Episcopatum eius alter accipiat.
His Bishopric let another take.

Mr Fisher has Preached before his Majesty twice already.] As true as
steel. And there to the comfort of his Auditory he told his own heroical
Acts in producing Actors from Heaven and Purgatery, for the Nunnizing of Mary
Wiltshire, Mary Boucher, Mris Francis Peard, and others his ghostly children.

I hear the Prince was married upon Easter day.] True and trusty news. The
Capons are not yet fed that should be eaten at that Feast, and yet the
Epithilamium or Marriage-Song is made by Master Pateson in the dedication to
the Book called, The image of both Churches.

The Lady Abbess will accept of eight score pounds.] I verily believe it and
more money if she could get it. A good Broker for Dowries; but those Dowries
suck a great deal of money out of England.

I shall make you laugh.] Good sport belike. In the mean time we laugh at you
(good Master Worthington) for your news of non ens; and that you build
Churches and Castles in the air.

A Letter sent from the said J. VVorthington to his Uncle in London, a
Seminary Priest.
Most loving Uncle,
I Know you take it very unkindly that I wrote not unto you by the last packet;
but the reason was because I intended to have come over within a week
following, had not Dr Kellison hindered me. Let me entreat you to provide some
good house where I may be entertained in London at. Mid-summer, when I intend
to see England. We understand there is liberty enough now, every man with you
may use his Conscience. My Cosen Melling wrote unto me that they hoped to
purchase all the Churches in Lancashire, if this world last long. The heaven
has been long full with our cries, the world with our afflictions, Sed tandem
miserendi tempus, exultandi dies. Pursuivants, men infamous, who at their
pleasures enriched themselves with the spoil of our goods, I hear that now
they sneake up and down, and the only preferment any of them can attain
unto, is to keep a Tobacco-shop. We shall no more I hope be made a Spectacle
to the World, and to Angels, and to men. But Nisi praecedit pugna, non succedit
victoria, says St Cyprian. It is a comfort that the case is so altered.
Interim Germanicus. I was lately at the Hage in Holland, where I found but
seven Religions in one Family; the man of the house being of one Religion,
the wife of another, the children and servants of others. The high powerful
Lords the States keep a great toil there, though the best of them were but
the son of a Beere-Brewer or Basket-Maker. I saw there King James his
daughter and her Worshipful Husband, whose high aspiring thoughts are now low
enough, even as low as that muddie Country is beneath any sound earth. Their
dwellings are fitter to be a habitation for fishes than for men. I got an Ague
there which I was afraid I should not so soon have shaken off. I would entreat
you Uncle to send me over to Doway five pounds, to fit me with some
necessaries against my Journey: And I have written to my Cosen Maxfield to send
me five more. I have Printed a Book which I will bring over with me, I am
sure that will help me with money enough in England. I was at Anwerpe where I
bought a Box of hallowed Rings, which I value at a great rate, so that I will
begin to pay my debts to your self and others my good friends when I have
been a while in England. Wish my Cosen Maxfield to show you his Letter. I
remember my duty unto you, and so rest

Your loving Nephew I. Worthington.
Duac. May 20. 1623.

The Comment.
LEt me entreat you to provide some good house where I may be entertained.]
His harbinger has provided him a house in Holborne, one of those that stand in
the next way to Tyburne.

My cosen Melling wrote, that they hoped (if this world last long) to purchase
all the Churches in Lancashire.] We thank your cosen Melling for telling of a
long lasting world; But as for Lancashire, I can give by my abode in it, some
little account of it, and of their acquaintances swelling into thousands, yet I
hope they shall never purchase Church there, though they have purchased and
invaded too many houses and families.

Pursuivants etc.] Do they now scorn the Officers of Justice and Religion
amongst us? If hereafter those Pipes that have for a time bin put up in a bag
shall be played on again, let not those take it in snuff who have now made no
more of our Laws made against them then of a vanishing euaporated whiffe of
Tobacco. And as for the Pursuivants, they would have this libelling knave to
know, that the worst of them has means to maintain himself without being
beholding to any Popish Pedlarly Priest whatsoever.

Interim Germanicus.] Cunningly spoken. I think he alludes to the Interim in
the time of Charles the fifth, and would imply that they have in England a
midling provisionall sect of Statizing, Temporizing Romanists, who can conform
to the times, in hope they shall be otherwise fairer bent for their ends. Many
here are that tread upon Roman earth, though English ground.

A Beere-brewer or Basket-maker.] He had this jest out of Robert Parsons, the
brazen-faced libelling Jesuit his books. But yet those Brewers he speaks of
have made drink so strong that it has often been huffecap to their enemies.
And their Baskets have been so stuffed with earth upon their rampires, that the
greatest Ordnance of the enemy could not demolish them at Bergen vp-Zone.

Whose high aspiring hopes, etc.] God may please to give them a time to repair
their decays, which they patiently expect. But it may be some trial of their
patience, to have their losses redoubled by storms from that faction whose
supporters have procured and continued those damages.

I got an Ague there.] By feeling your purse I find you have febrem
pestilentem, at least a malignant fever; your blood and spirits being possessed
with a callenture gotten or increased by the bad air upon the banks of Tyber.

I have printed a little Bocke.] No doubt it is a goodly work made by this
five pound man. Some bungling botcherly bundle of miraculating Saints piping
new. Let Mr Henry Barber of Holborne have the uttering and dispersing of it,
who met me within these few days and challenged me for putting him into my
Catalogue of Popish Booke-sellers, and said he had little reason to have gone
in among them, for that he had been in prison for it heretofore. Or if Henry
Barber be by this means too infamous, I commend you Mr Worthington to another
Trader, one Mr Vdall of Gunpowder-Alley, who was very angry that in my
Catalogue I put him down plain Vdall without an M. at his girdle.

Money enough.] Pray mark how these cheating Mates make a prey of their
credulous Laick Disciples. They count it no small part of their reuennew the
sums which they squeise by dropping idle pocket Pamphlets which they sell at
an high Market and unreasonable rates, as before I have showed in diverse
particulars. I doubt whether they have wit enough that upon these occasions
furnish them with moneys enough.

A box of hollowed rings, which I value at a great rate.] Does he make them
Hogs whom he thus ringeth, or rather wringeth by extracting good silver from
men and women past Nonage, though not Dotage for such rattle-baby toys? Oh
Trumpery! Is this zeal and Christian Devotion? Why do we laugh at the
barbarous Indians for imparting to us their richest commodities in exchange for
glass, beads, penny whittles, copper rings, etc? But the Popes Benediction, or
any the least touch of Sainting Miracle-monging fiction is able to infuse the
highest worth into the basest baggagely New-nothing to hang upon the sleeue of
admiring adoring ghostly Children of the Jesuits. How does his Holiness
exorcise and conjure Beads of wood, of stone, of Coral, and of all other
stuff, making besotted Ignaro's believe they have great power against sin,
the Devil, and Hell; whereas alas all is but cheating, and to gull them of
their money. (*)

The Coppie of a Letter Indorsed as follows.
Au Tresreverend Pere le Pere Berville, General des Peers de la Congregation
de L'oratoire en France a Paris.
REverendissime Pater,
DEest nobis hoc tempore homo prudens, diligens, and constans, qui negotia
Episcopi nostri, and Cleri in Curia Romana tractet: Habetis in vestra
Congregatione R. P. Thomam Rant Anglum, qui Italice loquitur, and Romae
aliquando versatus cum laud est, and in Anglia antequam Congregationem vestram
ingrediebatur causis agendis diu, multumque studuit. Hunc idoneu^ reputamus,
cui negotia nostra co^mittamus. Rogamus itaque Reuerendissimam Paternitatem
vestram vt hunc virum nobis concedat, vel ad tempus saltem common let, ne Rmi
Episcopi et nostrae causae oportuno praesidio in ea altissima Curia distitutae
sint Vestrae Co^gregationis proprium esse inaudiuimus viros pios et prudentes
Episcopis concedere: quapropter summis precibus obsecramus, ne hanc gratiam
denegetis Ordinario nostro vestri amantissimo, qui hoc etiam a Paternitate
vestra Reverendissima antea petiit. Quo quidem beneficio nos omnes sibi and
Congregationi suae summopere devinciet. Deus Reuerendissimam Paternitatem
vestram diutissime seruet incolumen.

Reverendissimae Paternitatis vestrae observantissimi, Ioannes Colletonus
Vicarius generalis orientalis Angliae. Richardus Smitheus Vicarius generalis in
partibus Australibus Angliae. Richardus Broughtonus Vicarius generalis
Septentrionalis partis Angliae. Edwardus Bennettus Vicarius generalis in
partibus Occidentalibus Angliae.

Londini 24. Septembris Anno Domini 1623.

The former Letter in English. Indorsed
To the most reverend Father the Father Beruille, General of the Fathers of
the Congregation of the Oratory in France, deliver this in Paris.
Most reverend Father,
He means the late new cast Bishop of Chalcedon.
WE want at this present a wise, diligent, and constant man, who may dispatch
the businesses of our Bishop and Clergy in the Roman Court. You have in your
Congregation a reverend Father, one Thomas Rant an English man, who speaks
Italian and has been to his commendation sometime employed at Rome; as also
he was much and long employed in England in soliciting of businesses, before
his admission to your Congregation. This man we think fit to trust with our
affairs. Their affairs are Faires to purchase money.
And therefore, we beseech your most reverend Father-hood that you would grant
us this man, or at least lend him us for a time, least the most reverend
Bishops affairs and ours should be destitute of Protection, as occasion may
serve in that most high Court. We have heard that it is proper to your
Congregation to afford pious and prudent men unto Bishops. Wherefore we
earnestly entreat you, that you would not deny our Ordinary this favor, who
does fervently love you, and has heretofore requested thus much from your most
reverend Father-hood. By which benefit your Father-hood shall much oblige us
all to your self and your Congregation. God long preserve your most reverend
Father-hood in prosperity.

Your most reverend Father-hoods much bounden, John Colleton Vicar general of
the East parts of England. Richard Smith Vicar general of the South parts of
England. Richard Broughton Vicar general of the North parts of England. Edward
Bennet Vicar general of the West parts of England.

London 24 of September. 1623.

The Comment.
Poor England you find quartered without judgment, by this domineeting
Quaternion of Popish popular Quarter Masters. An admirable newerected intruded
Hierarchy. Our Lord Bishops had need look to their Rochets. For I hear of a
strange imaginary scambling after the revennewes of their Church Livings. Great
hopes there is of purchasing Churches, and great news of sending over more new
Bishops. The nimblefooted Messengers deligated from the Popes Holiness, may
intrude where they list and obtrude what they please (it should seem) without
restraint or reproof. Alas great Roman Idoll-Gull, there is none of our
Bishops that fear your leaden Bull. As for your Bishops of Chalcedon, Gortyna,
and Cydonea, who have their authority so bravely signed sub annulo Piscatoris,
I desire them to tarry where their land lies that may maintain them in
Pontificalibus. The truth is, in England we have as yet no empty Palace worthy
to entertain them except it be the Gate House at Westminster, or the Stone
house at Newgate, where they shall be pompously attended.

Is it not enough that the little Foxes of Rome eat up our Grapes, but other
wild Boares must must enter into our Vineyard? The Lord has yet a hook for
their nostrils and a bridle for their lips. Let Abaddon the King of the
Locusts, that Romish usurper rave and brave, seeking to enlarge his Territories
from East to West, or as far as he lift, claiming Hyperbolicall power to bear
through Diabolical drifts; It makes no matter; our Josiah (whose name shall
ever remain upon record in the Calendar of the just) has taken away all
abominations of iniquity, all intruding Jurisdiction that might stream
hither from the Well of Rome; having in himself (...) and (...), an inbred
power, limited only with justice and equity; (...) absolute dominion and
universal command; and yet (...) also, subjection to none but God only. And
who (but the Pope and his adherents) doubts, but that the limbs and branches
of his authority are extended over all persons and in all causes as well
Ecclesiastical as Civilli His power profession and faculty is immediate and
next unto God, held from him in Capite, not derived from beneath: he is not one
of those Princes of whom Blondus speaks, that should honor and worship the
Pope as God; he kisseth not the hands and feet of his Holiness, but is
architectonicall, supreme and commander of all other functions and vocations.
Blond. Just. Roma. lib. 3. Bertrandus.


The Copy of a Letter sent from P. Row a Romish Priest, to his brother
William Row in ENGLAND.
Loving Brother,
ALbeit according to S. Bernards saying, Efficacior lingua quam litera: The
tongue is of greater efficacy then the Pen, And so I could wish rather to
enlarge my self unto you by word then by writing, (my occasion of writing unto
you at this time being very serious) yet since according to the old Proverb,
Against necessity there is no law, I will plead my cause by this mute Advocate
of my mind.

Those that are of religious Orders vow obedience to their Superiors, who may
command them to run to any Angle of the world, to the Indies.
So it is that I have received command from our Superior to travel to the City
of Seleucia within the Province of Isauria, a place I know not where, and so I
know not whether ever I shall see England again. I will delay my Journey eight
weeks longer, and would entreat you (as you respect me) to send me over before
my going the thirty pounds you owe me. Though I told you I would forbear it a
year longer, yet now I cannot do it, neither would you I hope desire it,
considering my case. I had come this Summer into England, but that the Superior
of our Order is thus pleased to put a trick upon me, the burden whereof I
must patiently undergo. I have deserved better I am sure, then to be so
foysted off and driven God knows where. I wrote unto you a fortnight since by
Mr Herbart, desiring you to send me a dozen yards of good broad-cloth, of a
fine new mixed color for a friend of mine. We every day expect to hear from
you and to receive it. The money that is in my brother James hands I freely
forgive him, for I know he needs it. The Popes pardons you find are hardly
purchased.
I procured Mr Shepherd an Indulgence, but there is yet twelve pounds of the
charges unsent, I harken still when I shall receive it. If he have not yet
taken order (as I appointed him) for the payment of it in Anwerpe; I pray
speak to him that he send it over with your money. I pray let there be no
iarring betwixt my brother Robert and you: I have written to him and charged
him deeply to behave himself soberly and lovingly toward you. Had I come over
as was intended, we might have had great comfort one of another. I envy not
the brave life which my fellow Priests in England now lead. Remember me dearly
to Master Brown, Mr Midleton, Mr Jones, Mr Curley, Mr Bond, and whom else of
my acquaintance you meet withal, and let them know what is become of me. Tell
Master Midleton that he look well to my Books, and if I never see him again
they are his. I desire him to write to me so soon as he can. Let me hear how
the Catholic Cause does thrive of late. I hear all is as we would have it.
Not so Sir, for you would have all turned topsie turuye. Again your new
Hierarchy is not yet established.
I cannot write what I would at this time, but defer it till I hear of
another Messenger. And so desiring you to pray for me I rest

Your loving Brother, P. Row.
Lisle April 8. 1623. The Hollanders have had a late overthrow; and for other
News we have none.




The Comment.
THose news now which the Romanists, the Authors of the aforesaid Letters
intended should be Occulte dimissa privately conveyed to their true-hearted
friends in England, are by a wrong Messenger, Oculis and auribus subiecta
infidelibus, miscarried far contrary to their hopes and expectation. It is
easily collected from their said Letters of what spirit and temper they are,
what mark they shoot at. I desire the Reader to make construction of some
things himself. I have by the means of good friends come to the sight of
other Letters of theirs, all which savor of nothing but rancour and malice
against us Protestants. But alas what are all their stout Invectiues, but so
many gusts of wind to drown in disgrace the ship of Christ? What are all their
threats but raging waves that batter her? What are their peevish and malicious
slanders, the fond absurdities they foist upon us, but horrible monsters? What
all their brags and boasts, but Sirens songs? Such waves against Gods Church
have never wanted in any age, who by battering her have broken themselves; yet
will not the latter learn of the former, nor fear their ends whose courses
they follow, but with a new rage of fury run to their ruin.

A PROCLAMATION Concerning the Sale of Jndulgences at the next Staple Fair at
Rome now near at hand Anno Domini 1625. Called the great year of Iubilee.
IT is not unknown to the learneder sort especially of those who live within
the Circle of the Christian Papalizing world, that this present year of Grace
1624. is the Eeue or Vigill of the b^th jolly year of Iubilee, beginning In
die Natalis Domini prox. when the grand Mart of Pardons and Indulgences is to
be set up, and open shop thereof to be kept in the Pope-holy merry old City of
Rome.

In the Eeue of this great Staple Fair, it behooveth we who have devoted my
self in all service to his Holiness, to exhort and advise all tenderhearted
Romanists, to provide themselves with two things especially, Sins enough, and
Gold enough. Sins enough, else there will be no wounds to cure. Gold enough,
else there will be no cure for the wounds. The weakness and corruption of our
nature will be get the first, we need no spur to gallop down that Hill. And
the corruptions of the Court of Rome will attract the other.

Deposcuntur opes tanquam medicina malorum,
Exportantur opes irritamenta malorum.
In this great Fair I must tell you we have nothing but honest and fair
dealing, our trading being by way of compensation in equal balance. Sin you
know is so heavy a thing that it presses a man down into Hell. Nothing
therefore is able to lift a man up from the downfall, but that which it self
is most heavy. Philosophy and Experience tell us, that Auro nihil grauius, no
created matter in the world weighes heavier then gold. Nothing therefore has
our hallowing holy Father the Pope thought fitter to put into his scales to
lift men out of Purgatory and mount them on high than massy silver and gold.
Whereof if thou come to our Stations at Rome, see thou bring thy burden and
weight. Auro enim nihil r arius, nil charius, nil suauius, nil gratius. Nothing
at his Holiness Market may be sold without gold. But bring that; and then as for
Dispensations, Absolutions, Appellations, Faculties, Inuestitures, and such
Interests as the Church of Rome does afford, thou shall want none; So say the
Negotiators of that Apostolical Sea. Oh brave and beautiful Rome? Apoc. 18.
The Merchants are waxen rich with the abundance of thy pleasures. Vnde haberi
possit Indulgentiarum communicatio nisi ab hac sede, says Bellarmine the great
Bailif and Clerk of this Market? Who can forgive sins but the Pope only?
His Pardons are that traffic whereby the Church of Rome (whereof his Holiness
is the Head) keeps her intimate correspondency and participation with all her
members, tying thereby their consciences by a secret and strong obligation unto
the Pontifical Seat.

Does any one think that they are ordinary trinkets and trifles which are set
to sale in the Popes Market? In for^ Papali.
Commodities vendible at Sturbridge, or Bartholmew Fair? Fie younster, you are
much deceived. Famous Babylon, the seven hild City, Papal Rome, She shall
have many that shall be Merchants unto her of the souls of men. Apoc. 18. 13.
Her Indulgences are a relaxation of temporal pains inflicted upon souls in
Purgatory. And is it a small matter I pray you to escape the hot, fiery,
flagrant, torrid, sulphurous smoke and flames of Purgatory? Oh no; It is
written in the Decrees, Capit. quid in aliud distinct. ^5.
There is no earthly pain or Martyrdom, to be compared to the pains of
Purgatory. And the holy man that Angelical Doctor Thomas of Aquine says, That
the pain of the fire of hell, and the fire of Purgatory is all one, and that
they differ nothing at all, but that the one is but temporal and the other
eternal. Virgill set a partition of Iron and other metal betwixt those two
fires. Aeneiad. lib. 6.
Yet some men be of opinion that the partition was but a pale made of Wainscot,
which (because it was of wood) was long agone burnt away; Hell and Purgatory
both but one Kitchen.
so that now Hell and Purgatory enter both in at one hole and are both but one
fire. There was a soul which had lain thirty years in Purgatory (says the
Book called Sermones discipuli de Tempore) Sermones discipuli de tempore and
de sanctis. sermon. 160.
and at last there came an Angel, who did bid the soul choose, whether it
would tarry yet one short Winters day in Purgatory, or that it would return
into the world again, and there do a marveilous hard penance, to wit, for one
long hundred years space should go barefoot, and tread still upon sharp iron
nails, eat nothing else but brown bread, and drink bitter gall mingled with
vinegar, and wear a cloth of Camels hair next the skin, and a stone under
the head in place of a pillow. This soul did choose much rather to do all that
same hard penance in earth, than to tarry one day longer in Purgatory. Consider
now what a sharp, bitter, biting sauce Purgatory is, all the plagues and pains
whereof thou may escape if thou will but go to the Fair at Rome, and carry
some store of money with thee.

A pretty tale to tole Greist to the Popes Mill.
In the territory of Apamea a town of Syria, there lived one German Mossocus a
man very rich and covetous. He was advised by his friends in one of the years
of Grace or Iubilee to travel to Rome, there to be made a brother of the Gild,
and to partake of all the Indulgences, Remissions, Privileges, Liberties,
Dispensations, Sacrifices, Benedictions, etc. which his Holiness is used to give
at that time publickely: the said German was so loath to part with his money,
and to be at any expense in traveling to Rome, that he chose rather to loose
that great blessing offered him, then to unloose any of his worme-eaten rotten
bags of silver. Wherefore mark what followed. His house was burnt down to the
ground, and his money perished therewith, and him self narrowly at that time
escaped the fire. And now his riches being all vanished, he travailed to Rome
for Indulgence and Pardon for his sins, where being arrived he entered into
the Temple of S. Constanza, where there met him the Ghost of one Isoac a
neighbor of his, who dyed some two years before, and told him he had all that
while been in Purgatory; but now (quoth he) by the help of the holy Masses,
Mattenses, Suffrages, Almesdeeds, Pilgrimages, and other good works of piety
and charity had at this time, I am delivered. Those bitter pains that I have
endured (quoth the Ghost) thou might have escaped, but that thou did
regard a little dirt and dust, that is thy money more then thy soul; thou have
escaped of late one fire, the burning of thy body; but there is a worse fire
the flames of Purgatory, which thou can not escape. German Mossocus hereupon
much amazed, pined away and about a week after dyed. And at the very instant
as he was departing out of the world, he was heard pronounce these words; I see
the Flame. In the Book called The proof of Purgatory, Printed An. 1621. page
84. 85.


Again, one Hernandes Garcia, Earl of Castile in Spain, who warred much with
Almancor of Corduba King of the Moors, being to fight a great battle against
his said Adversary, was desirous before his going into the field to get our holy
Father the Popes Benediction, not doubting but by means thereof he should have
the more prosperous success. And so with have to Rome he went, where being
arrived he visited his Holiness, who did Bless him and thereby assured him of
victory. At the same time he obtained from his Holiness a special pardon and
plenary Indulgence for all his sins; and then salied upon the Moors. In the
conflict the Moors were chased, and admirably discomfited. Great cause here
was for Hernandes to praise God for the grace he received from his Holiness,
finding that good issue in his aforesaid affairs. But he became most
ungrateful, and did at a certain time scoff at the Popes Indulgences, no
whit regarding the inestimable weight thereof. But mark his reward: he was
presently stricken lame and blind. And after that there appeared unto him many
thousand souls, who said they came out of Purgatory, and did strive amongst
themselves who should gain of his Holiness that Pardon which had been given to
this said Hernand Garcia, and by him wretch not esteemed. Belike it was Holiday
with them that day: For learned Mr Stevens writes that upon any Saints day The
souls in Purgatory are at rest.
This said vision brought him to a remembrance of his impiety, and a serious
consideration of the infinite mystery of the Popes Indulgence, which is
perfectly available to purge a man from his sins, and to free him from the
scorching pains of Purgatory. So that after, he repented him of his former
evil, and still sued unto the Pope to be again merciful unto him. And after
the performance of great penance he was again pardoned by his Holiness. Which
pardon was no sooner granted, but he had his sight restored him, and the
perfect use of his limbs as he had before. Witness the Author of the Book
before Cited, called The Proof of Purgatory. page 71. 72. Et sequ.

Here are too tales able to stop the mouth of the most obstinate Heretic in
the world, who shall be bold to say the Popes Indulgences are but pickpurse
trash and trumpery: Oh yes note the punishments of the contemners of them:
mark their extraordinary operation, far beyond any quack-salving Empericks
pill or potion. A man blind and lame you have heard restored to his limbs and
sight by the holy Fathers only Pardon and Indulgence. And but that one of his
Holiness Canonical Authors told me of it, I should have sworn it had been a
lie in a budget. For my own part I now know what to think, believe it else
who will.

Yet it may be; as Aesop devised all his Fables for the Morals sake: So the
Popish Legendarians invent their tales to make a good moral use of them only,
for the wealth and reputation of the Pope and his Clergy. Purgatory, Pardons,
and Indulgences, indeed they are the Channels that bring water to the Bishop of
Rome and his Chaplains Mill; the stalking walking Horses that bring home all
the Provander and provision to his Holiness Kitchen: the Posts or Pillars that
uphold the whole fabric of their Masses, Miracles, Processions, Pilgrimages,
Dirges, and the like.

Pope John the eight, through the great pity that he had upon the silly
souls burnt and broiled in Purgatory (like dried Herring, or Westphalian
Hammes or Gamons of Bacon which hang seven years long in the smoke) by the
good and ripe advise and council of Odilion a holy Father and Monk of an Abbey
called Clunie did command and ordain that always the next day after
All-hallowes day, All-soules day.
a solemn day of devotion should be kept for all Christen souls: which order
is very precisely followed and observed by our dear mother the holy Church of
Rome, and many years of Pardon given or granted to all those, which upon that
day do devoutly visit the Chantry Priests and Masses of Scali Coeli, using
their purse liberally for that purpose, and to have a trentall of Masses, a
sack full of seven Psalms, and three or four pokes packt with Pater nosters
and Aue Mary's, all well measured and filled, whereof to make a present to the
silly souls in Purgatory, for that is fit meat for their mouths, and they are
as well refreshed with those dainties, as though they were wrapped about the
head with a wet clout in a cold morning. But yet I will not omit a pretty take
for my purpose.

We read (quoth the Author of the book called Sermones discipuli de tempore)
Sermon. 41.
that in old time good people would on All-hallowen day take bread and deal
for all Christen souls. And one good Woman a widow, who had in store but
three pecks of flower, did make it all into loaves and deal it, saying to them
that received it, Remember to pray for the soul of my Mother. And one of them
praying very earnestly for the soul of this good Woman's Mother, her Mother
appeared unto her and told her, my daughter by her charity and thou by thy
good prayers have now helped me out of Purgatory; Tell my daughter that she
sell her Cow and go presently to Rome to the Popes Holiness for a Pardon for
her sins, and then she may be eased of such pains as I have endured: which
being told to her daughter, she rejoiced much and did as she was bidden, and
went to Rome, and had Indulgence. And the Pope by divine revelation knew before
she came of all that had happened to her. This Tale is alleged by Father
Steuens in his Book called The Unity of Gods Church. page 271.


Let me then entreat all honest English Italianated Romanists, who are willing
to chaffer for this singular, exquisite commodity of Indulgence at the best
hand in this next ensuing year of Iubilee, that they provide them of good
store of cash; though I hear Pardons will be then very plenty, and therefore
the less dainty.

The prices they shall find high or low according to the coursenesse or
finenesse of their Remission, the lightness or weightinesse of the crime, the
ability or weakness of the purchaser. I have within these few days seen in
the hands of one (who esteems it as a great raritie) an authentical Book of
the particular Prices and Taxations of all Pardons, Faculties, and Indulgences
grantable by the Popes liberal Holiness, which Book was Printed above an
hundred years ago in Paris, bearing the name of Taxa Came^e Apostolicae,
which as I guess is like to be published in English ere long against the
opening of the great Market, for the benefit of the Christian world. And sure a
great benefit it is and special convenience to our Romanists who are willing
to trade, to know before hand the prices of the Market by the Book of the
general Bailiffe, or Clearke of the Market. It is defended by some Writers
Deseusio Parisien. Curi^ pro liberate Eccl. Gall. Ludouic. 11. Oblato arus. 77.
that the common Indulgences only, with the Letters of pardon, and the
Reseruationes pectorales, mentales, regressus generales and speciales accessus,
with other such trifles more, are worth to the Pope in one only Kingdom above
two hundred thousand Crowns a year: which through all Christendom would
amount to above ten millions of Crowns, which is a pretty moderate
reckoning or sum. I have been informed by some of the Priests in London that
some great persons of our Kingdom have sent the Pope two or three hundred
pounds a piece for Pardons. The use of some of which Indulgences in the manner
of their proceedings is very remarkable. For they are the Mother or Midwife of
many wicked practices, for the advantage of their Church, as being the very
bellows which blow the fire of Treason against the persons and states of
Princes. This ware bewitcheth not only private men, but great Kings; For her
Merchants are the great men of the earth. Apoc. 18. 3. Therefore infinite store
of this Babylonian trumpery was transported unto the poor Indians, for the
pretended benefit of their souls, but for the intended benefit of a Princes
worldly estate.

The Ministration of the Popes pardons is with the ingredients of Parchment,
Wax, and encaunted Words, all which by purging the entrails of their purses
have a wonderful operation in them.

The Treasury of Indulgences is shut up in a Chest (his Holiness having the
Keys) wherein is heaped up all the superfluous meritorious good works of St
Francis, S^ Benedict, St Dominick, S^ Thomas a Becket, St Boniface, St
Alphonse, and other holy Fathers, Petrus Asores in Catholica assertione de lege.
whose merits being so overflowing plentiful, over and beside what has
answered for their own sins, Vid. Extrauag. Clement. 6.
the Pope dispenses and distributeth the remainder to every person according
to his Holiness discretion, which is much guided by weight and measure of that
which is brought to purchase a good Market. Thesaurum Ecclesiae vocant Christi
and sanctorum Apostolorum, Martyrumque merita. Calvin. Instit. lib. 3 cap. 5.
The bottom of this Chest is so vnplummetable, that it can never be sounded,
emptied nor diminished. If it were possible that all the people of the world
did go to Rome in one year of Iubilee that every one might receive full
Indulgence and Pardon, yet should the same Chest be no more emptied thereby,
then the Ocean Sea should be with taking out of it one spoonful of water; or
St Goddards mountains be diminished by taking from them one handful of sand.

Tho. Becon. de Reliqu. Eccl. Romans sol. 186.
Lastly, as for the extent of these Indulgences. Some of them are for an hundred
thousand years, so liberal is the holy Father. Pope Innocent the 8. granted
some for fifty thousand years as but an ordinary kindness; Pope Clement the
7. for forty thousand; Pope Clement the 5. for thirti^ thousand years.
Plenariae Indulgentiae a Papa Centoru^ annorum: a Cardinalibus centum dieru^:
ab Episcopis quadraginta.
Some are granted to the living, some to the dead. Some purchase pardons as
they do Lands, not only for themselves, but their heirs. Some have their
whole sins remitted, some but part. Some have power granted for the freeing
of one soul out of Purgatory by the Popes Indulgence, others have liberty to
free many. Some of their dispensations are the dissipations of divine and
humane right; some are the disvniting of natural and moral bands. Some are to
tie Princes in unlawful marriage; some to untie many Subjects from lawful
obedience: All of them are of great presumption against the Laws of God and
Nature. Calvin. Institut. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Sunt sanguinis Christi prophanatio, Satanaeque ludibrium, quo Christianum
populum a Dei gratia, a vita quae est in Christo abducant, and a vera salutis
via avertant.

SPECIAL INDVLGENCES PVRCHASED AT Rome, granted to diverse English Gentle
believing Roman Catholics, for their money.
MY chief intent in propounding a recital of particular Indulgences given to
diverse particular men of our Nation, is not (God is my witness) to cast
imputation of folly upon Gentlemen of worthy and respected Families in our
Nation; but to imply and signify in regard of the public by this taste and
essay, what great sums of money are exhausted and gotten out of this Kingdom
to enrich Rome upon pretense of these and other such like Trumperies. They make
a Mart of the Nations. Esa. 23. 3. The Papal pardons indeed which like
Summer-swallowes so busily fly abroad, what are they else then very Nets for
money, Impostures, Sophistications, Circunductions, Collusions, and Deceivings
of the people, defacings of Christ's death, obscurings of Gods free grace, very
spurs unto all lewdness of life? For what offense, knavery, sin, or
abomination can be so great, which may not be healed and made clean with the
mollifying oil of the Popes candid Indulgence?

-- Venalia Romae
Thura, Sacerdotes, caelum est venale, Deusque.
Jndulgences granted to Relics, Crosses, Beads and Pictures, at the instance
of Sr Robert Sherley, Ambassador from the King of Persia, to all Christian
Princes.
De profundis, with one Pater Noster and one Aue; and those that cannot read,
three Pater nosters and three Aue's, gain a plenary and deliver a soul out of
Purgatory.

The Divine Office, or Offium B. Mariae, or 7 Psalms, or Coron. of our Lady,
or a third part of the Rosary, or the Letanies of Saints with the Prayers, or
that of our Lady approved, praying our Savior for the exaltation of holy
Church, and extirpation of heresy, gain all the Indulgences which in that day
are got in all the Churches within and without the walls of Rome, and a
Plenary for those that shall be confessed and communicated.

Pater nosters and three Aue mary's, praying our Savior for the Advancement
and Honor of Sr Robert Sherley, a grand Promotor of the Catholic cause,
desiring also the increase of all Religious Orders, they are made partakers of
all the Intercessions of the aforesaid renowned Knight; as also of all the
sacrifices, prayers, fastings, mortifications, and pious works of any of the
members of the Catholic Church.

Pater noster and one Aue Marie; praying for the exaltation of holy Church, and
extirpation of heresy, he does gain the Remission of the third part of his
sins, and being confessed and communicacated, saying seven Pater nosters and
seven Aue Mary's, deliver three souls out of Purgatory.

Jndulgences granted to Crosses, Beads, and Pictures, at the instance of the
Procurators of the Canonization of St Carolo Boromeo.
Holiness does grant to any that shall have about him any of those forenamed
things blessed, and praying before any of the said Pictures, shall say the
office of our Lady, of our Savior, or of the dead, or the seven Penitential
Psalms, or graduall, or the Coronarie of our Lady, or of our Savior, or the
third part of the Rosarie, or shall hear Mass, or a Preaching, or shall
visit the most holy Sacrament, or shall accompany it, or shall give an Alms,
or do any other like works (although they should be bound to do the same)
praying for the extirpation of heresy, gain for every time the remission of
the third part of their sins, and being confessed, and communicated, a
plenarie Indulgence, a poena et culpa, etc.

Holiness does also grant to every one that shall make reverence to any Cross
or Picture, or shall recommend himself to God, to our Lady, to his good
Angel, or to that Saint which he is most devoted to, or shall give thanks to
God for his benefits received, or in the beginning any action, or in time of
any tribulation shall sign himself three times with the sign of the holy
Cross, or shall say once Deus in adiutorium meum intend, or shall do other
pious or charitable works, gain for every time twenty years of Indulgence.

penitent for their sins, with purpose to Confess them, and communicate,
shall gain ten years of Indulgence, and when moreover they shall examine
their consciences, they gain remission of the third part of their sins, and
being effectually confessed, praying to God for the happy estate of holy
Church, gain dubble.

Priest shall confess and communicate or say Mass (as well being bound as for
devotion) and pray to God for the extirpation of heresy, or the exaltation of
holy Church, he shall gain a plenarie, and praying for the souls in
Purgatory, deliver every time a soul thence, according to their own intention.

Whosoever shall cause to be said three Masses of the dead in one or more days
twelve times in the year; for every time delivers a soul out of Purgatory,
according to his own intention.

holy Thursday, and upon the day of the Ascension of our Savior shall be
confessed and communicate, and shall pray for his Holiness, and for the
exaltation of holy Church, gains the Indulgences of the blessing of his
Holiness, which he is used to give publicly in that day as if he were present.

Stations of Rome, in what time of the year soever, who so has any of the
aforesaid holy things, may gain the same Indulgence as well for the living as
the dead, saying in the Church, or at home before some of the said Pictures
five Pater nosters, and five Aue's in honor of the most holy blood of our
Savior, sprinkled in his most holy Passion.

Miserere, or one Credo, etc. or Te Deum, etc. in honor of the most holy blood
as above, and kiss the ground three times, may be partaker of the Indulgence
which they do gain, which make the going of the holy stayres that day.

Mass, and shall pray for his Holiness, for the Christian Princes, and
tranquillity of their state, do gain every time all the Indulgences and
Graces which in that day are got by visiting all the Churches within and
without Rome.

conservation and increase of religious Orders, is made partaker of all their
sacrifices, fastings, disciplines, prayers, and other their good works, as if
he were a member of any of them.

Charles, shall say five Pater nosters and five Aue's in honor of the Passion
of our Savior, gets a plenarie, and the remission of all their sins.

Holiness does grant to those that say one Pater noster and Aue, or the Psalm
Laudate Dominum omnes gentes, or the Psalm De profundis, or shall kiss any of
the above named holy things, saying three times Jesus and one Salve, Pardon for
all those deserts which they have unadvisedly committed in saying the divine
office (either being bound thereto or for devotion) or any error in saying the
office of our Lady, or our Savior, or by saying or hearing Mass, or saying
or doing any other kind of spiritual work.

hindered by any lawful cause so that he cannot be present at Mass, or that
being a Priest cannot say Mass, or cannot say his office, or other things to
which he was bound; By saying five Pater nosters and five Aue's in honor of the
most sacred blood of our Savior sprinkled in his most holy Passion, obtains
the same Indulgence which he should have had in fulfilling the aforesaid
things. Those which at the point of death devoutly say once Jesus with heart,
not being able to pronounce it with their mouths, being therewith contrite, not
being able to be confessed and communicated, obtain all Indulgences in form
of a Iubilee.

Holiness does grant over and beside the aboue-named Indulgences and graces (of
what sort soever they be) that it shall be sufficient for any one to have of
the aforesaid holy things either proper or borrowed, and if that it happen any
do break or be lost, one other may be put in the place of the same, and shall
have the same graces and Indulgences, and that they do serve for all places of
the world, neither are they to be recalled, except there be express mention
made of the aforesaid Chapters.

Jndulgences granted to a Countess of this Kingdom by the Intercession of her
Son. Anno Domini 1607.
Holiness is pleased to grant that for thirty years following, upon the sixth
of February, every year, in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, (which is
seated upon one of the seven Hills, called Mons Esquilinus) there shall be
said that day at the high Altar a Mass for the said Countess, and thereby
shall she obtain a plenary remission for all her sins past. And by
repeating five Pater Nosters, five Aue's, and one Credo, etc. She shall be
able her self to free a soul that day out of Purgatory.

Splendid Chapel of Pope Paolo the V. (where he lies buried) there shall be
said upon the seventh of February during the space of thirty years following,
Masses for the children and kindred of the said Countess; and by virtue thereof
the third part of their sins shall be remitted; And if they be Confessed and
Communicate the same day, they shall obtain a plenary Indulgence.



Holy man to say Mass daily for the souls in Purgatory, she shall at the
hour of her death have full remission of all her sins, excesses, and
trespasses whatsoever. A poena and culpa etc. The like Indulgence has she
gained for her children, and as many of her kindred as she shall pray for, or
wish well unto.

Jndulgences granted to the Catholics of England, at the instance of
Cardinal Allen.
Holiness does grant to all the kindred and friends of the said Cardinal
(embracing the Romish Catholic Religion, and saying every day three Pater
nosters and three Aue Mary's) freedom from the pains of Purgatory, and every
one of them who shall say one Pater noster and one Aue more for the honor of
the said Holy Cardinal, shall get a plenary Indulgence for his friend.

Masses of the dead in one or more days twelve times in the year; For every
time delivers a soul out of Purgatory, according to his own intention.

Catholic of England upon holy Thursday before Easter, and Ascension of our
Savior shall be Confessed and Communicate, and shall pray for his Holiness, for
the Cardinals, and for the Exaltation of holy Church, gains the Indulgences
of the blessing of his Holiness, (which he is used to give publicly in that
day) as if he were present.

Lady with three Ave Maria's in a day more then is enjoined by his Confessor,
and once in a week shall say over this Prayer.

O domina mea sancta Maria, matter Dei, pietate plenissima, summi Regis filia,
matter gloriosissima, matter orphanorum, consolatio desolatorum, via errantium,
salus omnium in te sperantium, virgo ante partum, virgo in partu, and virgo
post partum; fons misericordiae, fons salutis and gratiae, fons consolationis
and indulgentiae, fons pietatis and laetitiae, fons vitae and veniae; hodie and
quotidie, and in hora exitus mei, and animam meam and corpus meum tibi
commendo: omnem spem meam and consolationem meam, omnes angustias and miserias
meas, vitam and finem vitae meae tibicommitto. Amen. Virgo virginum praeclara
Mihi iam non sis amara.
Whosoever performs the premises shall receive many blessings from our Lady
in this life, and at his death our Lady shall appear unto him and comfort him.

His Holiness does command all those that honor our Lady to carry about with
them, the book called Officium B. Mariae Virginis, or our Ladies Psalter; and
to keep our Ladies Beads and Pictures.

Jndulgences and Pardons granted to Sir John Markam, Knight. Anno Domini. 1608.
Holiness does grant unto the said Knight for diverse his pious and laudable
acts, plenary Pardon and Absolution for all his sins formerly committed; as
also Impossibility for the pains of Purgatory, promising him a good Angel
always to attend him: He does further yield that whosoever shall say for the
soul of Sr John Markam (being dead) thrice Pater Noster and Aue, shall gain
forty days of Indulgence whatsoever sin he commit.

Holiness does further grant to Katherine and Mary, sisters of the said Sr John
Markam coming to Confession and Communicating, and having any of the Meddalls
of this Pardon, saying three Pater nosters and three Aue's, a plenary
Indulgence for the time past; And if to the former they add a De profundis,
they obtain Pardon for fifty days after, and may deliver a soul out of
Purgatory.

John Markam, and his Sisters, saying with Devotion at the hour of their death
(the word) Jesus; or if either of them cannot for the extreamitie of their
trance pronounce it with the mouth, yet if either of the parties but think of
that blessed name, they obtain a plenary Indulgence in form of a Iubilee.

A Pardon granted unto Master Rawson of England. Anno Domini 1608.
THe said Mr Rawson having devoted himself unto the service of the blessed
Father and Lawmakers St Benedict, has obtained by the Intercession of the said
St Benedict, (who did call himself from all worldly tumults to serve God
alone) a plenary Pardon for himself, and such Indulgence as follows for all
his brethren the Catholics of England.

Sancte Benedicte or a pro me, with Pater noster and Aue, shall forthwith have
a third part of his sins remitted him.

Pater nosters and three Aue Mary's for the advancement and happy increase of
all the Religious Professors of the Order of St Benedict, shall participate a
particular benefit by all their sacrifices, prayers, fastings, mortification
and good works, as if he were a particular member of that Religious Order.

or Obligation for any part of that Order, shall forthwith deliver a soul out
of Purgatory.

Benedict, that is, to St Placidus, St Maurus, the Virgin St Scholastica his
Sister, and to all holy Monks and Nuns, shall be able to make war against
the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and instantly deliver two souls out of
Purgatory.

Jndulgences granted by his Holiness to the Family of the MANPHILDS in England.
Anno Dominini 1608.
Rome, in what time of the year soever, any of the aforesaid Family shall pray
before any of the sacred Relics and Pictures sent from his Holiness, they
shall gain the same Indulgence as well for the living as the dead, as is given
that day publickely at Rome, saying in the Church or at home before some of the
said Pictures or Relics five Pater nosters and five Aue Mary's, in honor of
the most holy blood of our Savior sprinkled in his most holy Passion. Of
little worth is that skull or dead man's bone which will not (by beco^ming a
holy Relic) add something to the Popes Exchequer.


Miserere, or one Credo, or Te Deum, etc. in honor of the most holy blood as
above, and kissing the ground three times, any of the aforesaid Family may be
partaker of the Indulgences which they do gain who make the going of the holy
Stayres that day.

Antiphon in honor of our Lady, gains a plenary, and shall free a soul out
of Purgatory.

Aue Regina coelorum,
Aue Domina Angelorum:
Salve radix, salve porta,
Ex qua mundo lux est orta.
Gaude virgo gloriosa,
Super omnes speciosa;
Vale o valde decora,
Et pro nobis Christum exora.
Indulgences granted to the Family of the Lord M. in England, at the
Intercession of Tob. Matthew. Anno Domini. 1608.
HIS Holiness has granted unto the said Lord M. for the relief he has
affoorded unto distressed Catholics, as also for his bounty to the houses of
Bruxells and Lisbon, I wish rather that this English money had bin spent in
England upon some public service there.
and for yielding his helping hand to the repair of the Churches of St Peter's,
Santa Maria Maggiore, St Paul's, St Sebastian and Fabian, St Lawrance, Santa
Croce, St John de Lateran near Rome, that he shall be partaker of all the
Masses, Prayers, Fastings, Watchings, Pilgrimages, etc. had at the Stations of
Rome; together with a plenary Remission of all sins, A poena and culpa, etc.
for a thousand Lents and sixtie-fiue years. And besides saying any day of the
year three Pater Nosters and three Aue's more then is commanded him by his
ghostly Father, he shall be able to free one of his Friends out of Purgatory.

Indulgences very large granted to the Family of the Lord W. at the
Intercession of the said T. M.

Indulgences granted to the Family of the Lord Va. at the Intercession of T. M.

A PARDON GRANTED TO THO: GER. OF England Knight, and his Lady.
PAulus quintus Episcopus, servus servorum Dei: Dilecto filio nobili viro Tho.
Ger. Militi; and dilectae in Christo filiae nobili mulieri ejus uxori, salutem
and Apostolicam benedictionem, etc.

The same at large in English thus:
PAul the fifth, Bishop, servant of the servants of God: To his beloved son
the noble Gentleman T. G. the younger, Knight; and to his beloved daughter in
Christ the noble Lady his wife, greeting and Apostolical benediction. Having
heard of late of some desires of yours which concern the salvation of your
souls, and receiving your Petitions from the hands of the Religious man Henry
Stanley, we have granted to your said Petitions a favorable hearing, and by
the tenor of these presents do grant this Indulgence to your devotion. That
such a ghostly Father as either of you shall choose, shall have power by
Apostolical authority, to grant to you full remission of all your sins
whereof you shall be confessed, as also freedom from the pains of Purgatory.
And every Wednesday, Friday, or Saturday that any of you shall say over the
Office of our Lady, you shall merit for whom you love best. And if upon Easter
day you shall be confessed and communicate, and say nine Pater-nosters, and nine
Aues, with a de profundis, for the souls in Purgatory, you shall every time
be able to free one soul thence. Also at the hour of your death the Devil
shall have no power over you, nor at al trouble or torment you. What lawful
petition you shall ask at any time of God, he shall grant it you. Your enemies
shall not prevail against you. Yet we declare that if upon confidence of this
Remission, you shall commit any notorious sins wilfully, that then this
present Pardon shall not help you as concerning them. You must also persist in
the unity and faith of the holy Church of Rome, and pray for the extirpation
of heresy, and live in obedience and devotion toward us and our successors
Popes of Rome, canonically entering into that Sea, and further do your duty to
all religious men. Lastly, you shall give twenty shillings yearlie toward the
maintenance of the Cope of S. Thomas Becket, and every Friday a penie to the
first poor body you meet. Let it now be lawful for no man to infringe this
Pardon and Grant of ours, or with any boldness to contradict it. And if any
shall presume to attempt any such thing, let him know and assured lie
understand, that he shall incur the indignation of Almighty God, and of his
blessed Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and all other Martyrs and Saints.
Given at S. Peter's in Rome, under the Fishers Ring, the 9 of April, in the
first year of our Papacy.

The form of the Absolution wherewith they are absolved with whom his
Holiness so graciously dispenses.
AVthoritate Dei Patris Omnipotentis, and beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum
ejus, ac authoritate Apostolica mihi in hac part commissa: Ego absolvote
abomnibus peccatis tuis mihi per te vere confessis and contritis, and de quibus
confiteri v^lles; si tuae occurrerent memoriae. Plenariam absolutionem omnium
peccatorum tuorum, in quantum claves Ecclesiae se extendunt in hac part,
authoritate istarum literarum Apostolicarum tibi do and concedo, ita ut sis
absolutus ante Tribunal Domini nostri Jesu Christi, habeasque vitam aeternam,
and vivas in secula seculoru^. Amen.

In English thus:
BY the authority of God the Father Almighty, and of his blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, and by the Apostolic authority committed unto me in this
behalf: I absolve thee from all thy sins, by thee to me truly confessed
and contrite, and of which thou would have been confessed, if they had come
unto thy remembrance. Moreover I give and grant unto thee full absolution and
remission of all thy sins, so far as the keys of the Church do extend in
this behalf by the authority of these Apostolic Letters, so that thou be
absolved before the judging seat of our Lord Jesus Christ, and have everlasting
life, worlds without end. Amen.

Another form of Absolution.
AVthoritate Dei Patris Omnipotentis, Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and totius
matris Ecclesiae: ac virtute hujus Bullae and Papalis Jndulgentiae, Ego absolvo
te ab omnibus peccatis tuis, etc.

BY the authority of God the Father Almighty, of the Apostles Peter and Paul,
and of all the mother Church, and by virtue of this Bull, the Popes Pardon, I
absolve thee from all thy sins, etc.

A third form of Absolution.
AVthoritate Dei Omnipotentis, and beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus,
ac authoritate Apostolica mihi in hac part commissa: Ego absolvo te ab omnibus
peccatis tuis and poenistibi in Purgatorio debitis propter culpas and offensas
quas contra Deum and animam tuam commisisti. Et in quantum mihi committitur,
restituo te illi Jnnocentiae, in qua eras quando baptizatus fuisti, exceptis
punctis hiis reservatis Domino Papae, ut anima tua vivat cum Christo in secula
seculorum. Amen.

BY the authority of God Almighty, and of his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul,
and by the Aposto like authority committed unto me in this behalf, I absolve
thee from all thy sins and pains due unto thee in Purgatory for the faults
and offenses which thou have committed against God and thine own soul. And as
much as lies in my power, I restore thee unto that Innocence wherein thou
were when thou wast baptized, those points only excepted, which are reserved
to the Lord Pope, that thy soul may live with Christ worlds without end. Amen.

General Pardons granted by diverse Popes for diverse considerations, etc.
Pope Innocent the 8, has granted to every man and woman that bears the
length upon him of Christ's nails wherewith he was fastened to the Cross (the
just length of every one of them was nine inches) and worshippeth them daily
with five Pater nosters, and five Aues, and a Creed, that he shall have
granted him these seven great gifts that follow.

The first is, He shall never die sudden nor evil death. The second is, He
shall never be slain with sword nor weapon. The third is, His enemies shall
never overcome him. The fourth is, Poison nor false witness shall never grieve
him. The fist is, He shall have sufficient goods and honest living. The sixth
is, He shall not die without the Sacraments of the Church. The seventh is, He
shall be delivcred and defended from all wicked spirits, pestilence, fevers,
and other maladies.

Pope Jnnocent the 8, etc.

TO all good Christian people disposed to say our Ladies Psalter within this
Church or churchyard, on any of these beads, the which have been pardoned at
the holy place of Shene, shall have ten thousand years of pardon. Also for
every word in the Pater noster, Aue, and Credo, 23 days of pardon, totiens,
quotiens.

Also they are pardoned at Sion, and by that ye shall have for every Pater
noster, Aue, and Credo said on them, three hundred days of pardon. Also unto
all those that the beads do string, or cause to be stringed in time of
necessity, there is granted by two Bishops fourscore days of pardon, and Gods
blessing and theirs.

Also you must say first on the five beads five Pater nosters, five Aue Mary's,
and a Creed, in the worship of the 5 wounds of our Savior Christ, and then
after every Creed, say on the first white bead of the five Jesus for thy holy
name, and then on the red bead And for thy bitter passion, then on the first
black bead Save us from sin and shame: then on the second black bead And
endless damnation: and then on the last white bead Bring us to the bliss,
That never shall miss Sweet Jesus, Amen.

The Pardon whereof, remembering the wounds great and small of our Savior
Christ, is 5 thousand, 4 hundred, 75 years, of these 5 beads. The whole sum
of pardon granted of both Monasteries for every Psalter saying on these beads,
is 26 thousand, 6 hundred years, and 50 days, totiens, quotiens.

Therefore let no man nor woman presume to carry away or to convey the
aforesaid beads, but hang them again where ye find them. For if they do,
they are accursed four times in the year in the general sentence. And at
every Psalters end, pray for all christen souls.

Pope Clement the 7, with diverse other holy Fathers Popes of Rome his
predecessors, of their paternall holiness and abundant graces, have granted to
all the brethren and sisterne of the said gyld that now be, and to all other
that will be, full power and authority to choose them any able Priest to their
Confessor, secular or religious, which may hear their confessions, and give
unto them once in their life and in the Article of death, plenary and full
remission of all their sins, excesses, offenses, and trespasses, how grievous
and enorme soever they be, a poena and culpa, etc.

Again the brethren and sisterne of the aforesaid gyld, may say or cause to be
said, Masses and all other divine Services before day light incontinent after
three of the clock after midnight not only in hallowed places, but also in
unhallowed places, though they be suspended or interdicted by ordinary
authority.

Also every brother and sister that will say any Wednesday, Friday, or
Saturday, one Pater noster, one Aue Maria, and a Credo, in any Church or
Chapel where they do dwell, provided always that they give somewhat to the
aforesaid gyld, and put-to their helping hand to the sustentation and
maintenance of the charges of the said gyld, as often as they shall so do, shall
have clean remission a poena and culpa, and the same remission as if they had
visited the Chapel of Scala coeli of Rome, and the Church of S. John
Lateranense, when the Stations there be celebrated for the quick and dead. The
picture of Saint John Baptist, and a stone, will drive away an angry dog.


The aforesaid brethren and sisterne also causing Mass to be said either on
the Wednesday, Friday, or Saturday, in Church or Chapel for the dead, shall
deliver what souls they will, and as often as they will out of Purgatory.

They may also lawfully in time of Lent and other times of the year, in the
which white meats be prohibited and forbidden, eat eggs, cheese, milk,
butter, and all other white meats, freely and without scrupulosity or grudge of
conscience: and if they be sick, they also may eat flesh with counsel of
their Ghostly father and Physician.

And whosoever shall procure any man or woman to be brother or sister of the
aforesaid gyld, shall have for his godly travel five hundred years of pardon.
Also every brother and sister, with their fathers and mothers departed, shall
be made partakers of all Masses, Mattenses, Prayers, Suffrages, Alms deeds,
holy livings, Pilgrimages, and all other good deeds and works of piety and
charity, the which be done and shall be done throughout the whole universal
Church militant, and all the members of the same for ever. And furthermore, our
said holy Father has granted to all Christian people, being truly penitent and
confessed, or having purposed to be confessed, at such times as the Law has
determined, and there devoutly do visit the Chapel of our Lady in Goston,
and also do visit three times seven Altars there assigned in the Parish Church
at the Feasts of the glorious Assumption, Nativity, and all other feasts of the
same our blessed Lady, or within eight days following after every of the same
Feasts, or any day of the said Vtas, putting-to their helping hands to the
maintenance of the charges of the same gyld, shall have and enjoy all and
singular Indulgences and Remissions of their sins, as if they had personally
visited the Church of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul at Rome, and other the 7
principal Churches the^ in the year of Iubile and Grace, and also shall have all the same Indulgences and Remissions of their sins as they should have if they
had personally visited the Church of S. James in Compostell in Spains, and had
done or caused to be done there any other thing for the obtaining of the
Indulgences of the said year of Iubile at Rome and Compostell.

Also our holy Father has declared and decreed, that these said Remissions,
Faculties, Indulgences, and Dispensations, shall never be revoked, suspended,
nor denulled, but ever to stand in full strength and virtue, from henceforth,
notwithstanding the year of Iubile at Rome, or any other manner of cause
whatsoever shall happen in time to come.

And every man or woman may be made a brother and sister of Goston gyld, and
enjoy all Remissions, Privileges, Liberties, etc. if they will pay every one
of them at their entering six shillings eight pence, and every year after,
during his or her life, eight pence, or else thirteen shillings four pence
for the whole, for every singular person, toward the maintaining and
sustentation of Priests, Clerks, and poor bead-men, which daily be found with
the charges of the said gyld.

Pope Clement the 5 granted to so many as give ought to the sustentation of the
order of S. Trinity of Houndslow, his blessing for ever, and twelve years, a
hundred and threescore days of pardon, with relaxations of the third part of
their penance, and of the pains due for their sins.

Pope Alexander the 4, to all the brethren and sisterne of the aforesaid order,
that gives some good portion of their goods yearly to the brethren or
Messengers of the said order, or in their Will and Testament do give and
bequeath some honest portion of substance for the relief of the said brethren,
has licensed and granted, to choose unto them any apt and meet Priest to be
their Confessor or ghostly Father, I advise them to take M. Medcalfe for the
men, M. Leake for Gentlewomen.
and to absolve them from all their sins, toties, quoties, and also to be
buried in Christian burial, of whatsoever death he deceased, if he were not
excommunicated by name.

Pope Innocent the third dispenses with the brethren and sisterne of the
aforesaid Order concerning all vows of abstinence, and of pilgrimage going,
except only the vow of pilgrimage unto Peter and Paul at Rome, and Saint James
at Compostell, so that it shall be lawful for them to change those vows of
abstinence and pilgrimage, unto other works of mercy and charity; and this
has he done of his special grace and mere motion to al them that give
somewhat to the said Order of Saint Trinity.

Pope Gregory the ninth has granted to all brethren and sisterne of the
aforesaid order, and to all their parents and friends, whether they be, alive
or dead, all those Indulgences and Pardons Pardons innumerable, and good cheap.
(which are innumerable, and may justly be compared with the Stars of the sky,
and the sands of the Sea) that they have, which go on pilgrimage either unto
Rome, or unto the holy Land.

Pope Pius the 2 has granted and given to the aforesaid brethren and sisterne,
once in their life plenary remission, and full forgiveness of all their
sins, yea, and that in all such cases as are reserved to the Apostolic Sea.

Very graciously and innocently considered.
Pope Innocent the eight has confirmed all the aforesaid privileges,
indulgences, pardons, etc. and of his special grace has doubled them all for
the salvation of the brethren and sisterne of the Order of S. Trinity.

Pardon of the Augustine Friars.
Pope John the 23 granted to so many as be brothers and sisters, and
benefactors of the Friars Hermites of Saint Augustine, that they shall be
partakers of all the prayers, sacrifices, preachings, contemplations, fastings,
watchings, pilgrimages, vows, obedience, chastity, poverty, patience, mercy,
alms, and of all other spiritual labors, travels, pains, exercises, etc.
that be done either of the Friars of the aforesaid order, or of any other
devout and religious people througout the world, with Remission and
forgiveness of all their sins, a poena and culpa, toties, quoties.

The like pardon was granted of diverse Popes to the Fraternity of Burton
Lazare, with dispensation of vows, and relaxation of foam part of penance,
with plenary remission of all their sins.

The clemency of Pope Clement to such as are bountiful to S. Mary of Runciuall.
To them that gave any thing to the Hospital of Saint Mary of Runciuall nigh
unto Charingcrosse without the walls of London, Pope Clement the 4 granted that
they should be partakers of all the Masses, Prayers, Fastings, Watchings,
Pilgrimage-goings unto the holy Land consecrate with the blood of Christ, or
unto the City of Rome, privileged with the authority of the blessed Martyrs
and Apostles Peter and Paul. And if they be Priests or Religious persons,
either men or women, and have failed to say their divine Service, either
through negligence or default of books, or sickness of body; the aforesaid
holy Father does mercifully absolve them from al such offenses, and release
them from the pain and punishment due unto such offenders.

Money is the Merchant in all the Popes affairs.
Pope Clement the 6, of his special grace has given and granted to all them
that give some part of their substance, being confessed and contrite, release
of the third part enjoined them by their ghostly father, and three years of
pardon, with an hundred days more of pardon, with free burial in places
although interdict, and of whatsoever kind of death they chance to die, with
2000 Lents, and 85 days of pardon, etc.

Pope Alexander the third has granted to all them that give ought to the
maintenance of the Collegiate Church of Saint John of Beuerley an hundred days
of pardon, and relaxation from the seventh part of their penance.

Pope Innocent the fourth has granted to all the brethren of the same
fraternity, pardon of all sins forgotten, and of all vows broken, except the
vow unto the Holy land, and at their latter end remission from all their
sins, a poena and culpa: so that to every brother and sister of that
fraternity, being confessed and absolved, their Confessor may say on this
manner: John or Joan, as free I make thee,
As heart may think, or eye may see.
Of this pardon it is also thus written: Omnibus in annis qui turbant jura
Ioannis:
Ter execrantur, damnati jure probantur.


The pardon granted to the Fraternity of S. Cornelis at Westminster for such
as give any thing unto it, comes in the year to two thousand, seven hundred
and threescore days for ever to endure.

To the Fraternity of the Sepulcher of our L. Jesus Christ, have been granted
by diverse Popes of Rome, especially Pope Urban the 4, as large Indulgences as
any of the former: pardons for 20, 30, and 40 thousand years, with odd days.

A DISCOVRSE OF ENGLISH NVNNES of late transported within these two or three
years.
IT is observed, that cunning Fowlers when they have caught one bird in their
net, will make use of that for a stale to tole-on others. And so it is with our
Priests and Jesuits who entice the daughters of diverse of our Gentry here in
England to the Nunneries beyond the Seas: They not only transport them
thither, as it were with a Writ called Corpus cum causa, (them with and for
their money) but also make use of those that are in the Cage already, that they
may seem to sing out the praises of the place where they are. And to this end
the Mother Abbess by the direction of an inspecting spiritual father makes
them write over letters, or rather inditeth letters in their name to the
exceeding magnifying of the state wherein they live, that other young Birds of
that brood, remaining in England, may be drawn to fly to the same forain nests.

I have seen of late diverse letters written from diverse Nunnified Gentlewomen
to some of their kindred here in this Kingdom: The subject of which Letters,
though from diverse hands, wholly concerned, first the extolling of those places
wherein they were settled; secondly, the earnest requiring and demanding of
great sums of money to be sent over at appointed times.

For the former, I envy them not that mopish, mo^kish, foolish paradise into
which their ghostly fathers have brought them, but am content they shall solace
themselves with the joy and delight of their Angelical life.

The sums of money which pass out of our Kingdom to the Nunneries.
But as concerning the other, I wish it were duly considered of, what infinite
sums of money pass out of our kingdom yearly, to vnderline those said
Nunneries. I have been credibly informed, and some of the Priests (namely,
Father Flood Jesuit, their prime Procurator, and others) have boasted in my
hearing, that the annual pensions given by our popish Voluntaries to such
uses, amount to the full value of four thousand pou^ds, besides the rich
portions which many of our English women carry over with them, and must
sacrifice and lay down to the Lady Abbess her shrine, before they be accepted
of or admitted into their religious Cell, unde (ut ab Inferno) nulla est
redemptio.

The places to which our English women are sent.
The chief places of receipt for our English women, are Bruxels, Griueling, and
Lisbon. The several Orders of Nuns.
The several Couents of Nuns there are of S. Clares order, S. Bridgets or S.
Brides order, S. Katherines order of Seen, Justinians order, Mary Magdalens
order, and Augustines order.

Those that have but a little or no portion, are packt by their Masters to
Griueling to the poor barefooted Clares. Mary Wiltshire, the daughter of a
poor Tailor, whom I spoke of in my other Book, being but a servant and a
poor wench, she should have been seated in this lower form, being of the
courser thread.

Those of a moderate portion trudge away to Lisbon, where the whole Nunnery is
allowed daily 5 crowns and their bread, with some other alms upon occasion
bestowed upon them, as when they show the head of S. Vrsula, the bones of S.
Bridget and her daughter, sundry relics of S. Augustine, the milk of our
Lady, the blood of Hales, with diverse such trinkets and conceits.

But those that have a good round sum for their dowry (as 1000 or 2000
pounds, which some good customers carry hence) such are stamped for Bruxels,
where the hungry Jesuits (who sometimes meet with as good booties as the
Merchants of Argier) dispossess the^ of all worldly cares and vanities, and
like subtle Alchimists refine them out of their silver and golden dross into
a more sublime estate and condition.

I have seen within these few days Letters that came from M.C. E.C. and A I.
Nuns at Bruxels to some of their kindred in England. One of them writes for
five hundred pounds: That the Abbess had done a great favor in taking so
little: That the Nunnery is poor, and that the Abbess cannot forbear the
money any longer.

Pope Innocent the fourth appointed a company of enlarged, vncloistred,
vbiquitary Votists of several sodalities: A great many of which we have latent
in our kingdom; and of whom the Priests and Jesuits make great use. For these
are the scraping Mendicants, who bring good store of prouender to the Ignatian
cratch. Their labor is to beg what they can get for their holy fathers or
masters, and to do them all kinds of service, as to starch their linen,
sweep their chambers, make their beds, wast their Church stuff, etc of which
rank are Mistress Baily in Grayes Inn Lane, Clarentia the Maid, Mistress Halsal
in Bloomesbury, Mistress Venetia, Mistress Philpot, Mistress Fowler, Mistress Flood
in Holborne, Black Besse, and others.

As for the beginning of Nuns. When Pope John the first was made Bishop of
Rome, Monk Bennet, alias Benedict, after that he had placed himself and his
Monkish brethren in a certain noble and famous Cloister, built upon the Mount
Cassinus, raised up also an Order of Nuns, and made his sister Scholastica
Abbess over them.

Their Apparel is commonly a black, sometimes a gray coat, cloak, coule, and
veil. They may not read the holy Scripture without consent or permission of
their superior. Their orders are all wrapped full of superstition and
hypocrisy, seeking their salvation, not in Christ through faith, but in men's
inventions by foolish and popish works.

A Catalogue of the Names of such young Women as to this Authors knowledge have
been within two or three years last past transported to the Nunneries beyond
the seas.
Mrs. Anne M^nfeild. Mistress Anderton. Mrs Parker. Mrs Anne Gray. Mrs. Talbot.
Mrs. Linsel. Mrs. Sydnam. Mrs. Percy^. Mrs. Gerard. Mrs. Flood. Mrs. Ashton.
Mrs. Greffin. Mrs. Halsal. Mrs Blimstone. Jane Roe. Mrs. Eueleigh. Mrs
Worthington. Elizabeth Lusher. Bridget Lee, a kitching maid, sometime dwelling
at the upper end of Holborne. Mrs. Molineux. Mrs. Ingam Mrs. Web. Dorothy
Stamp. Mrs. Ireland. Mrs. Blackstones. Elizabeth Powell of Holborne. Mrs.
Ruckwood. Mrs. Lathom. Mrs. Fortescue. Mrs. Winchcombe. Mrs. Townely. Mrs.
Townely. Mary Turner. Mary Smith. Mrs. Jones. Mrs. Bishop. Mrs. Owen. Mrs
Clifton. Sara Brewer. Grace Wire. Mrs. Atkins. Mrs. Drury. Mrs. Stanley. Mrs.
Sanders. Mrs. Conniers. Mrs. Abbington.
Factors employed for the conueying over of the said Women to the Nunneries.
MAster Hughes of London, a man very active in performing the said business.
Master Palmer. Spanish John, commonly called The Devils factor: or Forty pound
John, which name was given him for cosening two gentlewome^ of 40 pounds, whom
he undertook to transport. John Smith. A kinsman of Master Fisher the Jesuit.
Vdal of Gunpowder Alley. John Barbar. James Heart. Vincent. Captain Dak.
Sherborne. Langton, a Lancashire man. Master Peeters. Stubbes. Louet, a brother
to the popish Goldsmiths.
FINIS.

