A declaration made by the Archbishop of Collen, upon the deed of his marriage,
sent to the States of his Archbishoprike.

With the letter of Pope Gregory the.13* against the celebration of the same
marriage, and the Bishops answer thereunto.

According to the coppie Imprinted at Collen. 1583.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1583.



To the right reverend Father in God John, Bishop of London, Thomas Delone,
wishes increase of grace, and continual happiness, both of body and soul.
IT is not unknown to the learned, nor of the wise forgotten, (right reverend
Father) in what miserable servitude, intolerable torments, heaviness of heart,
and grief of conscience, the godly has from time to time continued under the
tyranny of superstitious Popes and Prelates of Rome, whose intolerable pride
is of the Lord detested, and of all christian people abhorred, through whose
hypocrisy the world has been so long deceived and many thousand souls drawn
from the truth, to the abominable service of idolatry, forsaking the laws and
co^mau^dements of God, to follow the vanities and traditions of men.
Nevertheless, they are not ashamed most impudently to challenge to themselves
the name and title of Catholics and the servants of Christ, and yet treads
his word under feet, despising his holy ordinances and institutions, and as it
were in despite of his glory, follow the works of their own imaginations. But
after the world had of long time been blinded, by the notable dissimulation of
this deceauing church* the Lord of his mercy and love, sending the light of his
holy word, for the relief of his afflicted flock plainly discovered their
hypocrisy, and their filthiness to all flesh. Whereby it is come to pass that
many worthy personages, lately living in darkness and ignorance, is now turned
to the truth, with most earnest repentance of their former life. And among the
rest, through the great mercy and grace of God, this worthy Prince, and bishop
of Collen, Ghebbard, whose heart being opened, and his eyes cleared, has most
effectually shown the fruits of his unfeigned repentance, and having made
declaration thereof throughout his dominions and jurisdictions, has abolished
the abominable mass, and in steed thereof planted the everlasting and
glorious Gospel of Christ, to the great comfort of many grieved and wounded
consciences. Which when the Pope perceived, and knew with great flattery and
adulation, he sought to withdraw him from this most godly and christian
enterprise, charging him with the oath he made to the church Apostolic, and
with his duty toward God, which he both by scripture, but specially by their
own laws, counsel, and decrees, does manifestly defend, and by the fame
approve, that he has done nothing against his oath or duty in any respect: and
the rather does he reprove them by their own authority, for as much as the
same is the greatest confutation that may be against them. And because the
same was done by a worthy person of noble race and parentage, and a bishop by
office and calling, I thought none more meet for the patron of such a
specialty, the^ your Lordship, unto whom I owe all duty and reverence, who for
the good will borne to your Lordshippe, has dedicated unto you this simple
translation, faithfully and justly done according to the copy. Trusting you
will accept the same according to the worthiness thereof, and be a defense
against all that shall seem to mislike of the matter: and in so doing, you
shall bind me for ever at your command* unto whom I wish continual
prosperity in this present life, and in the world to come joys everlasting.

Your Lordships most humble at command, Thomas Deloney.

A Christian declaration touching the Religion which the right reverend Prince,
the Lord Ghebbard, chosen, and confirmed Archbishop of Collen, Elector of the
Empire, and Chancellor for the Province of Italy, Duke of Westphalie and
Enghern, and proclaimed throughout his dominions, the 17. day of January.
1583.
WE Ghebbard, by the grace of God elected, and confirmed Archbishop of Collen,
Chancellor for the province of Italy, Elector of the Empire, Duke of
Westphalie, Enghern, etc. to ye Estates, Earls, Gentlemen, Citizens, and
subjects, of our Archbishoprike ingenerall, and to every one particular, and
to all other under our obedience. Know you by this present, all above named,
and every of you, as we never had nothing more in mind, since it pleased God
to call us to the estate and office of this our Archbishop, by a lawful
election (which yet we also have) then the safeguard and defense of this
Archbishop sea and electorshippe, committed unto us by God, and likewise of
Germany, one part of us, principally in that which concerns the glory of
God: and having had most humble supplications and requests, made unto us by
some of the Estates and Nobles of our dominions, joined with earnest suit of
the most noblest Estates of this great and mighty Empire, to have the Gospel
publicly preached, and the Sacraments administered in all places of our
dominions: as it is ordained and appointed by the word of God. Following the
articles, and confession of Auspourg, and the christian exposition thereof,
according to the will of God, which is that Jesus Christ his son, should of
us be hearkened unto, and his commandments observed and kept: that all
Princes and Magistrates of this world; might open their gates to the king of
glory, that thereby we may learn to know our duty in the charge to us
committed, knowing there is no excuse for us, at the last day, when Christ
shall come in judgment: what time we must render account of the charge and
office wherein he has placed us. For if by us the way of salvation should be
stopped toward our subjects, being nothing ignorant thereof, God which is a just
and severe Judge, unto whose will and commandment we are all bound to obey
(and that without dissimulation) would not see it unrevenged.

We for these causes, understanding the humble peticio^s of our said States and
subjects, are determined no longer to defer the grant of their just and
rightful request, having had the advice of our Lords and counsel, and after
great deliberation we have permitted, to our aforesaid subjects, under the
dominion of our Archbishop sea, of what state or condition soever, not only the
liberty of their conscience (always agreeing to the word of GOD) but also
assurance by this our present ordinance, and by virtue thereof, that they
shall not be grieved, molested, or troubled in their persons, dignities,
honors, or goods, by any governors, Justices, or other inferior magistrates,
whatsoever. For the profession of their faith, conscience, and rule of
Religion, being according to Gods word and the confession of Auspurg. Granting
freely to al prelates, Earls, Lords, Cities, and towns, with all other our
commons and subjects under our Archbishop sea, and Electorship, full liberty to
use public preaching in all parts of our dominion, and to exercise the
administration of the holy Sacraments, as it is ordained by the writings of the
Apostles and Prophets, following ye Christian exposition of Auspurg, and
notwithstanding all impeachments of our Lieutenants and Magistrates, or other
persons whatsoever: assuring for the same (as it is the duty and office of a
christian Prince) of all and every under our dominion and jurisdiction, to
defend and maintain them through the help and grace of GOD, being certainly
persuaded, that his almighty power has been the only direction of this our
christian enterprise, and that he will defend his glory and holy word, against
all the gates of hell.

Moreover we protest before the majesty of almighty God, which is the
searcher of the hearts and raines, that we have not taken in hand this godly
and christian enterprise, moved by ambition or desire of honor, or any other
thing to our particular profit and commodity: but for the glory of Christ
Jesus our only savior and redeemer, and the advancement of his holy word, and
for the eternal felicity and salvation of our subjects, which he has given
us in charge. Neither have we done it to raise discord and discention in the
common wealth, but rather to set and establish one christian order, in the
Churches and Schools of this country, as it is thought convenient, by the
counsel and advise of the principal of our Estates: minding to take
delyberation and advise upon the reformation of the Churches and Schools of
our said Archbishop sea, and Electorship, at the first assembling of our States
and Lords, as soon as opportunity shall serve. Admonishing the while all
those under the obedience of our foresaid Elector, which shall be moved to
embrace and follow the religion established at Auspourg, and the expositions of
the same, ageeing to the word of God, behauing themselves in all modesty, as
it becomes all such as are led by true christian zeal. Forbidding them
expressly, that they shall do no wrong nor injury to any in deed, or in
words, to the end that every one of them may live quietly and peaceably one
with an other.

And for the particular safegarde of our person, if it come to pass by the
will of God, that we should join our selves in marriage, to the end that none
might take occasion to blame us, as doing the same against our duty, seeking
thereby some particular profit or commodity, or that our intent were, to leave
to our heirs some advantage, to the prejudice of our said Archbishop sea, or
Electorship, and to gratify the same against all reason or henestie. We
protest by this our public writing, and before the eternal and everliving
God, that the same was never our purpose or intent: that is to say, to draw
unto our heirs, our said Archbishop sea, or to bring them to any right of the
same succession, or for any other particular profit to their commodity.

And for this cause we will have it openly declared, by the publication, of
this our present ordinance, that whosoever shall hereafter come, the election
ought to remain at liberty, unto the consent of ye rest of our most noble
Electors (as heretofore it has been) and after our decease, to be resigned
without force. And for this cause, all and every of our subjects and other
persons under the obedience of our Archbishop and Electorship, shall
understand, that they are not held, or bound to owe any obedience, or in any
respect to reverence, any man whatsoever (as their true and rightful Lord)
till such tune, as by the consent and council of our Electors, the Prince
which shall succeed, be lawfully and righfullie chosen. And that they shall
not acknowledge, or take for their Prince, any that shall enterprise to take it
in hand, without the ordinary and lawful election of our aforesaid Electors,
and the express declaration of him which shall succeed, by their authority:
as it has been observed by long and ancient custom (notwithstanding any
disposition heretofore made by us, or any other preposed) against this our
present ordinance: but without regard thereof, we utterly at this present, and
for the time to come, declare them of no effect. Abrogated and abolished them
in the straitest manner and form that may be, being ready at all times to
confer, and take more deliberation upon the same, with our aforesaid
Electors and States of our province, making them such confirmation and
assurance of this our present promise, in such manner that no danger, nor
fear, or other damageable enterprise may come or happen, for any such matter
by us, or by our heirs. Therefore, we charge and command, all and every of
our Lords, governors, magistrates, Judges, Treasurers, Receauers, Consulles,
Citizens, commons, and all in general, diligently, and straightly, to observe
this our present command, that every one may be maintained according
thereunto. And that they may neither hurt, or do injury to any, nor they of
any, be iniuried or molested, for whosoever shall herein be found faulty,
shall incur our indignation and displeasure, and shall not escape most
grievous punishment: for this is the truth of our last charge and
commandment. In witness whereof, we have published, and imprinted, and
sealed with our seal, this our present declaration, causing it to be carried
into all parts and places of our dominions, unto such, as shall make it known
to all. Given at our City of Bonne, the.16. day of January, in the year of
our Lord. 1583.

Pope Gregory the 13. to our right reverend and beloved brother, Ghebbard
Archbishop of Collen, Prince, and Elector of the Empire.
RIght reverend and beloved brother, the great and worthy personage,
proceeding from the Noble house of Truchces, your ancient and honorable
progenitors, as well in ancient time, as of fresher memory, has left us
sufficient witness of the worthiness thereof, and nobility of their blood: whose
affection and constancy, has always been manifestly declared toward the
catholic faith, but principally, by Cardinal Augustus, which held the first
seat hereof, under whose discipline you have been most religiously and
holilie brought up, as it was convenient for ye holy Church of Rome, in such
manner as there was no small hope conceived of you, trusting that you will show
your self a person worthy so noble a race, by the like instruction: from
whence has grown the fatherly good will, which hitherto we have borne unto
you: which we have not only since that time entertained, but also in like
manner augmented, by the means of the good report of honorable personages:
which promised unto us all things with you most excellent and just. After it
came to pass, that you were elected by the charter of Collen* to the dignity
and Archbishop sea of this church, and although that election was disturbed by
sundry and manifold difficulties, in such sort that it was not only strongly
withstoode, but in a manner vanquished and made vain. Nevertheless, we used
such benignity toward you, that all impeachmentes rejected, we approved and
allowed the judgment and election, made by the same charter for you.
Increasing the force and virtue of our Apostolic confirmation: by reason
whereof we are persuaded, that there is none which ought to bear greater
reverence to the holy seat of Rome, nor that ought to be a greater obseruer
of the ecclesiastical discipline, then you, hoping that we should have had
great help, through your constancy and fidelity. But it does greatly
displease us, and merueilously grieve us, that our hope therein is not only
weakened and made less, but also utterly lost. And further, we understand from
day to day, by the letters of many, and the report of diverse, such things of
you, so unworthy the dignity and degree wherein you are, that without great
shame, we are not able to express it. And although verily we have oftentimes
refused to believe such unworthy reports, yet the daily clamor has
constrained us greatly to doubt thereof, being afraid of your fall, which now
we will no longer dissemble, wherefore we do admonish you, that you would have
a regard and a foresight to your honor and salvation (while it is time) and if
possible you have gone any further, then reason required, speedily withdraw
your self, that those things which heretofore has been declared of you, may
be proved false (which is our only desire) and that you will openly manifest
your mind and full intent, inwardly conceived in your heart: to ye end, that
your good name, princely parentage, and the ecclesiastical order, be not by
your means for ever stained, with ignominius reproach, by ye adversaries of our
honor.

Again, consider your duty toward God, which has raised you to the dignity
and degree of the sea Apostolic, which you should cherish with singular
affection and favor, and for the same it is that you ought to spend your blood
in all christian profession: For by how much the more you are of hie calling,
and honorable estate, by so much the more is your fault greater, then any
others, when you fall from any part of your duty. And by so much the more,
will your fault be greater, as you were of honor and dignity, in the church of
God, and in great authority with the Princes of the Empire. Consider then
what troubles and dangers proceeds from such new remoouings of things, and
how heedfull the prudent and godly man ought to be, from hazarding so lightly
his honor, state, dignity, and his soul, whereof there has been so many
strange and wonderful examples in our time, which may make us to be better
advised in our dealings, but if we have possible suffered somewhat to much in
former time, attribute the same to our affection toward you, and to the desire
we have had of your honor and dignity. Neither do we any thing doubt, but
that this our fatherly kindness, shall be received of you with that effect which
it ought to be, for many good reasons and just causes: and that you will not
forgette to show due reverence toward this holy seat, that we may
acknowledge you, for our dear and beloved son, as heretofore we have done,
which will be an occasion to us greatly to rejoice: and because we have not
thought it sufficient to send our letters only, we have sent our reverend
Brother, the Archbishop of Treues, to take his journey toward you, to
confer more at large, of these our affairs, who shall more cleerelye
discover unto you our will, counsel, and intent, to whom we are assured that
you will give both faith and credit.

Given at Rome, at saint Peter's in the year of our Lord 1582. the 17. day of
December, and in the 11. year of our Pontificalitie. Io. Baptista Canobius.

To Pope Gregory the.13. Ghebbard Archbishop of Collon, Prince, and Elector of
the Empire, sends greeting.
I Have understood by your letter, your fatherly affection, and worthiness of
such a Prelate, but in this principally, that you will not lightly give place,
to untrue tales, neither faith to the evil reports spread abroad of my actions
and deeds. For if it were sufficient to accuse, who should be in these
corrupted days excused, wherein the most godliest men, are assailed with envy
^ and what is he that can defend himself against the conspiracies of evil
willers, I acknowledge you as a good father, exhorting me to persevere in the
faith, integrete good discipline, and obedience unto the Chatholique,
Apostolic, and true believing Church. Giving me advertisement of the great
and manifold dangers, falling on those, which are desirous of novelties, which
following their disordinate lusts and affections, are drawn from the company
of the Apostolic church. Wherefore my duty is to accept of your charitable
and holy admonitions, knowing that which is said by Solomon, that he which
refuses discipline, has no regard of his own soul: but he that harkeneth
to correction, shall obtain knowledge. I must needs confess, that I have
been over slack and negligent in things appertaining to the salvation of my
soul, the rest of my conscience, and the duty I owe to the glory of God,
and the dignity of the Church.

But your letters has served me as a spur, pricking me forward, and greatly
provoking me, yt all dissimulation laid aside, and all superstition by me
rejected, I am minded openly to declare (even as you have admonished me) yt
which I have conceived in my heart, and considering the faith I owe unto GOD,
that has called me to this his degree, that which I owe to the church
Apostolic to my country, and the public wealth thereof, and also to my
self, knowing the saying of that great and holy man Augustine to be true, and
worthy to be had in memory, that there is none that does more harm to the
flock of Christ then such as cou^terfetteth the lamb in the room and office
of the ministry, the same is cited 83. distinction, the second cannon. For as
much then I am come to the age, wherein I am able without the advice of others
to govern my self, and by the only will of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has
vouchsaued to call me to the great charge of an Archbishop: and as it is a
thing proper to the nature of a christian man, to inquire and follow after the
truth, I am settled in the furtheraunce of this good work, without musing at
all, on any custom or human authority: finding by the holy scriptures, and
among the ecclesiastical histories, yt this which we have commanded to be
done, becomes him which is the child of God: and which is also required in
the office himself has already established, yt is to say, Jesus Christ, which
is ye only way, the truth, and the life, in whose name, as also with the
Father and the holy Ghost we are baptized: to whom appertains ye catholic
church, having redeemed ye same by his precious blood. Upon this foundation is
the church sustained, being also beautified and enriched with most excellent
tytles, which he has given by S. Paul in the first to Timothy, the third
chapter: calling her the house of ye living God, the fortitude and strength of
the truth. Then the Roman church which was in the time of S. Paul, and
certain years after, was of great renoume and estimation, for the faith they
had in Jesus Christ, and at that time taught through the whole world: the which
faith was her only ornament, insomuch that the Priests and Elders of the same
Roman Church, plainly confessed, writing to S. Ciprian in his 7. epistle of
his 2. book, in these words, That letting the honor and praise decay, which S.
Paul gave to the Romans, was a great and grievous crime, and yt it had been
less shame, never to have had those praises spoke of, or preached abroad,
then after the publishing thereof, to lose the honor of such high
commendations. Therefore as often as it comes in question, to speak of the
pure, true, Apostolic, and universal church: reason requires, and all wise
men gives counsel, that we ought to discern between that, which is
grounded upon the head corner stone, Christ, upon the holy Gospel (the honor
and name whereof shall endure everlastingly:) and that which is ye bastard
church, going against the truth* worshippeth God in vain, following after the
commau^dements and traditions of men. And therefore ye golden rule of
Tertullian, has ever pleased al good and virtuous men, saying, that the first
has been always the truth, and that which came afterward corrupted, and that
is it which hindeth me to the oath which I have made, which oath does
command, that I must acknowledge the said Apostolic church, which holds
the ancient belief of the Roman church, agreeing to the belief of Nice, and
of Constantinople, which does acknowledge and believe one baptism for
remission of sins, by ye blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: which is our only
purgatory that cleanses us of all our sins, which receaueth no other
traditions then this only, that are appointed by the Apostles, leaving and
delivering faithfully, that which they received from our Lord Jesus Christ.
After whose example I am bound by my oath, to take the holy scriptures,
interpreting and understanding the same, not after the sense or interpretation
of any Bishop or Council, whatsoever, but after the understanding and
exposition of the true, Apostolic, and holy mother Church, that (I say) which
has followed the steps of the holy Apostles. Whereunto the ancient Fathers
has from time to time consented, so that without any blemish to the oath which
I have made, I am addressed after this rule, and bound to this foundation,
neither will I receive or believe any thing, which is not brought from the
same, wheresoever it was written, whether at Rome, or at Trent, being
reasonable to prefer these ancient things with new, the truth with falsehood,
and the traditions of the Apostles, with ye co^mau^dements of men. For our
laws as it does evidently appear in the 15. distinction of ye third canon:
does not allow these ancient and most renoumed Councelles the like aucthority,
as they do to the holy Scriptures and Apostles, which says thus: The holy
church of Rome, after the writings of the old and new Testament, which we
receive for certain rules, does not forbid but that we may receive the
Council of Nice, of Constantinople, Ephesus, and of Chalcedonae. Thus have I
hitherto showed, what was the band and foundation of yt oath which I lent, upon
the which I protest, that (by the grace of God) I will not starte nor turn,
from the true faith in Jesus Christ, nor separate my self from the holy and
Apostolic church, to the which I do owe all reverence, as I will do all my
life: in remembrance of that which I did vow in baptism to God, and promised
to the Church. For the rest, it is out of doubt between all good and learned
men, that whatsoever we have promised or sworn, if it be wrong and contrary
to our first faith, received in baptism, that it binds us not at all, this
(I say) is to be seen by the rule of the right cannon Law, that is to say,
that an oath taken against good and godly works, binds not: and following
the right cannon, the oaths that are made against good deeds, draws us unto
sin. Whereupon the Master of Sentences has wisely said, in the 39.
Distinction after Saint Hierome, that an oath has three proper companiens,
verity, judgment, and justice, and if any of these lack, it is not a true
oath, but a false oath: But Gratia^ gives these aduertiseme^ts upon the deed
of an oath, Evil promises (says he) breaks faith, change therefore the the
ordinance of evil and dishonest things, and do not that, which thou have
unwisely promised, for that promise is against God, which is accomplished with
wickedness.

In the seventh cannon of our law, we have a rule given, which we ought
straightly to observe, not only for the regard of oaths, but in all the actions
of our life (that is to say) that if by the sutteltie of our crafty enemy, we
are falling into any fault, we must seek to escape it, by that means which
we see is least hurtful and dangerous: thus you see, that the old and
ancient Fathers has generally concluded, that all indiscreet and unlawful
oaths, ought not to be observed and kept: and that it is more tolerable for to
break an oath, then to persevere in the sin of fornication. The same is also
learned by the aucthority of S. Augustine that if faith be not observed, to the
intent to return to the right way, it cannot be called ye violating of faith,
for as much that the same is not true faith, which is requisite to commit
sin. It is easy to show by many learned men, and also by the holy
scriptures, and by the ancient Doctors, that partly the slacknes and
slouthfulnes: and partly by the covetousness and malice of many Popes, sundry
things has crept in ye Roman church, as Platinus (though otherwise greatly
affectionated to ye Roman seat) certifieth that those things do not agree to
the Apostolic and catholic church, but they are notably injurious against
Jesus Christ, which is established for to be the redeemer of peace, by the
faith in his blood, and also most idolatrous, which whosoever should follow of
a truth, should sin greeuouslie against God: and yet as Arnobius says in
his seventh book against the Gentiles, that* we ought to forgive liberally and
freely, though it were against the Church, and against our own conscience. For
these things then, I am not drawn through any cause by you, (as many other
great and worthy personages has taken occasion, to withdraw themselves) not
from the catholic church, but from the corruption and abuses, which turns
vpside down the foundation thereof. I will not for this time enter into long
disputation, but I would rather come to the crime, wherein I fell my self by
you most accused. I see, I see, or at the least, I feel a certain smell, that
cannot be less then a sinful thing, the peine whereof, craves the loss of
my life, or of my charge and dignity: for the which I am accused among you,
which makes me most odious, and makes the world to think, that I reject all
discipline, all duty, and all honor, but the shame thereof (falselie accusing
me) makes your selves almost to blush. Which is, because I am purposed to
marie, which S. Paul nevertheless affirms, to be honorable among all men:
and which is also set in the Roman church, among the number of the
Sacraments. But whenever I am minded to accomplish this thing, what shall I
do, or enterprise against the examples of the holy Apostles, and their rules
and decrees? What do I against the advice of Clement, Alexandrian? or against
our own Laws, in the.28. Distinction, the.11. and 12. Chapters, where mention
is made of the wives of Priests, and Deacons, being abundantly contained in
the.17. cannon, as it was decreed by the Council of Gangar, that, If any
reject a married Priest, being of opinion that he ought not to offer, because he
is married, and for that cause will not come to his service, let him be accursed.

Moreover, those words spoken with great gravity by Paphuntius, in the
Council of Nice, are commended in the second part of their decree, which did
not fear to call marriage the second degree of chastity. Wherefore is it then
that the authority of Siricius or Pelagious, should be of greater weight
among us, then that of the Apostles? Of general Counselles? Of ancient
Fathers before mentioned? Or of GOD himself? Which plainly pronounced, that it
was not good for man to be alone. What folly, or what madness I pray you is
it then, to endure rather adulterers, fornicators, and Sodomiticall livers, in
the ministry and church of Christ, then those which has true and lawful
wives, following the commandments of God? From what spring, or from whose
mouth came the same doctrine, which forbids and condemns marriage? It
appears by the eleventh chapter of Daniel, verse. 36. 37. and the first of
Timothy, the fowrth chapt. ver. 1. 2. 3. Aeneus Silueus, in his description of
Germany, witnesses that the holy bishop Vldricus, strongly withstoode the
laws of Celebat, against the Popes of his time, writing an Epistle unto Pope
Nicholas, wherein he greatly complained that the chiefest Prelates, and Priests
(namely of Italy,) were so much given to lust and lechery, that they would
not abstain from deflowring, maid, wife, or any other, nor spare their own
kindred, but commit sin against nature, with ye masquelin sort, and also with
very brute beasts: and there he declares an history worthy the noting, that
Pope Gregory the first, being he, that did first forbid ecclesiastical persons
to marie, sending afterward, certain fishers to fish in a mote, hard
adjoining to a Nunrie, they found more then six thousand childrens heads that
had been thrown therein, which when Gregory saw, and perceived the wicked
fruit of his Celebat, sorowing to hear the same, he brake that decree,
alleging the sentence of S. Paul, that, It is better to marie then to burn:
Adding also, that it is far better to suffer marriage, then to be the cause of
murder. The Abbot Vspergus also in his Chronicle, makes mention of an epistle
in the most renoumed counsel of the ecclesiastical states at Bresse Nore,
made against Heldebrand, wherein among other things, was a complaint made, yt he
deuorsed spyrituall persons from their wives, and under this detestable Pope,
the Churches were in great danger, and also he declared yt they were not bound
in any promise to the Pope, for it is a greater thing to make a vow to obey
God, and the catholic church, then to submit our selves to the will and
pleasure of any Pope, whatsoever. For these reasons, I that knows my duty
toward Jesus Christ, and his Church, I am determined to take the lawful way
and remedy, permitted to all manner of men (without exception) against evil
and disordinate lusts, as it becomes a true bishop, and a man of noble race
to do: to the end, that I may keep my soul chaste, and arm the same
against all allurements of the flesh. Therefore am I determined to enter into
marriage, not being moved by any light or disobedient mind: but after long
trial made of my self, I have known that it is not good for me to live
unmarried. Which gift is not permitted to all, nor for ever, (that is to say,
to make so long a trial of themselves:) I am resolved, following the laws of
the church above mentioned, to leave that indiscreet vow of the Celebat, which
is not in my power to perform, esteeming that this is lawful for me, for the
avoiding of a greater evil, and for the better observing and accomplishing the
vow of chastity, which I made unto Jesus Christ: and in so doing I have
framed my self according to the commandment of God, submitting to his
providence, and staying to his protection, not caring what evil men may judge,
nor for ye threatenings, dangers, or any other thing whatsoever, having in
memory that which Theodorus has written in his fourth book, the tenth
chapter, of the ancient Christians. Which did know no greater grief then
the renouncing of piety: and although the tyrants went about raging and
running upon them, as storms, or tempests, yet could they not be shaken or
put back from piety and godliness. Therefore, in all extremities, I have
recourse to the judgment of those which has right intelligence and knowledge.
Unto whom I do appeal and submit my self, after the example of Justinius
Martyr, in his Apolligie for the Christians. In this submission most rightful
and just, that by those which religiously fears God the truth alone is
reverenced, and to the same, all and every thing must be agreeing.

Now I address my self to you Pope Gregory, to the end I may obtain of
you this my purpose, (being most chaste and according to the discipline of the
true and ancient Catholic Church) some protection and defense. Therefore I
do earnestly pray and beseech you, that of the same affection which it has
pleased you to admonish me, that you will take my part in my most just
enterprise, remembering that those which smothlie flatters you, (a sort of bribe
takers, which does but lightly and softly touch the most dangerous
wounds) be not those that does most honor, and reverence unto you and the
Church: but well are they, which Plutarch speaks of, in his Trentes of the
difference between the flatterer and the friend: which boldly and lyberallie
speaks, admonishing, and rebuking, not according to their own appetie and
desire. What am I then that should speak or brall against the Popes? if they
take all that they say out of the word, laws and commandments of God, and
out of the writings of the Apostles and Prophets, upon which doctrine, the
Church and the Popes, ought to be founded and builded; by GOD which has the
sufferaintie over Kings and Popes. Oh that it were the good will and pleasure
of him, that I might see the day, that you would not take the care to oppress
me, and all other men, lovers and followers of the doctrine and life of the
Apostles: but rather that you should earnestly undertake to cast far away
from you, so many vanities, so many idolatries, simonies, and sacrileges, and
cut off these effeminates, fornicators, and adulterers, drunkardes, and idle
persons, which our own laws does excommunicate, to the end that the
Roman church, might recover her ancient dignity, and that pear and
tranquillity might come again, among all Christians. that many grieved and
wounded consciences might find rest and consolation. Now as it is commonly
said, that of a poor gardener, or a simple man, something may be heard of
reasonable sense: so I hope that you will not take this my small admonition,
otherwise, then with a fatherly, religious, and equitable heart: which is made
unto you by one of your Brothers in Jesus Christ, and an Almayn, which could
never dissemble, whereupon, I pray God to keep you in his protection.

FINIS.

