DISTRACTIONS, OR The Holy Madness. Fervently (not Furiously) enraged against
Evil Men; or against their Evils. Wherein the Naughty are discovered to
Themselves, and Others: and may here see at once, Who they Are; What they Do*
And How they Ought. Somewhat Delightful, but Fruitful altogether: as Ordered
to please a little; but Aimed to profit much.

By JOHN GAVLE, Vtriusque olim Academiae.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, for Robert Allot. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE BAPTIST Lord HICKS, Baron of Ilmington, Vicount
Camden; Health, Honor, Happiness, both in this, and a better Life.
My Honorable good Lord,
I THVS (as I am bound) bethink me. Whose ought Mine to be, but whose I am my
self? To accept the Parent, is (I presume) not to refuse the Brood. It is but
my Duty, to beget any thing to your service: and shall be your Goodness, to
vouchsafe it entertainment. I must confess, it had bin better, this windy Egg
should have been pasht in the Shell; than been hatched under your Lordships
Wings. It is a common Fault; and some beside me, bewail I together with me: Ah
that such our worthless Brats, so wontedly creep into so honorable Bosoms!
What ouer-insolence is it of ours; that we dare to shroud us there, where we
ought rather fear to be detected? This is more than Boldness, that I presume
now a Patron for my Work: It shall be but Duty, that I endeavor once a Work
for my Patron. What have I here set before you; but what your self (before me)
have not only noted, but hated also; Men's Vanities, and Evils? Oh pardon, that
I present your Lordship with what you like not to behold: I shall so be tied to
make amends with what (I know) you love to embrace.

To Praise you (as they use) for your Piety, Gravity, Bounty, Clemency;
would be thought to flatter you: To have named you is (in all these) to have
praised you. Yet will I (maugre all such their imputation, or exception) pray
for you. May your Lordship live long days, and good: yea, having now attained
to a good age; let it yet be added to your days. May your iustest Honor
(maugre the mutability of these rolling Globes, and Times) never be destitute
of Continuance with Enlargement. May you lastly, for Honor terrestrial, and
fading; enjoy an Happiness celestial, and with eternity. So prays, and vows

Your Honors devoted and dutiful Chaplain, JOHN GAVLE.

TO THE WISE, and Good, a few Words beforehand; and they in their own Words,
the Words of Soberness and Truth.
YOU, the recovered Sons of a once-Fallen Father; yea, the recounted Sons of
a Father everliving: whose Souls he has so Graciously enlightened, so
inflamed; and so made you, as J said (in your Manner, and Measure) both Wise,
and Good. You are (J believe no less, and as much rejoice) as fresh Fish, in
this salt Sea; as tried Gold, to this cankred Dross; as purging Fires amidst
these noisome Dunghills. You are indeed picked out for Fish; yet is there (you
know, and grieve) much Soil beside you: You are sown for Wheat; and (alas!)
what Tares come up among you? Woe, woe! There will be Goats; though you be
marked for Sheep. To you I come (so please you bid me, for you need me not) in
the Spirit of Meekness: The Rod only is laid upon the Backs it was made for;
the Backs of Fools. Nor to those come J thus only; but even otherwise, as I
see occasion. The Physician of the Body uses not the same Means to heal all:
Nor, with that other, and better of the Soul, is there one way to win all.
To yield to Some, is (by that m^anes) to gain them to our selves. That J come
to Men in their own Words; is to bring Men to your Minds. It Is but my Bait I
have somewhat ordered to their Appetite: you see how my Hook is, it hangs upon.
Let my aiming excuse me; and not my Saying, or Seeming only censure me before
you. Never was it but allowed, by none but lauded ever; so to stoop to others,
as thereby to raise them up. Our Holy Lord vouchsafed himself to be made like
us; so to make us like unto himself: would take upon him our silly Offices; so
to bring us to his holy Mysteries. What said that Great Doctor of himself? To
the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things
to all men, that I might by all means save some. What should J say of ancient
Authors, of holy Fathers; that have writ of weak things, of grave things
weakly; and both to instruct the Weak? Besides their love to Goodness and
Truth; it was some Art of theirs: so to bend themselves to others, as to draw
on others to themselves. To hit a man home a little in his own humor; has often
been the way to stoop to his Capacity, to touch his Affections. Let it then
be at leastwise excusable, so to let a Man understand what he is; as thereby to
bring him to what he ought to be. Let no man judge me light, by my Looks; my
Face (J mean) and Forefront: A more weighty, and profounder Title of a Book,
the Subject and Style accordingly; J observe (for J have already been so
occasioned) have soon tired, nay quite deterred a Common Reader: Let not the
Better be against me, since I thus would win on the Worse. What ever the Most
may mutter against me; my hope is, the Best will say somewhat for me; against
whom J ought, J can say nothing: J know (through the impossibility of pleasing
all) I cannot but displease some. Who can say so well, and warily, which all
will approve of; nay which many will not even mislike? Let no reverend Father,
no loving Brother (whom J humbly observe, whom heartily I embrace) say me
malecontent; and therefore moved: (as have also been many in this Mind, and
Mood.) Against or besides our State, and Church; nor have J read, have J
observed; do I judge, do J acknowledge any; so justly Humane, so religiously
Divine. Accept my Words upon my Faith; J labor to look to, and satisfy me
with my self: J envy no Man, J inueigh against no more. Nor shall the Foreign
Cauiller vpbraid us with our selves: J say not so of this our Land alone. No: I
am a better Bird than so; to defile mine own Nest my self, by saying it so
foul. I dare say, other Nations, and their Manners; do (in a manner) instifie
us, and ours. Yea and our Publican Sins (J persuade me) in this our Church,
shall rise up in Judgment against the Pharisaicall Righteousness of that
other, of theirs. Yet are not we the Better; that they are the Worse: Nor are
we the less to be blamed; though they be the more to be abhorred. Let me then
disclose to them their Abominations, in our Infirmities. We may together
shame Others, and blame our Selves. And now, you again the Wise ones and Good!
if J shall do (in any whit) well, and worthy you; afford it your Favor: if
otherwise, be pleased yet to Pardon it. So J leave you, whom J humbly crave;
and come to those, whom J rightly challenge to be my Readers.

A PREFACE APOLOGETICALL to his Readers, touching Himself; yea and somewhat
Satyricall to the Readers it touches: Where the Man so Distraught, tells them
all together; the Manner, Motive, Maine end, and Method of his Madness.
My Readers.
ME thinks I hear each of you ask with ACHISH; Have J need of mad men? Not
one inferres with FESTVS; Much Learning does make thee mad. Whether you have
need of the Former; Sure I am, I have need of the Other, and to no other end. I
tell you true, I want Wit to be out of my Wits. It is other than Folly, and
Rage, is required to an Holy Madness. Nay but I may take those Two unto me;
for I am Mad outright. I had as good say it, as hear it. They have likewise
said, of Other, and better than I. Have I need of mad men, that ye have
brought this Fellow, to play the Mad man in my presence? said the gabbling King
of GATH, of One that wisely assumed such Behavior for his better Safety.
Wherefore came this Mad Fellow to thee? said the Servants to IEHV, touching the
Prophet, that came about a business of Weight and Worth: This Mad Fellow (say
they) and wherefore came he? Though (as it was told them) they knew both the
Man, and his Communication. PAVL! Thou art beside thy self: said a new
Succeeding, and (perhaps) a new Gaping Governor; to One that well answered for
himself: I am not mad; but speak forth the words of Truth, and Soberness.
And (which I abhor to repeat) the worst in this wise, was said of Him, that
was the best of All: He has a Devil, and is mad. Wicked men, and witless;
judge of Others, and Betters, by themselves. Themselves are Graceless; and the
rest (they think) are Reasonlesse. The Wisdom they apprehend not, they say,
is Folly. He does Foolishly, that does beside their Drift. He talks
Nonsense, that speaks beyond their Conceit. The Fervent (with them) are
Furious: They count of Zeal, but as Rage: And the Saints Earnestness, they
call his Madness. HANNAH is Devout; and is so thought DRVNKEN: And They were
said to be Full of new Wine; that were filled with the Holy Ghost. Be a man
Devout or Zealous; the world will deem him either Drunk, or Mad. Are ye so
Mad; to think and say so madly of us? yours (if any) is the Madness: Why nure
ye others with your own Brand? Mark but who has marked you: I will smite
thee with Madness. The Wise Man said it of wicked men; Madness is in their
heart, while they live. Take now your Tongues from us; turn them against your
selves. You had as good yield to confess at first; as you shall be
constrained at last: We Fools counted his life Madness. Themselves are Mad;
and they call us so: that are not Mad, save mad at them. Shall I moan me with
him in the COMEDIAN? Ay me! they say I am Mad; when none so mad, as they. No.
As the PSALMIST rather: J said unto the Fools, deal not so madly: Then
doubtless they would not make me Mad. I enjoy their Madness, while I seek to
shun it: Let them care to heed it, and they may do so by mine.

But (as I tell you) I have taken upon me, to play the Mad man. Though not
with Him, that did so, for his own safeguard: but so to save others, have I
done it. As was said of their Ignorance, and Delusion: so let me say according
to my Knowledge, and Zeal: The Prophet is a Fool, the Spiritual Man is Mad;
for the multitude of thine Iniquity, and the great Hatred. In my sense; a
Fool, and Mad am I: for the great Hatred I have to thine Iniquity. My Aim
is, and therefore my hope is, I may here say with Him: Whether we be besides
our selves, it is to God: or whether we be Sober, it is for your Cause. I am
indifferent what I seem to be, so it be for Gods glory, and his Childrens
Good. The truth then is; I am (as I ought) thus distraught: For I am both
Warranted, and Urged to it.

Warranted. The Prophets, and Holy men, (as they were commanded) have gone up
and down, some Naked, some Chained, some Loaded, some Wounded: One in a
passion, lets fall the Tables, Another on purpose breaks his Bottles. One will
needs have another to smite him, Another cannot but must needs smite another.
They have bedusted their Heads, besmeared their Faces, beslauered their Beards:
They scrabbled with their Fingers, tore their Hairs, rent their Clothes; and
(like Mad Men) threw dust into the air. The Saints of God have been sometimes
possessed with a Divine Fury. Our strangest Motions, and Gestures (such as men
commonly mock, and irke) God often times both bids, and likes. Even the
Vncouthnesse and Abruptness, of our both Passions, and Actions, serve to
discover our Zeal, our Indignation, our Devotion. The Prophet took him a
TILE, pourtrayed the CITY, laid a SIEGE, built a FORT, cast a MOUNT, and set a
CAMP against it. He likewise CVT OFF his Hair, WEIGHED his Hair, DIVIDED his
Hair: BVRNT a part in the Fire, SMOTE a part with a Knife, SCATTERED a part in
the Wind; and BOUND a Remuant in his Skirts. This was (may I say) a mystical
kind of Madness. To have seen him thus writing upon a Tile; thus busied about
his Hair: who would not have thought him mad, that knew not what he meant?
He that has made the Foolish things of this world to confute the Wise; has
his good Purposes, in the idle Acts, and (as we would think) but uncouth and
abrupt Behauiours of men. In the Foolishness of our Doings, as of our
Preachings, has God his wise Art, and Ends. God has stirred up weak Actions
in his Saints and Servants; so to stir up the weak. Those Practices of
theirs that have borne show of Weakness in their Working; were not without
Worth in their Meaning; and have had Weight in their Effect.

Urged. None but Stocks, but may be moved: Especially, how ought we to be
urged against Iniquities? I have cause enough to make me mad: Nay, should I be
so, so often as I have cause; I should never be but mad. How unquiet shall he be
(yea even incessantly so) the motion of whose own Affections must depend upon
others Evils? What moment shall it be, in which there will not be to move him?
Besides himself; even all are always ready to provoke him. Unhappy he! when
so many mad him. I could (with Others) have been Sad, and Merry; but I have
chosen (by my Self) to be Mad at Evils. While Iehu comes up against Iezabel;
what should he but Drive Furiously? but (as there) march on in Madness? There
is a mad Knot of Evils in the World; and they ask a mad Wedge to sunder them.
I will (and spare not) both Lance, and Sear: Nor shall the Diseased howl, and
bawle at me; but rather thank himself. An intemperate Patient, and
obstinate, makes, and needs a Physician both hard and harsh. I am sorry for
Heraclitus; that was so Sad himself: because others (he saw) were Bad. Shall
every Bad man, make me a Sad man? When (I marvel) shall he be Merry; whom
others Evil may afflict? This were to hurt my self, and do them no good.
Alas too tender Philosopher! himself was to be wept for; that so wept for
others. I laugh (in like manner) at Democritus, that mocking Philosopher; that
made such lests at men's Earnests. How should I think him serious; that thought
all ridiculous? I rather like (with Lampsacus) to mix both, and fall a Madding:
to put upon me the very Face of a Fury: and (as a Spy come from Hell) to give
the Devils notice of men's mischieuousnesse. There are Evils in the world, to be
Sad at, Merry at, Mad at. We cannot but wail at men's Miseries, but smile at
their Vanities, but rage at their Iniquities. Errors may provoke us; but
Impieties will inrage.

Ask now no more with Achish; I answer you at once; You have all need of Mad
men. The Divine Fury is ready against you; The Furies of Hell are ready for
you; a yelling Fury of your own is within you: Oh suffer another Fury, and
shun the other; an Holy Fury! An Holy Fury, to spy out your Evils in your
Hearts; to tell them to your Teeth; to curse them before your Faces; to rend
them from your Souls; to damn them to their Hell. Never more need of Mad men,
than now adays. No Fierceness of men can be enough to curse, and damn the
now Sins of men: No Fury under Heaven; none above Hell, is enough to plague
them. I will as disorderly reckon the Disorders of our days.

Now are the Evil Days; the Perilous Times: for now, The whole world lies
in wickedness. Since the World was, never was the World so wicked as now. It
was once the Wickedness of a World; but is now a World of Wickedness. The
Wickedness that once was, was concluded in a Garden: but the whole World
cannot contain the Wickedness that now is. Nay, the Wickedness that now is,
can contain a whole World: For so he says, The whole World lies in
wickedness: And not Wickedness only in a World. The World was a Seat of
Wickedness; but Wickedness is become a Continent of the World. Quite against
the Rule of Reason, the Accident is the receptacle for the Subject. We are now
the worst Generation of Men: Even they upon whom the Evil Days are come
indeed. Our Fathers have left their Faults behind them: which of Evils in them
at first; are become Examples to us after them. Wickedness is now not only
Done, but Taught. Ungodliness is grown to a Fashion: Iniquity and Evil is
so generally, customarily, publicly taken up: that to be Wicked now, is not
only made pardonable, but thought commendable amongst us. We have exceeded
our Forefathers Evil: and (for our Time) have set up Sin at so high a Pitch;
that it were impossible to think how Posterity should add unto our
Iniquities. And this is the woe of all; that Men are irrecouerably Evil. Their
corruption has brought them to a custom; their custom to an Obstinacy; their
Obstinacy to a Necessity of being Evil: and that Necessity of being Evil,
to an impossibility of being otherwise. As a Divine Philosopher to his Friend;
When thou shall see (said he) a Multitude in a Market, Theater, or like
frequented place; think with thy self, there are as many Vices, as Men. I say
besides; in a Playhouse, Exchange, Hall, Court, and Church; there is ever a
greater throng of Sins, than Men. For, amongst the throngs of Men, every Man
has his throng of Sins. Not to the Heads of Men only, but to the Hairs of
their heads, may their Sins be numbered. Men were never so many, but one man
might reckon all the rest: But the Sins of one man, are more than he can count;
much more, than for which he can give account. What say we of men, and their
Sins? You cannot reckon more Nations, than you may Abominations. Besides the
Barbarous People, whose Religion it is, to do Devils worship; whose Law, to
do Men Wrong: We speak of these more Civil, more Christian Parts. Lo here!
Every Nation (as I said, and I cannot say more fitly) his Abomination. The
Germane Gluttonous, the Italian Irefull, the Spaniard Proud, the Frenchman
Effeminate, the Dutchman Deceitful, the Irishman Idle, the Scottish-man
Soothing, and the Englishman (alas the Englishman!) Evil. Observe all manner of
Men, and their Manners. Turks are Barbarous, Jews Malicious, and Christians
(ah Christians!) Hypocritical.

I may say of Any, or of All. Iniquity abounds in all both Nations, Persons,
Actions: In all which Innocence is not only rare, but none at all. He spoke
but too true of these Times, and Crimes of ours: In the last days, perilous
Times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, Covetous,
Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy,
without natural Affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers, Jncontinent,
Fierce, Despisers of those that are Good, Traitors, Heady, High minded, Lovers
of Pleasures, more than lovers of God, Having a form of Godliness, but
denying the Power thereof. In these Days, Men are Borne, Live, and Die unto
themselves: And are become such strange Lovers of themselves; that beside
themselves, love they neither God, nor Man. Their own Lusts only love they as
their lives. Those vices of theirs that please them, they maintain: Will
outface, rather than acknowledge them: rather approve, than forsake them.
Every man now for himself: Nay, every man now one against another. All wild
and savage Ismaels, His hand against every Man, and every man's hand against
him. His Brothers Knife, at his Brothers Throat: his Brothers Sword, in his
Brothers side. Stranger is not safe with Stranger: Nor is Kin secure with
Kin: And loving Brethren are as Black Swans. The Godly man most of all, is
(in this world of wickedones) as a Lilly amongst Thorns; as a Sheep in the
midst of Wolves: With JOB, a Brother to Dragons; and with EZEKIEL, a Neighbor
to Scorpions: A LOT in Sodom; a JOSEPH in Egypt; an ISRAEL in Babylon. Must
either be drawn to do Evil; or forced to endure it. All that is in this
World, is either Snares, or Preyes: There is no way for us to escape our
selves; but by seeking to entrap others. The world is come to such a pass;
that we must either do Wrong, or take Wrong; Kill, or be Killed, Deceive, or
be Deceived.

Religion (it is manifest) is but taken up under hand: while Piety, and
Honesty lie so under foot. They make some Profession, that so they may wrong
with loss Suspicion. Men walk like Foxes in Lambs skins, that they may the
rather deceive: and come like Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, that so they may the
sooner devour. Pharisee like, Clean Outsides, painted Sepulchers, whited
Walls; they devour Widows Houses, under pretense of long Prayers. And what
more foul Iniquity, than this so fained Sanctity? How horribly do men belie
their Vices? Their Pride, they call Gracefulness, their Flattering, Courtesy;
their Tyranny, Justice; their Avarice, Thrift; their Lewdness, Pleasantness;
their Profuseness, Bounty; and their Craft and Subtilty, call they Policy, and
Discretion. It was never good World since Vice went in Virtues Name, and Habit.

The Manners of Men have now brought Laws themselves into their Subjection.
Never more Laws; none more Lawless, than now adays. What Offenses are done
daily before the Bar of Justice? Right is but little Defended, even where
Right seems to be most Reserved. Laws are bought, and sold: And he commonly
has the best Pennyworth of Law; that has the worst Cause. Laws are so many,
and so abused; that they are made to discourse, and dispute Truth, and Right:
Whereas were they fewer, and well executed; they would easily and readily
determine, and command them both. Nor does a Common wealth labor so in the
multitude of Laws, as of Lawyers. (I speak not of just Judges, and equal
Officers of the Law.) But of cunning Catchpoles, and hungry Pettifoggers; that
(like swarms of Flies) pester, and infest a land. These (if you knew all) have
robbed many a Church, wronged many a Widow, starued many an Orphan, and undone
many an honest Man. In foul stirs, and Contentions of Men, these thrust in
for more filthy Advocates. Of these I say; Many Lawyers, many Wranglers. Else,
how should these men live, that are raised by others ruins; did they not make
work for themselves. These Seminaries of Dissension, have a Cavil, or a
Quirke, to make the Law it self (which indeed is a Rule of Peace) set Men at
odds and keep them so. As when you send your Water to a needy Empiricke, you
must resolve to take Physic: so declare your case to one of these greedy
Catchpoles, and you must needs go to Law. Nay, he tells you what wrong you
have done your self hitherto: and all to bring you (by his means) to do your
self, and others Wrong. You (like silly sheep) take this Bryar-Bush to
shelter you; and he all to tatters your Fleece: you two must tugge together
ere you part. His is the Gain only in the end, yours (perhaps) both the Loss,
and Shame.

This is also a sore evil under the Sun: Virtue is set after Wealth Wealth
gets up a Cocke-horse; while Virtue but holds the Stirrup. Learning is made but
a Page to Riches. The Golden Ass is worshipped; the Ragged Philosopher is
contemned. Let a man be Religious, Virtuous, Learned, Wise; yet this thing is
thought to prejudice his best Parts; that he is Poor: But let him be
Impious, Vicious, Clownish, Foolish; yet that he is Rich, makes amends for all
the Rest. A Man without Money, is abhorred like a Monster: but adored as a
Goddess, is Money without a Man. This same Goddess Wealth, bewitches us all
to her Worship. For her we plot, and pray; and ride, and run; and dig, and
beg. For base Lucres sake, we are ready to embrace an Enemy, and fall at ods
with a Friend. So ours be the Gain, we respect not whose is the Loss; yea
though the Loss prove our Souls at last.

The World turns round in a Topsie-Turuy; and every Thing goes the wrong way to
work. The Ass is got to a Harp; Phaeton will be climbing; and Icarus must
go fly. Every man irkes his own Lot: is weary of his present Condition:
Nothing is more tedious to him, than himself. Nor can he contain him within
the pale of his proper Calling. Art has got a trick to force Nature. Every
Man considers what he Aims at; not what he is Apt for. Mercury is made out of
every Logge. Dunses go for Scholars; Wretches are pressed for Soldiers; Idiots
usurp Authority; and Knaves creep into Offices: Tailors take Orders; and
Weauers will be Priests. Frogs profess Physic. Wherein is a Man's least
Skill; that is his whole Profession. Men travel in untimely Births, labor in
unapt Actions: Like Channels without a Conduit; turn Teachers, when they yet
both might, and ought to Learn. They usually come armed to the Church; go
naked to the Camp: sing at a Funeral; mourn at a Wedding: study hard in a
Playhouse; sit fidling in a Senate House: earnest in a May Game; and slack
upon their Service. One takes upon him to swim over Hellespont on a Horse;
Another aims to ascend Athos in a Ship: One lies him down to sleep in a
Wagon; Another will go a journey on his Bed. One takes butterd Pease on his
Knife point; Another eats Eggs with Spoones. Bid him speak, and he is mute:
say Whisht, and he babbles. He writes Politics, ere he yet come into a
Commonwealth; Commands peremptorily, where he has small Authority; flatly
Determines, what he least conceiues. Who knows himself? who has himself?
who enters into himself? who keeps within himself? who seeks not himself
without? No man measures himself by his own Feet; by his own Parts is no man
measured. Asses prefer Straw, to Gold: and Dunghill Birds a Barley Corn, to a
precious Pearl. Baser things are esteemed, and frequented: Better things they
neither know how to prize, nor use. Fools and Idiots, let fall Substances, to
catch at Shadows: let the Bird go out of hand, and keep a beating about the
Bush. Uncertainties are the most certain Purchase. All turn Merchant
Adventurers, (for Places, Offices, Dignities; Temporal, Ecclesiastical) and
buy long Hopes, with a large Price. How many fondly both adventure, and undo
themselves, to be well spoken of? Speak him but fair to his Face, and you may
have his Heart out. His Table furnishes him with Friends; and they likewise his
Table: And now the Cloth scarce taken up, but they are ready to rise. Men are
all for the Present: And for that, so as it be commodious. What has formerly
been, is now forgotten. There is indeed a quick Apprehension, but no good
Memory of one another Acts, and Offices. If he cannot so do, as he has done;
he shall not be so thought, as he was. Former things are Frosted. An old Dog
shall be hanged; an old Seruing-Man discarded; and an old Friend neglected:
notwithstanding they have been formerly so Useful, Painful, Beneficial. A
man cannot tell whom to trust to; nor how to believe him. Beside what his Heart
imagines, and Tongue vtters; his very Face betokens Falsehood. He Will blow hot,
and cold both with a wind: Say, and unsay, nay gainsay with a Breath. Will
promise Mountains, and perform Mole-hills: and tell you of more in a Minute,
than you shall find in a Year. Nay (which is worst) will both Say well, and
Do well in Deceit. As, many a man has had a Good Turn done him: not
altogether to benefit, but to blind, and bewitch him rather. A Man speaks a
good word for his Friend, and two for himself: And commonly so aduises him, as
to bring his own ends about. Two men contend together, and a Third arbitrates
to eithers loss. Like Dogs, they snarle at one another, till the Bone be
snatched away from both Great men easily take occasion to wrong Inferiors with
authority. And the Poor man has offended enough; in that he is not able to
defend himself. The Poor man must part with his own Right; or else he gives
not the great Lord his Due. Rich men's Superfluities are grown envious (...)
Poor men's Necessities. Like Dogs in Mangers; they have no need of it, they
have no will to it; and yet they keep the poor Cattle from their Fodder. If
a Man be once down the Hill; every Man is apt to depresse him further. Once
gored in the Body of his Estate, how many Hounds pursue him, and trace him
still by the blood of his Wound? He is soon made more miserable; that is once
so. None has less paid him, than he, to whom most is due. Whom his Piety does
most commend; him does their Charity least reward. It is both the Rule and
Practice, to repel Force with Force: and repay Craft with Craft. So are we
wont to do to others, as we see they have done; not as we would they should
do, to us. Do a Man Good; and this is thanks enough, that he does thee no
Hurt. How many are ready to reward Evil for Good: and to wrong him most, of
whom he best deserved? What Spiders Webbes are here in the World? Turbulent
Waspes burst through; while Impotent Gnats are entangled. The Gallows groans
for great Thieves; and small Thieves only groan upon the Gallows. What one
Man does, is a Fault, and Punished: What so many do, is thought well, though
worse. It Is strange, that the Greatness, and Generality of a Crime; should make
it seem less mischievous, less miserable, less punishable. That belike is
Lawful, which comes once to be Common And (which is last, and worst) Men live,
at Men's lusts: So also, Men perish, at Men's pleasures. And to Kill; is both
Courage, and Skill. Murder is made a Man's Art: and it is his Credit, to have
handsomely done the Deed. Besides those that are evil to others; how many are
so unto themselves? How many Giants are there; how many Gulfes of their
Estates? They carry all upon their Backs; These put all into their Bellies:
these feed finely, and rot at a dear rate: They go gayly, till they be worth
not above their wearings. He makes a God of his Belly; He a Channel of his
Throat; He a Sink of his Heart; He a Liar of his Tongue; He a Thief of his
Fingers; He a Harlot of his Members. Yet (Oh desperate! Oh damnable!) say the
Thief, Drunkard, Blasphemer, Fornicator; their Thefts, Riots, Oaths, Lusts;
are all (if sins) but Venial Sins. No sin is so great; but is lessened in
his Opinion, by whose Mischief it is committed. Goodness and Truth have not
more Precepts, than Adversaries thereunto. The Covetous man shrinks and shrugs,
at a Lesson of Liberality: It irkes a Prodigal, to tell of Thriftinesse: The
Proud man endures not to hear of Humbleness: The Irefull has no Patience, no
not so much as to listen thereunto: The Thief stops his ears at the Charge of
Justice: The desperate Cutthroat is ready to dispatch him first, that would
dissuade him from the Fact: It Is tedious to talk of Chastenesse before the
Lustful: And Soberness to a Drunkard, is but as a Tale of a Tubbe. These men
will every one sooner mar the Rule, than mend their Fault. Wicked men will
rather abhor the Precepts, than forsake their Offenses. Precepts will do no
Good against them; and Judgments but make them Worse I will leave them
therefore to the Angels Judgment; but indeed the Devils Precept: He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still.

Mad? nay and Mad; and Mad again. Who burns not, starts not, frets not? Whose
Ears tingle not, Eyes sparkle not, Joints tremble not? Oppression makes a
Wise man mad; said the Wise Man: Iniquity (say all Good men) will make a Good
Man Mad. To hear, and see as I have said; is enough to make Wife, or Good Men
Melancholy, Moved, Mad. It would make a Horse break his Halter; to see what
Fidling, Piping, Morrice-dancing, Hobby-horsing in a Maygame: but to repeat the
Vanities, and Evils of Men; is able to fret a Man out of his Wits. It is not
possible to look here upon others; and yet be our Selves.

Whether it come of a Melancholy, a Blood, a Choler; it makes me Sad-mad,
Merry-Mad, Mad-Mad. See me sometimes bemoaning, deriding, and execrating their
Iniquities. Any ways in the world, to tell Men how I lament, scorn, abhor
their Evils. While I bewail the Weak, smile at the Vain, detest the Wicked;
am I so Sad, and Merry, and Mad.

Sad-Mad. Our Savior (pardon to the comparison!) was ANGRY and GRIEVED
together. The holy Prophets have laid Ashes on their Heads, put Sackcloth on
their Loins; smote their Thighs, and set their Eyes open, as flowing
Fountains, to gush out rivers of Tears; and all because of others Iniquities.
This is one of our Perfections, to be touched with others Evils, as our own.
Better to be grieved at, than guilty of another Man's Sin. Not to irke
another Evil; is as much, as to make it our own. I shall do no Man Wrong to
bewail his Wickedness. I need ask him neither Leave, nor Pardon, to be sorry
for him. It is a good fault; to afflict our selves, for others Faults.

Merry-mad. God but mocked the Man; Behold, the Man is become as one of Us: And
the Prophet, those Idolaters; Cry aloud, for he is a God etc. So the Wiseman,
the young Wanton; Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, etc. And the Savior, the
Traitor; Friend, wherefore art thou come? And so the picture of Patience, his
Cauilling Companions; No doubt but ye are the People; and wisdom shall die
with you. An Ironie is not unbeseeming Divinity. It has pleased the HOLY
GHOST, to be thus fair pleasant in Speech: as to have the Words of Holy Writ
Seasoned with Salt; that so they might Administer Grace unto the Hearers: And
especially, by a witty kind of deriding Rhetoric. Moreover, Holy Men, and
Learned; have in Weighty Matters, both Answered, and Censured; with a witty
kind of Mockage, and pleasant Disdain. One asked Augustine, what God did,
before he made Heaven, and Earth? He answered well and wittily; He made Hell,
for such curious Inquisitors as himself. When Julian the Apostate, demanded
arrogantly, what the Carpenters Son was doing? The Christians answered aptly,
and elegantly; He was making a Coffin for Julian. Erasmus (when he was asked
what Offense Luther did?) prettily replied; He took away from the Pope, his
Head; and from the Monks, their Bellies. More might be said of Holy Fathers;
much more of Wise Philosophers. One told a King, that he had his Ears in his
Feet: since he heard not his Petition, till he had there prostrated himself.
Another answered a Physician; He kept. his Health, because he used him not.
Another bade a Bastard (throwing stones amongst a Throng) take heed he did not
hit his Father Not almost an Apothegme of theirs; but thus both witty, and
weighty. Nor do after-Wits come short of the other. One called the Pope a
Participle; because he takes part of the Clergy, and part of the Laity,
without Mood and Tense; meaning, beyond Time, and Measure. Another asked the
Pope, if ever he said the Lords Prayer, and those words therein; Our Father,
and Forgive us our Trespasses: Which if he did, then was he neither Holy
Father, nor Father How many might he said of this fort? Wise men, and Good,
have wontedly said all against Evils; in this Graceful kind of Reproaching.
Men's Evils have been more easily, and profitably Derided, than Confuted. Even
these pleasant Disdaines, have often proved weighty Arguments against Iniquities.
Now, say me not Light; If I would have been Delightful. I would not in words
be Churlish, nor Clownish: Nor have I been Scurrile, nor Illiberall. Have I
iested at Laws, or Religion? at the Persons, or Miseries of Men? Except
against their Vanities, so ridiculous indeed; what have I said, but soberly? To
have been aptly Facetious; has added to the Gravity, and Severity of Speech.
Whether in some Appellations, Descriptions, Transitions; what has been said,
not so seriously: said I it only to make thee laugh? I were more than Mad, so
to make thee laugh; as to make my self thy Laughing Stock. Where my Words may
show some Lightness; my Aim there has this Weight: My sober Derision, my
just Disdain; thy smoother Reprehension, thy liberal Delight.

Mad-mad. I have here said enough, not only to excuse me for it: but (me
thinks) to encourage me to it. Three speak Truth; one of which is the
Madman. Thou may say me Mad: but I speak the words of Soberness, and
Truth. The Truth is; I love to strip, and whip Men's bosome-Harlots before them:
and let them plainly know themselves to be no better, than they are. What
should I parable it; with the Woman? J am a Widow, mine Husband is dead, My
Sons strove together, etc. These were but far Fetches: I had rather point
it, with the Prophet; Thou art the Man: this is plain to the purpose. If I
must speak against Vice; the vicious shall not teach me what to say. I should
not say, as they were: should I say no other, than as they would. I will not
ask counsel of them, to bewray their Counsels: but will make bold, after mine
own mind, to tell Men their Minds. Away with the fawning Curres, and
toothlesse; with the buzzing Beetles, and stinglesse: Give me the Dog that
will bite home; and the Waspe that will sting indeed. Take away the Tartness
(said a Bold-Speaker, for the Freedom of his Speech) and Bitterness from
Wormwood; and it loses both the Nature, and Name: Take away my Name too; if
you bar me of my Bitterness. Let your speech (said He) be seasoned with
Salt; tempered (he meant) with Discretion: Yea and (after him, say I) my Speech
shall be seasoned with Salt; powdered (I mean) with Severity. Abstract the
Acrimonie; and (in my Construction) The Salt has lost the Savor.

Lo! (thou say) a very Lamia: The mad Hagge has Eyes to put in, and pluck
out at will. He puts his Eyes (as one of those) in his Head, while he walks
Abroad: but keeps them in a Box, when he stays at Home. So are we wont
indeed, to have Lyncean Eyes to Others: but are as blind as Moles toward our
Selves. True, and it is the property of an Eye, to see all, but it self. I
confess; We can sooner find out others Faults; than mend our own. But if I
blame thee, with what my self am also Guilty of; Thou shall not need vpbraid
me with it: I shall now be enough to reproach my self. If I be no other,
than I say thou art: what my Tongue tells to thee, my Heart will not hide from
me. What I but call thee once, will it tell me twice. Double is his both
Guilt, and Blame; when the Fault rebuked by him, does also redound unto him. I
suppose (with Him) thou may say, and slander me; Physician, heal thy Self:
I abhor to hear from Him; Thou which teach Another; teach thou not thy
self?

But (after mine own Cure) I here am thy Physician: and have so dealt with
Iniquities; as do such with Maladies. See here thou may, the Parues
Affections, and their Affected Parts: together with their several Signs,
Grounds, Fruits, Causes, Cures. I have taken but Three Patients here in hand at
once: and they more than I look for Profit by; more (I fear me) than I shall
get Credit by. But Three, to the Three Furies, or Madnesses; whom I mean to
match against them. Three shall be all at once; since Three once were all: All
that is in the World (is but Three) the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the
Eyes, and the Pride of Life.

One thing is; and I would thee note it: I have applied it as a soueraign
Remedy, against whatsoever Malady: Concluding still with a Meditation of
Mortality, and Death. Nothing makes a Man more irke his Evil; than to think
on his End. He that thinks what he shall then be; will be wary what he now
does. Sin was the only means, that brought a Man to Death: but Death is thus
the only means, to keep a Man from Sin. He aimd aright; Remember the End,
(said he) and thou shall never do amiss. To meditate on Death, is as a Curb
against all sinful Courses: and a Spur pricking on to pious Duties Prick
the wandering Snaile but with the MEMENTO of Deaths Dart; and he straight
retires into his Shell: Let the Pilot sit close in the End of the Ship; and he
now gouernes it aright. To have Death before his Eyes; is the ready way, to
have God before his Eyes. He easily contemnes what is Present, and Passing
away: that considers what is Everlasting, and to Come.

I have no more (nor needed I so much) to say for my Self: Only, against Thee
(if thou be of them) have I yet more. All the Cursed Crew; Men of the World,
Sons of Belial, Children of Darkness, Impes of Confusion, Limbs of Satan,
Firebrands of Hell: I Will tell them All my mind, as I meet them. I Will take them,
where I find them: And say no more to thee; till I see thee there.

I AM Mad, say Most;
That most are mad, and worse;
I say me so;
'Cause I see them no other.
They make me Moan,
Sigh, Smile, Scorn, Rage, and Curse.
Nor I my Fervor;
Nor their Faults can smother.
How can I help it;
That am made so Mad?
It Is Thou must mend it;
That have been so Bad.
BOth Wise, and Good,
Will warrant me my Madness;
Themselves have likewise
More than moved bin:
Will either such
(Wise, Good) be for thy Badnesse?
Even they that work ill,
Will speak ill of Smne.
How can I help it;
That am made so Mad?
It Is Thou must mend it;
That have been so Bad.
THy sore Mishaps
I Moan; I Sigh, so see
Such Errors Frail;
Smile, to behold thy Fashions
Both sond, and vain;
Scorn thy Iniquity;
Rage, at thy Rudeness;
Curse thy Abominations.
How can I help it;
That am made so Mad?
It Is Thou must mend it;
That have been so Bad.
The Proud.
Go to then; and what is He? I have seen the Man but of late; and how suddenly
is he altered? True Emblem of his own Mutabilitie! He shows it, but he
heeds it not. To Day has changed him from Yesterday, both in Face, and
Fashion: Nor shall you see him the Same to Morrow, that he is to Day. The Man
seems but as he is; a very Changeling. Nay he so adapts his Humor also to his
Habit; that you shall never take him, but in as many Minds, as Suits. How he
grudges at the stinted Course of Nature, as but niggardly; that at first
allotted him but one Face and Skin, and Bulk, and Shape: but admires the
Liberal Invention of Art; that can still so trimly, and newly proportion him.
He thinks himself (I warrant him) a far comelyer Creature of a Tailors
shaping, than of Gods making. As the one therefore he shames to be seen: but
as the other, he glories to show himself. He is one of ADAMS own Sons, and
has it by Kind to blush at his bare Self. Ah! we could not thus irke our
selves, were not our selves conscious of some thing other than good: We see
some ugliness, which we would have none to se^. Had we not defaced the Image
of God in us, we had never bin ashamed to let it have bin seen. Truth desires
to beseene naked, as she is: And the Purest things abhor to be covered, or
colored. Painted Walls, painted Sepulchers, you conceive what they are beside
their Painting.

Oh but (I see) he has quite altered the Fashion; and has made him a new
kind of Catchcredit, of his old Couer-shame. His sightly Ornament, he counts
it; which was once but his Forefathers beggarly Shift. Ah! that Men can now
glory in that Superfluity; whose very Necessity was but the Badge and Livery
of their Shame. We know, it was ADAMS Shame, that he was so driven to have them:
And we think it our shame, when we are so driven, that we have them not. He
is not (I see by him) a little proud of himself: now beclad in a varnisht
Excrement; and so bedawbd in a glittering Rubbish. Who thinks himself the
better Man, for what he is glad to borrow of Beasts, and Earth? Is he the more
Man, for what they (before him) were not the less Bruits, and Dung? See see! A
Sheep in a golden Fleece: Howsoever he thinks of his Fleece; I will think
him but a Sheep. He prances most statelily in his gay Trappings. But I would
be loath to buy, or use an Horse, that is only so valued. It is for him to prize
a fair Outside; that knows, nor has nothing within, worthy more esteem. How
curiously he glances upon himself? He thinks, he is for other eyes than
his own, to be so broadly gazed at. Why cringes he so to his Coat? unless he
would in good earnest, which the Philosopher did in jest; Honor that, that
honors him. Bucephalus is now royally trapt, and flings at all but Alexander
himself: disbarbe but the Jade, and every Stable-Groome may bestride him. Many
Men as Proud to seem what they are not: It only debases them to be seen, and
known what they are. The Ass carries painted and polished Isis upon his
back; and (Lord!) how the Vulgar Worship him? A wise man will judge of the
Tree, by the Fruit, or Bulk: he is a Fool that does value it by the Bark, or
Husk.

A proper Squire he seems near at hand; and (you mark him) well dight up.
Beside a spruce shape, and gay Gloss he has about him; see what a lofty
Port, and Gesture he carries with him. He stalks on in state: I should say,
he marches most maiestickly. All his Pace is Measures; and his Hands
accordingly keep Time, to the Tune of his Feet. His Beuer cocks, Feather
waggs, Locks houer, and Beard stands in print: his Band spreading (like a Net)
about his neck, his Cloak displayed (as a Flagge) upon his arm, his Doublet
hanging by Gimmers upon his shoulders, and his Breeches buttoned about him: His
Boots ruffle, Spurrs gingle, and his long Rapier (which he is often tied to)
confronts him at the hilt; and toward the point, answers his heels with a
grace. What a supercilious Look he has? I warrant you, the very blast or
sound of his Speech, would make you start. How he reares in the Neck, struts
at the Stomach, and traces with his Arms a kemboll: he trips with his Toes on
the Earth, and waves his Hand, as he would touch the heavens with his Finger.
He has one part and property of a Man, which is, to look upwards. He thinks
this same does prefer him with Reasonables, when we know it does but
distinguish him from Bruits. Heel set his Legs upon the Last, rather than
lose an inch of his height: I will say one good word for him; and it is the best
I know by him: Than this Man in his way, no man walks more uprightly. Mark
how he heaues, as though he almost scorned to tread: He casts up his Nose
into the Wind, looks beyond the Clouds, mantles against the Moon, and busies
himself wholly to build Castles in the Air. What an Aldermans pace he comes?
He prolongs the Pageant for the Beholders take; and hurries nor on too
hastily, lest most Eyes find no leisure to look upon him. See see! he stops
and turns in the mid way, at but the apprehension of a lost labor. Oh do him
not the wrong to look beside him: for if you see him not, he comes by to no
purpose. The Proud man is not more haughty in his own, than ridiculous in a
wise man's eyes: whereas others look at him, he looks through him; and sees
plainly the vanity of his Mind, in that bodily shaping: He but smiles at
that Carriage of his, which others learn: And thinks, what Folly there is in
Pride, that faines to it self, as it would; and flatters it self, as it has
fained. He tells her, his eyes are purer, than her painted glory can dazzle: nor
are they stinted to behold that only, which she would have him see. He calls
her the Ape of Nations, and Fashionmonger of the World: and tells her plainly,
she has more Followers of her Fashions, than are either Wise, or Good.

Do you hear Sir? Surely his ears are taken up to listen only to his own
fantastic Suggestions. He is wholly busied about himself: and heeds not
others, while he thinks others cannot choose but heed him. At him once more: I
pray you Sir -- Now he squints at me over the left shoulder, as though he
deemd me at a glance, scarce worth the most careless piece of his notice.
Perhaps he likes not the fashion of my phrase, it is too homely for his quaint
relish, and sounds not correspondent to the scraping of his whole
acquaintance. I am not wonted to the fine Flourishes of his Fashionall
Rhetoric. He would have heard me sooner, had I bespoke him in his own
Dialect; which he heeds most, and best understands. I had forgot to think on
some curious Complement, and refined Salute: which himself has so often cond,
that he has them at his Tongues end, and there only. Now I remember me, I have
a whole Method of them lying by me; which he gathered but by Fragments, and so
he vtters them. Save you noble Sir; How fares your Body? You are fortunately
met; I congratulate your happy Fortunes; Sir I honor you; Would I might do
you any Office; I think me happy in your Noble Society; I desire your more
Acquaintance; I embrace your love with both arms; I kiss your hands; I adore
your worth, I reverence your shadow; Sweet Sir ravish me with your Presence;
bless me (kind Sir) by your Favor. Oh Sir your Servant; Pray Sir command
me; That I were but worthy to observe you, Would I might have enjoyed your
good company; Happiness attend you; my Service wait upon you. Vain
Verbalists! whose words are but wind, uttered, and ended in themselves: Lightly
occasioned, and as little intended. God gave you your Tongues, to use them
seriously, not to dally with so deceitfully. Nature has taught you the faculty
of Speech, to tell euch others your minds, and hearts: But you have coined, and
con'd your words of Art, to discourse, and dissemble with. Your words of
Course, and Complement; gain you as little Heed, and Repose from others: as
they have Truth, or Intention in your selves. You think you have learnt to
speak with a grace; and talk in a certain royalty of Speech: When (alas) it
is the Vanity only that is openly heard, and secretly smiled at.

I am your poor Friend Sir, do you know me? Not? He has but said, as I
thought. A proud Man remembers not another; because he has forgotten himself.
Yet (if I mistake him not) he so loves himself, whom he knows not; that he
almost hates all others, whom he knows. He enuies his Superior, neglects his
Equals, despises his Inferior. And for these last, he neither endures to
take notice of them; nor that they should make acquaintance with him He has
heard, Familiarity brings Contempt: he therefore contemnes all kind of
Familiarity. So does he glory in what he is; that than of what he was, he
is of nothing more ashamed. He thinks himself a goodly Branch, and noble; but
irkes to think on the vile and base Stock he grew upon. Nothing can more
disgrace him, than if his poor Father should meet him, and own him in the
Streets: And he blushes sooner at the meandness of his Kinsfolks, than at
their Misdemeanors. Who so Proud as he, than whom none more base? The Beggar
on horseback, is altogether for the lofty pace. Wretches always wax most
insolent, Cowards rigorous, and Peasants haughty. If he get once to think
better of himself, he therefore thinks worse of all: He concerts others
under him; because he is now rapt above himself.

It Is true I tell you. You know not me whom you scome; you I both know, and
pity Your Name (I take it) is Sir Haughty-Heart, A man of an High Descent: Your
Great Grand Father (I remember) came tumbling down from Heaven. He (let me say
by the way) fell justly, that was too Proud, to stand uprightly. And you his
Generation, like Monsters, you fling Mountains upon heaps; Yea like Fools in a
Confusion, you build you Babels so high; as though you would reach, and dare
Him; against whom your first Father once aspired. I easily observe, The Proud
Man and the Devil conspire in one presumptuous Fault: it therefore is, he
hazards with him the like desperate Fall.

Nay scowle not, stare not, stamp not, swear not; keep in your threatening
Words, and Weapon. Galled Consciences kick (like Iades) when their Sores are
touched: Give me leave a little. My Challenge is to another, and better Fray:
where the Conqueror and Vanquished may part friendly, with Safety and Glory on
both sides. Nor is it a single Duel I summon and provoke thee to; but a set
Battle. I can both number thy Forces; and order mine own. Disdain prouokes
your War, and self-conceit maintains it; Rashness musters up, and pride
leads out your Bands; Vainglory blows your Trumpet, and Insolence is not upon
the Skirmish. But, Humility gives me the safer Ground, Gravity rancks my
Troops, Modesty beats up my Drum, Meekness receives the Onse^, and Patience
gets the Victory. We yield a while, and you forth with sound an Alarm. Your
feather-flanting Brauadoes are at length but a blast before our Weather-beaten
Soldiers: and who now sounds Retrait? Pride is unhorsed by Humility, Gravity
has given Rashness the foil, Modesty has stopped the mouth of Vainglory,
Meekness has coold the courage of Disdain, Insolence is pinioned by
Patience, and Selfeconceit has taken heels and is run away from thee. Thy
Soldiers are thus put to sword, and flight: and lo (as I said) safety, and
glory on both sides! Of a base Commander thou art now become an honorable
Captive: Nor are we otherwise proud of the conquest; than that thou art humbled
in the Foil. We have spoiled thy Forces, because they were thine; thee have we
spared, because thou now art ours: March on with us to the fairest Mark in our
Field, true Peace and Liberty. Had thine been the day; we could but have died
honestly: thou may live honorably, now it is ours. To embrace an happy, and
lasting league, is needful for thee, and for us expedient: since thou have the
Benefit, and we the Credit of the victory. Only thou shall confess, and
rejoice; the War was most justly begun, and as happily ended. Happy is he,
whom Veriue having conquered, has made her Captive, Tributary, Subject,
Servant. There is no shame where she foyles; where she spoils there is
nolosse: She strives not with us, but for our good; nor are we hurt, but in
her repulse.

How answerest thou my Challenge? Enter Lists accordingly, and thou shall find
I have prophesied the number, order, and event of a Mystical Pfeuchomachie.
What needs all this (thou saift) betwixt us? Thou have ever professed thee a
Friend to those on my side; nor have thou entertained the other to thee. In
plain terms (so easily thou can excuse it) Thou never knew'st what Pride
was; nor yet can thou tell how to be Proud. No Man has been so vicious, but
that he has made Virtue his profession. Even the most dissolute will not own
their Vices: but will yet usurp a name from the former, howeuer the latter be
their practice. Never man was so proud, as to think himself so: That Pride
were more abbominable than was Lucifers, that could be proud of it self. But
listen, and I Will teach thee how to know thy self: Give ear awhile to thy
self; I Will describe thee a Man so like thee in all points and proportions: as
that he that sees you together, must put on his Spectacles, and view all
things double, that takes you for two.

A Proud Man is one that climbes the wrong way to ascend thither; from whence
his Father fell. Is his own NARCISSUS, and all Men's TIMON: hating others, and
enamoured of himself. One that esteems himself in a Contempt of others: or
contemnes others in his own Esteem; you cannot say whether first, or more.
Many a thing does he contemn in another, and yet admites it in himself. He
wonders at what he has, and boasts of more. He reckons his Chickens before
they be hatched; and all his Geese are Swans. He grows as big as a
Mountain, though he bring forth, but a Mouse: and as soon as he has laid, he
Cackles. He boasts of those parts of his; wherein many Beasts excel him, and
say nothing. The little he has so dazles him, that he sees not what a deal he
wants. His vices he puts in the back part, but his Virtues in the fore part of
the Wallet. Them he soon forgets, these he often repeats. Swan-like, he carries
a stiff neck over his white Feathers, but sees not that his feet are black.
Others Faults, and his own Parts are still before him: and thus while he
compares, he cannot but prefer himself. Because he is somewhat better than
the worst; he thinks him now as good as the best. He has so many Inferiors,
that he thinks no man his Superior. Whereas others are to others; this Man is
an Hypocrite to himself: For he seems to himself, what he is not; and if he
be any thing so, yet he thinks him more than he is. He promises such things to
himself, which neither are, nor are like to be: and busies, yea pleases
himself (for the while) in his fained Conceit, as in the real Fruition.
Touching himself, he subjects, his Opinions to no Man's: and in another
Censure, he yields to none before himself. His Matter, or another; he
examines it in the balance of his own Judgment; and is as impatient to remit
it, as to have it contradicted. He takes Chalk, and a Coal in hand: and his
White, or Black must stand. The Good Deeds he does (as the Wrongs that are
done him) he still remembers He casts to meet the benefited Party in the
Street, or a Throng; and there looks for acknowledgement: And if it be so old,
or were so slender, that he has now forgot it; he yet takes occasion by the
by, to put him in mind of it. He smiles to hear his own praise in another
mouth; and yet so minces thereat, as though he would seem to blush: But at
length is content to yield to others Sooth-sayings, before the Testimony of his
own Conscience: and casily persuades him to be as they say; though they say
nothing so as he is. All Men are Liars; and the Proud man most of all: for (at
once) he transgresses the bounds of Modesty, and Truth: For while his own
Suggestion makes him talk so largely; your own Suspicion cannot think he
says truly. There Is not an ill man hates his Fellow, this Man only excepted. A
Drunkard accompanies a Drunkard; a Whoremonger embraces a Whoremonger; a Thief
shakes hands with a Thief: one Proud man only abides not another: One Tree is
not taken notice of, where the whole Wood reaches to the same height and
growth. The Proud Man should not be notorious himself, could he suffer others
to be as himself. Love and Kings (they say) will no Corriuals: nor can Pride
(which is the Love of a man's self, and King of other evils) endure an equal.
POMPEY will no Mate, CAESAR will no Master. That Evil must needs exceed all,
that cannot endure another should match it. He steps first into the Room, and
sits him in the upper Chair; and (after some pausing, and gazing) roles his
Head upon his Elbow; and conceits with what a grace he nods toward you,
speaks to you, whispers with you, smiles upon you. Not a Motion of his, not a
Faculty, which smells not of Affectation. Nor so much but he Sirs, and Spits
with a grace; and so he Walks, and Talks. He speaks never but with a noise;
and always laughs with a kind of Derision: Commands also with Arrogance, and
rebukes with Disdain. He talks all with Interrogations; as though his words
were of Authority to question every thing. That you enter his Threshold, is
more than a common courtesy; but that you approach his Presence, is a great
vouchsafement. What shall I call him? A THRASO, a POLYPHEMVS? To whom shall I
liken him? To MAXIMINVS, that made his Senators kiss his feet? to DOMITIAN,
that would be styled a God? or to those diverse POPES, that were guilty of both?
or to LVCIFER, the Father of them all? To what shall I compare him? But to a
Cock, that claps, and crows upon his own Dunghill; a Peacocke that ruffles
in his own Feathers; a Toad that swells with his own poison; an Ass that has
gotten on a Lions skin, and now he is a Companion for none, but such as he
seems; an Ape that is enamoured of his own and ugly Puppets: a Chameleon that
gapes after the Air; a Bladder full of Wind; a shallow River, and bubbling; an
empty Caske, and sounding; an addle Egg, and swimming; a Thin Ear, and
blasted, that out-tops the fat and full Corn; a Cypress Tree, that has fair
Leaves, but no fruit; a Wine-Bush, that never betokened good liquor; a
disordered Member, swollen so big through its own Corruption. Have I now
pourtrayed thee in thy proper colors? This Glass reflects on none beside
thee: It Is (me thinks) thy lively resemblance; look here how thou like thy
self. For me, I would be loath (like the Painter) to fall in love with thee, by
the draught of thy picture.

Tush! I know thee, and all thy Kin; and have been but too much acquainted
with all of thine acquaintance. That old Gripe-good, that por'd so long in the
Dunghill; was the first that raised you al thence, and snow made you look so
high. He undervalued himself to that, which now makes you ouervalue your
selves. It was he, left you that which made you Lords: and you have purchas't
this, to think you so. But I Will tell thee; thou have a fair House, and think
it a very Heaven to many Houells: step but from thine own Gates, and see how
others build more and greater, BABELS for their Honor. Thou can walk so
far and wide on thine own Ground, that thou think every Passenger must
needs trespass upon thee: Take but the Map, and show me in what part of the
World thy Land lies. Thy Bags strut with a refined and imprinted Earth, and
that so swells thee: so did it not the Earth, that might have said before thee,
these are Mine. These Things make thee seem a Great Man within thy self:
Silly Grigge! come out of thy Pond and Mud; and thou shall meet with ouergrowne
Congers in the Sea. Pride is called the Worm of Riches: It is the rankness of
this Weed, to produce such a Vermin. If a Man can but once get to be Wealthy,
he soon learnes to be Haughty: So hard it is for him not to be puffed up, that
is so crambed up. He knew the difficulty, that gave the Caveat: Charge them
that are rich in this World, that they be not high minded.

Not know my Lady Goe-gay, the sprucest Dame in City, or Court? Her father was
frugall, forgetting he was Caesar: but she flaunts it out, remembering she is
Caesar's daughter. Me thinks I now see her, as I saw her last; how trimly decked
in her purple and fine linen. She ware upon her back, to what she never
laid her hands. Earth, and Worms, and Beasts, and Nations, these are, and
live, and labor, for what she soyles, and tears, and spends: Their Excrement,
and Sweat, take care to proud her, what she scarce takes pains to put on.
The good Huswife and applauded, seeks Wool, and Flax; she lays her hands
to the Spindle, and her hands touch the Distaffe: and so clothes both her, and
her household. Out upon these home-spunne Threeds! These sign like Habit, like
Condition: Far fetched, and dear bought are for our Ladies. One Country and
Nation must breed, another kemb, another spinne, another weaue, another dress,
another shape out, and another trim up their wearings. Alas weak Creatures!
they see not their Beggary in these sundry Borrowings: nor mind how frail a
Carcass and vile, is shrouded under so gorgeous Happings. Women's supplimentall
Art, does but the rather bewray Natures Defects. Perfuming, Painting,
Starching, Decking, these make some Annoyance, and Uncomeliness, though less
apparent, yet more suspected. We gaze with greediness and delight upon a
curious and glorious Sepulcher; and yet notwithstanding we conceive and abhor
what is within. Me thought she bare her Self so nicely and demurely, as though
her Body had been starcht and gumm'd according to her Clothes. Perhaps (she
carries them so answerably) she took aim by her Glass at once, to set both
her Vesture, and Gesture in the right Fashion. Ah their silly Folly! that
Metamorphize Nature into Art: and carry themselves more like Pictures, than
like Creatures. Oh blot not out the lovely Image of God; in faining, and
framing so vain a shaping to your selves! How she glittered (Forehead, Ears,
Bosom, Wrists, and Fingers) in her Gems, Jewels, Bracelets, and Rings? She
likened her Luster to the Moon, and Stars; and thought her less clay, when so
bedaubed with a polished Rubbish. Who might then prize her Worth, that bare
many Good Men's Estates upon her little Finger? She little considered, how many
Fingers were worn, and wearied; to make that one Finger shine. This is not
only one of our Vanities, but one of our Superstitions; That we can (against
our Reason, and Knowledge) believe that the whole substance of a great
Patrimony, may be valuably transubstantiated into the Quantity of a little
Stone. Gemmes, what are they, but Gums; or the accretions, or congelations of
brighter Water and Earth? They come but from a more subtle compacted Sulphur
and Mercury: and yet we think the very Heavens concurred with the Earth to
their commixtion; and so the Sun left part of his shining in them. Mere
notionall is their value; which is in the Opinion, not in the Thing: They are
worth nothing, only if you can but think them so. The Merchants Adventure has
transported them, the Lapidaries Craft has polished them, the vain Man's
Credulity has esteemed them, and the Rich Man's Superfluity has enhaunced
them. These be but rich Men's gaudy Trifles; as the painted Gew-gawes be for
their children. CHRIST is not put on with these Toys, and Rags. It is for
such as wax wanton against CHRIST; to fashion themselves according to this
World: For Godly Matrons, the old Fashion is best; Modest apparel, with
shamefastness and Sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array.

Who, Sir Lofty-lookes the Courtier? I saw him the other day in his golden
Fetters: and heard him make great boast of (me thought) but a glorious Misery.
He has gotten (he thinks) to be more happy than he was; and has quite
forgotten what he was. Fortune has exalted him, and how he exalts himself?
Clean contrary to the Rule; the Man thinks his Place has graced him: and
looks chiefly to be observed according to his place. He is grown to be better
clad than his Master; yea and bears an higher mind. It is hard to be chaste
in company with a Woman, to be sober at a Banquet, to be patient in a Fray: as
hard to be humble in the midst of new heaped Honors, and Preferments. How
rarely does he stoop so low; that so suddenly is rapt so high? Like a Moth, or
Rat of the Palace; he has often and much inquired after this man's Life, that
man's Office, the other man's Estate: and (after long, and earnest gaping) some,
or all these are fallen into his mouth. And now he has climbed so high on a
sudden, that you would wonder he wrought not himself out of breath. To say
all of such an one, in sum: Many he scorns, his Inferiors; He enuies
Many, his Fellows: One he soothes, his Lord; One he loves, Himself.

But what of Captain Scape-skarre? How he stalks up and down the streets in
his Shamoyse, and a Truncheon; that never ware an Harness, nor scarce can
wield a Sword. O but take heed how you wrong him! He has more Badges of his
Art and Valor about him; then a side Belt, or a Buffe Coat. Have you not heard
of his Wounds and Skarres, so many have been told of? He bids you see the Gash
he gat in his Forehead; and feel the Bullet, that lies in his Calfe: and you
must now think how he then hazarded; whereas (perhaps) he gat the one as he
looked back, the other as he ran away. It is a marvel he tells you not, how
he stood like a Giant amidst the Pigmies: how with the blast of his first
Volley, he made the Enemy quake like leaves; made them fly like Feathers; and
scattered them like dust before the Wind. And you must now believe him; or else
you do him the dishonor, as if you should either gainsay, or disprove him. He
tells you what a monstrous leap he took when he was last in Rhodes: and if you
will be pleased (for experience sake) to suppose the Place where he is, to be
Rhodes; he will also give you leave to suppose the Leap. Soldiers (be they
the most valiant and fortunate, that ever lifted hand or foot, for God, and
their Country) lose so much of their glory; by how much their own mouths are
the Trumpets of their Victory. Modesty is not less noble in a Warrior, than
is valor. If he have taken the City, let his works praise him in the Gate; not
his words only, when he has now got the Town upon his back. He has won
the Field; perhaps with a greater loss: and why boasts he of a Prize, when
all is too little to make amends? How says he, his Enemy is vanquished; when
his own are not recovered? The Day is his; it might have been the
Adversaries: and why insults he, where he might have couched? With what Glory
can he boast, where he might have complained with shame enough?

Ah but there is One of you (believe me, I could both love, and honor him; did
he not save me that labor, in doing the Office to himself) No matter for his
Name; You may think he is a noted Man. The Man has good Parts and Gifts in
him; you need not tell him so, he knows it well enough: you should take him
for a Beast, should you think him ignorant of his own Strength: He can do
well; yea, and he thinks as well of what he can do. As it was not ill for
MOSES that his Face shone, and the People saw it, though himself knew it not:
So were it well for us, did our light so shine before Men, that they might see
our good works, and we our selves ignorant to boast it. The Harp sounds no
less sweetly, though it hear not it self: Our good Parts would be no less
laudable, though our selves took no notice of them. It is both safe and
profitable unto us, that our selves have been ignorant of our Gifts. How
usual is it, to forestall our best Parts, with a fore Conceit? Many men might
in time have been both Good, and Wise; had they not as yet thought them so.
This hinders the Perfection of Good Parts, when we think we have attained them
so soon. God, and Nature have done fair for him, and he is now not a little
proud of himself. This has God done for him, he has wrought Good out of
Evil: this has he done unto himself, he has wrought Evil out of Good. It Is
strange how Vice here buds from Virtue. Whereas other Vices are in the Evil;
our Pride only is in the Good we have: Other Evils openly show the Worst; this
Evil trecherously spoils the Best we do. This is the craft and subtilty of
the Devil, that when be cannot at first prevent our Good Deeds, and Duties;
he seeks to prevent them afterward, by making us Proud of what we have done.
The Virtues that destroy their several Vices; he makes in general to nourish
this Vice: Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance; which banish and abandon
Folly, Wrong, Faintness, Riot: These nevertheless (and such others) occasion
Pride, and cherish it. Of all our Virtues, this is the chiefest; not to be
Proud of our Virtues. He built a School, College, Hospital; and I read his
name in every Window. Tush! he has erected him an everlasting Monument of
Letters: in whose very Frontispeece, you may read at once both his Name, and
Works: And you must conceive, these were not set so near together for nothing:
his Name does authorize his Works; and his Works immortalize his Name. He
smiles to think, how his Name is published, in the inquiry of his Works; and
how his Works are graced, in the mention of his Name. He has long learned to
exhaust others, like a Be: and now at length has got the Are to euiscerate
himself, like a Spider. Others Brood he commonly wraps in his own Clouts;
with here and there a newfangled Brat, much what like himself: and yet he
hugges them above therest; and says of his own inventions; O deep Notions,
and mysterious! Orare, and pious Thoughts! Oh how it tickles him to re-repeat
the Line, and Saying, he has couched so Emphatically! when as (perhaps) you
can scarce conceive it to be so much as sensibly digested. Just like a
fantastic Musician, he chiefly pleases himself; while he leaves the
Grounds, to run upon his Voluntaries. How readily, and rashly, do we broach
our own Opinions? how largely paraphrase upon our own Fancies? yea, we make
them ours also; which be no other, than have been said, or thought, save
somewhat otherwise. That we have made a bare shift to clad, or cloak another;
this is enough to own it to our selves. The Author boasts what curious Thread
he has so cunningly wouen from out himself, nor (for his Matter, or Method)
has he the least hint from another. The Translatour tells you, it is far more
tedious to confine his wits to construction, than to enlarge them to Invention.
He bragges of the Forrainers Learning, and Devotion; together with his narrow
inquiry of his Words, and mind: and now he compares his Turned Coat (though
in many places threadbare, moth-eaten, fusty;) to any fresh, and fair,
spotless, yea seamelesse Garment. Briefly, be it in things of our own, or
others; If our knowledge be a little beside others; even they must know it,
whose knowledge is far beyond our own. Nay, but he is now of another Mind;
he is not so Prodigal, as Niggardly of what he knows. Away (says he) with
these shallow Cestornes, with these empty Channels; that hold so little, and
power out so fast: Give me only the Gulf of Learning, and a Deuourer of
Books. I cannot tell what you would say he may be; but he will not (he says)
be a Fool in Print. He vpbraids him with Folly, that thinks himself knows
nothing, unless others know what he knows: and thinks it his own Discretion,
not to communicate his knowledge unto Fools. No; As Learning (he thinks)
began: ganue: so he will have it end in himself: For (so he persuades him) he
knows so much; that in him knowledge both lives, and dies. The knowledge that
this man has, he will not vent it out: no marvel then it be found in this
man, as is said; Knowledge puffs up.

But of all your lofty Crew; have you heard of him, that is proud of this; That
he is not proud? One that glories vainly, even in the Contempt of Vaineglory.
You have many of his Sect, and Sort: He seems lowly, but he grudges to be
despised; He cares not to bepoore, but he is loath to want: He goes barely,
fares hardly, lies coldly; an holy Man (I wis) and mortified! but that he
boasts as much of this, as you could of the Contrary. A fained Humility, puffes
up more, then a noted Pride: and is so much the more evil and edious, as it
seems to be otherwise. Tush man! (be he as thou would think, another to
thy self) I can as well see his Proud Heart through his torn Coat; as thine
through thy slasht Doublet. Thou proudly abhorrest his sordid rags; he also
spurns and tramples thy gay Garments; and with another kind of Pride. Thy
Ambition vrges thee to give; and he refuses thy Gift, for he also has his
Ambition. Boast thou before him; Thou art Alexander the King: and he will brag
with thee; He Is Diogenes the Dog. Pride is not always from endowments
within; nor yet from outward Accruments. A proud Heart often goes together with a
Beggars Purse and Coat.

I Will now tell thee of One thou know not: Heed him well; thou yet know not
him whom thou see. I tell thee (choose thee whether thou think me so; my aim
is, that thou be so thy self) I am not Proud: And good reason why; I have
nothing, I know nothing to be Proud of. Riches, what are they; but a spreading,
a moving, a glittering Earth? Hardly, and euilly gotten; doubtful to keep,
and dangerous; soon, and sorrowfully lost. Honor, what is it; but an imposed,
rather a supposed Hight, and Deem? a mere nothing in it self; but only is
more, or less, as others reckon it. Men are like Counters, all of the same
mould, and stamp: only when we cast up their account, we number them from a
Farthing, to a Pound. What is Beauty, but a Superficies of Color, and
Proportion; or a shadowed Shape, and Hue? a red clay mingled with Snow: A
Flower, which (ere it yet flourishes) is prone to fade: Crop it untimely, and
it lowres while you look upon it; Let it stand a while, and it withers upon
the stalk: The Frost of a Fever makes it droope downwards; and an aged Winter
makes it quite wither away. What is Strength and Stoutnesse, but a stiffer
Compact, or more solid Couchednesse of the Joints, and Blood? which (say Art,
nor Might can yet subdue) Sickness, Age, or Death will once enfeeble. I have
seen a Feather and a Wall more beauteous than a Woman: and know an Ox, or an
Oak, to be stronger than a Man. A Lion will outstand a Man, a Tigre outrun
him, a Stagge out-leap him, a Dolphin out-swimme him: It is great Folly, to be
Proud of those Parts of ours; which the very Beasts have not only with us, but
before us. And for Learning and Knowledge, what is it, but an insight of our
Ignorance; letting us know only, that we know nothing? I will ask him, that
knows the most, and applies it to the best; Who knows all Things? Who is wise
at all Times? The most he knows, is not the least of that he knows not. And
can we be Proud of these things of ours, which either are not ours, or are not?
These best things of Nature, Industry, Fortune, how can we call them ours, and
kiss our own Hands for them; when as they can neither get, nor keep them to
us? What we here arrogate to our selves, we steal from God. Oh wretched Man,
and thanklesse! What have thou, thou can call thine own, but Evil? God
gives thee all that thou art, and have besides: Let the Giver have the glory of
his Gifts. Why is thy heart so puffed up within thee, and thy Brother so
despised in thine Eyes? Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have
thou, that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it; why do thou
glory, as if thou had not received it? Thou art more Rich, Great, Fair,
Strong, Wise, and Holy, than he; yea, but he is more humble. God thinks better
of an humble Sinner, than of a Just man proud. Be he never so Good; God thinks
the worse of him, for that he thinks the beteer of himself.

It skarres me quite for climbing so high; when I consider, that he who first
ventered himself, and now vrges others, fell so low. He now and then spurs me
on to come after him: but (by his leave, or rather in his despite) I hold it
easier and safer to sit still; than to rise up and fall. He hazards that
climbes up the Hill; he that couches in the Dale, has not whence to fall. It
is for Goats to clammer up the Mountains; I am a Sheep, and can content me to
graze in the Valleys. Yet am I not so sheepish, to losh into the Ditch, because
the Bell-Weather has ventured: Shall I rush after him, as though I did only
mind his Going, but not understand his Drowning? Let Satan Keep his poison to
himself; or drink his draught to Fiends, not Men. Shall I pledge him in his
Cup, whereof (I know) he at first rasted, and perished? The Devil (I perceive)
was well enough if he could have kept him so: He once was (as it were)
enthroned on high; he now is imprisoned below: was once not an Angel only,
but the Prince of Angels; is now both a Devil, and the Prince of Devils: Was
once more fair than the Sun, is now as black as Hell: Was once a Spirit
true, and pure; is now a lying, and unclean Spirit. I will not pity, but
scorn him rather: How art thou fallen from Heaven (O Lucifer) Son of the
Morning? And will rejoice to hear, and belecue the Witness of his
Destruction: I beheld Satan, as Lightning, fall from Heaven. If I may give the
Devil his Doom; He is worthily thrown lower, that would have attempted
higher than can be imagined: An Hell is too good for him, that would have
usurped an Heaven: He merits to be confounded to Nothing that so insulted
against All things. Did he (think you) so ambitiously affect a Diety?
Certainly, Diabolisme was too little for him. Surely, No finite Creature can be
capable of so infinite an Evil; as to arrogate and attempt Divine Majesty to
it self. I rather think (then he enuyed the Majesty to the Creator) be
enuyed the Perfection to the Creature; and gloried in his own. He saw he was a
goodly Thing, and mighty; and thought he was so of himself, and none was so
beside him: Others he deemed subject, and himself only independent. He ought
at first to have acknowledged his maker; but he then gloried in himself. The
height then of Satan's Am^tion, was not so much a rebellious attempt to be like
God; as a Stubborn neglect rather, to be thankful to God, for what he was.
And what higher Contempt could he have imagined, then so Proud a Neglect? This
therefore exiled him his blessed and perfect Seat, and State: and made him (of
all Creatures) the most evil and accursed. His Pride threw Satan out of
Heaven, and made him a Devil of an Angel: Our Pride also will press us down
to Hell, and make us Fiends of Men. He that endured not Pride in Angels; how
shall he suffer it in Men? How shall Dust and Ashes be lifted up, without
Consusion: since this Principality gloried not, but to his Shame?

Of all Sins, God hates, and plagues Pride; as the Pride of Sins. There was
no Sin before Pride; no Sin now without it: Since every Sin is a proud
rebellion against the Will of God. What can be more Proud, than to live against
his Will, by whose will we live? What more unthankful, than to despise his
commands; which commands, not only that he may be known to rule, but rather
that he may take occasion to reward? Nothing opposes God more than Pride; GOD
therefore (of all) Resists the Proud. This made him set his Face against all
his Creatures, for enill. He therefore cast LVCIFER our of Heaven, ADAM out of
Paradise, the Builders out of BABEL, HAGAR out of his Masters house, IEZABEL
out of the Window, SAVL out of his Kingdom, NEBVCHADNEZZAR out of his
Condition, HEROD out of his Life: He therefore cast CORE and his Company into
the Earth, HAMAN into the Air, PHARAOH and his Host into the Water, and the
SODOMITES into the Fire: He therefore cast IEZABEL to the Dogs, the BETHEL
Children to the Bears, and the envious Lords unto the Lions. All Gods
Creatures fight for him, when he sets himself to resist the Proud. God is Lord
over Man, more than Man is Lord over the Creatures: Nor are the Creatures bound
to serve Man, longer than Man serves God: If he will be so proud, as to kick
against him that is his Maker; they will be so bold as to strive against him
that should be their Master. The big and lofty Creatures; Buildings, Trees,
Mountains, Rocks; these all are obnoxious to every Tempest, and Thundering:
while the low and little shrimps and Shrubs, shroud and stand secure: These are
dashed, and These encouraged by him; that puts down the Mighty from their
Seat, and exalts them of low degree. Pride (we say) will have a Fall: This is
but the Ladder by which Men climb to Ruin: This but lifts men up, to cast
them down the more violently and desperately. When you see a Proud Man near,
think Judgment not far off. Where there is Pride in the heart, there is
certainly a plague at his heels: Yet a little while, and the Flourishing Bay
is gone. Big Trees stand seldom till they wither; but are rather blown or
hewn down before.

Yea but I am humble; Nor is it thanks-worthy, that I am little in mine own
eyes. since One greater than I made himself of no account. How can we make us
low enough; since He whose shoe latchet we are not worthy to unloose, humbled
himself at our Feet? How can vileness be puffed up; since He that was Great
beyond estimation, made himself of no esteem? It is humility enough with us,
that we subject us to our Superiors, and prefer us not before our Equals;
but too much (we count) to subject us to our Equals, and not prefer us fore
our Inferiors: But (O wondrous Humility!) He subjected him to Inferiors, who
among Men and Angels had no Equals. He bowed the Heavens, when he humbled
himself to our Life; He bowed the Head, when he humbled himself to our
Death. Odious was our Pride, the Pride of the Sons of Men: That could not be
cleansed, not be healed, but by so rare Humility, the Humility of the Son of
God. Why are we puffed; for whom our Savior was so emptied, why so lifted, for
whom he became so prostrate? What Worm of Earth can be lifted up, when the God
of Heaven was brought so low? We that are base, to what can we be abased; when
He was humbled that was so high? Oh Dust and Ashes! learn to contemn thy
self; for whom the God of Spirits was despised. Learn of him that was
humbled, not only for thy Pride; but to make thee humble. Oh learn of him,
that says; Learn of me; for J am meek and lowly in heart.

I wonder not that the Devil was so proud; for he was an Angel bright, and
perfect: But it makes me start and gaze, to see Man so; that is but Dung, vile
and vanishing away. The Devil had more to be proud of than has Man: yet Man
will be as proud as the Devil. What is Man, thus to forget, thus to
transgress his own Condition? Did he seriously consider himself, this would
make him keep warily within himself; at least, not step so lauishly beyond
himself. Why liftest thou up thy self (O Man!) when thy self is enough to
pull thee down? Art thou not wretched, mortal, evil? Thy black Feet will bow
thy stiff neck, notwithstanding thy white Feathers. What art thou but a
Shadow, a Sepulcher, a Statue, a Glass, a Bubble, a Blast, Dung, Dust, and
Ashes, Wormes-meat; a crazy Body, and full of Corruption, a cankred Soul, and
Fraught with evil: whose Being, no Being; whose Life, no Life; whose Life is
gone, or going; whose Death is coming, and will come. And now (Earth and
Ashes!) how art thou puffed up; whose Nature, and Lot it is to settle, and
sink? What should a Giant do in a Dwarf; or so high a mind in so vile a
carcass? The Sergeant, Purseuant, Catch-poll of the Great King; that knocks
at the door of Young and Old, high and low, rich and poor, that equals
Scepters and Spades, Iron and Straw, Books and Babbles: She turns Beauty into
Blackness, Strength into weakness, Wisdom into Folly, and lays Honor in
the Dust. Dig up the Beggars Grave, open the Princes Tomb; view well both
their Skuls, and see how like they look: compare their Dust, and thou shall
find no difference. Why does Man (in his life) so proudly prefer himself to
the Most, and Best: whom Death shall once equal to the Least, and Last? No man
is proud, but he that is ignorant of himself. Know then (O Man) at once, and
contemn thy self: Know whence thou were, what thou art, and whither thou
must: Whence thou were, from a muddy Slime; What thou art, a rotten Dung;
Whither thou must, to the place of Dust and Worms. In all that was, or is, or
is to come; here is nothing to be proud of. How can he be proud of himself;
whose Birth is a pollution, whose life is a Desolation, whose Death is a
Corruption? our Life is but a step to Death; or many Deaths to one Death: Youth
is the death of Infancy; why then are we proud in the Toys of our Infancy?
Manhood is the Death of Youth; why then are we proud in the pleasures of our
Youth? Age is the Death of Manhood; why then are we proud in the strength ofour
Manhood? Decrepitnesse is the Death of Age; why then are we proud in the
wisdom of our Age? Lastly, Death is the Death of all, why then are we proud of
any?

Tush! what of all this? Thou now think never the worse of thy self, for
what thou shall be. Tell thee (thou faist) not what thou were, or must be; but
what thou art. Its all one for that: what thou have, thou mean to make much
of it, while thou have it. Go to Great-Heart; thou will (ere long) be
lessened. Be proud yet awhile of thy self: where shall once be thy Self, or
Pride? Do, do; Out-gaze Heaven till Earth gape for thee: and spurn Men, till
Men tread upon thee. Then shall they perceive thee to be as vile; as thou
could conceive of them. Yea, when thine Honor, Wisdom, Beauty, Strength;
shall be sown in Weakness, Horror, Folly, and Dishonor: Thus shall they
entombe and entitle thee at once. GOod Reader know,
That come nigh;
Here lies he low,
That looked so high.
Both poor, and nak't;
That was gay clothed:
Of all forsak't,
Who others loathed.
He once thought all
Enui'd his Worth:
Nor Great, nor Small,
Now grudge his Turfe.
The Heavenly Cope
Was his Ambition:
Three Cubits scope
Is his Fruition.
He was above all;
God above him:
He did not lone all;
Nor God love him.
He that him taught,
First to aspire:
Now has him caught,
And pays his hire.


The Jrefull, OR Angry.
But whither Sir Hotspur? what, al in haste? A word (I pray) and you will; yet
not (as you use) a word and a blow. Come prithee, let me walk thee a while, to
cool thee. Spur not on too fast; thou wilt either jade, or stable thy self. I
conceive thee, and can prescribe. Perhaps, thou have not the wit to reckon the
Greek letters; not the Grace (perhaps) to repeat the Lords Prayer: yet (may
be) the leisure to take a Turn. In good sadness, thou art angry; something now
ayleth thee. Something? The Fool (sure) has more wit, than to be angry for
nothing. One (thou say) has wronged, and urged thee: Hark a while, and
thou shall hear him say no less of thee; than thou now of him. Men are wont
to accuse others, when themselves are in fault. The Angry man (especially) is
seldom but guilty of his own allegations, and Complaints: and often times wrongs
another, in What he says, in that he says, another has wronged him.

Naught but a glance, a puff, a snuff, a frown, a shoulder, a spurn? and
(beside these flouts and scorns) neither stay, nor speak? Thus are our
Passions hot upon their bent pursuit: thus disdainful at their least
opposition: thus careless of the best advice. Bid him stay, and be advised.
You had as good say nothing: He is resolutely bent upon his rules (I know)
which he as ill understands, as follows: That he ought not to be wronged: That
he ought to be satisfied for the wrong.

Surely the man is lost, or lacking; and is wholly bent and busied, to seek
and overtake himself. Or rather, is so taken up with himself on a sudden;
that he yet has no leisure to take up himself. He drives on very furiously,
and most stiffely bestirres his stumpes: and yet (I warrant him) cha^es as
fast, as he posts; because his feet are so sluggish and unweildy, that they
make no more haste to bring many his other members into action. His spleen
which cannot so soon burst out against another, now boyles and bubbles within
himself. Out ugly Hagges, and Bell-dame Witches of our Minds, and Souls!
rebels to Reason, and enemies to Sense How do ye possess, and mishape us?
With what sophisticating dregs of Exorbitancy do ye skarre us from our
selves: and hurry us headlong to that inconvenience, which we seldom warily
recover; but which we rather shamefully repent too late? If these Tempests
hoyse and toss us, we rarely recover our harbor; but our Ship is either
swallowed of gulfes, buried in the waves, or split upon the rocks. Our
Affections (for they have their Office in us, without their Fault) become
chaste Handmaids to our Minds, while carefully and discreetly curbed and awed:
but give them leave, and Liberty, and they turn inordinate Prostitutes to our
lusts. Sit close to the Stern, and let these only apply their own Oars; and
the Ship sails with a merry gale, and prosperous: But let loose the Reins,
and (as untamed Horses) they hurry along; and at last they throw their Rider.
Fire is a good Servant, but a bad Master; useful upon the hearth, but hurtful
beyond the bounds: Such are our fiery Affections also: we are not Tyrants, but
must be masters over them: we cannot root them, we must restrain them. Let
HAGAR sit about SARAH, and she will stir contention in the whole House of
ABRAHAM. That these Bond Huswiues (our Affections) usurp over Reason, that
Free Matron, is enough to disturb and distract the whole Man. These are the
troubled waters, in which we cannot see our faces, and shapes: nay, in which we
wallow purposely, that we may not see them. These are the dusky Clouds, that
obscure the Sun of our little world, our Reason. If these boisterous Winds
get head against us; they trouble our Sea, perplex our Pilot, split our Ship,
and drive us all to wrack. But I say no more to my Self. We may bewail our
Selves in Others; it is in vain, that we warn Others within our Selves. Have
after the Haslting; nay, have at him with an encounter as resolute, as speedy.

But soft; not too near him. The man turns big, and sower upon me. He
seemed Impatient at the first; and now grows Furious at a next affront. Anger
is wont to resistand assault those it meets with, as those it aims at: and
grows as short against the mean occurrences, as against the maine Opposite.
See, see! He Is all on a froth and fume. Look on him well, and like him worse.
His Head startles, Hairs bristle, Brows wrinkle, Eyes sparkle, Teeth chatter,
Tongue stammers, lips quauer, Joints tremble, Hands clap, Fingers twitter, Feet
wander: His Blood rises, Stomach fills, veins swell; His Heart burns, Breast
boyles, Breath shortens, and his Color goes and comes: Now red as fire, now
pale as a clout; now rashly hot and flaming, now fearfully wanne and chill.
What uncouth alterations of Mind? Did you ever see such frantic anticke
gestures of Body? In this Glass (I warn you all) behold, and abhor
yourselues. Did he here also see himself, he would scarce know himself; yet
scarce that, ere loath himself. The Man quite marres a good Face of his own.
How uncomely and loathsome is his Mind now (could you mark it) that works
these distempers, and distractions in his Body? He seems (me thinks) as ugly,
as outrageous: and his Feature not more unseemly, than his Feats. Mark him
now: Now he stands, now starts, now stampes, now Stares, now shrugges, now
scratches, now snuffes, now grinnes, now gapes, now wrings. Such Apish tricks,
such Bedlam prancks; as you would judge him (in his Fit) either a Fool, or or
madman: And who will think you other in his case? Anger is a short madness.
Ah peevish passion, that thus distempers and distracts us! of all our hard and
adverse Affections, the most harsh and churlish. The rest have some easement;
this only will no mitigation. Fear has some Boldness; Sorrow some Joy;
Despair some Hope; this Fury only has no mercy. They move us, but this
inrages: They disturb, but this confounds our quiet.

Yet more tricks with this angry Ape? Come a loft Jack: Sirrah? How do your
fellow Brutes startle and bestirre them in a moved mood? See the Sport: He now
rampes like a Lion, bristles like a Boar, fomes like a Bear, kicks like a
Horse, stampes like a Bull, pushes like a Ram, grinnes like a Dog, scratches
like a Cat, swells like a Toad, hisses like a Snake, bills like a Cock, tugges
like a Goose, buzzes like a Beetle, stings like a Waspe, and now mumpes and
mowes like himself. Nay about Jack. He now bends his brows, gnashes his
teeth, scratches his head, tears his hair, beats his breast, wrings his
hands, smites the post with his fist, and spurns the dust before him with his
feet. The angry Ape said I? I should have said the Ape of Anger. There is no
savageness of Beasts, which he here imitates not, if not exceeds. Nay, he will
follow the very Fiends in his fury. Man is in nothing more Brutish (I yet say
not Deuillish) than in his Anger. He is well compared, to what he so well
resembles. I shall think him neither better, nor other than a Beast; that
suffers his senseless passion to blind and sway the Reason of a Man. No better
than a Beast? Much worse. A Beast knows not how to be angry: Anger is the
Anger of a man. Man's is the sin; a Beasts is but the shadow, and shape of
Anger: A Beast often shows the violence; a Man only has the vice thereof: Such
(perhaps) seize, wound, kill; roar, and bray, bellow and bleat: yet forthwith
(for all the Anger, or Sorrow) fall to Feed, or Sleep: He only has this
Ground, and Grudge within him. And hereupon, no Man but prone, no Beast but
loath to be provoked: It strives still to shun, what he often thirsts to iucurre.

My Friend, be fair conditioned; it is best for you to know, and love your
self. Nay my haughty Haire-braines, it is no pishing, tushing, laughing,
scowling, scoffing, scorning matter. Scorn thou my Pity, while I pity thy
Scorn. Another has wronged thee; alas! and alas that thou therefore wrongst
thy self: Thou needs must vex thy self, because another has vexed thee. I
had thought (howeuer) that thou could not so have hated Another, as not to
love thy Self. But what carest thou, how thou hazards thee, to hurt him. A Be
has stung thee, and thou wilt pull the whole Hiue about thy ears: yea (silly
Be!) thy self wilt also sting, though in the loss of thy Sting, thou lose
thy Life. Thou Wilt throw thy Dare howeuer, though more by that means light upon
thee. It is nothing, if thou perish in his ruin. Ah silly Fencer! but naked,
and yet spightfull in thy Frayes; that look only where to hit the the other,
not where to guard thy self. An angry Man is his own worst enemy; and offends
none more than himself: He is often more crucified in the Thirst; than the
other damnified in the Execution of Revenge. Anger is a Fury, that rightly
haunts the heart, that harbors it: a Viper that worthily gnawes the womb,
that does conceive it. It is but just, that an inordinate Mind and froward,
should be a Plague, a Torment, a Danger, a Destruction to it self.

I have cast thy Water: I Will tell thee what thou feels, which (because thou
feels) thou can not tell. Thy Disease is the spice of an Ague; commonly
called the Physicians Shame; which every Man is here to himself. The Ground is
a choleric Humor, the Seat a naughty Stomach, the Cause a bad Digestion, of
hard meats especially; the Sign a Burning, a Shaking Fit; the Effects a
Distemper of the Body, and a Distraction of the Mind: the Cure is, to be let
blood in a Wild Vein, to purge gently for Choler, to abstain from sharp and
bitter Prouocations, and apply thy stomach only with pleasant and easy
Leniments. Nay if you take it not in time, before the third Fit at the
furthest; it grows to more Diseases, than I can either Cure, or Count. Then is
it the Inflaming of the Blood, the Swimming of the Brain, the Blearing of the
Eyes, the Burning of the Heart, the Belching of the Stomach, the Shaking of
the Hands: Strifes Inflammation, and loves Oppilation; the Dropsy of
Indignities, and Consumption of all Humanity. The Minds Ecstasy, casting Reason
in a trance: the Bodies Lethargy, lulling the sense asleep. Name me any thing
that's bad; and it is no better. A roaring Lion, a ravening Wolf, a savage
Tigre, a wild Boar, a she Bear, an untamed Beast, an unbridled Horse, an
vnyoked Ox, an untaught Ape: a Cloud, a Wind, a Shower, a Storm, a Sea, a
Wave, a Gulf, a Rock, a Wrack; a Rack, a Pit, a Hell. All the Elements out
of their element. A consuming Fire, a pestilent Air, a troubled Water, and a
quaking Earth. Thus can I call it all that's bad; and what shall I say to thee?
A foul evil is Anger, and egregious. There Is no Evil, which it either causes
not, or matches not. What Evils to Strifes, Enuies, Murders? and whence are
they? What Evils do men beyond it: and amongst us Men, What Evils are done
beside it?

Thou know (perhaps) nor it, nor thy self, by these Names of mine: or love
rather not to hear on it in harsh terms. I now come to thee; thus mince it
with thee. It is forsooth (as you commonly call it) an Hasty nature: So; its
thus known in all: but how call you it each in other? Oh, it is the Soldiers
Stoutnesse, the Ministers Earnestness, the Woman's Pettishnesse, the Sicke-mans
Peeuishnes, the Youngmans Rashness, the Old-mans Testiness, the Priuate-mans
Choler, and the Great man's Displeasure. Be it so in the Seueralls; what is it
yet in the Sum: Every man in his Humor; and yet but one Humor in every Man.
Are Sins less, for the variety of Names, and Subjects? Anger may be more
impotent in one than other; yet is it not less evil. We all have not our
Might answerable to our Mood. It is with more Rancour, than Power, that the
very Waspe stings, and Worm turns again.

But its good (and it be but to sharpen a man's wits) to be angry a little, now
and then. Why not better, to be always more? A Good thing is not Ill, because
it is more. The Thing is merely evil, whose Increase may make it worse.
Virtues only know a mean: Vices have a more or less. A less Evil has not
more Benefit, but less Danger: A less Anger, is a less Evil; it therefore
Profits not more, but hurts less.

Who I angry at thee? at thy Anger rather: Nor angry at thy Anger I. It is not
fitting a Fault should take upon it, to correct a Fault. Yet let me say; Zeal,
and Justice, reprehend and punish, with earnestness, with severity; not rage,
not cruelty The Philosopher would not smite his Servant, because he was angry:
nor (were I so) would I chide thee. We are not angry at him, to whom we would
the Amendment of evil, together with the punishment. Is the Law therefore
angry, because it conuicts, the Judge because he condemns, the Officer
because he executes the Malefactor? It is Piety that moves here, not
Infirmity. The sword of Justice is not put into a Mad man's hand. Authority
requires not a rash, a lawless rigor; to what a grave, and just severity can
execute. Are Magistrates set for Posts, and Ciphers; idle, and immovable? It
is the Spur of their Office, that now moves them: They are angry at
Enormities; the very Cause is enough, to exempt it from that Name: It is not
perturbation now, but indignation. Take away this spirit and life of the Common
Wealth; and each civil Society faints in dullness and heartlesnesse; yea
groans under disorder, confusednesse and ruin. These may sin, in being not
angry: These may be angry and sin not: Thou both art angry, and sinnest.

True, true; The Ant (I know) has her gall, the Fly her spleen, and the
Worm will turn again. Nature (I have learned) has given to all Creatures a
desire and endeavor to preserve them selves in their proper Being: and hence it
is they so resist, or avoid whatsoever may oppose, or endanger it. Even vilest
Creatures wax offended, at what may molest their peace and safety: How much
rather then is the noblest Creature displeased at injuries, at indignities? A
Man is worthily moved at his Friends Wrong, and his own: and a Christian
(above all) at his Gods Dishonor. But what a Man is he, that will wrangle with
a Worm; that will fight with a Fly; that a Mouse can move him? We have such a
sort of touchy Spirits; whose Tinder hearts, apt to receive the least Spark of
a Flinty offense; kindle forthwith the Match of Contention. Like Thunder and
Lightning, a Crack and a Flash, a Word and a Blow, The Devil (I think.) at
first extracted. Saltpeter from their moulds and ashes: Their very Nature is
Gunpowder; you can no sooner touch it, than it flies in your face. There Is a
Spark, all Fire and Tow; every blast of breath is the Bellows to kindle him:
and every. Block in his way, is Fuel for his Fire. He is too forward in his
Frowardness, that falls out with every Thing, upon every Occasion. Say no
Occasion be given him; heel rather feign it, than want it. Say no thing oppose
him he will yet be at odds with himself. Anger is often impatient, even of
Observance: and longs to be croft, that so it may get to vent it self. Say
still as he says, to sooth him; yet he will hastily bid you (as Caelius the
Senator bade his yielding Client) say somewhat against him; that so you may be
known to be one beside him. He Will wrangle with you for Goats hair, and stand
against you for a Straw. Pinnes, and Points, are enough to set Boys together
by the ears. He takes it in high disdain, you so carelessly bedasht his
Doublet; and vows to be even with you, since you hapt to tread upon his Toes.
You have either taken the Wall, or not pledged the Health; and he must needs
fight with you. He frets and fumes at his Fortune; Curses and conjures the
Devil, and the Witch; bites, and burns Cards and Dice, and now he is
satisfied in a silly revenge. There is no Trifle, which a Wise man cannot laugh
at; or a Fool be angry at. Rather than his injuries shall be unrevenged;
he will pursue the Waspe that stung him, bawle with the Dog that barks at him,
beat the Wind that blows in his face, fight with the Post that withstands him,
and spurn the very Stone he stumbles at. Creatures all as insensible of his
Anger and Revenge; as himself is of the Evil and Indiscretion. I have seen a
Child, that fallen, full Angerly would beat the Ground: Somewhat had offended
it, and it did not know what to be revenged of. Children are moved with but
appearances of hurt and wrong: and likewise are appeased but with fained
strokes and tears. How Babish are we men in our Passions? We are easily angry,
but at what we know not: Something seems to wrong us, and we have some desire
of revenge. It is a shadow of Offense, that moves us; and a shadow of Amends,
will still us. A but counterfeited Appeasement, is enough to a but conceited
Indignation.

Bid BALAAM hold his hands; and smiteno Ass, but himself. Can he neither see,
nor feel; to strike so at himself through her sides? Poor Ass! she had too
much of his Load; though he had spared his strokes. But he will needs stab her
for stumbling. I have known such Bedlam Balaams, as would wrathfully revile
and curse, furiously smite and slay their silly Beast, for but failing or
falling under them; when (alas) already wearied or maimed by them. How shall I
think him other than Brutish; that will match and measure his indignation to a
Beast? NAAMAN snuffes, because his Physician would cure him another, and better
way, than he thought. He looked he should heal him by the Sound of a word, by
the Touch of a finger: had he not better Wash, and be healed by himself? He
thought this was not so good; because he thought not of it. Reason would have
esteemed that, which was the best: his Rashness would have that best, which
he had esteemed. The Reason of ^ Man always thinks what is fittest to be
done: his Rashness only hastens him to do, what he ^hinkes. This Evil has
Anger also, that it will not be advised. It (while it opposes every thing)
endures not any thing should oppose it. It judges after its own Fancy, and
does accordingly; and will by no means be drawn from it self. The Truth is
but a Tale, that gaine-sayes: and the Right does it Wrong, that oppugnes it. No
man's Anger seems unjust to himself. Howeuer, it thinks better of Obstinacy,
than Repentance: and will repeat rather, than recant the Evil: yea, will the
rather seem to justify it, because it would not seem to accuse it self.
NAAMAN therefore distasted the Waters of JORDAN; because he was only enamoured
of the Rivers of DAMASOVS. Many men rashly kick at, and peeuishly interpret at
the worst, what is Said, or Done for the best; only because it thwarts and
crosses their perverse and Obstinate Humor.

BALAAM stomachs his Ass; and JONAS pets for his Gourd. There Is no such
Impatience of Men, no such Indiscretion; as to be moved at Trifles, to murmr
for them. It is but Childish (you will say) to whine for Puppets. What shall I
say of these? The Mind is but base like them, that so^ values them, to be so
angry for them. A generous Horse will scorn to meddle with a bawling Curre.
The vilest Natures are the most querulous and contentious: much more in vilest
Things. A Fool, a Child, a Woman, a Sick man, and he that's twice a Child,
(they of the feeblest Condition, Sex, and Age) name me one beside them, so
easily and unadvisedly moved. Be not thou one of them, and let them be all One.
So he wisely Counsels thee. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger
rests in the bosom of Fools.

Have I raked up your Subble; soon in, soon out; soon hot, soon cold? I
must hammer your Wedge too, that's so long in heating, and burns so sore. The
yelping Curre did but snarle and snatch, and I shook him off: this sullen
Dog will fasten hard, and bite sore (I fear me) he looks so grimme. But I Will
now do my best to staue him. Ha! The Madman and his sword are ill met: It were
safer that the cursed Cowes horns were shorter. Anger is so wretched of it
self, and impotent; that it thunders it, when it has now gotten authority and
power. Take heed of him; he has drawn his blade, and vows, not to put it
up, till he be revenged: His Life (he swears) shall answer for the Wrong. Oh
how he will hacke him, and hew him, the next he meets him. Do you hear him?
He Will cleave his Coxcombe, bumbaste his hide, rattle his bones, split his
heart, let out his puddings about his heels, and garter him in his guts. His
blood is up; and will not settle, but in blood. Outrageous and bloody villain!
irefull Hell-hound, savage Tigre, Monster of Men, and Devil of Monsters. Thou
go about to revenge one, and a petty Indignity; and so offerest another,
and more hateful Injury. Anger (Oh this Anger) is not an unreasonable only,
but an unruly Passion. It knows neither Ground, nor Bound; while it is both
Causlesse, and Extreme. Cursed CAIN! look upon thy Brother, he is thy Makers
Image also; as fearfully and wonderfully made, as thy self: his bones, and
hairs are as strictly numbered, and his blood more precious in his Markers
Eyes. What Fury of Hell prouokes thee to destroy that Image; which no art, no
ability of thine can repair; no amends can acquit? Tush! what is a Death to a
Dishonor? His Life shall but pay for thy Disgrace: Ah! nor thy Confusion, but
for his Life.

The LAW (when it was used at the most, and interpreted at the worst) allowed
no more, than an Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, a Hand for a Hand, a Foot
for a Foot: Stripe for Stripe, Wound for Wound; but Blood answered not but for
Blood; nor but for Life, was Life required. Do I instance (think thou) for
thy private Retaliation of wrongs? rather against that overplus of Evil,
whereby thy revenge tyrannizes so far beyond the Offense. HE, that knew best
how far that LAW did stretch, and how long it should last; now tells thee
otherwise: Ye have heard that it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth: But J say unto you, that ye resist not Evil. The Talion Law
(when it was) was for public Justice, not for private Revenge: Especially,
since the Revenge of a man knows no Order, holds no Equality, in his own
wrong: So that commonly there is more wrong in the Revenge done, than in the
Wrong received. He has endammaged thy Goods; must thou therefore assault his
Person? He has torn thy Coat; must thou therefore tear his Flesh? He pluckes
thee by the Hair; will thou therefore pull him by the Throat? He has blemished
thy Name; and must thou therefore spoil his Life? While thou will be thus
satisfied, for the wrong he has done thee: what satisfaction will thou make
him, for the wrong thou have done? He is the more Offender himself, that
seeks to avenge him about the Offense. Let it not be pleaded, whether has
first, or last: it shall be judged, whether has most offended. Besides the
Ground, and Occasion thereof; this evil has Anger in the End, and Execution;
that it is unjust. His Wrath is just alone, that shall once render to every one
according to his Works. Thou wicked SERVANT, and merciless! will thou pull
thy Fellow by the throat; and hale him to Prison, for a few Farthing
Trespasses? Thy LORD shall once bind thee hand and foot, and cast thee into
Utter Darkness for many Talent Offenses.

Anger is but the Devils Wrath; and the angry Man but his Weapon: A Weapon
wherewith he kills double, or two at once; ones Soul together with another
Body. Hellish Instruments of Fury are they all, to set a World in combustion;
and bring themselves to confusion. What a spite is this? Thus the Devil uses
Man's hand, for Man's destruction. Thus laughs the Adversary, that every man's
Sword is in his Fellows side: thus glories, that Man is his own, and others
ruin. God made Man Man's God: but the Devil thus makes Man Man's Devil. Shall
I turn Actor in this balefull. Tragedy of Men, and Days; and inueigh against
this Fury of the World? Direful Miscreant, and hateful Monster of Hell!
impatient of our Being, irefull at our Quiet, hurtful to our Safety, and
dismal through all our Days! Who but SATAN did first enwombe thee? Woe, and
alas! that Man did ever enbosome thee. Thy rage has undone more Lives, than
the force of Death has dissolved. Thou Plague of Mankind that have cost them
such measurelesse, such numberless, Blood and Wounds. Not Tigres, not Dogs,
not Vipers, but Men, ah Men are grown the impatient, the froward, and
stubborn Generation: thus untowardly do they degenerate from themselves. The
Lion, the Bear, the Wolf; feed on the Heart, the Ass, the Sheep: but Man
thirsts after Man's blood, and the greedy Canniball gluts himself with Man's
flesh. Ask why he is so hengry? It is because he is so angry at his Fare: It
is his Fury that prouokes him to that Dogged Appetite; and gets him such a
Stomach to it. Revenge is but the Executioner of all those Cruelties, whereof
Anger is the first Inuentor: That but the Practitioner, this the Engineere.
Whence come Stabblings, Stranglings, Poysonings, and rufull Maceratings? This
first taught, and urged, to dig out a man's Eyes, to slit his Nose, to cut out
his Tongue, to hew off his hands, to carbonate his Flesh, and shiuer his Bones.
Yet more, and worse; Because it will not do a Man the Favor to dispatch him:
it studies to put him to as many Deaths, as Wounds: and thinks that if be
perish other, or sooner than it would; that he has as good as escaped, in
comparison to what it meant him. Diverse has this Evil diversely surpised and
ruined. One in his Bed, another at his Table, another on his Way, another in
the Church. Not Time, Place, Persons, Occasions, can forbid Angers rash and
raging attempts. Widows and Orphans, Young and Old, lament and curse this
Evil; since it untimely took away the Husband from the Wife of his bosom,
the Parent from the tender Infants head, the staff of his age from the aged
Father. What say I thus of some? This Firebrand of the World, has set all
Nations together by the ears, has dilapidated whole Cities, depopulated whole
countries: has made mountains of Carcasses, Rivers of Blood, and Mists of
gasping Breaths: Outrageous Hagge, and odious! had the World but one Head; she
(with Caligula) would strike it off at a blow: So she might see the whole
Fabric in a flame; she ( Nero-like) would not grudge her ashes to a second
Chaos. This evil has Anger thought, and done; and would yet do more: It never
but had a desire, above the power; a thirst, beyond the practice of revenge.
Yet it thunders, though it now can dart no more: having done the utmost spite
and rage, it yet will threaten worse. Thus (as follows) have the Furious
vowed and sworn against the lives of their Adversaries: To give their
Carcasses to the Beasts of the field, to the Fowls of the air; to strew their
ashes upon the Sea; to make them they shall neither know, nor say who hurt
them; not to leave so much as one, to carry news of the rest: That he will make
them eat their own dung, and drink their own stale; that not their God shall
deliver them out of his hands: That he means to ply them with Powder and
Pellets, as thick as mist and hail; that he will tread their Gray-haires to
their well nigh returned dust; strangle the Infant in the Parents eye, and
arm; spoil their Virgins, rip up their Big, bereave their Mothers; Make
their Men to draw in his Wagons, to grind in his Mills, to dig in his Mines:
Their Princes necks shall be but his Footstooles; and their Young-mens backs
but the Asses for his loads: Thus roar the Lions, thus hiss the Serpents,
thus bark the Dogs. Naught but spue out their rancour, but breath out
revenge. These have (I mark) most commonly gone together (I would like
Fellows to the Gallows) the Angry, and the bloody minded. Murder was the
first fruits of Anger, CAIN rose up in a Fury against his Brother, and slew
him. So, the Brethren in iniquity: What of them? Fearful! and to be
detested: In their Anger they slew a man: And therefore (may such other, fare
no better) Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it
was Cruel. As for me, (and so says every harmless Spirit) O my soul! come
not thou into their secret: unto their assembly (mine Honor!) be not thou
united.

There Is yet an old Bear to bait: I would he were blind, or toothlesse; it
would be good sport to whip him. What must he such haling to the stake? As
loath as he is to come thither; I would be loath to trust him there. That
bubbling Brook was more turbulent: but this still and standing Lake is more
violent; Old Anger (I mean) which makes up the slownesse, in the weight of
Ire. A Monster of a tedious breeding, of an unfortunate birth; a Serpent of a
Difficult hatch, and dangerous; an ill Liquour that being kept too long, has
tarted and tainted the Caske; a Poole that has formerly been stirred, and yet
can find no time to settle: a Lion that long couches, and slumbers sullenly;
yet rouzes him in the end, and roares hideously: a Fire that having long lain
smothered, breaks out at last into a fierce and furious flame: a mote at first,
that offends; a Beam at last, that blinds the eye. Comparisons are not here
more odious, than is the Vice. Liken (and you will) the growth of this ill
Weed, to any thing that waxes worse.

Mark how to stint, and stop it. Crush the Cockatrice in the Egg, push the
Scorpion in the shell, hunt the Young Foxes, while they are yet but petty Cubs;
take the Small Brat, and dash his head against a stone. Anger is a disease,
with more ease, and honesty, prevented; than recovered. This Fury does, as do
many wild Beasts, and Serpents, namely, change their Names, as they grow in
bigness, and years. In the infancy, they call it Haste, and Passion; in the
Youth, Anger and Choler; in the Growth, Ire, and Wrath; in the Old Age, Hatred
and Malice. Thus do I distinguish the Age; will thou I also determine it;
Anger is then Old, when it lives above a Day. It then lives too long, when it
suruiues the Ephemeron: which (they say) lives no longer; than I said Anger
ought to live. He that bids You Let not the Sun go down upon thy Wrath;
forbids withal, you should let the Sun (gone down) to rise upon it. Two Suns
are too many for an Angry man to see. Accession of days adds unto this Evil.
Haste is so turned batred; For so is it defined. Hatred is anaged, and
strengthened Anger: and Anger doubled by days, and degrees. Hatred (for so I
now call it) having taken long and deep root in the hearts of Men, is not
readily and easily weeded thence. A man's love often turns to hate; his Hate
seldom returns to Love. Implacable man, and impious! His evil lasts with his
Life: Nay, when he is dead, it will be a Question (as was of Sylla) whether
He, or his Anger died soonest? They story Some to have hated so while they
lived; that dead, and burned together, their flame notwithstanding was divided:
And Others, who slain together, their blood refused to be mingled. The Sin
of a Man outliues himself: this Sin especially. A Good man's Anger (they say)
is soon dead: but a bad Man (I see) is sooner dead, than his Anger.

How came thou (prithee) to be so choleric? The Man (I know well) has it
by Kin, it cost him naught. I was saying, the Hate and Ire of Men lived, when
Men were dead. I cannot say, their Hate lives with the Dead: I have noted, the
Dead have derived their hatred to the Living (I speak not of Enmity betwixt
Nation and Nation; so mutual, so continual.) The Man hates, the Son hates:
and why? his Friend, or Father hated formerly. He but euilly succeeds, that
will be heir also to his Fathers evils. There is observed a natural
Antipathie, an hidden Enmity, or inbred Auersenesse betwixt Trees and Trees;
as betwixt the Oak and the Olive, the Vine and the Cole-wort: betwixt Beasts
and Beasts; as betwixt the Elephant and the Dragon, the Panther and Hyaena:
betwixt Serpent and Serpent, the Spider and the Toad: Bird and Bird; the Eagle
and the Wren, the Owl and other Birds: Fishes and Fishes; the Lamprey and the
Conger, and the two great Fishes call Orca and Balana. No such innate and
contrary Qualities are observed betwixt Man and Man: though indeed, the
succession of Hatred would give to note (as it were) a natural Antipathie
betwixt them. We know, and say it is their Vice, howeuer they would make us
believe it is their Nature that sets them at so cominuall odds. Hark, O Man?
thou that at once proceedest from thy Fathers Flesh, and Frowardness: that
this kest thou dageneratest from his Stock, if from his Vice: There was never
but one Enmity worthy, yea necessary the propagating; even that, which God (at
first) provoked, and proclaimed irreconcilable: J will put Enmity between
thee, and the Woman; and between thy Seed, and her Seed. Ah thou Traitor to
thy God, and Foe to thine own Soul! why make thou a Covenant with thine,
and thy forefathers Adversary? That mortal jar was only to be derived to
Succession. How many Sons have vindicated their Fathers wrongs to the full?
Even successions of Families have continued the Strife and Debate, their
forefathers began betwixt their Houses. Alas! that an ISRAELITE grudges at, and
strives with an ISRAELITE (a Man with a Man, a Christian with a Christian) And
yet rather suffers any Injury, and Slavery; than break an hard Covenant, a
seared Peace with PHARAOH, the Devil. O all ye cankred Sons of ADAM! Impes
together of his Loins, and Lusts: How is it ye have forgotten the Old
Quarrel, which though it began in your First Father; yet it equally concerns
your Selves? You have an Adversary to you all; why wrangle, and struggle ye,
one with a another? Were you not joined to him; you could not thus be divided
against your selves!

Me thinks, I should (by this) make thee angry at nothing but thine Anger. If
Anger (as I have said) be a Passion so inordinate, unseemly, Brutish,
Pusillanimous, Envious and mischievous; if it have neither Ground, nor End; if
neither Delight, nor Gain; if it obscure Reason, and exclude Grace; if it be
detestable to God, Distastefull to Man, and Prejudicial to himself; What Wise
man, and Good, will now be anger; Had Anger either Pleasure, or Profit in it;
there were some enticement to it: But Anger is an Evil, every ways so evil;
that it carries no color for its entertainment. It is by a show of profit, or
Delight; that other Sins insinuate: this sin of Anger only, intrudes upon a
Man, with palpable vexation, and loss.

Yea, but thou can temper thy self, and take up thine Anger in time; and
check it, ere it rush into these rash, and rigorous Exorbitances. Tell me;
had thou not better quite exclude it; than (having admitted it) now busy,
and trouble thy self, to guide it? It is safer to keep out, than get out of a
Fray: and better not to hazard the Disease, than presume upon the Remedy. The
Courser (by your leave) is not so soon taken up; when now on his race, now in
his speed: The Rock is steep, and thou art heady; how readily, and easily,
do thou now fall past recovery? Thy Sea is troubled, thy Ship is tossed,
Anger sits Pilot; and (ere thou think on an Anchor, an Harbor) behold a
Wrack. A man may with more ease forbid his Anger; than he can command it:
with more safety may he prevent it, than recall it. The Entrance of many
things are in our hands, but not their Issue. While yet it is not, Anger is the
power of the Man: when it now is, the Man is in the power of his Anger Set
Anger once on foot, and it runs, not so far as you will let it; but will
hale you rather as far as it list. I cannot but smile, thou wilt needs account
thee Captain, and This thy common Soldier; to fight under thee, for thee:
Lead him warily on, heel scarce come fairly off. While thou wilt sit Judge, to
pass the Sentence; and make it thy Crier, to put thee in mind, and mood: be
wise; thou may soon condemn thy self.

How Man? Call and account thee a Coward, an Ass, an Idiot, a Block, a
Stoicke, a Stock? And why? because thou want an Heart, a Spirit, the
Valor, the Courage, to be angry at them; to check and curb in thy Fury, the
Indignities they do thee. Tell them (and thou will) from me; They only are so;
that so say; so think. What a Madness of Men is this, and Folly of theirs?
Are we therefore senseless, because not impatient of our Wrongs? Base minds!
thus to play upon not Patience. It is for Fools, and Peasants, to judge them
sottish; whom they find not peevish: For Knaves, and Villains, to do him the
next Wrong; because he so calmly put up the first. I tell thee, (and so say)
the Best, and Wisest) Anger adds Courage to no Man, that is not so without it;
But rather, basely inthralls him to another Power, and Mercy; while he is not
in his own. Than the Peevish, none more Slavish: So base an Affection, lurkes
not but in basest breast. Vilest wretches are the rather moved; because they
would, but cannot be revenged. What think thou of the Body, that yelpes and
yexes, at any small push, at every sudden motion? is it not too too crazy? To
cry out you hurt it, when you scarce touch it. Verily, the Mind is as
corrupted and cankred, as the Body vlcerous; to shrink and shrike, at every
push and prick. To stumble, and wrangle at every Offense; argues but the Mind
wretched, and infirm. I never saw any Man in this case; whom I judged not
Boyish, Womanish, Foolish, Sickish, or (at least) Old and Peevish. Now on the
contrary: None so magnanimous (in my mind) as he that forgets injuries. Nor
am I of another mind, than the Wise Man: It is the glory of a Man, to pass
over a Transgression. It must needs be a right noble mind he bears; that he
can, but scorns to be revenged. A Man is a Lord in his Favor: in his Anger is
Man but a Slave. He has fought a stout, and stately Fight; that has subdued
his Affections. I will ever think the best of such an one, and speak no
worse. Bold Heart, and Brave! that has already curbed his Passions, and cured
them to a skarre: having only remaining in himself, but as it were the
Shadows, and Suspicions of his Affections. But a Coward is he (will I be bold
to tell him) and base! that (could he win a World) cannot here conquer
himself.

Thus much I of Thee; and (unless better) too much. Now hear me of my Self.
Credit me; I either so am, or (at least) would be so; as I now will show me
to thee, though so I boast me not. It is Honesty, and but Modesty, that we
would so set forth our selves; as willing Patterns, for others to imitate: and
not as idle Pictures only, to be gazed at.

I am not (Featherlike) stirred and tossed at every puff and blast of
Coffeehouse: but strive rather to stand steadfast (as a Pillar) maugre the
winds and storms of injury, and offenses. I set me like a stayed Rock, to
repel their surging, urging Waves: and (like a Wall of Marble) retort their
angry darts into their own faces and throats. Men shall see my Contempt, in a
no notice of theirs. Though he would acknowledge his Offense; I will (with
Cato) not so much as acknowledge me offended. This is a stayednesse, is an
Happiness of our Minds; that we daine not to answer Fools in their Folly. You
ask me, why I do not requite the Wrong? I answer, because I feel it not. No
wrong (as I take it) is done to him, that will not take it to himself. I take
Wrong, as Honor: Honor is not in him, that is honored; but in him that
honors: nor is Wrong in him that has, but in him that does the Wrong. Me
thinks, A man's Revenge is but the Confession, or the complaint of his own
vexation. Mine then would but tell them, how they have troubled me. And vile
Minds (I know) will the rather do it, when they know how to vex me. It is
enough to me; I may, but will not quit the evil. He that will still do all
he can; it were better he sometimes could do nothing.

Shall I (like my Dog) bark and bawle at the first push or rush; not knowing
whether it be my Friend or Foe that knocks at my door? There Is no greater
Folly, than to be angry at we know not whom; and for we know not what. Or,
will I bawle with the Dog that barks at me? There Is no folly, to the
enterchange of spightfull speeches. The Tongue (I know) prouokes more than the
Hand: and Men are apt to stomach rather what is Said, than what is done against
them. I will not blow the coals of Ire with bitter Words: my soft Answer shall
rather strive to appease his Wrath. Nor (when it is past) shall he boast how he
awed me, in my present yeeldance: since I so guided him; that had neither the
wit nor power, to rule himself. It is not Awe, but Discretion to forbear a
Fool.

I smile at BALAAM, that could be so angry at his Ass: and think, whether was
more brutish, her Condition, or his Affection? He is but a Brute himself, that
thus will match himself against a Brute. I laugh to read the angry Letter
Xerxes wrote against the Mountain Athos: threatening it that (unless it would
make way to his Forces, and Designs) he would hew it down, dig it up, and
cast it into the Sea. Was not he a bold champion, that durst menace, and make
unto himself, so huge an Antagonist? It still moves my Diaphragme, what once
moved the spleen of Cyrus; that he vowed in a rage, (and accordingly
achieved) to drean the profound River Gyndes, so that Women and Children might
go drie-shod in it: and all was, because the base and unmannerly Billows
presumed to beat in the Kings face; and spared not to drown one of his
Majesty's Coachhorses. While he thus labored to make it not a River; I would
thus have judged, he made himself not a Man. It is a ridiculous Folly of Men,
to wreake their Anger upon such Things; as neither can feel it, nor do
deserve it. I shall think that Man out of his right mind, that is angry at
that thing, which never had a mind to offend him; no nor had a Mind. Brute
Things and inanimate, may have the Hap to hurt us; they have no Will to wrong
us. Ha, ha; will a man be no wiser than his Dog, to snarle and snatch at the
stone, because it is flung at him? I abhor the unequal Ire of Pollio, that
condemned his Slave to be devoured of his Lampreyes; for but the casual breach
of a Crystal Glass: and applaud withal the just displeasure of Augustus,
that therefore caused all his glasses to be broken, and his Deuourers to be
stifled. It was good the vilest Dust should choke them, whom the noblest Flesh
should but have satisfied. Ah the lightness of such Men! whom such light
things, and occasions can provoke. The glimmering of a Color will provoke a
Bull, the wagging of a Shadow will move an Aspe, the wapping of a Towell will
urge a Bear, the squeezing of Grapes will incense an Elephant: And what is a
Man unlike these; whom a Feather, a Straw, a Toy, a Trifle can thus incense,
urge, move, provoke? This is the Folly of Man's Anger; when the Passion is more,
than the Cause.

I am summoned, challenged, yea cowarded with indignities: and yet I lothly
enter the lists of Strife; or rather enter not. Shall I there hazard me, where
to be conquered is grievous, to conquer is but inglorious? Will I rave and
trample the Dung and Dirt, whereby (the more I bestirre me, yea howeuer I
behave me) I am but the rather annoyed, but defiled. The pursuit of Anger is as
a Suit in Law: the Plaintiff, the Defendant, both are losers in the end. To
contend thus with my Superior, were dangerous; with my Equal, were doubtful;
with my Inferior, were base. (Anger is but a wretched evil, and forlorn;
that is authorized, is patronized in no Degrees of Men.) With my Superior will
I fear, with my Equal will I blush, with my Inferior will I scorn to
contest. Has one or other offended me? if he be under me, I will be so Good,
as savor him: if above me, I will be so Wise, as savor my self. I will wink
at the Child, and Old man, for the weakness of their Age; at the Woman, for
her Sex; at the Fool, and Madman, for their Condition. Yet so, as to let them
know, it was not well done, but rather taken so. This is a Man's both quiet, and
renown; that he can forbear. His Mildness shall pacify his Adversaries,
while they cannot but wonder at it; shall proeure him Friends, while they needs
must affect it.

My Affections are in my Custody, and shall keep within my Compass. I will
so hold the reins, as that I can curb, or loose them; not so much when it is
my pleasure, but when I see my time. We must leave our lives, if we will avoid
Offenses: And of these, though many (when they come) may be borne with; yet are
not all to be neglected. We cannot (often times) but be moved at the Evil of
things. I that must love my neighbor as my Self: may notwithstanding so hate
his Vices, as mine own. An unreasonable Patience, is little better than an
inordinate Anger. This kind of Dullness would not only encourage the Bad, but
even incite the Good, to do evil. The Zeal of a Man is enamoured of the
Virtuous; nor can it be but displeased at the Vicious Displeased, not at the
Party, but his Vice: Displeased at the Evil he has done; not so much because
he has now so done, but rather that he may do so no more. I now can be
angry; yet so, as my Anger be not a worse Fault, than the Fault I am angry at.
I can be thus angry; to resist, to check, to punish: yet not because I am now
provoked, but because I now ought so to be. If (while I dispute against Anger)
a saucy Fellow should spit in my Face, purposely to provoke me: I would not
now doubt (with Diogenes) whether I ought so to be? but let him truly and
justly know, and feel, I am angry; for so I ought.

But if this Passion (as it is wont in most) prove exorbitant, and fall to
range (yea and rage) beyond her Pale; provoking me still to hurt the other,
and vex my self: What remedy now but Patience? I turn me aside (with Plato)
and now forget him whom I was angry at; and mind rather to revenge me upon my
angry self. I now draw me apart, take some time to bethink me in, let
Reason breathe awhile; and the Fit is past. Pause then an hour, disturb not
thy stomach; and the Hard-meats are digested. This Disease of Anger (contrary
to many) is soonest helped by Delays. I take the counsel of Athenodorus to
Augustus; count my Letters: or rather that of S. Ambrose to Theodosius; say my
Prayers. And while my Devotion warmes, my Passion cooles. Thus is it awhile
delayed, thus allayed at the last. Withdraw but the Fuel of Rashness from
this Passion, and the Fire is abated: Let but the Sun of Reason shine upon it,
and the Mist is vanished. Ah the Frowardness of a Man! that his Ire can glow
and burn, a Month, a Year, a Life throughout: which a Week, a Day, an
Hour, might (if not extinguish) otherwise assuage. It is strange to think,
how Anger one way deferred, languishes: although another way prolonged, it is
the rather enraged. Architas, Socrates, Plato; these were but Heathens, yet
would not so much as beat their Servants in their Anger: Shall I that am a
Christian, rise now against my Brother? Shall my Stomach serve others one way,
as I (another way) would serve my Stomach: only eat when I am hungry; only
beat when I am angry? By no means. I am wiser, than to launch forth in a
storm: If he have offended me, if provoked me; the offense will
notwithstanding remain, when the Provocation shall be past. There Is no hurt to
take another, and better time, to punish, or admonish: I shall so show me the
Wiser; and (perhaps) make him the Better. Oh do nothing in your Anger! for
then you will do any thing. What profit have you? What credit? to commit that
suddenly, which you may repent at leisure. Many a Man because he has been so
causelessly angry at Another; has had cause enough (after) to be angry at
Himself. The End of sudden Anger, was always the Beginning of late Repentance.

Another has done me wrong; I might have done no less to him: His might
likewise have been the Sorrow, and the Evil mine. We are all offensive each
to other; and may need each others Pardon. He is liuelesse (they say) that is
faultlesse: And whose turn (can you tell) shall it next be, to crave mercy for
his Fault? Should we not wink at our mutual Offenses; there would be no end
of Strifes, and Plagues, betwixt Man and Man, yea betwixt God and them both.
Do we look to find others inexorable; since our selves are so implacable?
Full often has a Man been driven to beg Forgiveness of him, to whom he
denied it: and now to kneel to him for Grace, whom he sometimes spurned in
disdain. I will deal with mine Adversary, as to tell him how I am dealt
withal: so to teach him how he should deal with me.

My Brother has offended me: Alas! and I my God. My Brother me once, and in
one thing: I my God always, and in all. If Jupiter (said He) should thunder
down his Darts, so often as Men provoke him; he should soon leave himself
Weaponlesse, and Men Liuelesse: If my God (think I) should have been angry
with me, so often as I have offended him; I should not have yet been, whom my
Brother might now offend. He is one, and the same Clay with me; that now
lifts up the hand against me: I that am a vile Worm, have kitked the heel
against the God of Majesty. With what face, can I beg pardon of my Lord, and
Master; when I have denied it to my Fellow-Seruant? One Man (says a WISE MAN)
bears Hatred against another; and does he seek pardon from the Lord? He
shows no mercy to a Man, which is like himself: and does he ask
forgiveness of his own Sins? How does the merciful Lord check the
merciless Servant? Should not thou also have had compassion on thy Fellow
Servant, even as J had pity on thee? Oh that Men would therefore Do, as they
Pray! Forgive us our Trespasses; as we forgive them that trespass against us.
I will do to another, as I would another, yea as I would my God should do to
me: Overcome evil with Good. My Savior stood as a Sheep before the
Shearers; they smote him on the one cheek, and he gave the other: they
reviled him, and in his mouth were no reproves. And is the Servant above his
Lord? What Loss, or Shame is it for me to suffer, as CHRIST suffered? What
Profit, or Credit will it be for mine Enemy, to do as IVDAS did? Oh call but
thy Saviors Sufferings to mind (the Wrong, and Scorn he took) and what can
be too hard for thee to bear?

And I, and mine Enemy; Who are we, and what? Men both, and Mortal: Men
mortal in our Nature, immortal only in our Anger. Ah that we would be each
against other everlastingly; that are for our selves but a while. Nothing will
more work upon this our fierce Affection; than to think upon this our frail
Condition. The Man is mortal, as he ought; why should his Anger (as it ought
not) be immortal? This is also a great Evil under the Sun, Vexation of
Spirit: That a Man will add Unquietness to the Shortness of his Days; and
so make them still not only Few but Evil.

But Thou strengthenest thee in this inhumane Fierceness; unmindful
altogether of thy humane Weakness. Thou now think to acquit thee, ere such
a time: Alas! that thou think not, that Time (perhaps) may be beyond thine
own. Thou would the Death of thine Enemy: Oh wish it not, attempt it not:
Yet a little while, and Death her self will do it; without thy Trouble, and
Sin. The Mouse and the Frogge fought so long, till the Kite came and tare
them both to pieces. Oh strive not so long, till Death come and part the Fray;
and so take you both away, him Wounded, and thee Blemished. When thou art now
gone with, or after him: thy Name shall yet survive a while, as odious as thy
Life. When Death shall have cooled thy courage, weakened thy hands, stopped thy
mouth; Men shall thus write upon thy Grave: HEre lies a Fury,
hight Sir Ire;
That bred, and earned
immortal Fire.
He 'gan to wrangle
from the womb;
And was a Wrangler
to his Tomb.
A Peevish, and
a Foolish Elfe:
Foe to his God,
his Saints, his Self.
He hated Men;
Men did not love him:
No Evil, but
his own, might move him.
He Was; and was
Earths Load, and Care:
He Is; and is
Hels Brand, and Share.


The Covetous.
IS it you (and be naught) old Pouch-penny? Me thought, it was some such
Scrapeling; he came so sneaking on. It is many an honest Man's luck (more than
mine) to stumble upon such Blocks in every street. I would none beside me, had
more need, or use of such; save only to know them with me: They should not
seek him long; I soon could spy him out. A Covetous Man is easily inquired,
and determined, by him that is not so: But he that sees him, and is like him;
can no more discover the other, than express himself. Pouch-penny did I call
him? But he is not so known to every one. He has more Names, than ever he was
Christened with. The Best call him no better, than you would call a Wretch;
Silly, Needy, Cark, Snig, Gripe, Sharke, Droyle, and Plod: And for the Most,
they call him no more, than you would call a Dog; Snap, Catch, Pinch,
Holdfast, and the like. We may justly, and modestly (and then justly, when
modestly) call the Naughty, no better than they are. Call me a Spade, a Spade;
a Wretch, a Wretch; a Knave, a Knave: Never go behind his back, and so
beslander him with the Truth. Tell a Man his Evil to his teeth: yet so, as not
to revile him; but reprehend him rather.

Wearish Wretch; so like a Flea-biter he looks. Say as you see; is he not
mostly Wry-Neckt, crompe-shouldred, pale-fac't, Thin-cheekt, Hollow-eyed,
Hooke-nos'd, Beetle-brow'd, Purse-lipt, Gaunt-belly'd, Rake-backt,
Buckle-hamm'd, Stump-legg'd, Splay-footed, Dry-fisted, and Crooke-fingered:
with a learing Look, slow Breath, stealing Pace, squeaking Voice: His tall
Hat, and tatterd Cloak, Threed-bare Buskins, and cobbled Shoes; a swagging
Pouch, and a Spadle-staffe: And if you reckon him only by his Coat, and
Carcass; one would scarce bestow the hanging of him, to have them both. They
say commonly, ill Humors, ill Manners: but here certainly ill Manners, ill
Members. For (could you see into him) he is not more ill-fauoured, than
ill-conditioned: There Is certainly more ugliness in him, than appears by him:
A mind more misshapen, than can be figured in a Carcass never so disfigured.
How monstrous a Vice is Avarice, and odious? It distorts the Body, and
distracts the Soul: Is Natures very Enormity, and an utter Anomie to Grace;
here quite sweruing, there far out of frame. It makes a Man look ugly, and
to be loathed; but odious inwardly, and to be abhorred: makes him seem a
Monster on the outside; but makes him a very Devil within.

Flock here my pretty Birds; here is an ill faced Owl, will find you all work
to wonder at. See how stridling he stands; he couches and crouches upon his
Staff; nor looks he at you, but under his elbow: and say what you will; he
never speaks but when his mouth is open. Come on then, look and laugh, and
hollow, and whoot, and whistle, and hiss; gibe and jest, frumpe and flour,
point and play: here is a broad Butt to hit, and an Asses back to bear all. It
were good sport, to laugh and scorn him out of his skin, for his Coin. Lo
the Couerous Carle! what a needy Niggard it is? Oh it is a scraping Churl! Out
on him greedy Gripe! A very Gut-head, he has Asses Ears direct; a Forehead
and it were to set his Leekes on; He sees well, and his Eyes were vncast; I
wonder he is not ring'd for rooting; you may see your face in his so
transparant Cheeks; a Head he has like a Moule, and his nails were grown;
and a Foot to shouell the Street before him. Hateful Misereant! how has he
worn and wrested himself from Gods good Making? His steeple Hat has
harbored many a Thousand; and his woollen Cap scrues to keep warm his Wits.
His weather-beaten Cloak he had by Inheritance; and he means to make it in
his Will. He has forgot the Making of his Doublet; but it pulls him (ever and
anon) in mind of repairing. His Breeches are in the Fashion, not so much for
pride, as to save Cloth. But how bare soever be his Back, and belly thin;
his Bag is well lined, and he keeps it warm. There Is not a hole in his Hose,
and yet not a place where there has not been a hole. His shoes have cost him
more the maintaining, than would provide him Shoes. He keeps a free house;
you may as soon break your Neck, as your Fast: and a clean withal; you may
as readily wet your Shoos, as your Lips. The Man is oft-times so melancholy at
Home; that he is glad when he may cheer up himself at his Neighbors Board:
And (upon many occasions) grows so desperate, that he cares not what becomes
of him; only he is loath to be at the charges of making himself away. What
chattering about a Night-Bird? and who can keep Countenance at so absurd an
Object? Covetousness is as well worthy Scorn, as Hatred: and the Folly
thereof as much to be laughed at, as the Iniquity to be abborred. God, and Men,
have thought Vice not odious only; but ridiculous. Whom God has abhorred, them
also has he laughed to scorn. The Covetous especially, have been oftener
counted, and called Fools, than Fiends. Ironies are an approved Rhetoric,
and an earnest Argument against Impieties. And some Evils are more profitably
derided, than reprehended.

In good sooth (for all this) he looks but sparing on it. Whatsoever he lacks
of the Spirit; You would judge him a mortified Man according to the Flesh. He
forbeares oft-times to feed so full as Nature requires; Though Grace was never
in his mouth or mind, either before meat, or after. He seldom cats but
sparingly; though temperately never. Thereason of all is, because he so eats,
not to subdue his Body; but to save his Meat. Like Tantalus, he stands up in
Water to the chinne, and Apples hang by closters hard at his Lips; and yet he
pinches and pines in the midst of meat and drink. An artificial Chymicke; he
has true Mydasses Touch: all that he should eat and drink, he turns into
Gold: I would he had Mydasses Ears withal, it would make him more known,
and laughed at. Like one that sold a Ratt for two hundred Pence, and dyed of
Hunger himself: so will he often times starve his carcass, to crambe his Pouch.
A Covetous Man's Mind is a slave to his Money; and his Body a staue-to his Mind:
He will not satisfy the Appetite of the one; because the other has an
Appetite will not be satisfied. Oh baseness of Men! to undervalue their
Affections to base Dross; and their Lives to base Affections. Ah their Folly
and Wretchedness! to have the Creatures of God, and use them not; which they
therefore have, to use: to prefer their Wealth to their Health, their
Gettings to their Beings, their Money to their Body; their Gold to their God,
their Silver to their Soul; and rather possess it, than enjoy themselves.

Suppose him now set at another Table: His Knife (answerable to his Stomach)
is the first drawn, and not the last in the Dish. Now not a word with him:
Ask him any thing; and he answers all with Yea, and No; not above a
monosyllable at the most. Look how he loads a Borrowed Trencher? His Cheeks
strut, Teeth walk, and Chaps plie apace: And lest you might hap to cut him,
not where he likes not, but not enough; he saues you the labor of a Carner.
He now feeds full upon Free-Cost: and says with Diogenes, That Wine is best,
and most pleasant to him, which he pays not for. Now makes he a full amends
to his whining Stomach, and his Guts leave grumbling: But as the Wolf eats
one good Meal for three Days: so though he feast his Body now abroad; he
will make the poor Carcass pay triple for it at Home. Yea and (all this
while) if his Host be beholden to him for more than his Company; he eats
double: out eats him, and eats him out. The Covetous is one of a ravenous
Generation: A very Harpy, Tigre, Wolf, Bear, Dog, Devil, Pit, Gulf, and
Hell. A Cormorant begat him; The Daughter of the Horsleach bare him: and he
like a cursed Caterpiller, is continually gnawing: Devouring Widows houses,
and sucking the very Blood from the hearts of the Fatherless. Oh all ye damned
Deuourers! that eat up Gods people, as if it were Bread, Bloud-suckers of
BELIAL! Surfeit yet a while in your hellish Insaciacie: Ye shall once spue out
your Bowels; and empty your selves into a Pit as bottomless, as ever were your
desires.

But I will home with him, and see what an House he keeps. Let me tell you, he
keeps an open House: but you may understand, it is the Roof vnthatcht, or
Windows vntrellessed; for the Door is never vnbolted. The Grass grows
green upon his Threshold; and his Dog is as good as a Porter, to keep Beggars
from his Door. His Chimney smokes but seldom, and Dawes make nests in every
corner. You cannot come to visit his Beer, but you shall find it at a very
low rate, low estate, if not dead outright: And for his Bread, Age and
Experience have brought it to an hoary head. He is now at his own Finding, and
mark how his Board is furnished: His stall and Garnor furnished the Market, and
that his Coffers: his Garden-plot only fills his Table, and that fills his
Belly. Roots and Herbs he calls his First, and Second Course: and three hungry
Sallets supply the places of so many hearty Services. He cuts up a Carrot, and
pickes out a dainty bit in a Turnep: Beets are his best Fare; and he thinks how
he riots amongst his Leekes and Lettice? He shiues out his Bread by weight or
measure; an Ounce, or an Inch; and at every Cutting observes the Loaf. You
would think he humbred his Morsels: He goes so far, and no further; not
because he would eat no more, but would no more should be eaten. He eats the
more Pottage on purpose, to spare the Flesh. He seldom eats like an Epicure,
to please his Palate; never like a Man, to nourish his Body; but commonly like
a Hog, to fill his Belly. A belly full is a belly full, and it be of
Buttermilke. He may eat Gold; and yet he feeds but grossly. Like a Tradesman,
that sells off his best wares at a good rate; and keeps the worst for his own
use: Or like him, that sells out the good Liquour; and reserues the Dregs for
his own drinking: Like an Idiot, he has the best to choose on, and makes
choice only of the worst; Leaves the good for others, and takes the bad unto
himself: Or like That Ass, that carried dainty Cates upon his back; and
notwithstanding filled his belly with Hay, and Straw. But if he be a
Worshipful Miser, and of ancient standing; Not the Cognizance only, but the
Coat also is the self same, his Great Grand-sire gave before him. He must do,
as his Father before him; or else how should he uphold the House? Now has be
more Dogs, than Men to wait upon him: and his Table fills more Ears, than
Bellies; and more fills Ears, than Bellies. He now quarters a Capon, and roasts
half a Rabbet: and tells you an old Tale of an Hare, and another of a Pigge,
that was proportioned to three several Spits, Fires, Days, Dishes, Meals:
But an approved Story, how that the Loyne of a Cock was once a Service for a
King. His Taylour has not half so many ways to turn his Breeches, as his
Cook to dress his Dishes: he sends up the same Dish seven days together,
disguised only in seven several Sauces. And for the cold Pie, it is so long
since it came hot out of the Oven; that it has got on a Freize coat to keep it
warm: and at last is feign to flit from his Table, to his Trough. He grudges
to bestow any thing upon himself; and brawles with Wife and Children, as the
daily means of his undoing: And when he must needs dispend, he shrugges it
out, and kisses every Piece he parts from. How should a Covetous Man be good to
any? since he is not so to himself. Will he feed the hungry; whose own
Stomach still complains? Will he cloth the naked; that only shrouds himself
in shreds? Will he give to the Poor; that cannot be persuaded himself is
rich? Well he relieve others Necessities; that thinks there is nothing beside
him, which he wants not himself? Unprofitable Earth-load is he; borne to do
good to none, no not himself. Neither and Wife, Children, Friends, Neighbors
the better for him: And for himself; he is, but lives not; because he is to no
purpose: he has, but inioyes not; because be uses not what he has.

It Is bed time by this; and (not once minding, or mentioning his God) he
commends himself to the keeping of his Bolts and Bars. Wife, Children,
Friends, Servants, he asks them all once, and again, if they have made all
sure? and being accordingly answered, he yet rises at last to resolve himself.
Than the Covetous Man, none more distrustful. His Wife he thinks is false
unto him; and his Children cosen him: His Servants he accounts no better than
Thieves. If they be his Friends, they come to sharke upon him if Strangers, to
steal from him: His Superior he suspects of extorting, his Equal of
defrauding, and his Inferior of purloyning: Yea, he is oft-times anxious of
himself; nay, and will trust his God no further than he sees him. Now is the
Gate shut, Bridge drawn, Door barred, and Trunk locked; and now he lies him
down to wake; for why, he cannot, or else he dares not sleep. The Wise Man
knew his disease, and tells the Cause: The Abundance of the Rich will not
suffer him to sleep. Thoughts are entered into his head, and Sleep is departed
from his eyes. It is his Care to get more, will not let him rest with what he
has. He now lies imagining mischief on his Bed; and takes counsel of his
Pillow how to deceive, and wrong. How to add his neighbors House, and Field
unto his own? How to double his Talent by the safest means, and in the
shortest time? How to take up, and put off at the best hand? How to let out
Money with good Security, and for the most Advantage? How to bring about such a
Bargain? How to forestall such a Market? How to ingrosse, how to inhance such
a Commodity? How to purchase such a Living? How to inueigle such an Estate? No
evil can be thought, which Covetousness does not both think and plot. It
cares not to deceive the simple; nor makes a Conscience to oppress the poor:
Neither regards it the Widows Tears, the Blood of the Fatherless, nor the
Laborers Sweat. It takes no notice of Father or Mother, spares not his own
Brother, and affords not the least Favor to his best Friend. It measures
Honesty by Profit; and thinks nothing not lawful to it self, which may make
for its own advantage: and so it go away with the Gain; it cares not who
lives by the loss. Oh cursed Avarice! the Metropolis of all Evils, and
Charibdis of Iniquity: Through its evil instigation; did EVE take, and taste
the forbidden Fruit; LABAN grudged the goods of JACOB, His Brethren sold JOSEPH
to the ISMAELITES; BALAAM took pains to curse ISRAEL; ACHAN inueigled the
exercrable Wedge; DALILAH delivered her Husband into the hands of his Enemies;
AHAB massacred NABOTH; GEHAZI belyed his Master; and IVDAS betrayed CHRIST. He
rightly said; Covetousness is the root of all evil: that fully considered,
what Evils come by Covetousness. It neither fears God, nor reuerences Man:
Profanes the Temple, forestalls the Market, corrupts the Court; swayes
Authority, impugnes Justice, violates Laws; Defraudes the Innocent, oppresses
the Poor; blindes the Eyes from beholding Equity, stops the Ears from hearing
the Truth, hires the Tongue to ratify Falsehood with an Oath, sets the Hands to
work wickedness, and makes the Feet run to shed Blood. What Evil has Hell
invented, has the Devil suggested: which Covetousness has not entertained,
not put in execution?

Yet tumbling and tossing; but as yet no folding of the hands to sleep. No,
no, alas; his Brains are too busied, to be settled on a sudden. He has a World
in his Head, and it makes him study how to get a Country into his Hands. Such a
Field (he thinks) lies commodiously for him; such an House is pleasantly
seated; is of a safe and free Tenure, and may be had at a reasonable rate: Such
a Commodity is both rare, and saleable; thus and thus may he ingrosse a good
parcel of it; thus and thus inhaunce the price. These and these sealed Bags
are in such a Chest; and these and these Bonds and Bills in such another. And
thus lies he counting all the night long. And if you were brought into his
Bedchamber at midnight; (as was Mycillus the Cobbler, into Grypheus the
usurers) you should even then find him waking: Nay, if the Devil should come
about that time to fetch him; he should hardly take him napping. The Riches of
the Covetous trouble and torment him on every part; whether of Body, or Mind:
He Conscience has no peace, his Knowledge finds no truth, his Desire gets no
appeasment; His Belly wants food, his back raiment, his Heart wants ease, his
Eyes sleep, and his Bones want rest. Sigismundus the Emperor, when he could
not sleep the night throughout, for taking thought, what he should do with
all his Gold, was newly sent him: the next day he dealt it amongst his
Captains and Connsellours; and could say afterward, Now I am rid of a
Tormentour; I shall now sleep in quiet. I would a Many should not so sleep,
till they had done likewise. Gape, and yawne, and turn, and toss, and muse,
and moan, and sigh, and quake ye restless Wretches! I will not pirty you;
since you may ease your selves, if you will.

But if (thus tired with Thoughts) he fall at last into some faint Slumber; Oh
how short it is how unquiet? He dreams all the while he is posting to a
Fair, crowded in a Market; either Buying, Selling, Chopping, Changing, Hiring,
Letting, Writing, Sealing, Counting: His Mind still runs upon Money, Wares,
Chapmen, Cheatours, Thieves, or Devils. Hark, hark; his Dog barks at
Moonshine; and he now wakes and starts at the apprehension of Thieves and
Robbers: It is the Wind whiskes by his Window; and he imagines he hears them
whisper: He hears but the Door creake; and he thinks they now are breaking in.
Up he gets, and loudly calls upon lusty Dicke, and Robbin, and Ralfe; when
there is no more but little Jack to hear him: Bids bring the Pistol, Musket,
Sword, and Spear; when his whole munition is a Spirit, or a Pitchforke. His
Color changes, Hair stands upright, Heart pants, Breast throbs, Joints quake;
and all this while he suffers so much through his Fear, as he fears to
suffer. Who would trouble themselves to get Riches; that thus trouble them that
have them? Trouble to get them, trouble to keep them, and trouble to lea^e or
lose them: Here plodding and toyling; there Watching and caring; and sighing
and groaning there: Making a Man here sollicitous, anxious there, and there
again forlorn. Molesting the Man, that his Goods are not increased; and
again molesting, lest his Goods should be diminished: It both vexes him, that
he has no more; and vexes him, that he may have less. It troubled AHAB, to
add NABOTHS Vineyard unto his own: It troubled the RICH-MAN, to conserve, and
enlarge his Possesions: It troubled the YOVNG-MAN, to part with his Goods unto
the Poor. HE knew well how restless a thing was Riches, who likened them to
THORNS: Like Thorns in the sides, they suffer not a Man to sit still: Like
Thorns in the Fingers, they hinder a Man from laboring with his hands: Like
Thorns in the Eyes, they blind a Man from beholding the Truth: Like Thrones
in the Heart, they bar a Man from embracing the Right: Like Thorns in the
Feet, they let a Man for going about any thing that is Good. To what shall I
now liken the Riches of the World; but to all the infesting plagues of EGYPT?
Their Rivers were turned into Blood; and these have made even Rivers of Blood:
Frogs came into men's Bed-chambers; and these creep into men's Bosoms: The Dust
of the Land became Lice; and this Dust of the Earth is turned to such like
Tormentours: Swarms of Flies infested Egypt; and these corrupt the Land: The
Murraine slew the Beasts of the Land; This (what with toyling, ryoting,
spoiling) has slain them the whole Earth thorowout: The Men could not stand
at ease, by reason of Boyles and Botches; nor do these suffer men to sit at
rest: The Hail destroyed the Beasts and Trees; and these have done the like
destructions: Locusts were brought into the Land; and these cause many a
Caterpiller: Darkness was over EGYPT so thick that it might be felt; and
these while they are grop't and felt with the hand, they blind the eyes: All
the first borne were slain at Midnight; and these have torn the prime
Youngling from the Mohers Belly, Breast, and Bed. Who is now the Rich man of
the World, that is not richer in Plagues, than he is in Possessions: That
abounds not in Restlesnesse, more than in Revenues. It was a Wise revenge of
One, always to enrich his Enemies, and Offenders: affirming, it was punishment
enough to make them rich: meaning, Wealth can want no Woe; and he that has
great Riches, has little Rest withal. But (say the Covetous Carles of our
days) punish them so, and hurt them sore. Silly Asses! they are burdened most,
and yet they think they are most rewarded: They take it for a Blessing, not
knowing that it proves a Snare. In the Worlds eye, he is the Happy Man that
has House by House, Field by Field, Flock by Flock, Bag by Bag, and
Chest by Chest. He goes clothed in purple and fine Linen, and fares
deliciously every day: Fine fed, and gay clad; His Cates and Raiments both
far fetched, and dear bought: and the Substance and Matter of neither are
thought good enough for him; but both are made better, if Cost and Art can make
them so. One Back and Belly of his, how many does it exercise and employ, thus
to clad, and feed? Besides, all men seek to him; serve, honor, and applaud
him. O happy be! He has an Heaven upon Earth; that thus has the World at
will. Fools! that conceit those happy, whose Miseries they conceive not. They
view the Painting, but not the Rottenness: See the best by them, but know not
the worst is within them. You behold laughter in the Face; but you now consider
not the Heart is heavy: You reckon what Pleasures, Profits, Honors; but think
not what Fears, Cares, Discontents. An honest poor Man would not have the
rich Gluttons Estate, to have his Mind. The one has little, and wants little;
the other wants as much as he has: The one could eat, and he had it; the other
has it, and cannot eat: There Is health and hunger; here is plenty and pain: This
is always timorous, that other still secure: This is Free, the other Bond: This
sleeps, while the other wakes. Many a poor Man has made merry with a belly
full of Bread and Water; and after slept soundly upon an hard Cratch: while
many a Rich man has sighed bitterly at a Banquet of Wine; and waked carefully
upon a Bed of Down.

Alas poor man, and perplexed! his last Nights ill rest has made him an early
riser: He is soon up, and full sore at hisDeuotion. A man indeed is he of a
daily devotion, but of no Religion: for he scarce comes to Church above once a
Quarter. What need he travel to sacrifice; or come abroad to worship? he has
a Chapel in his Chest, and a God of his own, his MAMMON. Each Part of his
Body, and Power of his Soul; has he commanded, (as did that King his
Subjects) that they forthwith fall down, and worship the GOIDEN-IMAGE. He
scorns and contemnes blind, and sluggish: BAAL, Asse-headed AN A MELECH;
DAGON the deceitful; and the unmerciful MOLECH: calls BAAL-ZEBVB but a
Flie-catcher; and thinks BELL and DRAGON but Gluttons both. He calls none Good,
but God: and of Gods, none more than MAMMON, the God of Goods. Other Gods are
either chargeable, or not beneficial; but as for him (to make good the Devils
words) he serves not his God for naught: Only he is often times perplexe; lest
(with LABAN) he might at any time lose his God: His God (he knows) is Current;
and therefore it is his greatest care to keep it. Yea and his Gods are so many
of the same Matter and Mould; that all his Service is to number them. He makes
much of his Money, for the Figures sake, more than for the Use: and thinks he
has it to ingrosse, rather than to employ. Every New Piece is a new Picture of
his Worship: which at first he examines by the Balance of his best Belief; and
after admits it as an Image of his Adoration. HE well saw his Superstition, who
called the Covetous Man an IDOLATOVR. Why did God oppose himself to MAMMON?
but for that they who serve MAMMON, oppose themselves to God: He therefore told
them truly; Ye cannot serve God, and Mammon. Of all others then, none
sothwartly idolatrous, as the Covetous. Others have worshipped the Creatures of
Gods making; but these the Works of their own hands: Now by how much the
Works of God are more worthy, than the handy Works of Men; by so much is this
kind of Idolatry more evil and odious, than the other. Nor is the Covetous
Man more spiritually Idolatrous; than ciuilly Slavish. The Dross is but base;
but the Covetous Man's affections are baser than the Dross: Else, how could he
undervalue himself to it? unless he saw somewhat in it, more worthy than
himself. They call him the Mony-Master; butyou may call it the Master-Money:
For which he toils Night and Day; bides Heat and Cold; runs through Fire and
Water; hazards Body and Soul. Silly Slave! thus to become a Drudge to his
Servant: As not possessing, but possessed rather; not using it, but employed
himself: not daring to dispend it, as a Master over it; but feign to guard it,
as a Servant to it: whereof he has the trouble only of the Custody; but no
profit of the Inioyment.

All the day long; and yet neither idle, nor well employed. Yet makes he Time
very precious to him: For he (together with his Coin) lets time also out to
Interest. His Money flies out (like Stales, or Quoyes) to fetch in more: And
(clean contrary to Natures rule, or practice) he makes even senseless things
to generate their like. What a Monster now is a Mony-breeder, that brings forth
thus against Nature? The Greeks not unaptly call Usury by the name of a Birth:
because there a Penny begets a Penny, and a Pound brings forth a Pound. Now
what need Gods Creatures increase and multiply for the use of Man: since Man
can make these Creatures of his own, increase thus beside God, to enrich
himself? An Usurer thus accuses both God and Nature, of ignorance and
improuidence; in that he has found out more ways of advantage, than ever they
ordained. Of tame Beasts, take heed of an Usurer; he is an old Ape, a subtle
Fox, and ravens more than a Tigre, Lion, Wolf or Bear. Mark what hurt he
does you, when you are the most beholden to him. What an Usurer lets out, he
parts with but for a time; but the other must quite part with, what comes in
again. Do you not know, you may have another man's Money so long in your hands;
till you come to have none of your own? You so may soon convert your whole
Estate into Debt. It is a Rule more experienced, than observed; All that an
Usurer has, is in other Men's hands: till all that other Men have, be in his.
Take an Usurers Money into your hands; and you take a Serpent into your bosom:
It stings like an Aspe, makes you sleep insensibly, and you never after awake
your own Man: It eats like a Canker, every sound Part: and burns like a Fire,
while any Fuel lasts. But notwithstanding, what a sort of Idiots daily seek,
and sue to him, to undo themselves? Nay they think, prmise, witness
themselves beholden to him, for their own undoing. The plain Country Fellow
comes in with a couple of Capons; the Gentle Man with a goodly Gelding; the
Grazier with a fat Ox; and the Great Man with a brace of Bucks. And he takes
these now, with Condition of what he must have hereafter. They must first
freely take his Servant by the hand, after, as kindly salute his Wife; and so
they make way to whisper himself in the ear. He now takes them apart;
pleasures them with the Presse-mony of engagement and thraldom to a Churl;
charms them with a Number, and set Form of words; binds them with their own
Hands; and (perhaps) at last hires others hands to lay hold upon them. Oh
damned Usury, and detested! Whether Usury directly, or indirectly; yet directly
damned. What is it at the best, but a necessary Evil; like a Woman, which a
Man can neither well have, nor want: but an undoing Benefit; like an ill
Servant, that eats more, than he earnes: but a tolerated Theft; Like a Sore,
that is suffered, only to prevent a worse Disease: But as it is made; what it
is, but the Spoil, and Shipwreck of Estates, and States? Of Estates; for how
Many have been thus impouerisht, to enrich One? Of States; for how should a
Private Wealth, but hurt the Commonwealth.

But (think you) is an Usurer all he is? Tush Man! he is any thing for
Advantage. Any Gain is good, how are it be got. Emperour-like, he smells
Gain well from Piss and Stale: nay Popelike, embraces it sweetly from the
Stews. He takes up all Trades to thrive on: Now a Labourer, now a Farmer, now
an Artificer, now a Merchant, now an Officer: now an Ingrosser, and sells all
by whole sale; now an Haberdasher of small wares, and sells all by retale. Nay
worse than these; An Informer, Promoter, Petty-fogger, a Pillager, Poller,
Toller, a Monopolizer, Market-monger, Corne-hoorder, Huckster, Broker,
Regratour, a Mountebanke, Catchpole, Cutpurse, Carder, Cheater; and many such
more than good: Of such like Trade, or rather Craft; which turn the Industry
of Nature, and Invention of Art, into no better but Deceit, and Wrong. There
are many ways for a Man to enrich himself, without his Evil. A due Time, and
good Means, will bring in Gain enough, to no Man's loss. That only is well
got, for which no Man is the worse. A Man ought both to labor in, and live by
his Calling. And may (doubtless) so wisely, and justly contriue his Affairs,
as to do himself good thereby, and no body hurt. And therefore are vocations
of Men well invented: Men only abuse them, when they make ill Inventions, their
Vocations. When Men will not labor, for that is painful; when Men will not
venture, for that is doubtful: But will rather defraud and circumuent, taking
it to be easily and certainly gainful: Having neither the Patience, nor
Honesty to expect, till Time, and industry may advantage them; But having a
reach beyond both, to rise of a Sudden: And so they be hastily, they care not
how unjustly rich.

Nay but I now come near the Man, that is so near himself. Why (God be
thanked) Man, thou have enough. Enough? No, no; Fortune has given to him (as
she has to Many) too much: but has not given him (as she has to None)
Enough. Enough 3 There Is two of the Enoughs (he says) and his (he thinks) is
little Enough. It mattereth not, how much he has with another; since it seems
but small unto himself. Little, or Much, it skilleth not; Little would have no
less, and Much would still have more. And therefore, his Hook hangs
continually, and all is Fish, that comes to his Net: He has a Plow in every
Man's Field; an Iron in every man's Fire; and an Oar in every man's Boat. Like a
hungry Dog, he gapes at euety Bit, and snatches at every Bone: Like a greedy
Kite, ere he have yet quite swallowed the first gobbet; he gapes and creekes
for another: At once pulls one Hand unto him, with what he has gotten, and
keeps close his Fist; and opens the other Hand, and holds it out for more. He
labors of a Disease, the remedy whereof does rather increase the malady: a
Fever, a Dropsy, a Doggish Appetite. Meat makes him but hungry; and the more
he drinks, the dryer he is; and all you can apply, adds but Fuel to augment
his Fire. The Serpent Situla has stung him, and (do what you can) heel die
of an unquenchable Thirst. Power in while you will, his Mouth is like a Sieue,
or Tunnell; still open and empty: and all that is put in, does rather stretch
out, than fill up his Belly. All other Desires of men, rest satisfied in their
accomplishment: This hungry desire of Having only, the more it is fulfilled, it
is enlarged. The Beasts can forthwith suffice their Appetites, only this
beastly Appetite of Man will not be satisfied What shall I call this
Covetousness? a Ditch, a Grave, a Gulf, a Whore, a Hell: infinite all, and
insatiate altogether. The Daughter of the Horseleach still cries; Give, Give:
but never says, It is Enough. He that loves Silver, is doomed not to be
satisfied with Silver. For, Covetousness is the Hunger of the Soul; and Money
is but a corporal Sustenance: It may well then fill his Purse; but shall never
suffice his Mind. The Covetous Man that loves abundance, shall not be
satisfied with Increase: Because the love of his riches increases together
with the Heap. A Poor man has little, and wants little: a Rich man has
much, and wants more than he has. The One rests content with what he has; and
thus is he filled with good Things: The Other coueteth to have more; and so is
he sent empty away. How much better is it, to be Full with little; than Empty
in the midst of much? And how are they Riches; which once increasing, Poverty
is increased also? That Man is Rich, not that has much; but that wants little:
And he wants the less, that has the least. He that has but little, esteems
well of a little Profit: but he that has much, sets light by a small Gain;
because he looks for more. The Man that desires many things, to him a Many
things seem a Few: but he that is content with few things, to him do even a
Few things seem a Many. A Beggar thinks him rich with a Penny; a Rich man
scarce thinks him so with a Pound. Many a Man has thought such a Thing too
much for him, before he had it: which when he has, he now thinks it not
enough. The Reason is, because he so seeks to have, as that he sees not what
he has. He sees not, how he has, what others want: but thinks he wants, what
another has. What another has, he wants; yea and wants what he has himself.
But, he that will have what he has, and have enough; Let him not get more, but
crave less: For the only way to make a Man Rich, is not to augment his
Substance; but rather lessen his Desire. He that eats much, and is not filled;
that drinks often, and is not slaked: Expletion but increases the Malady; and
there is no way to cure him, but by Purgation. A Man cannot have all that he
will; this he may, he may nill what he has not. He that would but a little,
may soon have all he would. I will desire no more, when I would be sure to
have my Desire.

What (I marvel) would the Man do with more? He has more already than is
well bestowed, or than he well knows how to bestow. It is his Goods Increase
he minds only, not their Use. How unworthy is be of the Talent, that binds it
in a Napkin, and hides it in the Ground? What is he better to have a thing and
use it not, which is nothing but the use? What then would the Man with more
Wealth? What? I Will answer for him; provide for an hard Winter, and keep in
store against a dear Year: (yea it is the thought of an hard Winter, makes
him he dare not enjoy the Summer.) He will therefore (he says) so dine, as he
may sup; and so go to day, as he may to morrow. Yea (Oh misery, and folly of
Men!) therefore will he certainly scant himself, lest perhaps he may be
scanted: and want that always, which he fears he may sometimes want. But
would you know why he yet so scrapes and heaps? His most end is; He therefore
would have more, that others might have less: Otherwise, he is not satisfied,
while there is any thing beside him. He aduises himself in this case (as a
Tyrant did his Officers) to consider how many things he wants; and to lee that
no other have any thing but he. What he has, does himself no good, does
others hurt: for he has it purpolely to keep it from others, rather than
keep it for himself. Like the Dragon that kept the Golden Apples; and that
other than kept the Golden Fleece: Like the Griffins in the Hyperborean
Mountains, that had no use of the Gold and precious Stones were there; yet
would suffer none to take them thence. Or (to compare him with what he is
acquainted with) like a Dog on a Hay-Mow, he lies there not to eat himself,
but to keep the Cattle from their Meat: Yea like a Daw, hides Money, not that
he has need of it, but that others might not find it. A Covetous Man does good
to none, no not himself: does hurt to himself, and all. Wife, nor Children
are the better for him; for whom Neighbors, and Strangers are the worse. He
counts it an indignity, to have Equals near him; and a misery to have
Neighbors by him: And could wish there were no more men in the World but he:
that so he might have a World unto himself. ADAM (he thinks) was well blessed,
when there was no more to inhabit a whole Earth but he: but now (he says)
the World is waxt so populous, that men have much ado to live one by another.
His endless coveting has made his Possessions boundless: And yet (he
thinks) he scarce has enough; when he now knows not what he has. I will
now say to him, and all; and so as my words are warranted: Go to now ye rich
Men (ye that join House to House, and Field to Field; till there be no room
left for the Poor) weep, and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you; your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten: your Gold and
Silver is cankered, and the rust thereof shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were Fire: you have heaped up treasures together for
the last days. Unhappy Wealth, and evil! that does no good to those that have
it not; and does hurt to those that have it: Troubling their Lives, blotting
their Consciences, damning their Souls: and from a hell they made unto
themselves: bringing them to the Hell prepared for them.

Oh cry him mercy! he disclaimes him that can claim any thing of him; that can
say What, or Whom he has Oppressed, undermined, polled, ingrated, spoiled,
cheated, circumuented, or extorted. Whose House has he hired from over his
head, or Field from under his hands; or snatched his meat from out his mouth, or
pulled his Raiment from off his back: Has he been a careless executour, an
unequal Arbitratour, an unjust Guardian? Whose Wages has he withheld? Whose
Estate has he entangled? Whose Feofment has he imbezilled? Whose Pledge has
he not restored? What Promise has he not performed? and what Debt has he not
discharged? Or who can say, this was his, or is, or so ought to be? He defies a
World; what he has, he came honestly by, and it is his own. His Neighbor
(for what he ever wrought, or thought against him) has yet both House, Wife,
Child, Sernant, Ox, Ass, and every thing that is his. Excellent Pharisee! He
has kept the Commandments: But one thing is lacking; let him go and sell all
that he has, and give unto the Poor. He is iustifi'd (he thinks) because he
has done no man Wrong: Not knowing he is guilty, for that he has done good to
none. Others did he never injure; and so he is free (he persuades him) not
considering he is bound to succor others. Call him Covetous; and he tells you,
he never held others from their own: But I tell him, he is Covetous; because
he holds his own from others. Not only he that greedily inuades another, but
he that niggardly detaines his own, he also is Covetous. He has slain, that
saues not; he has hurt, that helps not; he has spoiled, that rewards not; he
has starued, that cherishes not; he has stripped, that clothes not: and he that
has not given, even he has taken away. The Fault is no less his, that
bestows not on him that has not; than his, that exacts from him that has.
The Corn which thou hoordest, is the Bread of the hungry; the Wool and Flax
which thou transportest, is the Cloth of the naked; the Gold and Silver which
thou do so heap and hide, is the Price of the Poor: He that wisely gave it
thee for them; shall once (in their behalf) as severely require it of thee,
and thy like: J was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; J was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; Naked, and ye
clothed me not; sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not.

Nay and you talk of Giving, he is gone: This is (he says) no World to Give;
himself is (as others are) on the Taking hand. Quite of another mind from the
Scripture; It is a more blessed thing (he says) to Receive, than to Give: And
(clean contrary to the Prince, that thought that day lost, in which he had
given nothing) he thinks it all lost, in that day that he gives. You cannot
beat Bounty into his Brains with a Beetle. A very Truant is he (and you
examine him) at a lesson of Liberality: and if you take in hand to tutour him;
he makes any excuse, takes any occasion to busy him otherwise, than about his
Book. You would not think how he delays the Dole to the Poor; and what
Shifts he has to shun a Beggar. If he but suspect there sits a needy Crauer
near to such a Corner; he there either turns another way, or looks another
way: He either mends his Pace, chats to his Companion, or makes himself musing
on some hasty Matter: Now listens he to the other side, and the Poore-man is on
his deaf ear. It is not the first, and a faint asking will avail him any
thing; he must dog him to it, for what he does. But if you once come so
near him, and follow him so fane, that he must needs take notice though not
of Your Want, yet of your Noise: he never stands Iesuitically to equivocate
with you; I have it not that is (he means) not for you: but tells you blunt out
at once; I have not for you. Ask him a Farthing, and he says a Farthing is
too little for him to give; ask a Shilling, and he replies, a Shilling is too
much for you to receive: Ask more, or less; he minds to serve you with a
matter of nothing. Tell him you will pray for him, if he will be pleased to give;
and he tells you, he can have Prayers better cheap: Say you will pray for him,
whether he will give or no; and he will trust you (he says) for once. (A poor
Cavil is it, to flout out another Necessity.) And yet he thinks, he has
thus put you off with as good a Grace, and as much Credit; as another could
have pleasured you. But if he be drawn to Give, he gives so difficultly, so
frowningly, with such vpbraidings and reuilings; that he gives you a Fish, and
a Serpent at once; and together with Bread, he puts a Stone into your Poke. You
had better be without his Gift; it is not so sweet in the having, as bitter in
the receiving. Salute him with a Suit; and he stampes that he cannot stay to
hear you: He now turns, and talks to every one that comes by him: and
cries, I come Sir, to any one that but opens the casement toward him. Present
him with your Petition, and he puts you to petition the second time for an
answer to the first: Heel put on his considering Cap, and bids you come again
for an answer: and so you must spend more Time, Labor, Cost, for (perhaps) a
further Delay; or (more likely) a flat Denial. The Churl hates to be Poor;
nor would he willingly be thought Rich: verifying the Saying; He had rather be
rich indeed, than so accounted. (Contrary to many wavering Credit-mongers, that
seek to be so accounted; having scarce wherewith to make up their accounts.)
Especially, how little does he set by himself at a Levy, Sessment, Loan,
Tax, or Subsidy? And all is because he would do as little good as he could,
to King, Church, and Poor. He abhors to be charged with an Office of Charge:
will Fine for a City Sheriff; and will be ready to cut his own throat, to be
made Sheriff of a Shire. He hates Papistrie for one Point especially, because
they teach, A Man may merit Salvation by his Works: He hears it, but he cannot
believe it; No, no, his Hope is, Faith will come to save him, though Charity be
away. Ah Charity, Charity! thou fair Fruit of the Faithful; and laudable
witness of a Soul Sanctified: Oh thou that art the Greatest of all Graces for
Abiding; where do thou now abide? O Love! O Dove! to whither have thou taken
thy Wings? How art thou flown out of the Arc of a wretched World? how art thou
gone out from us, not to return unto us? Alas! how is thy beauty stained,
Strength weakened, light darkened, and Heat cooled? Help, Oh help! come once
again unto us, and do some good amongst us: Now thou art gone, there is no good
to be done. The Hungry pine, while there is none to feed them; the Naked
starve, while there is none to cloth them; The Sick languish, while there is
none to visit them; the Captives call and cry, while there is none to deliver
them; the Poor complain, while there is none to right, or pity them. No man
remembers the Afflictions of JOSEPH. Never more need of an ANGEL to convey
Sustenance to him prisoned in the Den; or of a RAVEN to fetch Food for him
banished in the Wilderness: For, LABAN diminishes the Wages of JACOB; NABAL
will not part with a crumme of Bread, or a drop of water to the Son of ISHAI;
and DIVES denies LAZARUS to dine with his Dogs. Who releeues him with a
Penny, whom CHRIST redeemed with his Blood? Who thrusts not out CHRIST in a
stranger, rather than takes in a Stranger for CHRIST his sake? As the swinish
GERGASENES thrust CHRIST out of their Coasts: So with a many hoggish Churles,
away with the Beggar (the sturdy I mean not, but the needy) to the next
Constable, Stocks, House of Correction. Their care is but to be rid of them;
they care not to relieve them.

Oh ho, now I have him. Could you not think all this while, to what end he is
so great a gatherer? You must not think What only, but Whom he is to leave
behind him. He has laid up (with the Glutton in the Gospel) for many Years:
Yea and (beyond him too) for more Years than his own. Just one of them, that
Have their Portion in this Life, and leave the rest of their Substance for
their Babes. It is a Fatherly affection that vrges him thus to scrape and heap:
A Father (he thinks) does not half love his Children as he ought; that plots
not by all means to make them rich. To beget Children, and bestow them, is
(thinks he) a Fathers Whole: and to endow them largely is the only Education.
Better not beget, than beget to Beggary; is an Apothegme of his own: but the
old Rule he remembers not; Better unborn, than untaught. No matter for
Instruction, they shall have Wealth enough. Goods are more than Goodness: What
cares he whether they learn to live well; his care is to leave them well to
live. It is all one to be such an ones Hog, Horse, Dog; as his: Son: Nay,
his Hogs shall have a Swineheard, his Horse a Rider, his Dogs a Futerer;
but no Tutor for his Child. He will have a Shepherd in his Field, a Bailey in
his yard; but scarce a Minister in his parish: A Clarke for his Bonds, a
Steward over his lands; but no Schoolmaster to his Sons. He will look that
his land be well manured; but respects not though he that must have it, be
never so ill mannered. What an Idiot it is, thus to deck and dress the
Servant; whose master notwithstanding must be but a Slouen. Oh their baseness,
and folly! Less Culture shall be bestowed upon the Owner; then upon his
Possessions Sons, or Daughters; No matter what they are, but what they have:
Be she black, she is Penny white; be she crooked, her Wealth will make her
stract; be she never so bad, her Goods are enough to make her Good Be he base,
he is Gold Noble; Be he sheepish, he has a Golden Fleece, be his Demeanor
never so foul, he has a fair Demeanes. What Uncomeliness or Evil will not
Wealth make a man wink at? O Fools! Whether is better, and to be preferred;
Wealth, or Instruction? the one a gross Heap, the other a rare Endowment; the
one as vile to the other; as is the Body to the Mind. And whether is worse,
and rather to be despised; a Beggar, or a Fool? the one has no Money, the
other has no Wit: and what the one wants of a Rich man, the other wants of a
Man.

And is it He, for whom thou do so toil, and plod? Like thy Ox and Ass
then, thou art not for thy self. Thou art but the Conduit-Pipe, and he the
Cesterne: It comes through thine hands, but is laid up for him. Thou therefore
make thee poor, to make him rich. And what good will it do thee when thou
art gone, that thou left'st a rich Heir behind? Yea, more Rich (perhaps) than
Good. Thou have gained for him, and so have lost thine own Soul. Did it DIVES
any good, that his Brethren (after him) lived merrily; and (great-like) of his
Goods? Say they drank Wine in Bowls; yet nevertheless his Tongue was
tormented in that Flame. When thou die miserably, what art thou the better
that thy Children live never so bravely? What is it, that they beget iollity to
them, and horror to thy Self? Hereby have they Pleasure perhaps, but it but
short: but thou have torment both certain, and endless. A wealthy Son
profits not a guilty Father: No, though he would give all he left him, for
Masses, Dirges, Pardons, and Prayers; it could not (what ere Men feign) redeem
his Soul from Hell. Indeed, Happy (they say) is he, whose Father is in Hell.
For (say they again) A rich man is either a bad man, or a bad man's Heir. If
himself be bad, it will once go worse with him: but if he only be heir to a
bad man; he is happier himself, in that his Father is gone to the Devil for
him. Yet further; What faist thou, but another after thee may prove as lavish,
as thou have been scraping; as riotous, as thou sparing; and may scatter that
in a Year, which took thee a Life to gather: and what profit have thou, that
thou have labored for the Wind? It Is true, and just; both said, and Found:
After a great Getter, there commonly comes a Spender. Goods ill gotten, are ill
spent: The First Heir may have them, and a Second perhaps; all which a Third
scarce comes to hear of.

Nay but (I now bethink me) thou have never an Heir: For whom is it now thou
do so toil, and irke, yea and damn thy self? Thou know, thou must not
have them; and who must have them, thou know not. Perhaps, one that never
knew thee, or will never thank thee. HE puts thee in mind of such thy
Frailty, and Folly at once: Man Walks in a vain Shadow, and disquieteth
himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.
Tush! why tell you him? If no Body will lay claim to it; let it fall to the
King, Church, Commons, Poor of the Parish. But for fear of such a Forfeit,
thou have chosen thee an Heir unto thy self: One that thou love well; yea
better it seems than thine own Soul. One that loves thee well; and well he
may, and it be but for the love he has to thine. He cannot choose but love
thee horribly, while he loves Thine so impatiently: That is, he could wish
Thee, and Thine at once, both hanged, and had: yea, to have Thine, what cares
he to curse Thee to Hell? He is one of the same Name (I am sure) though not one
of the Kin. So, so; Keep the House howsoever in the same Name; belike the
Line was not worthy of it. ABSOLON has no Child for his Name to live in;
shall he rot therefore out of remembrance? no, not while ABSOLONS Pillar
stands. If he have no Monument of his Loins; he can have a Pillar of his Name:
and that's enough to uphold his House. This is one of the last, but not the
least follies of Men, to let a Title carry it, before the Right: To make
Kinsmen Strangers, and a Kinsman of a Stranger: With the whole Price of an
Heiredome, to buy the Name of an Heir; or an Heir of the Name: To purchase a
lying Affinity with a costly kind of Adoption. Nay but the Heir that must be,
is a Poor Sisters Son: The poor raged Knave (I can tell you) is like to be
Lord of all. He shall one day own all that is his Uncles; though his Uncle now
scarce will own him. Not a Farthing will he allow him to educate, and
maintain him; though leave him all at last, to waste perhaps, or else
ingrosse. You shall find him set the first in his Will; which never was
suffered to sit the last at his Table. It is the manner of the Covetous, to
part with nothing while they live; no not to those, to whom they mind to leave
all at their Death. While he lives, all is too little for himself; but let him
take all to him, when he dies. His Heir is now beholden to him, not for what
he has bestowed; but for what he could not keep: And will therefore thank
him, when he shall not hear him; will pray for him when it shall do him no
good. Thou now lie gasping, and thine Heir is gaping: Every look he lets
upon thee, accuses the slownesse of thy Death: For he thinks it his Wrong and
Hurt that thou live. He sighs and wailes before thee, not that he cares for
thy loss; but hopes for thy Gain: How he howles and blubbers, while thy hands
quake, Teeth guash, Eyes close, Breath stops, Heart choaks, and Soul flits;
and all, not so much that thou art now dead, as that thou diedst not ere this.
No Man's Death is more desired, than the Covetous Man's: It is always expected,
plotted often, yea and sometimes untimely effected. All therefore wish him
dead; because (like the Hog in the Pot) he does good to none, but after his
Death.

Well, thou wilt therefore shake off these Shadows; and mind'st (I hear) to
build some Hospital, School, College; or do some charitable Deed withal.
Says he so? The Man lives poor (I perceive) with purpose to die rich: and
dies rich, to do good after his Death. Yea, then do Good, when he can do no
longer hurt. He has robbed Peter all his Life; and will now pay Paul at his
Death. That is no Liberality to give, when he can no longer have: no Charity
to relieve one, with what he has wrested from another: no Piety to do Evil,
that Good may come thereof: and no Equity to get ill, with a purpose to bestow
it well. I would not wish thee to go to Hell all thy Life, with an intent to
win Heaven after thy Death. Do thou offend still, with purpose to make
amends? Wealths well bestowing, is not enough for the Fault in the getting.
Satisfaction may appease the Hurt; it cannot wipe away the Guilt of Fraud, or
Oppression. But if thou will do Good withal; I would advise thee to do it,
while thou have it in thine hand to do. Do well with it, while it is yet
thine: What thanks is it to thee, what Good is done with it, when thou have
left it. Do then resign it, before thou must needs bequeath it. thou had as
good do Good by thy self, as others. Even now feed and cloth the Poor, that
their Loins and Bowels may bless thee, before thou die. He is but a silly
Traveler, that so orders for his Journey, as to have his Provision sent after
him, when himself is already gone so far before: He may well want it, ere it
overtake him. Good Works go merrily with, or before us: they follow but
slowly afterward.

I dream but too well of him; there is no such matter he means. He means (as
Hermocrates) to make himself his own Heir: and wishes still that his Goods
might fall by succession to himself. Or else (with Another) will he devour
his Gold before his Death; and so bury it in him: Or (with such Another) sow it
in his Sleeue, and appoint it to be buried with him. Ah this bewitching Wealth!
ha this Gold, this Gold! how it ties Men's Hearts unto it? Once Covetous, and
always so. Avarice is commonly the Vice of old Age: Whereas other vices then
fade, this grows afresh. And as it begins with Age, so it ends not but with
Life. A Covetous Man grows the fonder of his Gold, the sooner he must forgo
it: Yea, when it must needs Leave him; even then is he loath to leave it.

I have now said so much of thee, that I had almost forgotten my self. Who
(think thou) am I? Even no better than I would; no other than thou oughtst to
be. Will I (like thee) abase mine Affections unto Earth; when I am bound to
aim at nothing under Heaven? To what can I stoop to in a World, that am above
a World? I am more worthy, than to welcome base Pelf unto me, so as to worship
it: My Mind came from Heaven; My Gold comes but from Earth: I do not mean to
set Earth above Heaven, in letting my Gold ouerrule my Mind. If it will dwell
with me, it shall be my Servant; I intend to be no Slave unto it. Riches can I
contemn, and not desire, and use: can use the World, as though I used it not;
can pass by this present Life; because I am to pass through it to another, to
a better Life. Yea, can content me with a present Scantnesse, for hope of the
Fullness I am to have hereafter. It is not an Earth that I would; nor can an
Earth suffice and appease my Will. My Heart is a true framed Triangle, a coined
Circle cannot fill it. Nothing can satisfy my Soul, but All things: He only
is enough unto it, in whom it is. Nothing less than God, can suffice the Soul
that is capable of God. Every Creature is but vile to him, that knows but his
Creator. A whole Earth is too strait for him, that looks as wide as Heaven.
The whole Ocean of the World is but as a drop to a thirsty Soul; to whom one
drop of the river of Paradise is plenteous refreshment. He counts Mammon but
base, that prizes God: And the wise Merchant cares not to part with all, to
purchase the precious Pearl unto him. Did my Will embrace a World, it would
still ask more; A World is not enough to my Will: What then should I desire,
but what only and fully can answer, and appease my Desire?

I have but little, it is true; and the best is, I want but little. I have but
little, yet enough: and that can never be little, that is enough; and what is
not enough, when it is at the most, is not much. I lack but little; I have
chosen the better part than so, to be careful for many things, when one thing
is necessary. Godliness with Contentment is great Gain; said One, that for
his Knowledge, knew both how to want, and how to abound: and for his
Experience, Having nothing, yet possessed all things. Godliness with
Contentment says he? Why that's enough for Man or Christian: Nature inuites the
one, to be content with a little: and Grace aduises the other, Having food and
Raiment, therewith to be content. A Man will Content him with Natures lot and
limit: so will a Christian be content with what measure God has met out unto
him. Content is all: The least Portion is enough, the lowest Condition happy,
with the aequanimitie of the Bearer. The Man is likest to God, that lacks the
least; whose property it is, to have need of Nothing; and to be sufficed with
himself. The Contented Man is rich in the midst of Poverty: whereas the
Covetous is poor in the midst of Riches. He that can be content with what he
has; wants not, what he has not: he that is not so, wants what he has. The
Patriarch cared for no more, but Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on: The Wise
Man craved neither Poverty, nor Riches; but Conuenience only. I will make
that enough to me, which God has given me with a sparing hand. God saw no
more was good for me, he therefore gave me no more Whether God gives little,
or much, he gives for the best. Better is a little with the Fear of the Lord;
than great Treasure, and trouble therewith. Or say my Estate be not enough to
my Will; I can make my Will enough to mine Estate: Namely, while it answers not
me accordingly; I can accordingly apply my self to it. He that cannot make
his own enough; will never have enough, though all were his own.

Me thinks I yet see how Crates threw his Gold into the Sea: And hear how
Phocion told Alexander, that himself was richer, who needed not his great
Gift; than was he who gave it: And think how Fabricius thought it a Kingdom,
to contemn the Wealth of a King. These knew Gold and Silver was but an
elaborate Dust; Wealth was but a toylsome Heap; and all manner of Riches, not
such as their own Worth, but the Errors of men had prized, and brought into
request. This unnecessary Trash (they knew, and proved) was but an impediment
to Virtue; and an inticement to Evil: They therefore (whose best Virtues, were
but the best Vices) despised that for Virtues sake, which they knew to be the
matter and means to Vice. Did the Nations abhor, and does Israel adore the
Golden Idol? Is Money less Earth and Dross, than it was of old, or are Men's
Affections now become more vile and earthy? Have Christians more need of
Wealth, than had Pagans? Nay have they not a nearer, safer, fuller Providence
within; than have they that were, and are without? How is it now, they prefer
the things of this Life before them, that had neither the Knowledge, nor Hope
of another and better Life? To leave and contemn the Wealth of the World, is
an ordinary Lesson of Philosophy: To heap and adore them then, can be no good
Divinity. If Nature could teach Them to neglect them; because they did them no
Good: Grace (me thinks) should the rather instruct me not to regard them,
because they do me hurt.

Yea (as I fay) do me hurt: and more hurt, then for which a World can make
amends. Both stain my Soul, and damn my Soul: and can a World now both
wipe, and quit, this both Guilt, and Loss? What shall it profit a Man, if he
shall gain the whole World; and lose his own Soul? (says HE, that does as
much as quite deny, what he does thus demand) or what shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul? An whole World (belike) is not worth a Soul. I were
unwise then to hazard my Soul, though it were for a world. I will tell the
Worldling what I know, and what he finds. Riches stain the Soul: For a Man
does not lightly and easily become rich, without his Evil and Sin. Why does
he call it the Unrighteous Mammon? but because Riches and Righteousness
seldom go together: But it is common to have Wealth and Wickedness at once.
How gets a Man his Wealth, but by Fraud and Oppression? how spends a Man his
Wealth, but upon his Pride and Lusts? That must needs be bad outright; which is
purchased by bad means, and employed to bad Ends Riches are but base in their
Nature; but are even bad in their Effects. He might have been Poor and
Innocent together; that is now grown both Guilty, and Rich. Is a man to more
good for his Goods? I will never think: Man the better for his Means; since
(I see) it is the means to make him worse. But I must tell him withal, what I
fear, and what he would loath to find: Riches damn the Soul. It is (woe, ah
woe!) too true. Before he begin his Gain, he has quite lost himself: yet
considers not, how he loses all in the loss of himself. The acquisition of his
Pelf was at the first sealed with the damnation of his Soul. Who but THEY
(the Devil and his Angels) were to fetch away the Rich man's Soul? He bids you
understand how headlong he hurries down to Hell; that tells you how hardly he
gets up into Heaven: Saying: It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of
a needle; than for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God. Briefly, He
tells plainly of their Blemish and Vengeance together: They that will be rich
fall into temptation, and a Snare; and into many foolish, and hurtful Lusts,
which drown men in destruction, and perdition.

Ah but it is a misery (me thinks) to be poor: And there is (we say) No Woe,
to Want. The Parenthesis was well put in, both for the pith, and Truth of the
Saying. Poverty is a Misery, but it is to them that so make it, because they
take it so. Poverty is no burden to him, that can bear it out: None feels
the weight of it, but he that fears to undergo it. Not trouble some is it to
him that bears it; but to him that will not bear it. Nothing is hard to a
willing Mind: to an unwilling is nothing easy. Poverty is grievous to no man;
but rather many a Man is so to it. This is the misery of it, that a man will
needs make it so to himself. I am worthily wretched, when I will not be
otherwise persuaded, but that I am so. In my Mind, He Is not poor, that would
not be rich: and he lacks nothing, that craves not many things. Tush, tush: No
man is poor indeed: and (but in conceit) is no Man rich. He is Poor indeed,
that cares to be rich: He Is rich enough, that fears not to be Poor. Reach
indeed to the Opinion of Men, and who is Rich? But stoop to the Condition of
Men, and who is Poor? Nature has limited a Man to live with little: And shall
a Man think him Poor when he has not wherewithal to transgress Natures
Bounds? There is a kind of Meannesse, and Scantnesse to many a Man: It is
their pecuishnesse to call it Baseness, and Beggary: and to reproach it so,
and abhor it. Men do miscall, what they know not how to esteem. And as
Children are skarred at Bugge-beares, and fabled or fained Hobgoblins: so
Fools fly this Ghostly and ghastly appearing Poverty by Fire and Water, Sea
and Land. Let others think Poverty a woeful misery; I will deem it (as I well
prove it) an happy Security. The Poor Man, he does no hurt; he fears no hurt:
He is not envied, not hated, not cursed; incures not the treacherous Enmities
of Men: He sings, and dances before the Thief; sleeps safe and sound under
every Hedge. Nothing has he, he fears to lose; and lies so low, as whence he
cannot fall. I should therefore like Poverty the better, because it is less
obnoxious to Fear, and Loss; Who would still trouble him to possess Riches;
that must once be more troubled in their Loss? It is safer a great deal, not
to Have, than to Lose: And he far merrier, whom Fortune never respected;
than whom she has now forsaken. The Lesser I am; I am Greater, than whom
Change, or Chance may indammage.

But say Poverty were worse than it is; and I poorer than I am: I am ot other
than Others, yea and my Betters have likewise been. What should I tell of
poor Kings, Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, Saints? CHRIST himself was Poor:
borne of a poor Woman, brought forth in a poor Stable, lapt in poor Clouts,
laid in a poor Manger, lived a poor Life: HE, even he hungered, he wanted; he
had not wherewith to pay the Due; he had not whereon to lay his Head. Now Worm
of Earth, how is it thou couetest so to be rich; since the God of Heaven and
Earth, was so willing to be Poor. What was there in the World, was worthy of
God? What cared he then for the worth of a World? Why would he want these
Things of ours? but to tell us, that we our selves might well be without them:
Why contemn them? but to teach us not to desire them. My SAVIOVR cared not to
be rich, feared not to be Poor: to bid me not trouble my self with so
needless Fears, and Cares.

One thing is, (let the World go the worst with me) I cannot live poorer, than
I was Borne; and so must Die. Naked (said the Poor man) came J out of my
Mothers Womb; and naked shall I return thither. And the wise man; As he came
forth of his mothers womb, naked shall he return to go as he came: and shall
take nothing of his Labor, which be may carry away in his hand: Jn all points
as he came, so shall he go; and what profit has he, that has labored for
the Wind? Come naked, Go naked; Bring nothing, Carry nothing: To what purpose
then do Men get and gather those things which they once had not; and once must
not have? These things of ours; here only we have them; and we leave them
here. Said I of Ours? How are they Ours, which at first were not so; and at
last shall not so be? That is ours, which we bring with us; but that another,
which we get unto us: That is Ours, which we keep with us; but that another,
which we leave behind us. That is a man's Own, which is not added to a Man;
which is not taken from a Man; which is not one man's more than another. A Man's
Soul is a man's own: Riches are not so. Oh hazard not your own, to have the
Things that are not yours! He fitly called them uncertain Riches: They
uncertain to us; and we likewise to them. They Uncertain: Now ours, now
others; now gotten, now gone. Nothing is Certain in Riches, but uncertainty.
So He expressly; Riches Certainly make themselves Wings, They fly away, as an
Eagle toward Heaven. An Eagle flies suddenly, flies swiftly: So are Riches
gone instantly, gone irrecouerably. These things of ours, they go from us by
more ways than one. Either thy Fade of themselves; or we Consume them; or
others Deprive us of them. Our Food is subject to putrefaction; our Garments to
the Moth, and fretting; our Gold and Silver to the rust and canker; our Lands
to bareness and barrenness; and our Houses to rottenness and ruin. Fire may
devour them, Water swallow them, Enemies spoil them, or Thieves purloyne
them. O vain Man! How is it thou now trustest in a Thing so vain? Trust not
in uncertain Riches: Set not thine eyes upon the Thing that is not: Yea, let
me say to One, and All of you: Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon
Earth, where Moth and Rust does corrupt; and where Thieves break through and
steal: But lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth and
Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through and steal. We also
are uncertain: Did not Riches leave us; yet must we leave them at last. Death
is not drawn to partiality; nor can she be corrupted: Gold and Silver will
not hire her to wink at the Wealthy. As dies the Poor Man: so dies the
Rich. She knocks as readily, and equally at the Kings, as at the Beggars
Door. Death (when she comes) comes not to take his Wealth from the Rich man;
but rather the Rich man from his Wealth. That Rich Glutton had laid up enough
in store for many years: but that Night They (Death and the Devil) they
fetched away his Soul. His Goods were yet laid up; but his Soul now was fetched
away. Trustlesse, yea and Witless Wretch he was! Trustlesse, in that (denying
the Providence of God) he laid up for so many years: Witless, not considering
how (for his own Frailty) he could not promise that Night unto himself. To
what end should I lay up for many Years; when I am not sure, my years shall
be many? Why should I so greedily get That to me; which I know not how readily
I may be fetched from, or it from me? Wherefore should I provide for so long,
when my Iourny is not far? The little I have, may (for what I know) out-last
my Life. I have (I know) but a little way Home; and I do not mean to make a
Burden of my Provision. I would have my Shoe but fitted to my Foot: a Cloak
too large or long, would but tire me to travel in. It is to Live, as to
Swim; easiest for him that is the lightest. So I have sufficient for to Day;
let to Morrow take care for it self. Why should my Care be for the Morrow;
when I am not sure the Morrow shall be mine? He that likes not my Resolution,
let him read my Warrant, and understand it. Take no thought for the Morrow; for
the Morrow shall take thought for the Things of it self. Sufficient unto the
Day is the Evil thereof: I do not mean to make it the worse to me, by adding
mine own unto it. Neither will I riot and waste, because I may die to Morrow:
nor yet Covet and scrape, because to Morrow may be mine to live. He that so
spends the Things of the World, as if he were to Die now; so spares, as if he
were to Live yet: the same uses the World, as if he used it not: And is richer
in the Inioyment of a small Portion; than is the other in the Keeping of the
largest Heap.

Churlish Death! (thou say) and the rather so; to threaten a Separation
betwixt Thee and Thine: than betwixt Thee and thy self. Thou irkest less (I
know) thy Body and Souls final Dissolution; than thy Mind and Moneys least
Division. Thou art married to thy MAMMON: tied in a Knot unto it, which Death
only must undo. Thou art one with thy Wealth: and ere thou will not be
covetous, thou will not Be. Hug thy Heaps yet a while; and kiss every Face
of thy Coin: Where thy Treasure is, there let thy Heart yet be: Death shall
scatter thy Treasure, when she hits thy Heart. While thou think on what thou
have laid up; that Night (thou think not on) shall come. Then shall their
Heap stay behind thee; and their Guilt only shall go with thee: And thy
Money moreover shall merit thee this Memorial: BEneath this Stone,
There lies One;
No matter for his Name.
But base by Birth;
He once kept Earth:
And now Earth keeps the same.
For all his Store,
He was but Poor;
Even wanting what he had:
Making himself
A Slave to Pelf;
No Slave so base, so bad.
His Thoughts were caring,
Carcass sparing;
To pamper up his Purse:
He lived a Hog;
Di'd like a Dog:
And's gone with many a Curse.
HIs Mind was Gold;
His Corpse is Mould;
Which now lies rotting here:
This, with the Dust,
That, and the Rust,
Shall once again appear.
God, Friends, and Health,
Were all to Wealth
Neglected, and Contemned:
Wherefore to Devils;
Foes, Woes, and Evils;
He Is justly now Condemned.



