The Spoil of Antwerpe. Faithfully reported, by a true Englishman, who was
present at the same. Nouem. 1576.

Seen and allowed.

Printed at London by Richard Jones.

Faults escaped, to be considered of the Readers: and to be amended, as
follows.
In. A. the third leaf, the second side, and last line for, Fuora villiauo:
read, Fuora villiacco. In. A. 4. leaf. 2. side, and. 7. line: for, take
Caves: read* take Arms. In. A. 6. leaf, the first side, and 20. line: for,
West or Southwest: read, East or Southeast. In. B. the first leaf, and first
side, the 22. line: for, west side: read, east side. And in the same leaf,
the. 2. side, and. 7. line: for, Southwest side: read, Southeast side. And in
the. 15. line: for, East side: read, West side. In. B. 4. leaf. 2. side. 9.
line. for aeste ville: read, ceste ville. And in the. 13. line, for Trumpete:
read, Trumpetter. And in the. 17. line: for Cauaille: read, Canaille. In. C.
1. leaf. 2. side. 1. line: for fleeing: read, flaying.
To the Reader.
I Shall earnestlye require thee (gentle Reader) to correct the errors passed
and escaped in printing of this Pamphlet, according to this table. And
furthermore, to understand that this victory was obtained with loss but of
five hundredth Spanierds, or six at the most: of whom I heard no man of name
recoumpted, saving only, Dom Emanuell. Thus much (for haste) I had forgotten
in the treatye, and therefore thought meet to place it here in the beginning:
and therewithal to advertise thee, that these outrages and disordered
cruelties done to our nation, proceeded but from the common Soldiers: neither
was there any of the twelve which entered the english house, a man of any
charge or reputacion. So that I hope (these extremyties notwithstanding) the
king, their Master, will take such good order for redress thereof, as our
countrymen in the end, shall rest satisfied with reason, and the amytye
between our most gracious Sovereign and him, shall remain also firm and
inviolate: the which I pray God speedely to grant for the benefyt of this
Realm.

Amen.
Note in the Model: that the trowpe of Almaynes by the ryuers side, should be
footmen. And also that the trowpe next the windemyl should be horsemen.



THE SPOIL of Antwerpe.
SInce my hap was to be present at so pitteous a spectakle, as the sackyng and
spoil of Antwerpe, (a lamentable example which has already filled all Europe
with dreadful news of great calamity) I have thought good for the benefit of
my country, to publish a true report thereof. The which may as well serve for
profitable example unto all estates of such condition as suffered in the same:
as also, answer all honest expectations with a mean truth, set down beetween
thextreme surmises of sundry doubt full minds: And increased by the manyfolde
light tales which have been engendered by fearful or affectionate rehersals.
And therwithall, if the wickedness used in the said town, do seem unto the
well disposed Reader, a sufficient cause of Gods so just a scorge and Plague:
and yet the fury of the vanquishers do also seem more barbarous and cruel,
then may become a good christian conqueror: let these my few words become a
forewarnynge on both hands: and let them stand as a Lantern of light
beetween two perilous Rocks: That both amendyng the one, and detestynge the
other, we may gather fire out of the Flint, and Hunny out of the Thystle. To
that end, all stories and Chronicles are written: and to that end I presume
to publishe this Pamphlet: protestyng that neither malice to the one side, nor
parciall affection to the other, shall make my pen to swerve any jot from
truth of that which I will set town and saw executed: For if I were disposed to
write maliciously against the vanquishers: their former barbarous cruelty,
insolences, Rapes, spoils, Incests, and Sacriledges, committed in sundry
other places, might yield me sufficient matter without the lawful remembrance
of this their late stratageme: or if I would undertake to move a general
compassion, by blazynge abroad the miseries and callamities of the vanquished:
their long sustained injuries and yokes of intolerable bondage: their
continual broils in war: their doubtful dreades in peace: their accusations
without cause: and condempnations without proof: might enable a dome stone to
talk of their troubles, and fetch brinysh tears out of the most craggy
rock: to lament and bewail the burning houses of so near neighbors. But as
I said before, mine only intent is to set down a plain truth, for the
satisfiynge of such as have hitherto been carried about with doubtful
reports: and for a profitable example unto all such as being subject to
like imperfections, might fall thereby into the like calamities.

And to make the matter more perspicuous, I must derive the beeginnyng of this
discourse a little beeyonde the beeginnynge of the massacre: That the cause
being partly opened, the effect may be the more plainly seen.

It is then to be understood that the sackyng and spoil of ANTWERPE has
been (by all lykelyhoode) long pretended by the Spanyerds: And that they have
done nothing else but lien in wait continually to find any least quarrel to
put ye same in execution. For proof whereof, their notable rebellion and
mewtinye beegun in the same, when their watch word was Fuora viliauo, might
sufficiently beewray their mallicious and cruel intent. And though it were
then smoothly colloured over, and subtly appeased, by ye crafty deuisers of
the same, yet the coals of their choler being but raked up in the Imbers of
false semblance, have now found out the wicked winds of wiliness and wrath:
Which meetynge together have kindled such a flame, as gave open way to their
detestable devices. For thus estates of all the low countries being ouerweried
with the intolerable burden of their tyrrannies: and having taken arms to
withstand their malice and rebellyous Mewtinyes, the town of Antwerpe
(being left open and subject unto the Cytadell) did yet remain quiet, and
entered not into any martial action. Whereat the Spanyerdes beeinge mutch
moved, and having not yet opportunity to work their will so colourably as
they wisshed, beestowed certain Canon shot out of the said Castle, and slew
certain innocent souls, with some other small harm and damage done to the
edifices: Thinking thereby to harden ye hearts of the poor flemynges, and to
make them take ^ues for their just defense: whiles they thereby might take
occasion to execute their unjust pretense. And this was done on the xix. or.
xx. of October last.

Now to answer all objections, I doubt not but it wilbee alleged, that the
Castle beestowed the said Canon shot at ye Town, because they of the Town did
not shote at the prince of Orenges Ships, which lay within sight thereof: But
alas it is easy to find a staff, when a man would beat a dog.

For the truth is, that those Ships did no greater hurt, either to ye town or
Castle, then friendly to waft up al manner of Grain and victualles, for the
sustenance of ye said town: which even then began to want such provision, by
reason that the said Spanyerds had builte a Forte on Flaunders side upon the
same River: And thereby stopped all such as brought Uictuall to the said
Town: burning and destroyinge the country near adioynyng, and using all
terror to the poor people, to the intent yt ANTWERPE might lack provision.

And about the same time also the Spanierds cut of a Bridge, which was the open
passage beetween Antwerpe and Machlen, at a village called Walem. A manifest
proof of their plain intent to distress ye said town, and to shut up the
same from all the rest of Brabant. Since they were walled in with the River on
the one side, and on that other the Spanish horse men occupied all the
country, and so terrified ye poor people as they durst not bring their
commodities to ye same. All this notwithstanding, the chief rulers of the
said Town of Antwerpe, appeased the people and put up these injuries until
they might be better able to redress them. Soon after the Spanierdes
(assysted by the treason of certain high Duches) entered the town of
Maestrecht upon a sodeyne, and put the same to sack: killynge, and destroying
great numbers of innocent people therein: a thing to be noted. For that
Maestrecht had never revolted, but stood quiet under their garrisons as
faithful subjects to the king. And the one half thereof perteyned also unto
ye bishop of Liege, who had yet meddled nothing at all in these actions. The
chief rulers and people of Antwerpe perceiving thereby the cruel intent of the
Spanyerds, and doubtinge their Dutche garyson which was of the Count
Euersteines regiment (as they were also which betrayed Maestricht,) beegan to
abandon the town, leauyng their houses and goods beehinde them: and sought to
withdraw themselves into some place of safer abode. Whereat the estates veynge
moved with compassion, and doubting that the town would shortly be left
desolate, levied a power of three thousand footmen, and eight hundredth, or one
thousand horsemen, and sent the same under the conduct of the Marquise
d'Haurey, the young Count d'Egmont, Mounser de Capres, Mou^s. de Bersel,
Mou^s. de Goo^nie, and other nobles and gentlemen to succor and defend the
town of Antwerpe, against the cruel pretense of the said Spanierdes: And they
came before the gates thereof on Friday the second of this instante: at a Port
on the west or southwest side thereof called Kybdoerporte: Whereat the Spanierds
being enraged, discharged sundry shot of great Artillery from the
Castle, but to small purpose. At last Mouns. de Champaigne, who was governor
of the Town: and the Count d'Euersteine which was Colonel of the Garysone,
demanded of the States wherefore they approached the town in such order: who
answered yt they came to enter the same as friends, and to entrenche and defend
it from ye Spanyerds: protesting further, yt they would offer no manner of
violent damage or injury to the persons or goods of any such as inhabited the
same.

Hereupon ye said Mou^s. d'Champaigne and Count d'Euersteine went out unto
them and conferred more privately together by the space of one hour, and
returned into the town leaving the estates power at a village called
Burgherhout.

On the morrow being the third of this instant, they were permitted to enter,
and came into the town.xxi. ensigns of footmen, and.vi. cornets of horsemen.
Immediately after their entry, ye inhabitants brought them sackes of wool and
other such provision, wherewith they aproched ye yeard or plain ground which
lies before the Castle. And placing the same at thendes of five streets which
lie open unto the said Castle yearde, entrenched under them with such
expedicio^ that in less then five hours, those streets ends, were all
reasonably well fortified from the Castle for any sudden. At this time and.
xii. days before I was in the said town of Antwerpe upon certain private
affairs of mine own: so that I was enforced to become an eyed witness of their
entry and all that they did. As also afterward (for all ye gates were kept
fast shut and I could not depart) to beeholde the pitiful stratageme which
followed. The Castle thondred with shot at the town: but it was a very mysty
day, so that they could neither find their marks very well, nor yet see how
the streets ends were entrenched. It was a strange thing to se the
willingness of ye inhabitants, and how soon many hands had dispatched a very
great piece of work: for before midnight they had made the trenches as high
as the length of a pike: and had begun one trenche for a Counterskarfe between
al those streets and the Castle yearde: the which they perfected unto the half
way from S. Georges Churchyearde unto the waters side by S. Michels, and there
left from work, meaning to have perfected it the next day. That Counterskarfe
had been to mutch purpose if it had been finished, as shall appear by a Model
of the whole place, which I have annexed to thend of this treaty: by view
whereof ye skillful reader may plainly perceive thexecution of every
perticularitie. These things thus begone and set in forwardnes, it is to be
noted that the Spanyerds (having intelligence of the states power when it set
forwards from Bruxelles: and per ceuing that it bent toward Antwerpe) had sent
to Maestricht, Liere, and Aelst, to draw all the power yt could be made unto
the Castle of Antwerpe.

So yt on Sunday, the fourth of this instant in the morning, they al met at ye
said Castle. And their powers (as far as I could gather) were these.

There came from Maestricht very near to a thousand horsemen, led by Dom
Alonso de Vergas, who is the general of the horsemen: and five hundredth
footmen or more, governed by the Campemaster Francesco de Valdes.

There came from LIERE, five hundredth footmen or more, governed by the
Campemaster Iuliane de Romero.

There came from Aelst two thousand footmen, which were the same that rebelled
for their pay and other unreasonable demau^ds immediately after the winning of
Zierickzee. These had none other conductour then their Electo (after the manner
of such as mewtine and rebel) but were of sundry companies: as Dom Emanuels
and others. Nevertheless I have been so bold in ye Model as to set down ye
said Dom Emanuell for their leder: both because I think that (their mewtiny
notwithstanding) he led them at ye exployte, and also because, he was slain
amongst them at their entry. Thus the nwmbre of spanierds was. iiii. M. or
there aboutes, besides some help that they had of the^ garrison within ye
castle: And besides a M. high Almaynes, or more, which came from Maestricht,
Lyere, and those parts. And were of three sundry regiments: viz. Charles
Fuckers, Poelderuills and Froemsberghs: but they were led all by charles
Fucker. So yt the whole force of ye Spanierds and their co^plices, was five. M.
and upwards: the which assembled and met at ye castle, on ye said fourth day
about. x. of ye clock before dinner.

And (as I have heard credibly reported) would neither stay to refresh
themselves (having marched all night and the day before) nor yet to confer of
any thing, but only of the order how they should issue and assail, protesting
and vowing neither to eat nor drink until they might eat and drink at
liberty and pleasure in ANTWERP: the which vow they performed contrary to all
man's reason and expectacion. Their order of entry into ye Castle yard, and of
their approach to the trenches, I did not see, for I could not get out of the
town: neither did I think it reasonable to be Hospes in aliena republica
curiosus: Yet as I heard it rehearsed by sundry of them selves, I will also here
rehearre it for a truth. The Horsemen and footmen, which came from Maestrecht
and Lyere, came through a village on the east side of the town called
Burgerhout, about ten of the clock before noone, as before said: The Governor
and estates being thereof advertised, sent out presently part of their
Horsemen and Footmen to discover and take knowledge of them: But before they
could issue out of the gates, the Spanyardes were passed on the Sonth west side
of the town dyche, and entered at a gate which stands on the Counterscarfe of
the castle yeard, called the Windmil port: there entered the Horsemen, and all the footmen, saving the high Almaynes, who marched round about the Castle, by
a village called Keele and trayling their pikes on the ground after them, came
in at a small Posterne on the Brayes by the River, and on the east side of the
Castle.

Those which came from Aelst, came through the said vyllage called Keele, and
so through the Castle: issued out of the same at the fore gate, which stands
toward the town. Being thus passed, and entered into the Castleyard about
eleven of the clock, they of Aelst and of the Castle, cast themselves into
four Squadrones: they of Maestricht and Lyere, into two Squadrones: and their
Horsemen into a trowpe behind them: and the high Almayns into one Squadrone, or
Batallyon, by the ryuers side. Being thus ordered, and appointment given where
every Squadrone should charge and endure, they cast of certain loose shot,
from every Squadrone, and attacqued the scarmouch: the which continewed not one
hour, before they drew their Squadrones so nere unto the Counterscarfe and
trenches, that they brake and charged pell mell. The Castle had all this while,
played at the Town and trenches, with thundering shot: But now upon a signal
given, ceased to shoot any more, for fear to hurt their own men: wherein I
noted their good order which wanted no direction, in their greatest furye. The
Wallonnes, and Almaynes, which served in the Trenches defended all this while
very stoutly. And the Spanyerds with their Almaynes, contynewed the charge with
such valor, that in fine they won the Counterscarf, and presently scaled the
Trenches, with great fury. The Wallonnes and Almaines having long resysted
without any fresh relief or supplye (many of them in this mean while being
slain and hurt) were not able any longer to repulse the Spanyerds: so that
they entered the trenches about twelve of the clock, and presently pursued their
victory down every streate. In their chase, as fast as they gained any cross
streate, they fla^ked the same with their Muskets, until they saw no longer
resistance of any power: and then proceeded in chase, executing all such as
they ouertooke. In this good order they charged and entered: in this good order
they proceeded: and in as good order their lackeyes and Pages followed with
Firebrands, and wyldfyre, setting the houses on fire, in every place where
their masters had entered. The Wallonnes and Almaynes, which were to defend the
town being grown into some security, by reason that their Trenches were so
high, as seemed invincible: and lacking sufficient Generals and directors, were
found as far out of order, as the Spanyerds were to be honored for the good
order and direction which they kept. For those which came to supplye and
relieve the tre^ches, came straggling and loose: some came from the furdest side
of the town: some that were nearer came very fearfully: and many out of their
lodginges, from drinking and carousing: who would scarsely believe that any
conflicte was begone, when the Spanyerdes now met them in the streates to
put them out of doubt that they dallyed not. To conclude, their carelessness
and lack of foresyght was such that they had never a Corpse du guard to supply
and relieve their tre^ches, but only one in ye market place of the town which
was a good quarter of a mile from their fortifycations: and that also was of
Almaynes, who (when they spied the Spanyerds) did gently kneel down letting
their Pykes fall, and crying Oh lieue Spaniarden, lieue Spaniarden. Now I have
set down the order of their entrye, approach, charge, and assault: together
with their proceeding in victory: and that by credible report, both of the
Spanyerdes them selves, and of others who served in their company: let me also
say a little of that which I saw executed. I was lodged in the English house
vt supra, and had not gone abroad that morning by reason of weighty business
which I had in hand the same day. At dinner time the Marchauntemen of my
Country which came out of the town, and dined in my chamber, told me that a
hot scarmouch was begone in the Castleyeard, and that the furye thereof still
increased. About the midst of dinner, news came that the shot was so thick,
as neither ground, houses, nor people could be discearned for the smoke
thereof: and before dinner were fully ended, that the Spaniardes were like to
win the trenches. Whereat I stepped from the table, and went hastily up into a
high Tower of the said English house: from whence I might discover fire in
four or five places of the town, toward the Castleyeard: and thereby I was
well assured that the Spanyerds in deed were entered within the Trenches. So
that I came down and took my cloak and sword, to see the certainty thereof,
and as I passed toward the Bource, I met many, but I ouertoke none: And those
which I met were no Townsmen, but Souldyeres: neither walked they as men
which use traffic, but ran as men which are in fear: Whereat being somewhat
grieved, and seeing the townsemen stand every man before his door with such
weapons as they had, I demanded of one of them, what it mente? Who answered
me in these words, Helas mounsieur, il ny a point de order, and voila la ruin
de ceste ville. Aiez courage mon amy (quoth I,) and so went onwardes yet
toward the Bowrce, meeting all the way more and more which mended their pace.
At last, a Wallon Trompeter on horsback (who seemed to be but a Boy of years)
drew his sword, and laid about him crying, Ou est que vous eufuiez canaille?
faisons test pour le honeur de la patrie. Wherewith, fyfty or three score of
them turned head, and went backewardes toward the Bource. The which
encouraged me (per company) to proceed: But alas, this comfort endured but
a while: For by that time I came on the farther side of the Bource, I might see
a great trowpe coming in greater haste, with their heads as close together,
as a skoule of young frye, or a flock of Sheep: Who met me on the farther side
of the Bource, toward the market place: And having their leaders foremost (for I
knew them by their Iauelines, Borespeares, and Staves) bare me over
backwardes, and ran over my belly and my face, long time before I could recover
on foot. At last when I was up, I looked on every side, and seeing them run
so fast, began thus to bethink me. What in Gods name do I hear which have no
interest in this action? since they who came to defend this town are content to
leave it at large, and shift for themselves: And whilst I stood thus musing,
another flock of flyers came so fast that they bare me on my nose, and ran as
many over my back, as erst had marched over my guts. In fine, I got up
like a tall fellow, and went with them for company: but their haste was such,
as I could never overtake the^, until I came at a broad cross streate which
lies between the English house and the said Eource: there I ouertooke some of
the^ groueling on the ground, and groaning for the last gasp, and some other
which turned backwards to avoid the tickling of the spanishe Muskets: who had
gotten the ends of the said broad cross streate, and flanked it both ways:
And there I stayde a while till hearing the shot increase, and fearing to be
surprysed with such as might follow in tail of us, I gave adventure to pass
through the said crossestreate, and (without vaunte be it spoken) passed
through five hundred shot, before I could recover the English house.

At my coming thither, I found many of the March^untes standing before the
gate: Whom I would not discomforte nor dismay, but said that the Spanyerdes had
once entered the town, and that I hoped they were gone back again:
Nevertheless I went to the Governor, and privily persuaded him to draw in
the company and to shut up the gates: The which he consented unto, and desired
me because I was somewhat better acquaynted with such matters then the
Merchants, to take charge of the Key: I took it willingly, but before I
could well shut and bar the gates, the Spanyardes were now come forewards
into the same streat: And passing by ye door, called to come in? bestowing
five or six Musquette shot at the grate where I answered them, whereof one
came very near my nose, and pearcing through the gate, struck one of the
Merchants on the head, without any great or dangerous hurt: but the heat of
the pursuit was yet such, that they could not attend the spoil, but passed on
in chase to the new town: where they slew infinite nombers of people: And by
three of the clock, or before returned victors, having slain or put to
slight all their ennemies. And now to keep promise, and to speak without
parciality: I must needs confess, that it was the greatest victory, and the
rou^dlyest executed, that has been seen, red, or heard of, in our age: and
that it was a thing myraculous, to consider, how Trenches of such a height
should be entered, passed over, and won both by Footmen, and Horsemen: For
immediately after that the Footmen were gotten in, the Horsemen found means
to follow: and being many of them harquebuziers on horseback, did pass by
their own Footmen in the streates, and much hastened both the flight of the
Wallones, and made the way opener unto speedy execution.

But whosoever will therein most extol the Spanyardes for their vallure and
order, must therewithal confess that it was the very ordinance of god for a
just plague and scourge unto the Town: For otherwise it passes all men's
capacity, to conceive how it should be possible. And yet the disorder and
lack of foresight in the Wallons did great help to augment the Spanish glory
and boast. To conclude, the County de Euersteine was drowned in the new Town:
the Marquise de Haurcy and Champaigne escaped out of the said new Town, and
recovered the Prince of Orenges ships: only the young Count de Egmont was
taken fighting by S. Myghels. Mouns. de capres, and Mouns. de Goonie: were also
taken: but I heard of none that fought stoutly, saving only ye said Count de
Egmo^t, whom the Colonel Verdugo, a spanyard of an honorable compassion and
good mind, did save with great danger to himself in defending the Count. In
this conflicte there were slain six hundred Spanyerds or thereaboutes: And on
the Thursday next following, a view of the dead bodies in the town being taken:
it was esteemed at. 17000 men, women, and children. A pitiful massacre though
God gave victory to the Spanyerdes. And surely, as their vallyaunce was to be
much commended, so yet I can much discommende their barbarous cruelty, in many
respects: For me thinks, that as when God gives abundaunce of wealth, the
owner ought yet to have regard on whom he bestow it: even so, when God
gives a great and myraculous victory, the co^querours ought to have great
regard unto their execution: and though some, which favor the Spanish faction,
will aleadge sundry reasons to the contrary: yet when the blood is cold, and
the fury over, me thinks that a true christian heart should stand content
with victory, and refrain to provoke Gods wrath by sheadding of innocente
blood. These things I rehearce (the rather) because they neither spared age,
nor sex: time nor place: person nor country: profession nor religion: young
nor old: rich nor poor: strong nor feeble: but without any mercy, did
tyrannously tryumphe when there was neither man nor mean to resist them: For
age and sex, young and old, they slew great nnmbers of young children, but many
more women more then fowerscore years of age: For time and place, their furye
was as great ten days after the victory, as at the time of their entry: and as
great respect they had to the church and churchyeard, (for all their
hipocriticall boasting of the catholic religion) as the Butcher has to his
shambles or slaughter house: For person and Country, they spared neither
friend nor foe: Portingal nor Turk: for profession and religion, the Jesuits
must give their ready coin: and all other religious houses both c^yne and
plate with all short ends that were good and portable. The rich was spoiled
because he had: and the poor were hanged because they had nothing: neither
strength could prevail to make resystaunce, nor weakness move pity to
refrain their horrible cruelty. And this was not only done when the chase was
hot, but (as I erst said) when the blood was cold, and they now victors
without resystaunce. I refrain to rehearce the heaps of dead Carcases which
lay at every Trench where they entered: the thickness whereof, did in many
places exceed the height of a man.

I forbear also to recount the huge nombers, drowned in ye new Town: where a
man might behold as many sundry shapes and forms of man's motion at time of
death: as ever Mighel Angelo did portray in his tables of Doomes day. I list
not to reckon the infinite nombers of poor Almains, who lay burned in their
armor: some thentrailes skorched out, and all the rest of the body free, some
their head and shoulders burnt of: so that you might look down into the bulk
and breast and there take an Anatomy of the secrets of nature. Some standing
upon their waste, being burnte of by the thighs: and some no more but the
very top of the brain taken of with fire, whiles the rest of the body did
abide unspeakable torments. I set not down the ougly and filthy polluting of
every street with the gore and carcases of men and horses: neither do I
complain, that the one lacked buryall, and the other fleing, until the air
(corrupted with their caryon) enfected all that yet remained alive in the
Town: And why should I describe the particularitie of every such anoiance, as
commonly happen both in camps and Castles, where martial feats are managed?
But I may not pass over with silence, the wylfull burning and destroying of
the stately Town house, and all the monuments and records of the City:
neither can I refrain to tell their shamful rapes and outrageous forces
presented unto sundry honest Dames and Uirgins. It is a thing too horrible to
rehearse, that the Father and Mother were forced to fetch their young daughter
out of a cloister (who had thither fled as unto Sanctuary, to keep her body
undefiled) and to bestow her in bed between two Spaniards, to work their
wicked and detestable will with her.

It is also a ruthful remembrance, that a poor English merchant (who was but
a servant) having once redeemed his Masters goods for three hundredth crowns,
was yet hanged until he were half dead, because he had not two hundredth more
to give them: and ye halter being cut down, and he commen to him self again,
besought them on knees with bitter tears, to give him leave to seek and try
his creditte and friends in the Town, for the rest of their unreasonable
demand. At his return because he sped not (as indeed no money was then to
be had) they hong him again outright: and afterward (of exceeding courtesy)
procured the Friars Minors to bury him.

To conclude, of the seuentene thousand carcases, which were viewed on the
Thursday, I think in conscience, that five thousand or few less, were
massacred after their victory, because they had not ready money, wherewith to
ransom their goods at such prices as they pleased to set on them: At least
all the world will bear me witness, that ten (yea twenty days) after,
whosoever were but poynted at, and named to be a Wallon, was immediatlye
massacred without further audience or trial. For mine own part, it is well
known that I did often escape very narrowly, because I was taken for a Wallone.
And on Sunday, the eleventh of this instant (which was the day before I gat out
of the Town) I saw three poor souls murdered in my presence, because they
were poynted to be Wallons: and it was well proved immediately that one of the^
was a poor artyficer, who had dwelt in the Town eight years before, and
never managed arms, but truly followed his occupatio^: Furthermore the seed
of these and other barbarous factes brought forth this crop and fruit: that
within three days Antwarpe, which was one of the rychest Towns in Europe, had
now no money nor treasure to be found therein, but only in the hands of
murderers and strompets: for every Dom Diego must walk ietting up and down the
streets with his harlotte by him in her cheine and bracelettes of gold. And
the notable Bowrce which was wont to be a safe assembly for Marchaunts, and
men of all honest trades, had now none other marchaundize therein, but as many
dycing tables as might be placed round about it all the day long.

Men will boast of the Spanierds that they are the best and most orderlye
Soldiers in the world: but sure, if this be their order, I had rather be
coumpted a Besoigner, then a brave Soldier in such a band: neither must we
think (although it has pleased God for some secreete cause only known to his
divine Majesty, to yield Antwarpe and Maestrecht, thus into their hands)
that he will spare to punish this their outrageous cruelty, when his good will
and pleasure shall be to do the same: for sutely their boasting and bragging
of iniquity, is over great to escape long vnskorged.

I have talked with sundry of them, and demanded why they would command that
the Townehouse should be burned? And their answer was, because it was the
place of assembly where all evil counselles were contrived. As though it were
just that the stocks and stones should suffer for the offense of men. But such
is their obstynate pride and arrogancy, that if they might have their will,
they would altogether raze and destroy the Towns, until no one stone were
left upon another. Neither does their stubborn blindness suffer them to
perceive yt in so doing they should much endomage the King their Master, whom
they boast so faithfully to honor, serve and obey.

As for the injuries done by them unto our own nation particularly, I will
thus set down as much as I know. We were quiet in the house appointed for the
mansion of English Marchaunts under safe conduct, protection and Placard of
their King: having neither meddled any way in these actions, nor by any means
assisted the estats of the country with money, munition, or any kind of aid.
Yea the Governor and Merchants (foreseeing the danger of the time) had often
demanded pasporte of the Kings governors and officers to depart.

And all these with sundry other allegations, we propounded and protested
unto them before they entered the English house: desiring to be there protected
according to our privileges and graunts from the King their Master. And that
they would suffer us there to remain free from all outrage, spoil or
ransom, until we might make our estate known unto the Castellane, and
other head officers which served there for ye said King. All which
notwitstanding, they threatened to fire the house, unless we would open the
doors: and being once suffered to enter, demanded presently the raunsom of
twelve thousand crowns of the Governor: Which sum, being not in deed in
the house, neither yet one third part of the same: they spared not with naked
swords and daggers to menace the said Governor, and violently to present him
death because he had not wherewith to content their greedy minds. I will not
boast of any help afforded by me in that distress: but I thank the Lord
God, who made me an instrument to appease their deuill^sh furies. And I think
that the Governor and all the company will confess that I used mine uttermost
skyll and aid for the safegarde of their lives, as well as mine own.

But in the end, all eloquence notwithstanding, the Governor being a comlie
aged Man, and a person, whose hoarie heaires might move pity, and procure
reverence in any good mind, (especially the uprightness of his dealing
considered) they enforced him with great danger to bring forth all the money,
plate, and iewelles, which was in the house: and to prepare the remnant of
twelve thousand crowns, at such days, and times as they pleased to appoint.
And of the rest of our Nation, which had their goods remaining in their
several packehouses, and lodgings elsewhere in the Town. they took such
pity, that four they slew, and diverse other they most cruelly and
daungerously hurt: spoiling and raunsoming them to the uttermost vallewe that
might be made or esteemed of all their goods. Yea, some one they enforced to
ransom his goods twice, yea thrice: and all that notwithstanding, took the
said goods violentlye from them at the last.

And al these injuries being opened unto their chief Governors in time
convenient, and whiles yet the whole sum set for several raunsomes of our
countrymen and the English house in general, were not half paid: so that
justice and good order might partly have quallified the former rygors proffered
by the Soldiers, the said governors were as slow and deaf, as the other
were quick and light of hearing to find the bottom of every bag in the
Town. So yt it seems they were fullye agreed in all things: or if any
contention were, the same was but strife who or which of them might do greatest
wrongs. Keeping the said Governor and Marchaunts there still (without grant of
passeport or safeconducte) when there is scarcely any bittualles to be had for
any money in the Town, nor yet the said marchaunts have any money to buy it,
where it is. And as for creditte, neither creditte nor pawn can now find
coin in Antwarpe. In these distresses I left them the twelfth of this instant
November 1576. when I parted from them, not as one who was hasty to leave and
abandone them in such miserye, but to solycite their ruefull causes here: and
to deliver the same unto her Majesty and council in such sort as I beheld it
there.

And this is in effect the whole truth of the sacking and spoil of so famous
a Town. Wherein is to be noated, that the Spanyerdes and their faction, being
but syue thousand, the trenches made against them of such height as seemed
invincible: the power within ye Town fifeteene or sixteen thousand able
fighting men well armed, (I mean the Townsmen ready armed being coumpted:) it
was charged, entered, and won in three hours. And before six hours passed
over, every house therein sacked or raunsomed at the uttermost vallew.

The which victory being miraculous and past man's capacity, to comprehend how
it should be possible, I must needs attribute unto Gods just wrath powered upon
the inhabitants for their iniquity, more then to the manhood and force of the
Spanyerdes: and yet I mean not to rob them of their deserved glory, but to
confess that both their order and vallure in charging and entering was famous:
And had they kept half so good order, or showed the tenth part of such manly
courage, in using their victory, and parting of their spoil: I must then needs
have said that Caesar him self had never any such soldiers. And this must
I needs say for them, that as their continual training in service does make
them expert in all warrelyke stratageme: so their daily trade in spoiling has
made them the cunningest ransackers of houses, and the best able to bring a
spoil unto a quick market, of any Soldiers, or Mastertheeues that ever I
heard of.

But I leave the skanning of their deeds unto God, who will bryddle their
insolency, when he thinks good and convenient: And let us also learn out
of this rewfull tragedy to detest and avoid those sins, and proud
enormyties, which caused the wrath of God to be so furiouslye kindled and bent
against the Town of Antwerpe: let us also (if ever we should be driven to
like occasion,) (which God forbid) learn to look better about us for good
order and dyrection, the lack whereof was their overthrow. For surely the
inhabytantes lacked but good guides and leaders: for having none other order
appointed, but to stand every man armed in readynes before his door, they
dyed there (many of them) fighting manfully, when the Walloners and high Duches
fled beastly. Let us also learn to detest the horrible cruelties of the
executions in all executions of warlike stratagemes, least the dishonor of
such beastly deeds, might bedymme the honor wherewith English Soldiers
have always been endowed in their victories. And finally let us pray to God
for grace to amend our lives, and for power and foresyght to withstand the
mallyce of our enemies: that remaining and continewing in the peaceable
protection of our most gracious Sovereign, we may give him the glory, and all
due and loyal obedience unto her Majesty, whom God now and ever prospere
and preserve.

Amen.
Written the.xxv. day of November. 1576. by a true English man, who was
present at this pytteous massacre. Vt supra.



