The Fearful Fancies of the Florentine Couper: Written in Toscane, by John
Baptista Gelli, one of the free Study of Florence, and for recreation
translated into English by W. Barker.

Pensoso d'altrui.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman. ANNO. 1568.

To the gentle Reader.
IT may be, gentle Reader, that the baseness of the Title, will cause a
contempt of this Book, as the homely shape of Alcibiades tables without, made
men think, they had been of no better form within. But as they, being
unfolded, were found very fair: So per adventure under so plain a cloak, thou
shall see such stuff, as may content thy mind. I remember that when the
Florentines sent an embassage to the king of Naples who behaved himself very
wisely, the King did ask what manner a man he was in his country, and when it
was told him that he was an Apothecary: If the Apothecaries, (quoth the king)
be so wise and learned in Florence, what be their Physicians? If I shall show
thee, that the setter forth of this treatise was a tailer of Florence, thou
may use the kings courtesy, and embrace the book the better, for if tailers
be so well given there, what be they that profess lerning? A Couper was the
occasion why he took pain this way: which Couper of a plain man, had a good
natural discourse, and as some men when they be old, will talk sometime with
themselves: so the talk that old Just the Couper had with himself, when he
could not sleep, did minister matter to the maker of this present book: who
by other occasion has made diverse other to his co^mendatio^, in the Toscane
tongue. I find that occasion may do much. For had not I had once a man, that
used often to talk with him self, and a fellow, whose name was Just, as it might
well be, I had no more remembered the talk of father Just of Florence, which I
red when I was there, and thought no more of. But as John Baptista Gellie, for
so is the Tailer called, and for his wisdom, chief of the vulgar university
of Florence, when I was there, did publish these communications of Just the
Couper, and his Soul, Gathered by one sir Byndo his nephew, and a Notarie. So
I have for a passing of the time, caused the same to be put in English, that my
Country men may see how learning may appear in all sorts of men, and they
deserve praise when they will use it well. And so (o Reader,) may thou use
thy pleasure, and do as thou shall think good.

*



The Reasoning of JUST the Florentine Couper and his SOVL^. Gathered by his
Nephewe Sir Byndo.
The first Reasoning. JUST, and his SOVLE.
IT is well nighe day, and I can not sleep, it shall be better to rise and do
somewhat, than on this fashion to lie in bed and not sleep: for I can not
think, that this only slumbring can be very healthful.

Soul. Well, I poor wretch may now assure my self, that I shall never have
rest nor co^tentation in this body, neither young nor old.


Just. What voice do I hear, who is there?


Soul. When he was young I held him excused for his want of Living, although
he held me always occupied in this his handy craft. For first it is necessary
to provide for the needs of the Body, and then to seek for the perfection of
the Soul.


Just. Who is there, I say? Who is that that whistleth in mine ear?


Soul. But now he is old, and has sufficiently, I thought surely, that if
he had given him self to contemplation, and sometime lived half in a tr^ce,
that I having no cause to minister spirit to his senses, might withdraw me to
my self, and enjoy those intellections of the first principles that I brought
with me, since that I have with him learned none new.


Just. Do I sleep or no? it seems in my head: but soft, it may be some
reume, that makes a man think, he has whistling in his brain.


Soul. And now he following the manner of old men (which the older they be,
the more covetous they are) as soon as he waketh, he ryseth to work.


Just. Oh, she files her words, and is in my head, and speaks evil of old
men. What thing may this be? Jesus, Jesus, God grant that no spirit be entered
into my body.


Soul. Stay thy self Just, and be not afraid: for I am one that loves thee
more, and have more care to preserve thee, than any other that is in the world.


Just. I can not tell so great love nor so great preservation: It is a great
gentleness to enter into a man's head and never leave babbling. As for me, I
believe thou art the wicked whistle, In nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus
sancti. Amen.


Soul. Although it be well to bless thee as thou doste, because it grows of
a good meaning, proceeding from a good faith in thee, (without the which all
your works be dead) yet now it is nothing to the purpose. For I am a christian
as thou art, yea if I did not believe in Christ, thou should be no christian.


Just. Seeing thou fear not the Cross, thou art not the whistle as I
thought, but more like to be the spirit, that as men say, walks all the
night, and therefore I will say a prayer to make thee go hence. Procul recidant
somnia, and noctium phantasmata, hostemque nostrum comprime, ne polluanantur
corpora.


Soul. Ah fool, if thou knew who I am, thou would not seek to drive me
away, but rather pray me to tarry still, for if I should go from thee, thou
could not live.


Just. Thou art full of words: do thou think it a pretty sport to hear a
noise thus talking in a man's head, which haste made me almost beside my self.


Soul. Thou haste well said, not knowing how that thou art half beside thy
self. But when thou shalt know who I am, thou will not marvel.


Just. Then tell me what thou art, that I may assure my self of thee.


Soul. I am content, know thou Just, that I am thy soul.


Just. My soul how?


Soul. Yea thy soul, by whom thou art a man.


Just. Oh how can that be, am not I my soul my self?


Soul. No. For thou art one thing, and thy soul an other, and Just the Couper
of Saint Peter the great, is an other.


Just. If I am not Just the Couper, then I am made an other, and therefore I
said well, that thou were some evil thing, which would do to me, as was
done to Grass the carpenter, who was made believe, that he was become an other
man: but that shall thou not do by me, for I will stand constant.


Soul. Be content Just, and move not thy self: for there is nothing that does
more hurt reason, and the under standing of man, than anger. Wherefore quiet thy
self, and believe me, for that that I tell thee, is ye truth it self.


Just. Well, let us put case that I am not Just (as thou say) but see, I do
not grant thee it (for if I did so, what would other do) who am I then?


Soul. Thou art the body of Just.


Just. And who art thou?


Soul. The soul of Just.


Just. The what manner thing is Just


Soul. We two together, for neither is the body nor the soul, the man, but
that co^pound thing that coms of them both. And mark, that when the soul is
separate fro the body, it is called man no more, but a carcas, after the Latin
tongue, and a dead body, after y^ vulgar speech, so as thou spakest before, when
thou said, y^ were half beside thy self.


Just. This is true, and I can not deny it. But hear me, if thou art my soul
as thou say, what means this thy beginning to talk of thy self, without me,
shalt thou ever depart from me* Alas, I would not that, for then I should die
as thou say.


Soul. Have no doubt of y^ Just, for I have no less will to remain with
thee, tha^ thou have to remain with me.


Just. O blessed be y^ my sweet soul.


Soul. Yea I pray thee that thou will not put me from thee.


Just. Mary God forbid, believe not that, for I would live longer if I could,
than did Mathusalem.


Soul. Yea, but y^ is not enough, for y^ may not do as one of our Citizens
did, which was wont to say, y^ he never put away servant: but he handled them
so, whom he liked not, as they went away of themselves.


Just. And what ways be they that I must keep, y^ thou go not from me?


Soul. Take heed thou make no disorder:, whereby the temperature of thy
complexion, whereupon thy life is founded, do not come to such alteration, as
it choketh the* vital spirits, and force me to depart* from thee.


Just. And if I regard, my self, as thou say, how long will thou tarry
with me?


Soul. So long as thy grounded moisture ^e not dried up: for thy natural
heat shall be quenched,* as a lamp that lacks oil.


Just. And whereof commes that?


Soul. Of age, the which is nothing else but a drying* up of the one, and a
cooling of the other.


Just. O good Soul hears* me, teach me then if there he any way to restore this
moisture that thou speak of, that does quench as the oil of the lamp,
that it may continue longer.


Soul. There is none other way, but that which nature has taught thee,
giving thee appetite to eat* and drink: with one of the which heat, and with
the other moisture, is restored.


Just. Then he that eats and drinks well, shall never die.


Soul. Rather the contrary, for too much nouriture* do gendre too great
quantity of humors* and the most part not good, whereof come those
infirmities, that violently do strangle the lively spirits, even as a light
put out by force, and is the cause of death before our time.


Just. Oh how might a man then do it, by eating and drinking by rule?


Soul. Neither by this could a man live ever* for that restorement that is
made, is of moisture and ^eate, which be not of y^ perfection, as those which
nature have given, although they (...) better or worse, in one and an other,
according to the complexion. And Just, thou know yt in this thing it haps,
as does in a vessel of wine, out of the which if thou take every* day a drop
and put in as much water* in space of time, it will come to pass* that it is
no more wine, nor can not be called watered wine, but rather wined water,
because there lackes in it* (...) work the operation of wine: even so when
moisture and heat restored by outward mean of eating and drinking, do
overcome the natural, it can not do those operations that the natural does,
whereby the life falls to decay.


Just. What is the cause, that among men that use all one manner of diet, some
have longer life than other.


Soul. Complexion which one has by nature better than an other, by which his
hea^e is more temperate, and his moisture less apt to be dried up and
corrupted, as in sanguine (...) and al them yt have their moisture less watery,
and more ^^ry* Of the which thing thou may see evident experience in trees,
among which, they that have watrie moisture* as alders, willowes, and salowes,
and other like, endure but a while, and they that have airy, as pine, ^^rre and
cypress, do live long time* and and all this comes because the airy
moisture, is more hardly dried and corrupted, than is the watrie.


Just. Oh my soul, I do not remember, that since I had understanding, I have
ever had so much pleasure as this morning: and forasmuch as I am a little
assured of thee, and begin to believe that thou art my soul, and not a spirit,
or a vision, as I thought at the first, I will ask thee certain questions.


Soul. Say what thou will, for I willingly answer thee.


Just. But before I do ask any thing, I would have thee tell me, why after we
have been together.lx. year or more, thou haste deferred to discover thy self,
and to reason with me as thou do now: for if thou had done so before, I
should perhaps have be^ an other manner man tha^ I am now.


Just. There have been many causes that have kept me from doing of it, and the
principal cause has been thineage not apt unto it: for in thine Infancy and
Childehoode, thy members and parts be not apt to my services, and in thy
growing and youthly time, the passions of the sensitive part, that then be
most vehement, and in thy ripe years, care how to live at lust, has not
suffered me to withdraw* me into my self, as I have done now, when I am not
let of like things* although as yet* I can not do it, as I would, for thou
being afraid every hour not to lose that thou have (as other old covetous
men) thou do not suffer me to rest one half hour in the day: for when thou
have eaten or sleptte, thou runnest to thy work, whereby I being forced to
minister vital spirits to thy senses and thy members, I never have any rest:
and of this did I lament at the beginning (if thou reme^brest) when I began to
talk with my self.


Just. Well tell me (for this it is that I will ask th^^ first) what is the cause
why thou did lament of me? Have I not always loved thee, even as thou
had ben my proper soul and my life, as thou say thou art?


Soul. Yes, but thou haste much more loved thy self, and where thou ought
to have loved thy self for my sake, and have made much of thy self, that I
might the better have wrought in thee mine operatio^s, thou have loved me for
thy service: and so the part less worthy and less noble, has ever comanded
ye more worthy and more noble, as it does notwithstanding in ye most part of
men, yt thou sholdest not think thou art alone: therefore have not I good cause
to co^plain? But now I will not tell thee every thing, for it is day, and I will
have thee go to provide for thy necessaries: for else I should want my self,
to morrow as thou sayedst, I will return into my self as I do now, and will
tell thee at large, whether I have cause to lament of thee or no.


Just. Oh, will thou depart from me?


Soul. Depart, no: for then as I told thee, thy death should follow.


Just. I had fear of that, and therefore did I ask thee.


Soul. I will unite my self again with thee til to morrow in ye morning.


Just. Well: but my soul, I would y^ to morrow when you comst again to me, we do
not as we have don this morning.


Soul. Why?


Just. I would if it were possible, that we should behold one an others face.
For in this sort me think I am half mocked, and I have douted, till a little
while since, lest thou had talked in mine ear by a wile, as I have seen
one do with a dead man's head, which had bored an hole in a plank at the foot
of a deske, upon y^ which stood ye dead head, by which a trunk did pass into ye
mouth of the head, y^ every man thought it had been a spirit: of ye which thing
I stand yet in dout of thee. And finally I would have thee certainly assure me,
whether thou art my Soul or no, as thou say.


Soul. Very well, I am content, I will deliver thee of this dout by and by*
hear and mark well what I say unto thee, and I will speak it softly, that no
man hear it, if any be by, for it is a secret, which none other knows but
Just the Couper, which is thou and I.


Just. I am sure: for this I know that none other person but my self, knows,
therefore since thou know it, you art also I: and I have no more doubt,
Therefore yt we may to morrow reason more effectually, I would y^ one of us might
see an other: for then it seems a man speaks more the truth, than thus
without seeing together.


Soul. It is impossible yt thou sholdst see me as I am, because I am without a
body, and I have neither figure nor color: for y^ figure and ye quantity be
only in bodies, and color can not stand but in the upper part of the same,
whereby I am invisible: but I might well take a body, and so might I show me to
thee.


Just. And how?


Soul. Thou professest a scholar of Daut, haste thou not red it in his
purgatory? I could with my virtue informatiue, make me a body of air, giving
it thickness, and after color, even as the Sun makes the Air^ gross and
vaporous, whereof comes the rain bow. The which way the angels hold, and
other spirits, when they will show themselves to men.


Just. Thou will make me believe some strange thing then.


Soul. What strange thing? have thou not reddde in the Gospel, that Christ
when he appeared to his disciples after his resurrection, that they should not
believe he had one of these bodies, he said, touch me, for spirits have no
bones.


Just. Then let us do so, but see with all, that thou partest not from me, nor
go from my body, for I would not die yet


Soul. Well, I will find the way not to part at all.


Just. And how? for I will understand that, and not let this thing pass,
for it is of too great a weight.


Soul. I will separate my self with my intellectiue part, and with only
fantasy, without the which I could not understand, leaving in thee all my
other powers, that is, vegetative, by the which thou lyuest, and sensitive by
the which thou feel, and discourse by memory, that thou might reason by the
help (...), things which thou know, and, demand me what thou will.


Just. And by this mean shall I not dye?


Soul. No I say.


Just. Very well, remember then, I am out of peril, and I will not see thee
before.


Soul. Doubt not I say, and lose no more time, but rise and go to thy
business* for the sun is now risen.


Just. Well well, tomorow we meet again.


The.ij. Reasoning. SOVLE. JUST.
SInce thou sleep no more, arise and make thee ready, and light a candle,
and in the mean time I will form my self a body of this air about, even as I
said unto thee yesterday, that thou may see me, and we at our ease talk
together.

Just. Oh my Soul, with a good will, but hear me. I pray thee remember that I
said unto thee.


Soul. What?


Just. That thou make no separation from me, whereby my death might ensue.


Soul. What nedest thou to reply so often? have I not said unto thee, that I
will leave in thee all mine other powers, but only intellect and imagination,
which is it that makes you understand, and not it that makes you live, for
that is the power called vegetative the which you have common with trees.


Just. If I bear no peril of death, I am content, and if I do not agree unto
it, blame me, for beasts live, and understand not.


Soul. Ah fool, do thou esteem life so much, that thou woldst rather choose
to live fifty years without understanding as a beast, than ten with
intelligence, as a man.


Just. For my part I had so: do thou think it a pretty sport to die? I
tell thee, I never saw any yet come again: and of Lazarus that was raised,
they say he was never seen laugh afterward, and that was, because he was
afraid to die once again, so fearful was the first unto him.


Soul. This thou speak, because that part, which is void of reason, is it
that now speaks in thee, but if I were with thee, thou would not say so.


Just. I know not that, and as for me, since I can remember, I have ever ben
of this mind, and yet thou haste ben with me.


Soul. It is so, but as a servant, not as a maistresse, as I ought, for (...)
thou had followed my counsel, and not the other called sensual, thou
would have done as Paul did and many other, which desired to be taken out
of this life, where they knew they were Pilgrims, and brought home to their
country.


Just. Thou beginnest to trouble my brain: till a man comes to the points of
death, every one says so, but when death is present, the man changes his
fantasy: remember our master y^ went to pray in the gardin, to see if he could
escape death.


Soul. Ah Just, he did it not for that, but to show with these passions
natural that he was a man, as he had showed by miracles, and with works
supernatural, that he was God: but let us reserve this talk till a more
convenient time: what means it thou art so long about to light that match?


Just. I think it is somewhat moist, and the stone is not very good, and this
iron has almost worn out the s^eele.


Soul. Thou do as the Poet Daut says in his banquets. All artificers not
cunninge, do impute all the errors they do, to the matter they work on: why
did not thou say, because I am old and have the palsy, and miss the
stone oftener than I hit it.


Just. That is true in deed, I cannot deny it, and would to God I did not so
al soin other things, for I have delight to do nothing, and I am come to such a
time of age, that every thing is irksom unto me, and very pleasure is
unpleasant to me.


Soul. And yet would thou not die.


Just. Do thou not hear that I would not?


Soul. And do not thou see that this life of thine is nothing but a death?


Just. Though it be, I have seen of them that be much more elder than I, and
have no teeth, and go with their mouth to the ground, and yet would not die:
rather I will say unto thee, that the elder a man is, the more does death
grieve him: and I have seen the proof in my self, for when soever my head
does but ache, my heart quaketh, and I begin to say: Would to God this be not
my last request, for I did not so when I was young, rather do I remember,
that I had a sickness that brought me even to the port of an other world,
and yet I never thought to dye, but rather laughed at them, that would have
had me confessed: so as if I had dyed then, I had gone without any care or
grief, which now I shall not do, for I think of nothing else, and live even
as he made the declaration of the Tyrants life Dionysius of Scicily, which
tied a naked sword with a horse hair, and hong it over his head.


Soul. And what is the cause Just, as thou think, wherefore death is more
fearful to old folks than to young?


Just. I think because they are more entangled with the world, in the which
they have lived so long.


Soul. Ah that is a very simple reason, and takes place only in ^otyes as
thou art, and I believe thou haste learned it of Trees, which the longer they
live, the deeper root they make, and are then hard to be pulled up: but by
the reasonable discourse which thou haste, and long experience which thou
ought to have by thy long time thou have lived, thou ought to have made
a better reason.


Just. Be content, this may perhaps come of that thou say, that a man who
has lived long, and made a Judgment by long experience more perfect, does
better know, how goodly a thing life is to him, and how much he ought to
esteeine it and have it in price, wherefore it grieueth him the more to lose
it, tha^ it does a young man that does not know it: As it would grieve a man
more to lose a jewel that knows the value thereof, than it would him that
knows it not.


Soul. This thy second reason is not much worth neither, and though it were
true, it makes no less for him that would say the contrary, than it does for
thee.


Just. Which way? tell me.


Soul. Because if he that lives gets a judgment, by the which he knows
better the things, he shall know also better how full of misery our life is.
And if a man should not hope for a better in the other world, he should be the
most miserable and unhappy creature in the universal world, which is
manifestly against al right of reason, he being the most perfect of all, and
having understanding, which is a most divine thing: by the which not only the
holy letters, but also the Pagans and Gentiles, do call him lord of all other
Creatures, and the end of all other things, which they say are made of nature
for him.


Just. How can thou prove, that a man should be the most unhappy creature of
the world, if he did not hope for a better life than this?


Soul. Because in this life he is much disgraced, naked, without a house, not
able to speak, having nothing to eat, unless he gets it; and when he has
it, cannot use it, unless it be of other dressed: whereas other beasts be borne
clad, some with one thing, some with an other, they have their houses, some
under the earth, some in woods, some in floods, and the earth brings forth
all things needful for them, without any pain: and what testimony can thou
have more clear of this, than Pliny, which in his consideration of al things,
was so angry with Nature, as he called her mother of beasts, and stepdame of
man.


Just. Well, I am content it be so, but what makes this to my reason? which y^
say is as well against me as with me?


Soul. Because, he y^ shall handle these matters reasonably and without any
affection, he will conclude, that his felicity is not in this life, where the
other brute beasts inferior to him have it (if they may nevertheless be
called happy) of y^ which being certified by natural reason and the light of
faith, he will not much regard life, but rather be troubled: with a desire to
be out of it, and to go to the other, as they have done that have despised
vice, and gone by the way of virtue, so as if thou have no better reason, this
is only in apara^ce, and concludes nothing.


Just. Oh my Soul, whereof comes that?


Soul. That is it I have thought to tell thee (O my body) for so must I call
thee, to speak rightly, and not Just, as I have done and will do, because I
will not trouble thy brain too much: but will thou that I tell thee?


Just. Yea, I pray thee, for I desire nothing so much.


Soul. It comes of little faith: and surely there is nothing that causes
death both to old and young to be sorrowful, but that they believe too little.


Just. Ah, ah, a great Citizen of ours said well, who I think had in himself
proved by experience, when he caused his grave to be made, half within the
Church door, and half without.


Soul. Well, this thou must think Just, ye men be like unto on us, whereof the
young be soon taken. But as thy friend Daut faith.


In vain the Net is (...)de,
In vain the shafte is shot:
At birds that have their wings at will,
And for the snare care not.
Just. Oh God, I think thou say true, because I remember since I was a young
man, that many times at certain devotions that we made in a company, and
certain prechings that I heard, I was easily to be entreated to die: But now
backea while, for I would make any contract, to live.


Soul. Ah, ah, how think thou, is it not as I have faide? but marvel not at
that, for the manner of young men and women is easily to believe.


Just. I am of thine opinion, but hear me, the fault is more thine than mine,
for thou art she to whom beli^^e does appertain, and not I.


Soul. It is true that I ought to believe, never the less, the principal
cause that makes that I do not, is thy self.


Just. Oh, how so? see how thou would cast the blame upon an other.


Soul. Thou know how I can have no knowledge whiles I am united with thee,
but by the means of thy senses, the which, knowing nothing but sensible
things, do force me through the great union that is between thee and me, to go
by that path, which thou show me, and that is by the things of the world.


Just. These he but words, for thou art one thy self, and as thou say, the
principal, why then d^st thou not make me follow thee, and not thou follow me,
if I go a wrong way?


Soul. I am bound within thee, and: so clo^ged of thy earthly nature, that I
lose the, greater part of (...) strength; and ^a(...) lift up my self to
heaven, as the perfection of my nature does require. Besides this, the reasons
with the which I should make thee assured of the light of faith, have not so
great forc^* as have the knowledge of sense which thou ^euest me. But believe me
Just, that death does not grieve him that deleueth.


Just. This might as well be of him that b^leueth not, for^^ might think that
when he dies, as his pleasures shall (...), so shall his pains end also: of
the which I think there is no less number in the world than of the
pleasures, as thou did say.


Soul. And who is he that thinks there is nothing in the other world?


Just. Oh, oh, there is happ^ly one or two. I would I had so many (...)
ducates, as I have known and do know.


Soul. Oh, it had been as well said, so many virtues had I, but I see Just
that thou (...) an earthly piece, and crauest nothing but earthly things.


Just. Oh, if there were nobody else, how many Popes have there been*


Soul. What Popes, how like a (...) speak thou?


Just. I speak of them tha^ ha^^ interpreted The Pope, cause of some evil
opinion of the Soul.
the book of Lazarus so wy^kedly, as they have said, that in the other world
is nothing.


Soul. What book of Lazarus speak thou of*


Just. Oh, as though y^ knewst it not.


Soul. No not I.


Just. Well thou shall know it now. They say yt Lazarus being asked after his
rising, of many of his friends, what was in the other world, he answered, he
would leave it in writing. Now, either that he forgot it, or that it is not
lawful to speak of things of the other world, of one y^ had been there, as S.
Paul said, when he died left a book sealed, with order, it should be given
to the Pope, in the which nothing was written: wherefore the Pope that no
slander should be given to the world, which with great desire, did look to hear
what was there, did hide it, saying, he might not open it to any, but to his
successor, and so the Bishops have done from one to an other till this day. Now
they that have expounded the matter godly, affirming the cause to be, that it
is not lawful for men to know the things there, farther the^ has been declared
to us by the scripture, be they y^ have been good men: and the other, that have
thus interpreted y^ matter, that the meaning is, that in the other world is
nothing, be they whom thou have seen, which when they have come to their
Papacy, have done that Popes serve their turns.
they thought might serve their turn.


Soul. A Just, these be tales devised of such as thou art but I will say this
unto thee, that if thou considerest well, thou never foundst any that can
believe this, that there is nothing absolutely and without al respect: for they
should have to much contentacion and pleasure in this world, and they might
fulfill all their desires without any trouble of ^^nde, which were no small
thing, and they might also say, as that honest woman, which being taken in the
sack of Genoua, said: God be thanked, that I shall once have my lust, without
any remorse of conscience.


Just. I think thou say truth, for I have heard there was once one in
Florence that was called M. John de Caui, a Physician and Philosopher, most
famous, the which whilst he lived showed him self always to be re^olued,
that the Soul was mortal, nevertheless when he was a dying he said, by and
by I shall be out of a great force. And diverse other who^ I have known to be
of that opinion in their life, have been otherwise at their death. Whereof one
Naum Grosso, and Lance Goldesmith living pleasantly, and believing in
apparaunce, not much above the house top, yet at their death, the one called
for a crucifixe, but would have it given him by the hand of Donatello, that
was dead. The other said, I recommend my self to him in the other world, that
can do most, be it God or the devil, and he that most may, let him most catch.


Soul. Let these things go, for they have more of brutishness than of reason:
and if thou reme^brest, thou shall find, that in thy time, there have been
half a score and more, whom thou have known to have be^ in their life scarce
religious, and have seemed to believe too little, and yet have lived morally, and
as behooves to reasonable creatures, which at the point of death not being able
never to quench a certain prick of reason, and a certain desire and
acknowledgyng Immortality of the Soul.
of Immortality, although it were confused, and judging it natural, and
knowing that natural desires be not vain, nor of things that can not be had,
they have been reduced to God, and have confessed their error, and so
recommended them selves to God, as he has given them the light of Faith,
whereby they have dyed Christian men. But let us leave this reasonyng, and
go light thy candle, because it shall be time by and by that thou go to thy
work.


Just. Thou haste a thousand reasons, and I stayde to reason with thee. What
ayleth this tynder that it will not take? now thanks be to GOD, it is light.
Oh, oh, good Lord, What a goodly thing? what a goodly Creature? Oh my Soul,
blessed be thou, for thou art a fair thing.


Soul. Sit, sytte Just, least thou fall, for thou art old.


Just. I can not hold my self, but I must needs embrace thee, wyllyng thee
so, well, and never having seen thee before. But alas, what is the matter, I
feel nothing, yet I see thee: Am I not well in my wits?


Soul. Just, thou make profession of a Dautist, and thou do not remember
it, when thou should. Do not thou remember, that the like also happened
unto Daut himself, when that he would have embraced Casella: And the cause is
this, that we be as shadows, and do only show our selves to the sight, but
we can not be proprely touched, because that we be without bodies: And this
body which I have made me, being of the air, is also vntouchable.


Just. Then you be (as a man might say) a thing of nothing.


Soul. Yea, following the opinion of the common people, which call that
nothing, that is not compounded of earth, water of fire, making no account of
air. I think if in this chamber there were not these chestes, this bed and
other things, thou would say it were empty, if thou would say truth.


Just. Should I not say it were empty, when nothing is in it?


Soul. Yes surely, but there should be somewhat in it.


Just. What should there be, when there is nothing? I fear me, thou would
make me believe glass worms to be lanternes.


Soul. The air should be there.


Just. What? air or no air, when a tubbe is empty, I know there is nothing
in it, and I see it every day.


Soul. And what vessels be they that thou ever have seen empty?


Just. Mary all those in my shop.


Soul. Ah fool, be they not full of air?


Just. No: for if thou look well, there is darkness, and where air is,
there is light.


Soul. Then the night when it is dark, is none air. This is as ye speak of
young babes, which you say have no souls, until they be baptized, which if it
were true, it should follow, that neither Turk nor Jew had soul: but let us
leave this. Thou art little practiced and followest the ignorant: but that thou
should not remain in this thy false opinion, thou ought to understand;
that the air has a body, as well as the water, or the earth, but it is a
little more fine, and is dark of it self, if it be not lightened of the
Sunnebeames, or of some other light. And further, thou must understand, that
no emptye called Vacuum, can be in Nature, that is to say, that in this
universal world, there is no place, but is full of some body. And of this
thou may make a thousand experiences every day, but I will teach thee but
one, and that is, with that vessel wherewith thou watrest thy gardin: for
stopping the the hole above, the water commes not out of the holes beneath: and
that comes of none other cause, but that the hole above; being stopped, the
air can not enter in, whereby if the water should go out, that place
should remain void, the which because Nature can not abide; she makes the
water remain, contrary to her nature in that place.


Just. And who knows that that is the cause?


Soul. Who knows? every man that has wit.


Just. I will tell thee the truth, these be certain things that I can not skill
of, and I think they be toys to make a man mad. I do know that a vesselle
that has nothing in it, is void: and I can never believe otherwise, I hope
that thou will not use me, as Mathewe Serui was, who was made to believe that
he was an other man than he took him self, and that he was a Carpenter, and
made Tergates, whereby he entered into such a conceipte, that when he came to
houses where he used to go, and saw old Tergats hang there, he began to
say, that he knew of them that were made of his own hand.


Soul. Then see how hard it is, when one is far brought to understand a
thing evil, to set him in the right way.


Just. What would thou say, that when I would even now have embraced thee,
and found nothing that I did embrace somewhat? ah.


Soul. Dyddest thou not embrace the air?


Just. What air? I know I embraced nothing: within a while thou would make
me believe, that when my stomach is empty, it were full, the which if I
would believe, I should dye for hunger. God keep me.


Soul. I say unto thee, that if we should grant voidenesse, a thousand
inconveniences should follow, as for example: If between thee and me were
nothing, thou could not see me.


Just. Oh God, see how this gear grows. For out of doubt it is contrary:
Nullum vacuum.
for if there were any body between thee and me, then could I not see thee.


Soul. It is true, if it were such a body, that thy sight or imagination
could not pass, thou could not see me, but that should rise of an other
occasion, than a void place between thee and me.


Just. Tell me how this thing is meant, for I understand it not.


Soul. If between us were emptiness, and none air, the^ should there be no
light. Wherefore the beams of thine eyes could not come to thee, nor my image
come to thine eyes. For light is a quality, and quality is an accident, and
no accident can stand without a subject that rules it: then if here were none
air that did stay the light here could be none.


Just. As for me, I understand not what thou meanest.


Soul. Hear then, if thou can understand me an other way: when thou
stand by the fire, what is it that heateth thee?


Just. The fire: Who knows not that? this is a childishe thing.


Soul. But that is not true.


Just. Oh what heates me, the wind? Thy matters be childrens toys, if I would
believe them.


Soul. The air heateth thee which touches thee, which is heated of the
fire, for the fire not touching thee, can not heat thee, for no body can work
in an other unless he touch it.


Just. What meanest thou by that?


Soul. I mean that if there were any empty place between thee and the fire,
thou should never be heated: For that heat which is an accident, having
nothing to hold it, could not come unto thee, but being stayde by the air,
which comes to thee, that air that touches thee, being hot, does heat
thee also.


Just. Well, I will tell thee the truth. Thou myghtest tell me this tale an
hundred year, and I believe, I should never understand thee any thing to this
purpose, and never believe thee.


Soul. I see this morning thou art not apt to receive the truth: therefore I
will not talk of any other thing, and it is time thou go to thy work: To
morrow at the accustomed hour I will go from thee, and take this body and
reason with thee, and thou shalt be better dysposed to understand me, than
thou art now.


Just. If we tarry until to morrow, thou shalt peradventure be better in
thy brain: and tell me no things that no man understands.


Soul. But see this night thou kepest thy candle light: for I will not thou
spend so much time about it to morrow.


The.iij. Reasoning. SOVLE. JUST.
THe crowing of the cock has not served this morning (O Just) to wake thee, it
is almost day, and thou stepest, thou answerest not, but stretchest thy self,
what means it?

Just. I am half minded to be angry with thee.


Soul. Why art thou sorry I have broke thy sleep?


Just. For sleep I care not, yet it greueth me thou haste waked me, for I have
dreamed the most sweet and pleasant things that ever I saw.


Soul. What things?


Just. I can not so well tell thee: for they were not as I am wont to dream
things that have neither head nor tail, and begin with one thing, and ends with
an other. But me thought I was in a quietness, and without any trouble,
remembering the resons we have had together, and I will tell thee one thing, that
I have understood sleping, that I could not do yesterday wakyng: of that
Vacuu^, or empty Nullum vacuum.
place, which yesterday would not enter, and I remember I have pierced a full
barel, and never could cause wine to come out, if I did not first open a vente:
and I never considered that it came of that thou diost speak. And I will tell
thee more, that now I know, how a swimmer a companion of mine was one day
deceived, of one of out citizens that wan certain fishes of him, which of
them should stand longest under the water: and hear how he did. He desired
to hold on his head one of these pottes with two ears, saying he did so,
because the water did hurt his head: and he that understood not the deceit,
did grant it him: My friend set it on his head downewarde, and occupied the
time that the air that was within, did not go out, and so no more water did
enter than does in a cup that is rineed downward, in such sort as he might
stand as long as he would, having no water about his mouth. Thou see what
I have understood by dreaming.


Soul. And whereof thynkest thou comes this dream, since thou call it a
dream?


Just. What know I? whereof comes other, that I have all the year?


Soul. No Just: for this did rise of me only, and the other that thou
dreamest, rises of mine other inferior Dreams.
parts, and of spirits, which do represent to thee sleeping, the images of
those things that Fancy has impressed in the blood, by the mean of the
senses, and therefore many times we dream in the night those things we saw in
the day, and the more the blood is altered, the more strong and disordinate
things we dream, as thou may know by thy self, when that thou haste been
sick or troubled with a fever, or when thou have been well washed with wine,
in the which (if it be good) thou thou haste delyght.


Just. It has pleased thee also as I think, for I never drunk but when I was
whole Just, of whom thou art so great a part, as thou say.


Soul. Ah, ah, thou haste now learned so much philosophy, as thou know,
that neither the soul, nor the body of it self, is man.


Just. I can not tell, I have told thee.


Soul. Surely, when soever one is touched where it grieueth him, he cries:
But be not angry Just, I will not for all this, speak of thee any villainy.
For in very deed, it is is not altogether evil to me, for good Wine makes
good Blood, and good Vinum.
blood does make the spirits more clear, whereby the senses may the better
healpe to work my operations.


Just. I looked thou would have said: And good blood makes a good man: and
the good man goes to Paradise.


Soul. Make thee ready, make thee ready quickly, and sit down that we may
talk together at leisure.


Just. Sit thee down till I be ready.


Soul. Ah Just, thou do not yet understand, that I am one of the substances
without body, and immortal, and suffer none of those things that do offend
thee: and that that I will now say unto thee, may be a mean to make thee
believe, that thy dreamyng this morning, was not a dream in deed, because it
proceeded not altogether, as the other, which thou have wisely called dreams,
of ye sensitive part, which thou have common with other brute beasts which do
dream also, but it was as I told thee, only my work with the help of thy
senses. For whiles thou were dreaming, finding my self free, I did retire into
my self, and with my part divine (for so may I call it, having it of God) I did
work in thy parts apt to understand, and to learn those intellections and
conceits, which thou confessest thou never had before: whereby thou may
easily persuade thy self (that although I am united to thee in such sort, as
it seems I cannot be without thee) that I am immortal, and can well be without
thee, seeing I can do some operation without thee, as thou have perceived.


Just. I will tell thee the truth, thou do persuade so well, that thou say
that I can not but believe thee, because I think, that thou being my part (I
mean when I am perfect Just) that thou ought not to deceive me. But now I
am ready, and I will set me down, as thou baddest me, and ask thee certain
questions more quietly than I have done.


Soul. Say what thou will* for I will satisfy thy desire in all things that I
can.


Just. The first thing I would know of thee, is: Why thou should lament of
me, for the first time that I hard thee speak in my head, as I remember, thou
saydst, thou never had rest in me, being young, and less could hope to have
any now when I am old.


Soul. Just, never repeat that, for if I did lament of thee, I had good cause.


Just. I do not remember that ever I did any thing against Just, for then I had
done it against my self, and then have I done nothing against thee, seeing
thou say that thou and I, be Just.


Soul. It is so, but thou haste not done as I would.


Just. How can that be? for I never knew till now, that any other was in my
self, but I: but if thou love me as thou say, I pray thee thou would tell
me wherein I have offended thee, that at least the little time we have to live
together. I may no more offend thee.


Soul. Well Just I am content. Do Anima nobilissima creatura.
thou not know that I am the noblest creature that is from the Heaven or the
Moon dounward?


Just. Yes, and I have heard it preached many times.


Soul. Do thou not know also that I am all divine, all spiritual, made of
the proper hand of God, after his similitude, and preferred before all creatures
that be in this world?


Just. I have read all thou say, in the Bible, but of man, not of thee only,
and let us use it so, that thou do not attribute it to thy self only, where
I also have a part.


Soul. Just, our union, whereby of us is made man, is so marvelous, that what
is spoken of the one is spoken of the other, as Aristotle does well show,
saying, that he that says the Soul loves or hates, might as well say the
soul spinneth or sows: nevertheless this dignity thou haste of me, because
thou art earthly, corporal, and without reason: but I cause y^ thou art called
a person divine and a creature reasonable.


Just. And how?


Soul. It were a long work to make thee understand that, let it suffice thee
y^ I being with thee and beco^ming thy form by mean of thy vital spirit, which
is the ^and y^ holds us together, I make thee a creature y^ takes part with
substance separate, which you call Angels, where thou did only participate
with brute beasts, whereof, we being united together, have been called of some
Philosophers, the band of nature and the world, Vinculum mundi and naturae.
for in thee do end the earthly and bodily creatures, and in me begins y^
divine and spiritual and be only one undivided, made so maruelously of two
contrary natures Miraculu^ naturae.
(as I have said) y^ Mercury Trimegist did call it y^ great miracle of nature.


Just. I confess all this to be true, but wherefore do y^ praise me, this
makes not for thy lamenting of me.


Soul. Hear me, and thou shall see if I have cause to lamente. I being so
noble a creature, have not (as reason is) mine end and my perfection in this
universal, nor in those things whereof that is made as have the other creatures
inferior to me, whereof if thos^ markst well, God, after he had created all
things of the world, he carried into Paradise only man, that he being separated
from other, might have used the operations there, that were convenient to his
nature, from whence he, by his fault, was most miserably driven out, (which
thing grieueth me more) that rightnesse taken from him, that wa^^^ Original
Justice.
us, that is to say, original Justice, by whose mean thou should have been
obedient to me, and should not have striuen against me as thou haste done
since.


Just. Well, well, I have so many times heard the same things told in the
Pulpit, that thou need not tell ^^^ them again, therefore let us come to the
conclusion.


Soul. If thou be not altogether a fool, thou might have gathered of these
my reasons, y^ my end and thine (for that I speak, I speak of man) is not in
these bodily and earthly things, for y^ is of other beasts which lack reason,
but it is only in the contemplation of truth, by the which, beholding the
Contemplatio^ of the truth.
marvelous works of the mighty hand of God, a great part in this world, may be
had, whither I was sent from God, and united in thee, that by the mean of thy
senses, and thy help, I might get all those knowledges, that the nature of man
can do, that those should be a ladder to bring me to consider the truth it
self, without any Veil, whereof should have grown my felicity, joined with a
blessedness.


Just. All this that thou have said, is well: but wherein have I hindered thee,
or ever anoyed thee, that thou can compain of me?


Soul. I will not speak Just, of those impediments common, that rise of thee
and thy proper nature, weak, and inclined to love and seek only earthly
things, but I will only lament of thee in this, that thou have ever held me
occupied in so vile exercise as thy craft of Couperage is: what grief think
thou Just has it ben to me, that I being so noble a creature, have ever ben
forced to minister to thee all my knowledge and power, that thou sholdest make
barels, pitchers, bows for babes, and patens with such other like, and that
only for thy business I must leave the contemplation of the beauty of this
universal, and hold mine eyes down upon a thing^o base and contrary to my
nature. Tell me, have I not cause to lament of thee?


Just. These thy reasons seem to me, y^ in one thing they be true, and in
another no. As touching the consideration of thy nature they be true, but in
consideration of mine and of man, not so, for the^ al handy crafts should be
taken away, and thou know how necessary they be, not only to me, but to thee
also, for when I suffer thou can not do thy works perfectly.


Soul. I will not take away manuell crafts, for I know well how many things
man has need of, and thy self particularly, without the which thou sholdst
fall into a thousand infirmities, and a thousand anoyances, which should let me
so, as I should less give my self to co^templation than I do, being as I am.


Just. How so, if al souls would y^ those men of which they be part, should
give themselves to contemplative life and study?


Soul. No I say, for I would that they to whom is by lot given an imperfect
body, or compound of humors or evil complexion, or that have the instruments
of the senses by some impediment that nature has found contrary to her
intention, not well apt to do their offices, were I say, those that should have
patience to exercise themselves in these base things.


Just. The thing should surely turn to al one term, for there should be more that
would apply bandy occupation, though liberal science, because the more part
be of them that be borne of that sort, that are little bound to nature, and
commonly be called men gross.


Soul. Thank the little wit of men, which, when they sow a field of corn,
they use all diligence that the seed be good and clean, and the land well in
order, but when they will get a child, they Error in generation of children.
have little count of the one, and less of the other: the more part seking
after it when they have supped, or be otherwise altered by eating and drinking,
whereby it is not to be marueled, though there grows more Sloes than Damasins,
for so will I speak for the honor of man's nature, which had more need than
other creatures, not to be in love but at certain times, seeing he does so
little work that knowledge that is given him of God, whereby he might put a
bridle to his unreasonable passions: but let us leave this, for it touches not
me, for I was allotted to a body well complexioned, and endued with very good
instruments, wherewith the senses be exercised, as well interior, as exterior,
and made lively with a blood so good; that engendereth so clear and subtle
spirits apt to do any operation perfectly: of thee, thus I say, that thou were
apt to do any noble exercise, as well contemplative as active, and yet have thou
alwais kept me in making of slippers: what say thou now, have I cause to
lament or no?


Just. What would thou I should have done? I was set to this art of my
father being a child, which as thou know, did occupy the same: beside I was
poor, and not able to go to my book.


Soul. If thou had ben rich, and able to make thine own choice, and of age
to know, I would have otherwise lamented with thee than I do, whereas now I
hold thee excused for this cause.


Just. Then tell me wherein thou haste cause to complain.


Soul. I may complain because that thou being come to the age of discretion,
and knowing thee in so good a trade, as thou did lay up money every year,
that now thou do not begin to think of me, seeking to give me, though not
in all, yet in part, some perfection, as thou did to thy self of wealth
and commodity.


Just. Oh how should I have done it?


Soul. In giving thy self to some science, that might have brought me
perfection and contentacion, and beginning to open to me the way of knowledge
of the truth, which as I have said unto thee, is my chief end.


Just. Be short, and tell me what I must have done.


Soul. Thou must (I say) have given thy self to the study of science,
dividing thy time so, as thou should not Labor and study.
have let thy work.


Just. And would thou that I should both have plaide the Couper and the
Student?


Soul. Yea would I.


Just. And what would the people have said?


Soul. What say they at Bolonia of one James Fellay there, which kepes his
occupation, and yet has profited in learning, that he may compare with many
that have done nothing else but study: and in Venice an Hosier that died of
late, and was very well learned?


Just. What time should I have had to it?


Soul. So much as should have suffised, which thou did spend sometime in
play, or in going abroad babbling by the way: for do thou think that they
that study, do study ever? if thou lokest well thou shall see them most part of
the day walking abroad: remember of Matthew Palmer thy neighbor, that ever was
a Potecarie, and yet got so much learning, as the Florentines sent him
ambassador to the king of Naples, the which dignity was given him only to
show a thing so rare, y^ a man of so base condition should have so noble
conceits, as to give himself to study, not leaving his exercise: and I remember
I have heard that the king said: What Physicians be at Florence, when their
Apothecaries be so singular men?


Just. I know thou say true, and I had inclination enough, but two things
caused me that I never had no mind that way, the one was the base art that I
was of, the other, the pain that I have heard of many that is in study.


Soul. Thou art even fallen where I would, alleging this second cause, for as
for the first, if these examples of our time which I have named do, not
suffice thee, let the ancient examples of Philosophers used some occupation.
those old Philosophers suffice, which used all some occupation, and specially
of Hippias, which did shape and sow his clothes, did make trappers for horses,
and many other things: but to the other I answer thee, that in the world is
not so easy a thing as to study and to get learning.


Just. Thou telst me a thing, which I thought the contrary.


Soul. Hear me and I will prove it. Learning easy to be gotten.
Every thing helped of his proper nature, gets his perfection without any
pain: and perfection is the knowledge of verity, wherefore a man in getting
it, should have no pain at all. Of this conclusion, the propositions being
true, I know that thou have no doubt at all: but because thou might doubt of
the^ I will prove them, and first the manner. Tell me, think thou the earth
endures any pain in going to the center?


Just. I thinke^ not.


Soul. And does y^ fire take any pain to mount to his Sphere?


Just. Less.


Soul. And do the plants take any pain to be nourished, to be augmented, and
to bring forth their seed? and the beasts to ^oa^e and gender like to them
selves?


Just. No, for I see every one does these operations if he be not let.


Soul. Then thou know that nothing dureth any pain to get his perfection,
because the earth is only perfect when she is in her Center, and the fire when
he is in his Sphere, where he has no contrariety, and the trees when they
become to their terms and brought forth their fruits, and the beasts when they
have gendred like to themselves to maintain their kind, which they can not do
in themselves singular, because so doing they grow more like their, first
mouer. Now I have only to prove thee, y^ them and perfection of man is to
understand, but I know that the desire of knowledge the which thou see to be
in every man, does assure thee of it.


Just. Oh, I would not have been dead yesterday for nothing in the world, for
thou haste opened mine eyes so well, that I see now that I never saw before in
three score years and more.


Soul. I will saay more unto thee, it were more easy for Just to understand a
work of Aristotle, than to make a Pitcher or a pair of Soccles for a Friar.


Just. Now thou speak of a great matter.


Soul. I speak as it is, and hear the reason. What pleasure have thou in
making a pair of patens, or a vessel, or such like?


Just. I have pleasure, because I see I gain thereby, and so provide for my
need that rises every day.


Soul. Let us leave gain, for that also comes of study, but what other
pleasure have thou?


Just. None surely.


Soul. And I less, rather I have an extreme passion, knowing (as I have told
thee) and finding my self occupied in such things vile.


Just. Then what is the cause? seeing it is (as I see) that so few men be
given to study, and chiefly of them that might, and want not the way to do it.


Soul. Of their evil bringing up and Evil bringing up, hinderance to learning.
government of their fathers, and of their evil way of life, which is now in
the world, and also in the fear which they make that be counted learned,
showing that study is the hardest thing that a man can do.


Just. Thou say truth, for I have hapt many times to hear them say so, and
they play as physicians, which alwais makes the diseases of their parents to be
grievous and dangerous, to show; that if they recover them, they have done a
great cure.


Soul. Ah Just, would God that this occasion only moved them to do so, but
they be moved of an other worse principle.


Just. What is it, tell me?


Soul. I must have more time, and now it is broad day, to morrow if thou will
reason as thou have done this morning, I will tell thee, that and other things.


Just. With a good will, and I pray thee too.


Soul. Well, I will tarry till thou call me: for I will no more wake thee,
to grieve thee as thou werte this morning.


Just. So will I do.


The.iiij. Reasoning. JUST. SOVLE.
Have slepte evil this night, God I what would it mean? yet I find no evil
at all. Some other will say; that these be the things which the infirmity that
all men covers, I mean Age, brings, to sleep evil, and watch worse: but
it shall be better for me, since I am entered into this Fancy, to talk with my
Soul, with whom I have had such pleasure these three rymes that we have
talked together, that every hour seems a thousand year to renew the same:
yet may it be a Dream, whereof I stand half in doubt: for I never heard that
any such thing has chanced to any other before this time: and though it
seems that David in his Psalms sometime talks with her, as in the
beginning of the Service, where he asks her why she is so melancholy and
troubled, yet could I never learn that she made him any answer as mine does
me: so as mine may well be a dream: yet I can not believe it: for I know many
things which I did not before. But now that I am sure I sleep not, nor dream
not, I will see, if she will reason with me, as she has done, and call her
as she appointed yesterday in the morning I should do. My soul, O my soul.

Soul. What would thou Just?


Just. See it is true, that I did not dream. I would we should talk a
while together, as we have done, and that thou would content me, in that
thou dydst begin to speak of yesterdaye in the morning: But see, I will not
that thou go out of me any more, as thou have done these two mornyngs: For I
pass not now to see thee: and I know I have been in great peril, and also
playde the very fool to put my self in such hazard, whereupon my life lay.


Soul. What peril was that?


Just. As thou say, thou had a greatte will that I should study,
wherefore when thou had been from me, and minded to return no more to mae,
but for to enter into the body of some Studente, then should I have been a
body without a Soul: and if not as dead, yet at least one of the base beasts.


Soul. Doubt it not Just, thou art in no such danger: for if thou remembrest
well, I told thee I did not in all separate my self from thee, but only with
my part divine, y^ which is such, as being immortal may be without thee.


Just. Very well, and because she may be without me, therefore I fear, because
I would not become a beast, I say, and see one other with my brain and with
his, sell me by and by, and then other, every day ten times.


Soul. Although I can be without thee, which shall be after that separation
that death shall make of us, nevertheless I can not inform any other body but
thee, til the day of judgment.


Just. Wherefore?


Soul. Because of that perpetual quality that I must inform thee, and none
other.


Just. What is that quality thou speak of?


Soul. It is a certain conuenience and inclination that I have to work by
thee, to begin to taste my perfection, which was not given me of God at my
creation, as to angels, which if I had, I should have no need of thee. And
this is the only thing that makes me differ from other souls, because, we
being not different in kind, as of y^ other beasts, forasmuch as we be
reasonable, and they not, nor can not be different in number, because we be not
material, it should follow, that we were all one thing: and this
consideration has brought many great men into greatest errors: but one of us
is different from an other, by that quality and respect, that she has with
her body, and not with other.


Just. I will be plain with thee: I understand not this matter.


Soul. Marvel not, for Duns (whom they call the subtle Doctor, who thought
he understood it better than other, gyuing it the name, Eccheita, a name
altogether strange to the barbarous ears, much more to the Latins, did not
understand it perfectly him self.


Just. Then let it go: for I would not that we should enter into these
toys, and then hap to me as did to him, that going about to blind other
men's brains, did so blind him self, as he was buried quick. Which thing
might well happen to me, if I were found once without thee: therefore tarry
with me, as thou haste done, for I will no more abide the peril, and I care
not now to see thee.


Soul. I see thou haste such fear of our separation, that it is full time I
deliver thee of it. Understand, that although I have told thee, I go out of
thee, yet I never did, nor can do it, but by death, and that is because I am
thy form, and am not in thee, as a mariner in a ship, as many have believed.


Just. This is a new trick, what? I have seen thee.


Soul. It appears s^ to thee.


Just. Appear? will thou make me believe I see not a thing when I see it?


Soul. I say it did but appear so.


Just. Which way?


Soul. I will tell thee, I moved from those visions and images, which thou have
in fantasy, and represented them to thy virtue imaginatiue, as I do when thou
dreamest, and so it seems thou dyddest see me.


Just. Can thou deceive me after this sort?


Soul. I can, and in this sort spirits deceive me^ many times, and therefore
their apparitio^s be called fantastical.


Just. What is it true there be spirits in deed?


Soul. Do thou doubt?


Just. I can not tell, I have heard say of many learned men, that they be
things fained, and things that appear only to certain simple me^, and that
they come sometime of mela^coly humors, y^ breed by hearing of strange things.


Soul. They be of those learned men that think they understand all things and
show, they have read little in Stories, or in Scripture, and little to believe
in the same, which is worse. I tell thee that spirits be, and besides this,
make them that believe them, to seem they be sometime an other thing: have thou
not heard that they that be witches, think they be Cats?


Just. Be these sorcerers also true?


Soul. Would God they were not true, which he suffers for our sins. Read
what the Count of Mirandula, writes of one that he had in his hands. And the
Canonists would have forsene that it had not ben true, which have made a
particular law of the witched and enchaunted.


Just. Surely that is a great argument, but let it go. Thou have taken a great
weight from my heart, saying thou wylt not go from me. But now let us turn to
our talk yesterday in the morning, tell me, whereof comes it, that these
Doctors do^ so discorage other from study, showing them it is a greater pain
than to carry the stone of Verma, (as the Proverb says.)


Soul. Thou know Just, that the least part of men be good, but whether this
comes, either of the infirmity of the flesh, or of evil custom, or of
little religion, I will not now dispute.


Just. Thou say truth, there be more bad than good, and do so increase, that I
fear we are nygh the end of the world. Thou see how we have grown worse
and worse these fifty years. I will not reason of Popes, Cardinals Popes. etc.
Worse and worse.
and Priests, and less of Friars, that thou sholdest not by and by proclaim
me a Luterane. But consider children of ten years old, how they be without
reverence, without shame, bold, dishonest, and mock a man of fifty years.
Alas, I remember that in my time, we passed twenty years, before we knew what
Venus, or Bacchus was: and now so soon as they be borne, the one is given
them for a nurse, and the other for a master.


Soul. Ye may thank their good education and the small wisdom of their
fathers, which think it a propre thing that a little child can speak an
dishonest word, or taste well of wine, and do not mark the evil to come,
which they get thereby, in teaching them such things: but let them alone,
for they will repent it after when they be older, but let us return to our
talk. Thou must know, that the goodness of men, (I speak not only of it
that is required of him that will live like a Christian, but of that that is
convenient for man) comes of love, the which does bring a desire and
gladness of an others weal.


Just Thou say well, and truly if men did love one an other, we should
need no law at all, for then there should be no murder, no theft, no usury,
no robbyng^ and till end we should live in such a quiet, as here men did in
the golden age.


Soul. So also euilnesse grows of a contrary to love, which bredeth envy,
and sadness for others weal, and therefore if thou consyderest well, thou
shalt find, that all maligning men be envious.


Just. Not only they be envious, but also foolish.


Soul. Because foolishness is also an imperfection of man, and not being
ruled with a good mind, produces infinite evil effects, and because fools
cannot purchase that riches and those honors that they would by the mean of
their sufficiency and virtue, they seek to procure it by a thousand ways
unjust and unlawful, so as they think they can do it closely, and care not
for the ruin of other, a thing so wicked, that even the brute beasts do
abhor, which, when they will needs do evil only with force, where as men
showing them selves friends, maliciously and with a thousand frauds do deceive
one an other every day.


Just. Oh my soul, thou speak wisely and truly, and he that will see this
thing well, let him look among us artificers, and he shall find that all the
malicious and foolish be envious.


Soul. And so it happeth among the learned, where, as well the foolish as the
evil, do nothing else, but pluck men from study, the foolish to be esteemed,
which they should not, if their foolishness were known, coueryng it only
with reproach, but doing nothing. The malicious, because an other should not
joy that good and that honor, that they think they have.


Just. What way hold they?


Soul. They say, there can not in the world be found a thing more hard than
it: and for all that as I said unto thee this other day, because to the nature
of man, there is nothing so convenient, without doubt it is the more ease.


Just. In good faith, in good faith, I begin to open mine eyes, and to see that
I did not before.


Soul. Thou must know that when Letters find a man wise and good, they make
him more wise and more good: And when they find a man a fool, and evil, they
make him more foolish and more evil. Do thou not see that there have been
of these learned men, that having no regard at al, I will not say of the law of
god, which they ought to esteem above al things, but of them selves and of the
world, to appear learned, have written a thousand works in the hurt and
offense of other men. I will not speak of them that bear the sign in their
forheade of that they be, as the Cortigian, and the Dialogue of Usury,
although the one be sufficient to corrupt the honesty of the Roman. Lucrece,
and the other the liberality of Alexander Magnus, but I mean of them that
under the shadow of good, do teach all naughtiness that can be thought, as
the book Of the three Chastities, y^ Solution of Miracles, which were a good
deed to take them from the world,


Just. Oh thou say truth, and they that have the charge ought to see, that
every thing were not put in print.


Soul. What thing can make thee more assured of this than experience: which if
thou markest diligentely, it shall show thee, that all learned men, being good
of Nature, seeking to communicate those good things that God has given them,
will exhort all men in such sort, as his state and ability requires, to
give himself to virtue: and if they see a carpenter, they will at least
encourage him to the Mathematicalles. As in our days that Image of God M.
Julian Caruine, (for so will I call him, because that so wyllyngly, after the
similitude of him, he does communicate his good things) did to Camerino, the
Carpenter, whom he has made so expert in that faculty, as he peradventure
is not second to any other that in Latin, or Greek, (of the which he has
no knoweledge) have studied in the like Science: and so should exhort an
Apothecarie to study Physic: and to be short, every man to seek to obtain
those things, which they think may be in any thing profitable or honorable
to them.


Just. Thou say truth certainly, for I remember, that Matthew Palmer of
whom thou spakest yesterday, did never other but exhort every man, of what
sort soever he were, to give him self to Virtue, vsyng to say, that there was
such difference between a man that knows somewhat, and him that knows
nothing, as was between a painted man and a man in deed. And master Marcello
likewise, which was my neighbor, and a man not only good, but goodness it
self, to every child that had asked him his opinion of any matter, he would
have answered all that he knew: so desirous was he to communicate his virtue,
alleging often that saying of Plato, that one man was borne to healpe an other.


Soul. What need we more? Did we not see this other day that most holy and
learned old man, master Francis Verino, a philosopher so excellent, as no man
in his age was like him, who reading philosophy, and seeing Captain Cepe
sometime come to his lecture, and understood no Latin, he began by and by to
read in the vulgar, that he also might understand: and a little before he
died, to show his exceeding goodness, reading openly in the study of Florence,
the.xij. book of Aristotle, he did expound it in the mother tongue, that all
men might understand it, affirming as S. Paul, that he was debtour to the
unlearned as to the learned.


Just. Such be the good men. But can those things of philosophy be taught in
the vulgar tongue?


Soul. Why not? Is not the vulgar Vulgar tongue.
tongue as apt to utter her conceits, as the Latin and other?


Just. I have (as thou know) no great knowledge in those things, and
therefore I cannot answer thee, but I hear of the learned of our time, that
they can not.


Soul. Just, this is one of the things which envy makes them speak, but it
will not be long, (thanks be given to our most noble Duke, who continuing to
exalt her as he has begoon) ere those spectacles shall be taken from our eyes,
that make every thing seem yelow: nevertheless, men might have seen clear
enough a good while since, if they had well considered the writing of friar
Jerome of Ferrara, who wrote in this our tongue the most high and hardest
things of philosophy, no less easly and perfectly than any writer of the Latin
tongue.


Just. Was not this friar Jerome a Florentine?


Soul. He was, and consider how much it help him to come and dwell in
Florence, (I mean for the tongue) which was such as every man may know the
difference that is between the things he wrote before and since.


Just. That I know not, but I have heard that without grammar a man is not
learned.


Soul. A Notarie can not be without grammar, and yet it is Coccoribus gra^mer
that ends every word in a consonant: but let us leave th^se trifles, gra^mer
or to speak better, the Latin is a tongue, and tongues be not they that make
men learned, but understanding and science, for otherwise it should follow,
that the Jew that is a goldsmith at Pecors corner, which can speak eight or
ten tongues, should be the best learned in Florence, and the Starling that was
given to the Pope Leo, should be better learned than these that have only the
Latin, because he could say good day, and many other things both in Greek and
Latin.


Just. Ah, ah, thou art disposed to dally: this Starling knew not what he said,
but did only speak what he was taught.


Soul. Thou make good my word, that the things and not the tongues make men
learned: and although they be signified by tongs, yet he that only understands
the words, shall never be learned: tell me if this proposition of Aristotle
were spoken to me (Every thing, every Art, and every Discipline desires that
that is good) in vulgar, and I understand it, what need have I to have it
spoken in Greek or in Latin?


Just. I can not tell, but they say so.


Soul. Let them say their pleasure, but this is truth, and I will tell thee
more, that the understanding of things is not sufficient to make a man learned,
but has need also of judgment.


Just. This I believe well, for I have seen in my days many learned men
fools, which have not ben worth two handful of nuttes, and yet have studied
enough: and I remember amongst other one Michell Marullo, which was one of
those Grecians that fled from the loss of Constantinople, and was very well
learned, as men said, and yet he was a fond foolish man, wherefore one day one
Bino Corrierie his companion said thus merrily to him. M. Michell, men say you
are very skilful in grammar, and in greek, it may well be, for I understand
nothing that way, but in vulgar, me think you are a very fool.


Soul. See, how thou by little and little beginnest to see light, I say unto
thee, that they say ^o only for envy, and will thou see it? now that they see
that Latin letters be made somewhat more vulgar than they were wont, they
begin to say, that he that knows not Greek, knows nothing, as if the
spirits of Aristotle and of Plato (as that honest Cortigian said) were shut in
an alphabet of Greek, as in a glass, and a man learning it, might drink at
one draught as he does a sirupe.


Just. Truly thou say truth, and they say so.


Soul. Then what will they do fifetene or twenty years hence, when the Greek
tongue shall be also as common, to so many at this day studying it? then they
shall be forced to run to another, and for example to say, he that knows not
the Hebrew, knows nothing, and so from one tongue to an other, and in thend be
driven to come to the Biskay tongue, from whence they can go no farther.


Just. Why so?


Soul. Because that tongue can not be learned nor spoken but of them that be
borne in that country: but I can say unto thee, that they must do other
things like unto these, if they will be counted learned: for now men begin to
do as children do, that have no more fear of Robin good fellow.


Just. What mean you by that?


Soul. I mean, it will not serve now a days, to say I have been at study, or
at the University, for men care not, till they see an experience thereof.


Just. I hear of certain young men that have begone a certain Achademia, only
that men by that experience may give some proof of themselves.


Soul. And thou see how they repine at it, and because they see some man
well lyked, of whom before was no name, they begin to find fault, and affirm
that it will hinder the reputation of good letters, and that men only study for
a show, and in the end it shall be as Burchiell says.


What a devil have these silk worms in their bodies, that always eat leaves
and deliver silk?

Just. This Achademia, has done to the learned, as the siege did to the brave,
for where at the first it was inoughe to say he was brave, and every man had
fear of him, now no man cares for such shadows, in so much as a little
child, if he have displeasure done him, will not be afraid with a knife to
strike a soldier: and of this more than one example has been seen.


Soul. Thou haste said truly Just, and though these that give not them
selves altogether to study, can not exceed them that be so learned, yet they
discover them, and cause that they can not now feed men with empty spoones, as
it was once said to one of them, as they could do, and have done to this
day: and in deed it was a gaye thing sor them, that when they did say, it
is so, every man must agree to their word, as Pithagoras disciples did: but now
they must show wherefore and why, if they will be believed: but let them alone. I
say unto thee, that this opening of eyes which this Achademia has done to men,
is Triacle for them.


Just. And do thou believe in deed that they that favor this trade, shall be
able to bring to perfection in time the sciences in our tongue, as they say they
desire?


Soul. For their sufficiency, I dare say unto thee, I know many very apt, and
I believe when so ever they will, shall be able to do it well, as already no small
tokens be showed, but as touching the aptness of our tongue to receive the^
perfectly, I speak unto thee resolutely, that our tongue is most perfect and
apt to express any manner conceit of philosophy or astrology, or any other
science, and as well as in Latin, and peradventure in Greek, of the which they
make so great a brag, for I remember that M. Constantine Lastari, that
Grecian of the which men of our age make so great a vaunt, used to say in the
gardin of Rucellai at the table, where many gentlemen were present, of the which
peradventure some be yet alive, that he knew Boccace not to be inferior to
any Greek writer for his eloquence and manner of speaking, and that he did
esteem his hundred tales as much as an hundred of these Poets.


Just. What do thou tell me? I would not for all that, thou should make me
believe a thing, which should make me be laughed at of the people if I should
speak it, and yet I know many honest men that do find fault with this our
tongue.


Soul. Who be they?


Just. They say Trissine is one.


Soul. That is not so, but rather seems so pleasant unto him, as he would
rob it, and though it be proper Florentine, as Boccace says, to have a part
in it, he would make it Italian or Cortigian, to be called.


Just. I have not read, nor heard reasoned by chance, as of the other that
makes the Dialogue of tongues. in the which they say, this is so much reproved:
and what say you to that?


Soul. I say he reproves it not, but rather honor it: but truth it is, he
makes one to speak those things which they do that reprove it.


Just. That is well, do thou not think he speaks it to that purpose?
Mahomet when he took the use of wine from his men, that they should not wax of
greater courage and better wit, whereby they might forsake his law, he made
them believe the Angel Gabriel did speak it: but if he did it to praise it,
why does he not answer to those things?


Soul. I will tell thee, to one part he answers not, because it is not
worth the aunswering, as when they say, that this tongue is nothing worth,
because it is the corruption of the Latin tongue, for all may see many times
that of the corruption of one thing, rises the generation of a better thing,
as in the generation of man: and what will thou say to him that says, that
this consonance that is in our tongue, is like the harmony or musycke of
drums, or rather of harquebusshes or ^alconets.


Just. And should he not answer to that?


Soul. No, for as thy Dante says, he should be no less a fool to answer
him that would ask if there were fire in the house, where the flame went out
at the window, than he that asks the question. And beside, Trissine does
answer sufficiently to this in his book which he made of Poetry, where he
shows what marvelous Art is found in our verses.


Just. Me thinks thou say truth, but take thou heed that love do not
deceive thee, as it does the most part of men in their own things.


Soul. I do not deny but that love does much, but tell me how could it come
to pass, that it is now so esteemed in every court, as every man endeuoreth to
write in it, the most and best that he can, but of the self goodness and
marvelous beauty.


Just. I believe as thou say, but wherein stands the betternesse of it?


Soul. In verse, by many very reasonably, but in prose, by few, and much less
than in verse.


Just. In this thou make me marvel much, for I would have believed, that men
do better that thing which they do often, and that is to speak in prose, and
not in verse: but what is the occasion of it?


Soul. I will tell thee, and note it well. The beauty and grace of the tongue,
proceeds not only of the words, but in the knitting and placing them together:
and he that will see, as in a glass, what this second part well used can do,
let him confer with the writings of the Florentines, and with other writings
that be not Tuscanes, and he shall find (if he has ears) the sweetness that
universally is in the clauses of this, and the hardness that is in other: sand
this order and facility can not be observed and kept in verses, because of
the measure, the sound and the rhyme, and yet it seems to men agreing in
certain particular laws, they can more equally meet in a way of composition,
and so better make verse than prose.


Just. Of this I can give no judgment, although I have read Dant, but this I
can say, that I have straight known a man by his pronunciation whither he be a
Flore^tine or no, though he forces him self to speak never so well.


Soul. No doubt of that, and be certain of this also, that if thou markest
well, thou shall know whither one be borne, or brought up in Florence city or
in the country, for they have commonly a certain rude pronunciation, and can
not leave it without some difficulty.


Just. That I think makes no matter, for he that is of the country, is called
and speaks Florentine.


Soul. Makes it no matter? rather is there great difference, if it be not
helped by good use.


Just. What is it thou say? was not Boccace of Certaldo, and yet one of the
most famous Florentine writers?


Soul. His auncesters were whereof his house always kept the name, but not
he: and if thou beleuest me not, read the book which he made of Floods, where
speaking of Elsa, he says it is at the foot of Certaldo, sometime the country
of his auncesters, before that Florence did recover them for Citizens.


Just. Then the tongue of which is made so great account, is Florentine proper.


Soul. Who doubts thereof? does not Lodouico Martello prove it well in his
answer, which he made to Trissinc? And know that who is not borne and brought
up in Florence, do not learn it perfectly: and of this it comes that many
dispayring to speak or write it well, have entered to speak evil and to
reprove it, and I think it has happened to them, as did to a great master of
our time touching the poet Dante.


Just. What was that?


Soul. I will tell thee. He coveting to be compted chief in our tongue, and
believing he iusted as well as our Petrarke, he prayseth him maruelously, so
thinking to praise himself, but perceiving after. (as he is very witty) that
he can not come nigh to Dante by no way, being driven by Envy, he did what he
could to disprayse him.


Just. Then he did, as they say, she Count of Mirandola and Friar Jerome did,
the one of the which, fyndyng by Astronomy he should die a young man, and the
other by the hands of Justice, they began to believe it was not true, and so
both spoke and wrote evil of it, but mark, for I remember, he blames that
only in the tongue, the which neither he nor none of ye other would have done,
if they had considered in what terms he found it in his time, and that he,
taking the mire from it, gave more help unto it, than peradventure Petrarke
did, bringing it to such a perfection.


Soul. That should be well also to consider in sciences, saying, that he only
to show him self a master, in them had made such Poetry, as might be resembled
to a great field full of many wild herbs, and a thousand other things more
immodest and dishonest, that I marvel, that though it were true, he would not
hold his peace, for the reverence of so great a clerk.


Just. If he were not a great master as thou say, and so should speak of
Dante, I would say he were presumptuous.


Soul. Say it boldly, seeing he speaks it without respect of Daut, to whom
he is more inferior than art thou to him, if we will not now measure the
perfection of man, by the favor of Fortune, as many do now a days: but let
him alone, for he has now the pen in hand, that showing the greatness and
the beauty of this Poet, shall discover either the rashenesse, the
foolishness, or the envy of him.


Just. And he shall do very well, for he that is envious, deserves none other
but to be chased and fled of every man, even as a wild beast.


Soul. Thou speak like a Philosopher Just, for envy is it that more
hurts the society of man, than any other thing, and the worse effects it
brings forth, as it is in men more wyttie and learned: But now the Sun is
high, I will that thou rise, and go to thy work, and an other time we will
reason of this more at the full.


The.v. Reasoning. JUST. SOVLE.
IS this the bell at S. Cross? it is so. O it is to long before day to rise:

These Graye Friars have this custom to ryng to Matens about mydnyghte, when a
man is in his best sleep: although to them, that go to roust as hens do,
it is small grief, and yet universally it makes a demonstration of no small
disease, it shall be well to sleep again a while, although the time that is
slepte is as lost, yea, is little less than as a man were dead, therefore it
shall be better to rise. But what shall I do then? it is so long till Sun
rise, that I shall be weary: But I may prove if my soul will talk with me,
although I begin to doubt, if I follow on, she will make me a fool: and
it is not to be laughed at: for all they that wax mad, be mad in soul and
body: and so shall this mine make me, if I do believe her too much. Behold,
she has begone to tell me, that a man may be wise, and learned, without
knowledge of y^ Latin or Greek tongue: which is a thing, that if I should
speak among the learned of our days, I should be wondered at, as an Owl: As
for me, I never heard a man could be wise in vulgar, but a fool well enough:
and I never saw man, of whom any great account was made, if he know not
some part of Grammar, so as I will not thus believe it. And peradventure I have
not understood her well, and therefore it shall be well to see, if she will
reason with me a while: and I will ask her the question. My soul, Oh my dear
Soul, shall we talk a little this morning?

Soul. Yea, I pray thee Just, and I have no greatter pleasure than that: for
whiles I stand gathered into my self to talk with thee, I am not occupied in
those vile and base conceits, which thou have the more part of time nor need
not minister to thy senses and strength in making thy pattens and barelles.


Just. I do not marvel thereat, for I my self do labor very unwillingly,
and nothing is more grievous unto me: and were it not that cursed force does
cause me, I would never work stroke.


Soul. What would thou do, live and be always in Idleness?


Just. No, but I would bestow the time in some thing that should delight me,
where as to work is pain and trouble to me.


Soul. Then think what it is to me being much more contrary to my nature than
to thine.


Just. I know not that: I see that God, after man had sinned, mynding to give
him part of penance, as he had done the woman in trauailyng with pain, said
unto him: Thou shall eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face* giving him
labor, for y^ greuousest and troublesome thing he could give him.


Soul. Ah, ah, see, see, how by little and little thou come to mine opinion:
Thou did marvel when I said unto thee the last day, that it was more pain
to a man to make a pair of patens, than to study half Aristotle: the reason
thy self haste showed: for to study, is natural and propre to man, and
leads him to his perfection: and to labor, is a penance.


Just Yea man must have also to live.


Soul. That is true: But all is to be content of that which is necessary, and
not to seek superfluity, which brings a thousand unprofitable cares to
man, and kepes him always occupied in the earth, and never lets him hold up
his head to heaven, from whence his soul came first, and whether she desires
to return: and know Just, that the greatest good and profitable thing to man
in this life, is to acquainte him self with things as they come, and content
him self with a little: for he that so does, lives with small care, and is merry
the most part of his time, if not all.


Just. I believe it certainly: for I proved it in my self, how profitable it
has been to me, to content me with that I have, measuring my will with my
fortune, and if I would have lived or clothed me better, I must needs have
done some dishonest thing, or gone and dwelt with other.


Soul. It were evil for great men Just, if all men were of that will: for they
then must serve them selves: because it is nothing but immoderate desire,
either of dignity, or of diete to eat and drink delicately, or to be clad
sumptuously, that causes that a man which reasonably might live three score
years (in ten or twelve of the which, he knows not what he does, and of the
rest he sleeps the half) sells those few that he lives, living in
servitude, for a little price: Which thing that wise Philosopher Diogenes
would not do, to whom Alexander the great, said: That he should ask what
he would, and it should be given him. He answered: Though he were poor,
he lacked nothing, but required him to stand aside, because he took the Sun
from him, that was not in his power to give him.


Just. Certainly to depend of himself is a goodly thing, and to be a friend to
lords, but not a slave, honoryng and obeying them nevertheless, as them that
hold in earth the place of God: and when a man will advance himself, he
ought to do it with Virtue, and not with service, thynking nevertheless,
that in every state he shall lack somewhat.


Soul. Then co^plain not of thine, and know certe^ly, there is no state in this
world, but has some discommoditie and some thing that displeases, and none
can be found as thou haste said, but that lacks somewhat.


Just. With this reason would I once prove unto a friend of mine that all the
states of men, were alike, and I told him that every one lacked somewhat, which
chiefly he desired: as for example: The lame desires to be sound, that he
might get his living and not go a begging. He that is hole and has nothing, to
have somewhat to live, that he needs not labor: and he that has to live
sufficiently, to get so much as he might keep an horse and a boy: and he
that has that, to get a dignity, or a gretnesse above other, and then to be a
Prince, and being a prince, never to die.


Soul. Then do not thou lamente though thou labourest a little, seeing every man
lackes somewhat.


Just. To labor a little were a pleasure, but always, as I do that have little
or nothing, is a despite.


Soul. Mark, thou do as other do: but tell me, what would thou have,
what want thou?


Just. Sweet Ducates of revenue, and then I should live well.


Soul. And when thou had that, thou should then lack somewhat, and
desire it, as thou do this, because as thou have said of thy self, in every
state there lacks some thing, thinking when thou have it, thou would be
content, and yet when thou haste it, thou art not content, but begynnest to
desire an other: So as once a Citizen of ours said wisely, to one that was
entered into great disorder, to bie a piece of ground that lay next him: Thou
must think, thou must have neighbors, and when thou have bought this, thou
shall have an other neighbor, of whom thou will have the like desire.


Just. I believe certainly, that there is care in every state but more in one
than in an other.


Soul. And is not thine one of them that so has, and of the greater?


Just. It is, seeing I must only live by my work, which (as I said before) was
put to man for penance of his sins.


Soul. Yea, to them yt have their wills disordinate, and be not content with
yt is convenient to their state, as Ada^ had when this happened to him. But to
him that directs pacie^tly his way in this life to that he is called, it
chances not so. What sweeter thing can be, than to live with the travel of
his hands? So that David y^ Prophet, which was also a King, as thou know,
did call such like, blessed. And know this for a conclusion, the more a man
has, the more care he must take: and it is greater and paynfuller
pensiveness, to rule superfluous things to him, tha^ is the sweetness to
possess them, and the more servants and laborers he has, the more enemies
he has, as that philosopher said well. But let us leave these matters, in
the which me think we have said enough: let us turn a little to them of
yesterday, which we left imperfect, because thou doubtedst before, yt if thou
beleuedst me, I should make thee a fool, as though you had not thy part as
well as other.


Just. Take this too, if it please thee: will thou say that every one is a
fool?


Soul. A fool? no: but that every man thinks so.


Just. Oh that is al one.


Soul. Know Just, that every man has a bra^ch, and be thou sure, yt one
greter tha^ an other: but this is y^ difference of yt wise and y^ foolish, y^
the wise carries it covered, and the fools carry it open in their hands that
every man sees it.


Just. Ah, thou art disposed.


Soul. Be content, I will prove it thee in thy self: how many times have thou
walked in thy house, setting thy feet in the mids of the pauing tyles seking
with great diligence not to touch y^ ends?


Just. Oh* a thousand times, and have been about from my window to tell how
many run by, and to do diverse other childish things.


Soul. Then tell me, if thou had so done abroad, would not the children
have run about thee, as they do about fools?


Just. By my faith thou say truth, and I will no more deny, but that I also
have my fondness: and now do I think that Proverb most true, which I have
often heard spoken, that if foolishness were a pain, we should hear groaning
in every house.


Soul. I will tell thee more, thou shalt find few men in the world, that
have left any fame, but if thou do consider their life, they have born their
branch uncovered: but because it has to them come well to pass, they have
been praised, but I will not we talk any more of this. Let us turn to our
reasoning, tell me how thou that have no Grammar, nor have studied, did
know, that labor was given of God, to our first fathers for a penance and
punishment for their disobedience.


Just. Oh, do not thou know, that so often have red with me the Bible,
which I have?


Soul How do thou understand it?


Just Why should I not understand it, know thou not, that it is in vulgar?


Soul. Yes. I know.


Just Then why do thou ask me.


Soul. To make thee confess that thou have spoken, that if sciences and the
scripture were in the vulgar, thou should understand them.


Just Yea, as touching the words, but to pierce to ye sense, is an other matter.


Soul. It is enough, that thou should have no difficulty in understanding
the words, but only in the intelligence of the sense, which they have also,
that read it in Greek or Latin: for thou may not believe, that by
understanding a tongue, al authors be understood, and all sciences that be in
the same: for to do that, there is need of some schoolemaisters and
interpreters, and yet with great difficulty be understood: and the like
should come if they were in vulgar. But now it is enough for me that thou
know, that it is not tongues that make the learned men, but Science.


Just. Therefore a man can not be learned, unless he understand the Latin
tongue, wherein they be all written: what will thou learn in ours?


Soul. Thank the Romans that have translated, if the Latin tongue be rich,
and blame the Toscanes, that have not cared for theirs, if theirs be poor.


Just. All is, if the fault comes of the tongue, that it is not so copious
of words, as men can write in it.


Soul. New words be made, and brought to use as things require.


Just. What? Is it lawful to make new words in a tongue?


Soul. Yea, in them that be not dead, and of them only, of which they be
propre.


Just Which call thou dead?


Soul. Those which be not spoken naturally in no place, as at this day, the
Latin and the Greek, and in our tongue, it is not lawful to make new words to
them that be not propre and native unto it.


Just. Why, is it not lawful to those strangers that knows it?


Soul. Because it not being to them natural, they can not make them so, as
they shall have grace. Mark well such as in our tongue, of some now a days
have been devised.


Just. Then thou iudgest it is none error to make them in our tongue?


Soul. Not of him that speaks it naturally, rather were it laudable. Tell
me, do thou thyncke that either the Greek, or Latin tongue, were so
perfect and plentiful of words at the beginning as they were after when they
flourished with so worthy writers?


Just. I believe it not.


Soul. Be thou well assured: for there is none of these things that be
exercised of us, that was in the beginning perfectly produced of nature, or
found out of art: for if that could be done, the one of them should be in
vain: for if Nature brought forth every thing perfect, we should have no
need of Art: and if Art of her self could make them perfect, we should have
no need of Nature. Did not Cicero and Boetio, make new words when they would
put philosophy and Logike in the Latin tongue?


Just. Did they borow them of other nations?


Soul. Be thou sure they did.


Just. And of whom?


Soul. Of the Greeks, and the Greeks of the Hebrews, and the Hebrews of the
Egiptians. Haste thou not heard that nothing can be said, but that has been
said before? but the Romans being other men, and of other judgment than be
now the Toscanes, loving more their own things (as reason is) than others, did
study only strange tongs, to gather out of them that was good to enrich their
own.


Just. Truly in this me think they were worthy praise.


Soul. Search all the ancient things, and thou shalt see that there be few
Romans that wrote in Greek, as our Toscanes do in latin, which is not their
tongue, and for all their doing, it is well known, that tha^ purity is not
seen in their writings, which is seen in the style of proper Latins.


Just. In this they deserve to be excused, it not being their proper tongue as
thou say.


Soul. Rather they deserve to be double blamed. Do thou remember thou have
heard, that when M. Cato did read certain things of Albino the Roman, written
in Greek, and finding that in the beginning he did excuse him self, that they
were not written with that elegancie that they ought, because he was a citizen
of Rome and borne in Italy, and a stranger to the Greek tongue, he did not
only excuse him, but laughed at him, saying: Oh Albino, thou had rather ask
pardon of an error done, than not do it.


Just. Truly these reasons be so good, that I for me can say nothing against
them.


Soul. See how the Romans did seek to enrich their tongue, and thought to
bring no less noble fame by this, than by conquering to their Empire some
City or Kingdom: and that this is true, read the Proeme that Boethius makes
in his translation of Aristotle's Predicamentes, where he says: that being a
man of Counsel, and not apt to war, he would labor to instruct his
country men with doctrine, and that he hoped to deserve no less, nor be no
less profitable unto them, by teaching them the Art of Greek sapience, than
they which with force and valiantness, have subdued some City or Province to
the Roman Empire.


Just. O minds and thoughts, holy in deed, and words worthy a citizen of
Rome: for the very office of a citizen is always to help his country as much
as he can, to the which we be no less bound, than to our fathers and mothers.


Soul. And therefore at this day is their tongue had in so great
estimation, for that it is so full of good Sciences, as he that will obtain
them must needs first learn it: where, if our Toscanes would translate
likewise the same, to them that would learn them, they should not need to
spend four or six of their first best years to learn a tongue* that they
might by the mean thereof pass to the sciences, which other wise might he had
with more ease and more surety: for thou must know this, that we never learn a
strange tongue to possess it well, as we do our proper: and likewise a man
speaks not so assuredly, nor with such facility: and if thou beleuest not me,
mark them who^ thou know study the Latin tongue, that when they would
speak in it, it seems they beg, they utter their words with such difficulty,
and speak so leisurely.


Just. Thou say truth, but this way of the Romans was very good, to
translate into their tongue so many goodly things, that he that will
understand them, must be forced to learn the tongue, and so was dispersed
throughout the world.


Soul. They did not only this, but whiles they were Lords of the world, they
caused it to be learned of the most part of their subjects by force.


Just. And what did they?


Soul. They had made a law, that no Ambassador should be heard, unless he
spoke Latin: and besides, all causes that were heard in all Provinces under
their government, and al process, was written in the Latin tongue: wherefore
all the noble men of every country, and all the advocates and attorneys were
forced to learn the tongue.


Just. I do not marvel though Rome became so great, if they used this way in
other things.


Soul. Of this I will not reason, for the goodly things that they got of all the world, do make clear testimony to all that consider it.


Just. O custom very laudable, O citizens very lovers of their country.


Soul. This custom, Just, was not only of the Romans, but of al other
nations: Seek as much as thou will, and thou shall never find that any Hebrew
has written in Egypt tongue, nor Greek in Hebrew, nor Latin (as I have said) in
Greek, and if there be any, they be very few.


Just. Where then have these Toscanes gotten this use, to write in Gramer as
thou speak?


Soul. Of their inordinate love of themselves, and not of their country, or
of their tongue, for so doing, they have thought to be taken the more learned.


Just. They do as the Physician that Jones had, which to seem the more learned,
did ordain certain receipts with certain names out of use, that made me to
marvel: among the which I remember one morning, that he made me a receipt, for
the impostume that thou know I had: where amongst certain other things, one
was called Rob, an other Tartaro, and an other Altea: so as I thought I must
have sent into the new found Islands for an Interpreter: and when it came to
pass, the one was Soap, the other Lees of a vessel, and the third M^^owes.


Soul. Oh thou have said well Just, and if thou considerest well, this world
is nothing else but a confusion: yet if the Toscanes would endeavor them to
translate sciences into their tongue, I have no doubt at all, but in short
time it should come into greater reputation than it is, for it is seen that it
pleases much, and is this day much understood and desired, and this comes
only for natural beauty and goodness of it, the which thing strangers not
knowing, many times going about to pullish it, do blemish it, and so it comes
properly to pass to her as does to a woman, which thinking to make her self
fair with painting, does utterly destroy her self.


Just. How can that be?


Soul. I will tell thee, whiles they seek to make it more beautiful, and
make the clauses like to the Latin, they destroy the facility and natural
order of it, in the which consists the beauty: and besides, they will take some
words used of Boccace or Petrark very seldom, the which they thyncke the
goodlyer, because they be seldom used of them, and because they have not by
nature the true signification, nor the true sound in the ear, they put them in
every place, and many times out of purpose, and so they hurt the natural
beauty thereof.


Just. I doubt if they cannot inunitate other, it might not be said to them,
as one Pippo said to Francis di Loma, who thinking to excuse him self of a
crossebeame which he had made in the gallerie of the Innocents, which bowed
toward the earth, saying he had taken it out of S. John's Temple, he answered,
thou have counterfaited only the worst of it: but if the tongue be of such
perfection as thou say, whereof comes it, that many of these learned, do blame
so much them, that translate any thing?


Soul. With what reason?


Just. They say the tongue is not apt, nor worthy, that such things should be
translated into it, and that it takes from them the reputation, and much
embaseth them.


Soul. All tongues, by the reasons I Translation in vulgar.
have showed thee before, be apt to utter their conceit, and the business of
them that speak, and if it were otherwise, they that use them, make them so:
therefore allege not this excuse, for it is nothing worth.


Just. What cause then can move them to say, that things translated into the
vulgar, be abased and lose their reputation.


Soul. That which I told thee this other day, which was the occasion of so
many other evils, even the wicked ennie and desire they have to be compted more
than other.


Just. Surely I believe thou say truth, for I remember me, that being one day
among these learned folk, and one of them showing that Bernard Segne had
translated; Aristotle's Rhetorike into the bulgare, one said he had done a
great evil, and being asked why, he answered, it was not meet that every
vulgar should understand that, which an other with great travail, had
learned in many years, in Latin and Greek books.


Soul. O words inconvenient, I will not say only to a Christian, but to a
man, knowing how much we are bound to love one an other, and more to ye soul
than to the body, to who^ no greater good can be done, than to make easy the
way of understanding.


Just. But soft a while, I remember they say an other thing.


Soul. What?


Just. They say that the things that be translated out of one tongue into an
other, never have the force nor grace that they have in their own.


Soul. They have not that in their own that they have in other, for every
tongue has her fynesse and delicacie, and peradventure the Toscane more than
an other: and he that will see it, let him read Dante or Petrarke, where they
have spoken of any thing that was before spoken of a Latin or Greek Poet, and
he shall see they pass him far, and that in few things they be inferior.


Just. But in translations they must have more regard to the sense, than to
the words.


Soul. I know they translate, by reason of science, and not to see the force
or the beauty of the tongs: and if it were not so, the Romans that thought
their tongue the fairest in the world, would not have translated the feats of
Mago of Carthage, into their tongue, nor tho Grecians that were so proud and
vayn glorious of theirs, (calling all the rest barbarous) the Egiptians and
the Chaldeis works: Nevertheless in translating, beside that a man ought to
be faith full, he must seek to speak the words as ornately as he can.
Therefore it is necessary to him that translateth, to know well the one tongue
and the other, and then to possess well the things or Sciences that be
translated, that he may utter them well and pleasantly according to the nature
of the tongue, for if a man will tell the things of one tongue, with the manner of
an other tongue, it has no grace at al: and if this were observed, translating
perhaps should not be so much blamed.


Just. They say further, that they do contrary to the authors intent.


Soul. How can that be? seeing who soever writes, he does it for none other
purpose, but that his things being preserved by letters, and not los^e by
voices, might be understood of all the world.


Just. Then thou think that to translate sciences in our tongue is good.


Soul. Yea, I affirm nothing can be more profitable nor laudable, because the
greater part of errors, comes of ignorance, and princes ought to regard it,
because they be fathers of the people: and to a father appertains not only
to govern his children, but also to teach them and correct them, and if they
will not do this in every thing, at least they ought to do it in necessary
things.


Just. And which be they?


Soul. The laws, as well divine as human.


Just. What profit should that bring to men?


Soul. What profit? how much more should they be lovers and defenders of Gods
law in vulgar.
christian religion, if it were begone to be read of children, and from hand to
hand exercised in the same, as the Hebrews do, which thing they can not do, not
having them translated and well placed in the vulgar?


Just. It is no marvel though the Hebrews do all so well know to speak of
things of their law, and a shame it is to christians which teach their children
to read either matters of merchandise or other things whereof no good is to be
gotten, where they ought to teach them first what appertains to a christian,
Service in vulgar.
knowing that those things which be learned in the first years, be ever more
than other kept in memory.


Soul. And beside this, with how much more reverence and attention should we
stand at service, if we did understand what is said?


Just. Truly it is so.


Soul. Tell me with what devotion, or what mind do men praise God, not
understanding what they say? thou know well the talk of Children and
Popeniayes is not called a speech, but an imitation of a sound only, because
they understand not what they say (for speech is properly to express words,
that may signify the conceit and the meaning of him that speaks) wherefore
our reading or singing of psalms, not understanding what we say, is like the
tatling of Children, or the babbling of Popeniayes. And I know no religion but
ours, that kepes this form: for y^ Hebrews praise God in Hebrew, the Greeks in
Greek, the Latins in Latin, the Sclauonians in Sclauony: thanks be to S.
Jerome that translated every thing in their tongue, as a very lover of his
cu^trey.


Just. Surely my Soul, this thy opinion pleases me much.


Soul. It may please thee, for it is S. Paul's, who writes to the
Corinthians, that they ought to say their Service in Hebrew. How shall an
ignorant say Amen upon your blessing, if he understand not what is said? and
what fruit shall he ever get?


Just. Whereof comes it then y^ when these things were first taken out of
Hebrew* they were not put into ye vulgar?


Soul. Because then for the confusion of many barbarous nations that were that
time in Italy, there was none other tongue but Latin, which was understand
through out: and mark that there is found no writing in that time, of holy
things, but in that tongue: and let this suffice for the laws of God. Now
let us come to man's: if they be those that must rule men, and after whose
precept we ought to live, why are they in a tongue that few do understand? The
Romans that made so many, and had so many of the Greeks, they made them in
none other tongue but in their own. And likewise, Licurgus and Solon and
others, that gave laws to all Greece, made them in none other tongue, but in
that the people used.


Just. If this be so necessary a thing as thou say, what means it, that as
well holy as civil laws be not translated into vulgar.


Soul. The covetousness of priests Couetise of Priests and Friars.
and friars, to whom the portion of the tenthes, which God by law has ordained
for them, not being sufficient, desiring to live so sumptuously as they do,
does hide them, and sell them by little and little, as they say, by inch, and
yet as they list, because they will afray men with a thousand threatenings,
which do not so sound in the law as they interpret, so as they have got from
the poor seculers, more than the one half of that they have.


Just. Ah this is a fault which I think is not only to be given to priests, but
to every one, for there is no man that thinks upon other thing, but to get
money from an others bag, and put it into his: but it is true, that priests
Friars and notaries that do it with words, be more witty than other.


Soul. Alas, it should not come to them so easily, if me^ had more knowledge
of Scripture than they have: and the cause why man's law is not translated, is
likewise the impiety of many doctors and advocates, that will sell common
things, and that they might the better do it, they have found this pretty toye,
that contractes can not be made in vulgar, but only in their fair Grammar,
which they little understand, and others less. I marvel certainly, that men
have suffered such a thing, under the which may be wrought so many deceipts.


Just. Though that be not so, yet it were more profitable, they were done in our
tongue: for a man should understand what he does, and then witness what they
have to testify, and they should see them written also, that they took not the
name only, and then make a long dashe at their pleasure, puttyng to every
word, Et caetera, which (as I think) is nothing but an hook, where as men not
understanding what they do, it is enough for them to say yea, and do not
regard the conditions, that many times be comprehended, whereby does grow many
suits.


Soul. And that is the cause I think why they do it: and therefore I will say
this unto thee: We have no less cause to lament of priests and of lawyers,
tha^ have those Princes subjects, which would sell them water and light.


Just. Of them, I let thee speak as much as thou will, but of Friars and
Priests I would not have thee say evil: for as I have herd the^ say, it becomes
not secular men to reprehende them.


Soul. Behold one of the opinions which the world believes true, because
they understand not the holy letters: tell me, are not all we the children of
God, and consequentely, the brethren of Christ?


Just. Yes, we be.


Soul. And brethren, in that they be brethren, be they not equal?


Just. Yes they be.


Soul. Therefore we as christians and children of god, be equal: and to one
brother apertaines to reprehe^d an other.


Just. That is true: but they have this dignity of priesthode that makes the^
more worthy than us.


Soul. What greater dignity ca^ be than to be y^ children of God? Will thou
yt the less light should cover the greater? It is greater dignity to be a
Christian, than a priest, or a Prince, A Christian.
which be offices given of God, and make men the ministers of GOD. Thou know
it is more to be the son of a prince, than his minister.


Just Then am I more than ye pope.


Soul. Not so: for first he is a christian as thou art, in yt which you be
equal, then because he is chosen to be a minister under God, one way he is
more than thou: but for all this, it is not prohibited thee, to reprehende the
errors that he does and commits, as a man and as a christian, so thou do
it with that reverence that charity teaches. And that this is true, thou have
example of saint Paul the Apostle, which says: He reproved Peter, that was
his greater, because he was worthy of it.


Just. Of truth this thy opinion does not displease me, but I will not speak it:
for beside their authority, they have also force, and defend themselves with
arms, seeing their excommunications will no longer serve them, as in the
primitive church, where when they did excommunicate any, suddenly either he
fell dead, or was carried away with deuyls.


Soul. Surely, if they had not other armure than their maledictions; a man
might do with them, as the soldier which haning taken from a Friar half a
piece of cloth, which he had begged, and the Friar thretning him he would
require it again at the day of Judgment, he took all the rest, saying: Seeing I
have so long a day of payment, I will have this too?


Just. Alas, why can they not do miracles as they have done?


Soul. Well said saint Thomas of Aquine, when Pope Innocent had a mou^tain of
money before him, and showed it him, saying: Thou see Thomas, the church can
no more say now, Argentum and aurum non est mihi, he answered Thomas of Aquine
to Pope Innocent.
no: neither Surge, and ambula.


Just. O my soul, thou know so many things, that certainly thou make me
marvel, and thou art much wiser and learned than I took thee. But tell me,
could thou have known them without me? for thou have said unto me, that we
be al one thing, and whiles thou art united with me, thou can not work but
in me.


Soul. O Just, this would be too long, and I will we defer it till an other
time, for it is now day, and time thou go to thy work.


Just. Oh thou say truth, it is clear day in deed. Oh how the time passes,
and a man sees it not, when he does or reasons of any thing that pleases
him.


The.vj. Reasoning. SOVLE. JUST.
WHen I consider sometime with my self, how great the pleasure must be, which
the happy souls feel, which being departed from their body, with good grace
of their lord, be returned into their heavenly country, to fill themselves with
the conte^plation of the first and chief verity, I do not marvel a whit though
Saint Paul (which had tasted part, when he was ravished to the third heaven)
did say, that he desired nothing else, but to be losed from the body, and be
with Christ: and the great delight, that I sometime feel when I am free from
the impediments of the body as I am now, induces me to consider it. I can
(with that light that my Lord has given me, in making me like unto his image
and similtude) consider the nature of so fair and diverse creatures sensible,
of the which this universal is composed and beautified, and by the mean of
them to ascend to the contemplation of celestial and divine things: whereof I
say often to my self, how ought they to be content, that be altogether attente
to regard in those divine treasures, and my contentation being so great in
beholding those few knowledges that I have of this and them, yet am not so
perfectly bent to the like work, because those powers, whiles they attend to
digestion and other operations necessary to the conservation of my body, be so
united with me, yt I cannot shift but they give me some impediment: albeit by
the mean of natural heat, they seething the meat, do make a fumositie to
rise to the head, which being joined together, do bind the senses, and gender
sleep, whereby I may return into my self, as I am now. O happy be they in
deed, which being but little occupied in the cares of the world, and in the
visions that the senses do impresse in their fantasy, remain and enjoy them
selves. Certainly it is no marvel, though they sometime see the things to come,
whereby men do honor them so much, and call them Princes, half Gods, and
things verily divine. But alas, I can no longer tarry in sweet things and
delectable study: for I feel the natural heat has so fined and consumed
those fumes that cause sleep, that Just will wake by and by. Therefore let us
return to our old business, and if he will not occupy me otherwise, we will
talk a while together, as we have done.

Just. Oh with what consolation and what pleasure have I slept a while? I
cannot tell whether it has be^ a dream or other thing, which has given me
such a contentation whiles I slept, as I think I never felt such a comfort in
all my life before.


Soul. Thank me Just, if thou have had any such comfort in thy sleep, for
I have been the chief cause thereof: although thou have help me somewhat with
the little eating thou made yesterday.


Just. O my dear Soul, I thank thee very heartily, but tell me, in what sort
have thou ben the principal cause?


Soul. I not being let, whiles thou were bound in sleep, with
superfluity of meat, or occupied in any of our common occupations, I
retired into my self, and there began to be very busily occupied with certain
knowledges which I have gotten by help of thy instruments.


Just. Stay a while, and before thou In the. 24. line of the page before going,
in the place of very busily occupied, read in Negotiation.
go any further, tell me what thou meanest by being in negotiation, for as
for me, I understand it not.


Soul. Negotiation is nothing else but to be doing and occupied in some thing,
doing in it as much as behooves, and it is a word that has his beginning of a
latin word, called Negotiu^, which in our tongue signifies business.


Just. It is of late used, for I do not remember that ever I heard it before.


Soul. So it is: but have not I told thee, that from hand to hand when tongs
go to perfection, that they must take new words for their purpose?


Just. I begin to believe it in deed.


Soul. So as they can not say, that sciences cannot be translated into our
tongue, for lack of words, for new may be made in ours, as has be^ in other.


Just. It is well: now to thy talk.


Soul. Exercising me, as I have said, being free from the impedimentes in
those knowledges, I felt so great co^tentation and pleasure, yt I reduced my
self into a quiet, which did not only make me happy, but also did pass into
thee, holding al thy parts content in them selves, whereof came that quiet and
sweet sleep, yt thou have so praised.


Just. O if it be in thy power to do this, and thou love me as y^ say, why
do thou not cause me to sleep thus always, having so much need of it?


Soul. Because of the enmity that is between thee and me, or to speak better,
the contrariety of nature, many times does not let me do it.


Just. How so?


mSoule. I will not speak now of the impedimentes which these organes wherein
the senses be exercised, do give me, when they be altered of thee, either with
too much eating or drynking, or with too much labor, and with a thousand
other passions: but tell me this, how often do I, being forced of this thy
part of lust, give place, and leave thee to do things, which be clean
contrary to my nature. Wherefore I, seeing I am commanded of a power inferior
to my self, fall into so great discomfort, that thou also felest it: for our
union becomes a continual bataile, which does suffer neither of us to be at
rest. Where as if thou did obey me, and dydst let me hold the bridle in my
hand as were convenient, we should live in such peace, that the operations
that proceed of me, as they that have their beginning of thee, and be given us
principally of nature, for our conservation, should be brought to their end
without any difficulty.


Just. I know certainly, thou say truth, and therefore I minded to request
thee, that thou woldst give some order and rule of it, what I ought to do, that
we might long keep our selves in union, with the least grief and displesure
that is possible: I will not now say without any, for that I know to be
impossible in this life, But before thou do this, I would desire thee to rid
me of that doubt, that much troubles me, and holds me in suspense, and that
is (as I said unto thee yesterday morning) how thou know these things without
me.


Soul. It is an hard thing which thou demaundest of me, and before this time
has made many fall (which have been accounted wise) into great errors:
therefore it might be better for thee not to know it: for to know that needs
not, genders more confusion. Nevertheless, for the satisfaction of thy desire,
I will tell thee what the opinions have been: but I will not after, that thou
with thy discourse of reason should confirm or content thy self with any of
them, but submit thy desire to the determination of christian religion, which
because it is guided of light more clear and sure, than is the sapience of
man, it can not err, as it does.


Just. What light is that?


Soul. The most holy light of faith, Faith.
reveled of God to the world by the mouth of his servants, and last by the
same of his most sanctified son, the way, the truth, and light of y^ world,
that the creatures reasonable might by the mean of this be brought to their
perfection, which certainly is nothing else but a contemplation of the first and
unspeakable verity.


Just Both in this and other, I will do that thou would have me.


Soul. Thank thine age, which has so cooled thy blood, and weakened thy
force, as thou leauest a part the pleasures of the world, and art reduced to
this way of life. Wherefore it may be rather said (as once that Citizen did)
that sin has left thee, before thou it.


Just. Be it as it may, I will not contend with thee.


Soul. Nor I would not for this, but thou sholdest continue to do well, for if
thou have begone to live in order by necessity, this servile fear (for so will
I call it) might one day by the grace of God, be turned into the fear of a
son. By the which thou should deserve no less thank of him, than reputation
of the world.


Just. It can hardly be brought about, but youth and other ages will have
their course, and he that does it not young, will do it old, as those birds
that can not sing in May, sing after in September: but let us speak no more of
this, deliver me from the doubt, I told thee.


Soul. Although there have been many opinions of them, which the world
calls wise, which have sought how I should know and understand things,
they may be reduced to two, for two principal sects How the Soul knows.
have been that have spoken and written of me: One of them is, that hold I am
immortal, all divine, created of God, most good and great, and poured into
thee: and of these Plato, Plato.
with his other Achademicall Philosophers was chief: an other is of them that
hold that I have my beginning with my body. And of this, Aristotle with his
Peripatetical scholars is Aristotle.
head, although he spoke not so, as it might clearly be gathered of his
words, whether he held I was mortal or immortal: but he strikes at large
sometime, and sometime so at hand, as some hold by him, that I am immortal,
and some mortal.


Just. How does he it?


Soul. I will tell thee. Have thou ever heard of one that asked counsel to
take a wife? And when he said, She is fair, take her quod the other: And
when he said, she is of evil blood: take her not then said he: but she has a
good dowry, take her then. No, she is somewhat proud, take her not: And so he
still answered yea or no, as he brought forth new matter. And so does
Aristotle with me: For when he considers me united with my body, he says, I
am mortal, and when he considers me, as an agent intellection, and that I
can work without it, he says, I am immortal: so as finally, he that reads
him, is never certain, whether I am mortal or immortal.


Just. Peradventure he was not certain himself.


Soul. I think so surely. Wherefore he did, as they do, that love y^ worlds
glory more than the truth, which when they know not a thing, because they
will not lose their estimation, they will not confess it, but speak
confusedly, that men should rather think they will not speak it, than that
they know it not.


Just. Of how great evil is this worldly pride the cause?


Soul. Yea, and that maruellously. Consider a little in things of religion,
that they which the world calls divines, for yt they will not confess they
do not understand things appertaynyng to Faith, by natural light, they have
taken upon them to prove it by propositio^s of Philosophy, which is al Divines
scholastical.
contrary to Faith, for that proceeds with order and natural principles, and
faith exceeds and passes all nature.


Just. Who have these ben?


Soul. Those which commonly we call Scholasticall, which have sought a reason
of every thing that God has made, with their learning.


Just. I marvel he is not once surely angry with them.


Soul. That is, because he is the chief goodness.


Just. As for me, I know no prince but that would be angry with his servant,
that would know a reason of all his doings. Me think this is plainly to call
God into the consistory. But tell I pray thee, whether these be the divines,
that are called Paris schole?


Soul. Even they, thou have hit it.


Just. Oh, those matters are decade. For Bartol ye bokeseller my neighbor has
told me, that he sells no more of the^, and that he has an hundred horsloade
which he would barter for clean paper, and give somewhat to boot.


Soul. Tha^k ye Lutherans, who giving. Lutheranes.
no faith but to ye holy Scripture, have caused, y^ men be forced to return to
read them, and to leave such disputatio^s.


Just. Mark that it is true, which is said: That many times of a great evil,
comes some good. But let us leave this, and turn to our talk.


Soul. Of these two sects which I spoke, Plato which held I was immortal and
divine, seeing that I understood every thing, said, I was created of God, full
of all sciences eternally. And after when I descended into thee, (for so God
had ordained that I should purgo me of certain spots that I had) I forgot them
al: and after by help of Schoolemaisters and exercises in studies, I returned
to my mind, and so he said, that our learning was a remembrance, and not a
learning of new.


Just. That opinion I could like well enough.


Soul. Thou would say so, if thou heardest the reasons that he makes,
which be such, as they made Origene Origin.
and many other christian divines to hold the same opinion: and Austen also,
when he wrote upon the Genesis Austen.
although he did retract afterward.


Just. Did Origene revoke?


Soul. Not that I know.


Just. And did he say too, that you were made of God eternally?


Soul. Yea, and that we were of angels shape, which opinion was after reproved
of the church as erroneous and heretical.


Just. Thou make me now remember of my neighbor, which said, that our souls
were those little Angels, which were not comprehended in sin, nor in service of
God, but between both, and were after sent into us to be determined, whether
they would follow good or evil: and it was never known he held this opinion in
his life, but after his death it was found in his books. Wherefore his bones
were taken up, and buried out of the church yard.


Soul. Who was that?


Just. Matthew Palmer, do thou not remember? but think thou he was damned
for this?


Soul. I do not believe it: for though this opinion is holden erroneous, yet he
feared God, and regarded the honor of the same, and he was a lover of his
neighbor, as thou do well know, in the which things consists all
christian religion. So as it is not to be believed, that a man of so holy and
good behauior, for holding such an opinion, which is not against the honor of
God, should be damned: and chiefly, believing he did not err, and being ever
disposed to change to the contrary, when need had been, as he so plainly
does confess in his books.


Just. I will not then say, that as his body was taken up, by the commandment
of him that then did govern the Florentine Church, so his soul was sent to
Hell.


Soul. It were evil for us Just, if it lay in their power to send us to Hell
as it is in their power to take us Purgatory popish.
from Purgatory, (as they say) and take none out, but such as pleases
them, or pay them somewhat: for so would they send all them that were not
obedient to their wills, what so it were.


Just. Of Purgatory I would not much care, since there be Bulls found out to
fetch us from thence.


Soul. But they give no more, for as they did put much money in their purses
one way, so are they great losers an other.


Just. How losers?


Soul. Of that is sprung the Lutherane doctrine, which has caused them
(beside the loss) a thousand dishonors. I will speak of none, but of him that
took in hand to deliver a man's father from Purgatory, promysyng a Floren, and
as soon as he had it in his hand, he ran his way, saying you said he is
out, and that is enough for me: for I can never think you will be so cruel,
that you will put him there again for one Florens sake.


Just. Here it was like to that that Carlo Aldobrandy did to the obseruant
Friars, to whom he was bound by a legacy of his uncle to pay every year two
Florens, to say an office for his soul. Then a certain pardon coming from
Iulio, whereof these Friars were ministers, gyuyng pardon to take souls out
of Purgatory, the said Charles took one for his uncle, and made it so to be
written with their hand, and after when they went to him for their two
Florens, according to the legacy, he answered he was no more bound to give it
the^, because he was in Paradise, and had no need, and in Hell was no
redemption, and out of Purgatory they themselves had delivered him, and showed
them their own hand. But let us leave this talk: for I will not that we speak
against the Church.


Soul. Ah Just, if thou knew that the church is nothing else but the
university of good Christians, that be in the grace of God (and not these
vicars Church.
that go hither and thither, fleeing the people of the world, or these
Friars, that have devised to deliver them self from the penance of labor,
which God has given us, exercisyng the inquisition, rather to maintain
themselves fat, and live at ease, than for charity) thou would not so say:
but let it suffice thee that Dant says.


For their curse we do not lose,
The love eterne, our chief repose.
Just. I can not tell, but I think it an hard thing, not to be buried in the
Burial in Churchyard.
churchyard.


Soul. Ah Just, it is well seen thou art a body, and thinks after nothing
but ye body. Do thou not understand that this is one of y^ things that has
been ordained of them, rather for the profit of them, than any benefit of us?


Just. What profit have they?


Soul. They make it be paid by weight of gold: which thing Pontanus
Christians unhappy.
considering, used to say, that christians were the most unhappy and
miserable nation in the world, because they must pay for the very earth they
were buried in.


Just. In very deed it is a very wicked thing.


Soul. And where they have their Mass for a work of mercy, they ought to call
it a work of gain.


Just. Friar Succiell said well, that there were six works only of mercy.
And when he preached, he exhorted men to give meat to the hungry, to clad the
naked, and the other good works: and when he came to the burial of the dead,
of that (said he) I will say nothing, for he that will not bury the^ let him
keep them in the house. But let us leave these talks, and make an end to
tell me that thou had begoon.


Soul. I am content, therefore mark well Aristotle with them that followed
him, the which me think hold me mortal, saying: That I have my beginning
with thee, and that I can work nothing without thee, and that I am nothing of
my self but only apt to learn, by the mean of a certain light, I have in my
self, called of them intellect agent, by the which I understand certain
things which be intelligible by their own nature, as that one thing can not be
and be in all one time, and such like, called of them first principles, and of
thy Dant first knowledges: and with the help of these they say, that I learn
all things. So if thou hold these things with Aristotle, thou canste never
know, how I can do these things without thee. But if thou hold with Plato,
thou shalt have no difficulty at all.


Just. Then what shall I do, if thou tellest me nothing else, I remain more
confused than I was before, not knowing which of these two be true?


Soul. Marvel not, for such is the sapie^ce of the world, and al they that
will walk only with the light of that, the more they learn, the less they
know, and wax continually more uncertain and less quiet. Which Solomon would
very well signify, when he says: He that joins Sapience to a man, joins
dolor.


Just. Well, what way then must I take to satisfy my desire?


Soul. Run to the Light of Faith as I said in the beginning.


Just. that were to enter into a more un certainty.


Soul. Why?


Just. Because the things of Faith, as thou say, be much more difficult, and
farther pass our knowledge, tha^ of nature.


Soul. Yea to them that seek to understand them with natural light, as I
said before, but not to him that walks with simplicity of heart and light of
the same.


Just. And how shall one do to have this light?


Soul. To prepare as much as ma^s power may to receive it, and then as the
Apostles did, to ask it of God, who having said to us: Ask, and it shall be
given you, he will not fail to give them us.


Just. And what preparation is it, we must make?


Soul. First to persuade our selves, that there is one intelligence that
understands more than we, and though we do not understand how he can make a
thing, yet it follows not but he can do it.


Just. In very deed it were a great presumption, not only a foolyshnesse, to
say, I understand not this thing, and I can not do it, therefore it cannot be
done.


Soul. Yet there be inow, that hold this opinion, and they may promise them
selves, never to have the like light, because it is written: God resists the
proud, and to the humble he gives grace.


Just. And worthily.


Soul. Further it behooves to be exercised in the study of holy scripture,
and above all to be a lover of religion, and ever to have it in honor and
reverence most great: for who so ever is a despiser of his religion, ought not
to be called a man, much less to be put among the lovers of sapience, as
Aristotle says of those Philosophers that did despise and deny the Gods. And
so doing, we obtain of God, the light of Faith, the which as I have said
unto thee, is only it, that may quiet man's understanding.


Just. Well, seeing thou iudgest it good to quiet my self, and be firm in the
determinations of the faith, I am content, and therefore I pray thee, that
leaving those things which the wise of the world think, thou would tell
me what the christian religion has determined: for in the other I never found
quiet nor contentation.


Soul. Thou must believe, because so it is, that so soon as the bodies be
disposed, God of his infinite power does create us divine and immortal, and
does create us all equal, as touching those powers without the which we should
be no reasonable souls, but after gives vssome particular gifts for our
benefit, knowing that by the mean of them, we may the more easily obtain our
perfection, and that we might work also holily in the ministry of God,
whereof he gives to one the gift of prophecy, to an other, the interpretation
of Scriptures: and to one, one thing, and to an other acording as his sapience
disposes, and seems good to his goodness. And yet no man ought to lamente,
though it be in his power to make of one matter, some vessels for honor, and
some for rebuke.


Just. I thought you all had been equal, and that those differences yt are
known in a man, had risen of the goodness, or of the imperfection of the
body, and had not been particular gifts of God.


Soul. So thinks also, all the wise of the world, which walk only with the
light of nature. And therefore not to lose more time, thou must know, that if I
know any thing, which thou thoughtest not, that it is a gift, which God has
given me, because it has so seemed to his goodness for our benefit, that I
being illuminated, might give light, and govern thee. Of the which thing we
ought much to tha^k him, because he has only given it for a weal: and I
ought to guide thee in his ways, and thou not to strive against my counsels.


Just. I know certainly (my soul) that thou say truth, and I feel that of
these thy words is grown in me a certain surety, a contentation, and such a
quiet, that I am determined never hereafter to be contrary to thy will, nor
rebel against thy counsel and laws. Wherefore I pray thee, that thou
would tell me, what I ought to do, to maintain my self in this sweet
union, and chiefly in those operations that depend and rise properly of my
self.


Soul. I think it shall be very meet, because I can not well work if thou be
not disposed. But because it is now broad day, and the thing is somewhat long:
I will that we tarry till to morrow, and therefore go to thy business.


The.vij. Reasoning. JUST. SOVLE.
O How the time flees away, it is day, and yet me think I went but now to bed.
This comes because I have slept well, thinking of nothing. Wherefore I held it
out to the vttermoste, from my first sleep till I awoke, and therefore have
not known the time between, for I have heard of a wise man, that it was the
soul, that by musing made ye time, whereof it comes, that they who be in
misery, think the days and the nights long, because they ever think of their
infelicitie: and the like haps to him that lokes for some thing that he
desires, because he thinks always of it. When I was a boy, I thought it a
thousand year from one Shrouetide till an other, because I desired it, and now
me think the one is no sooner gone, but the other is come. And peradventure I
am as he that has money enough, and passes not what he spend, but when he
has but little left, he begins to spare, and thinks upon it, as though he
were robbed when he departs with any. But let every man say what he will, sone
is a year, ten, and twenty, gone, and man's life is a short thing in deed, so
as it is a great foolishness of us, that shall so little time tarry here, to
charge and wrap our selves in so many matters of the world, which kepes a man
always either in no small fear, or in great trouble, and the more he has,
with the more he must strive. But much more foolish be we to fight with our
selves, as we do the most part of our time, by the reason of our immoderate
wills, which we norish with appetite. Wherefore we live with continual remorse
of reason, which does always molest us: whereas if we did subdue our part
sensitive to the reasonable, as becomes, we should live in merry and perpetual
peace, first with our selves, and then with little dolor or fear of things
which the world and fortune brings, as I know by experience, since that, that
my soul being illumined of my lord, she has made mine eyes also open,
whereby, being minded from hence forth to live as shall become a man, I feel in
me a quiet and contentation, as the like I have not felt in my life: therefore
blessed be thou always (O my soul) that have ben the cause thereof.

Soul. What do thou muse Just, that thou art so waking? what did thou
think of?


Just. I thought how contented a man might live, and how much more happy his
life should be, if he would live after reason, and not after senses, as he
does. Whereof it comes, that working, as a man may say, contrary to his nature,
he lives in an unquietness, and in a war with him self most great. For much
greater be the vexatio^s that our inward passions work, than the outward.


Soul. What other greater good had our first father Adam before he sinned,
than this inward peace and quiet?


Just. Oh why have it not we as well as he?


Soul. Because we have lost thorough his disobedience, the gift of that
justice, which they call original, which God had given him, which was nothing
but a bridle and a rule, that kept the inward parts subdued and obedient to
the superior, by the which the flesh did not kick against the spirit, nor the
sensitive parts wholly did desire other in man, but the preservation of the
singular, called indeuided, by the benefit of the part reasonable, and not for
delight, as they do now, nor did seek other than the good it self: the
which thing thy Dante no less pleasantly than learnedly does express, when
being brought to the earthly Paradise, in the state of innocence, he caused
Virgill thus to say.


Free I am, and right is thy pretense,
And will not do a fault for pleasure of the sense.
Just. Well my Soul, me think I am returned into this state, since I began to
be reconciled with thee, and having no more matter to trouble me, and not
desiring other, than to live after thy counsel, I feel such a contentment in
my self, that I think I am happy. But I lament me much of thee, that thou have
not taught me thus to live in my youth, for then would I have thought my self
most happy.


Soul. Lament of thy self, for thou wast the cause, for I never failed, when
thou gave thy self wholly a pray to thy senses, as beasts do, to reprove thy
self, at the least with the remorse of conscience, if not otherwise. But thou
driven of passions and seruent desires, which that age brings with it, did
bewrap thy self in false pleasures of the world, that either thou dydst not
hear me, or not regard mine admonitions.


Just. I will not here after do so again.


Soul. Think of it in time, as I have said unto thee before, for when thou
go about it, thou shall find it yet pain full, because of thy former use of
life.


Just. Well, be it as thou will, we will no more strive, and I will do after thy
way, but I pray thee, y^ thou would give me some rule, how I should rule my
self, that I may live in accord with thee, this little time that is left, and
show me what I ought to regard that I might be with thee so long as might be,
and with ye fewest displeasurs, as well of thee as of me.


Soul. This pleases me much, for I also, though I can attain to my chief
perfectness, I desire to be in thee, so long as may, for without thee, I am in
a manner imperfect, and this can not be but by the mean of life: which as I
said unto thee before, consists in natural heat, and grounded moisture, of
the which until the one be spent by violence, or ye other by old age, the life
endures: the which thing, some Philosophers considering, said, I was nothing
else but a temperature of complexion. If I then teach thee to maintain this
temperature, I shall teach thee to live long, but see you suffrest not thy self
after to be overcome of will.


Just. Of this I have said unto thee diverse times you sholdst have no suspicion.


Soul. Many things there be, that have need to be considered and regulate
necessary to the life of man, which, for being more perfect than any other
creature, and better membred, that by the multitude of instruments, he might
exercise many operations, and not one alone or few, as other creaturs do, he
has need of more things than any other, and chiefly ought to consider the
air, the place, and the houses where he dwell.


Just. This I perceive well, for of the Air.
air I am nourished by breathing continually, and of the place and habitacio^,
I take great comfort, if they be agreeable to my nature, and so contrary, if
they be not good.


Soul. The habitacio^ which thou have, Habitation
is very good and meet for thy behavior, for it is safe from moisture,
defended from wind, and stands toward the south, that makes it no less
pleasant tha^ helthful.


Just. In good faith, I may reasonably content me herein.


Soul. For the air thou need not make any business, being borne in
Florence, where it is most helthsome, and though it seems to some a little
sharp those two months in the heart of the winter, thou may by some
diligence defend thy self in the house with fires, and with windows well
closed, and abroad with wearing somewhat on thy head, y^ may defend thee,
seeing they use now no more hoods, as they did in old time, the which, as our
au^cients said, were found only for that effect: therefore they were made with
great rolls that bare out, and full of soft rushes, to be the more light.


Just. In this also I will do as thou wishest me.


Soul. Thou must also use great diligence in thy Diet, both in quantity Diet.
and quality, for nature in this age is so weak, that she may not be troubled
with much meat, nor vexed with variety thereof, and further the natural heat is
so weak also, that hardly can we digest the things that be contrary*


Just. Teach me a rule to keep, and I will not fail to do it.


Soul. Thou shall divide that quantity of meat which thou iudgest
sufficient to the conservation of thy life, without much trouble of nature,
into two or three meals a day, as thy stomach Meals.
shall bear, and of this thou shall not fail being none other impediment.


Just. This pleases me.


Soul. And because, as I have told thee, nature has for none other end,
ordained that thou should eat and drink, but to restore thee moisture and
natural heat, thou shall use for thy meats, all those things that be hot and
moist, for of those thou may only take nouriture apt to preserve thee alive
and hole.


Just. Which be they?


Soul. All those things generally, that be sweet, for among those tastes,
Sweet.
only the sweet nourishe, and the other seem to be made of nature not for
other but to repress and temper too much sweet, that it should not distemper a
man.


Just. How?


Soul. Because it is hot and moiste temperatly, whereof the other.vj. kinds
of tastes, (for so many they say, the prinpall be,) not numbering the oily,
which they say, is all one with the sweet: the strong which is called sharp,
the quick and the tarte, do decline to cold, the strong, which is in Pepper,
and is called biting, the bitter and the salt, take too much part with the
hot.


Just. Then sweet wine, and fruits that be sweet, shall be best for me.


Soul. Wine, surely yea, if it be subtle and odoriferous, but thou must drink
little, for the sweet, because it is hot, is also light, and straight
assaileth the head. Fruits in deed be sweet, but because (...)
they be raw, and hard to digest, they get no good blood, nor good humors, but
only figs, and grapes, which be very good as Galen does write, affirming that
all beasts and country men, in y^ time y^ they be, be fat, and have their
flesh clear and soft.


Just. And what of fruits that be kept?


Soul. Sweetings, Apples, Almonds, Pynochus: but these would be laid in
sirrupe, and after often used, and so take the milk from the Almonds, and use
it with sugar. And sweet Fenell is very Fenell.
good, for it does disperse and bear the nourishment through all the members,
and the natural humor increases, in such sort, as milk does to him that
digesteth it: and I will tell thee further, y^ Dioscorides writes, y^ the
serpent every year, casts his old skin after he has eaten Fenel.


Just. Oh these thy discourses please me very well my Soul, and I will truly
(say as that Philosopher) we die even then, when we learn to live.


Soul. Thou must mark also, that the Water.
water which y^ use to drink, be pure, and not mingled with any thing, which
thou shall know when it has smell or taste, and when it is more light than
other: no water to be found, that wayeth less than water pure.


Just. It were to much, to way waters.


Soul. To avoid that, thou must take the water of conduits, the which being
raynie water gendred in the air, of bapors which the Sun has drawn up, it
follows it is more properly water and lighter than it that passes by the
vains of the earth, because the Sun takes from the water with his heat, only
the parts more light, which be the more sweet: by which occasion some have
said S^^.
the Sea is salt, because the only earthly and gross parts remain in him
which be saltish.


Just. Now I know what wrong they do to nature, which, not using the prudence
that God has given them for their profit, do eat and drink of every thing as
beasts do, without any consideration.


Soul. The flesh of which thou wylt Flesh.
feed, must be of those beasts and byrds that have long life, for that comes
only (as I told thee) because they have good moisture, and less apt to be
corrupted, and consequently, more heat and more perfect.


Just. I perceive it well.


Soul. But mark above al, that they be young, for in them only be found heat
Young. Old.
and moisture perfect: for old either have not heat and moisture, or they
have it counterfeate and unnatural: and that this is true, experience it self
teaches, finding y^ no old beast is good, beginning with Pigeons, Pullein, Kid
and Veale, and so through all.


Just. I have heard spoken of fish, that Fish.
it would be old.


Soul. Know thou well Just, that they would say great, but not old: because
when a creature comes to his gretnesse, Great.
then he comes to y^ point of his flowers, and in the top of his youth. Mark
kine, and thou shalt see how much better a Veale is of three or four year,
tha^ a biefe of eight or ten, and yet they be a like great. Which thing can
not be seen in fish, because we can have no knowledge of their age, they
living under the water.


Just. I believe certainly that thou say truth, for I remember I have once
eaten at Pisa, of Mullets of.x. or.xij. pound a Mullets.
piece, and the one was good as could be, and the other dry like a straw.


Soul. And whereof think thou it came, but because the one was young, and
the other old.


Just. In wine how must I govern* my Wine.
self, for I hear much y^ old wine praised.


Soul. Yea to drink it for a medicine, but to nourishe, it would not pass one
Old.
year. For though it waxes more hot and strong, yet it has lost that
moistness natural, the which does recreate, and seems much to comfort man.


Just. Certainly y^ have taught me a way to live, which if I keep, I believe to
live xx. years longer, than I should have done.


Soul. It is not enough to be norished after this sort spoken of before, but
also thou must seek with al diligence, to comfort and help y^ vital spirits,
which be in thee, Vital spirits.
for thy great years much debilitate.


Just. How should I do that I know not?


Soul. With things that comfort, with exercise, with diet, with merry life,
and without thought.


Just. Tell me a little more distinctly, the way I ought to keep.


Soul. Because the seat of those spirits is principally in the heart, and from
Heart.
thence be dispersed by all the members, thou ought to use all the things
that comfortes, among the which the Mirobolane, is so fit, as some say, that
they be the tree of life, put in Paradise for the food of man. Many herbs
also be Herbs.
much to y^ purpose, as Mint and Borage, and some Spicery, as Canel, Saffron,
Spices.
and many other, which thou may understand of thy self, and of them that
have written of the conservation of the life of old men. But I will not thou
trouble thy self in using certain superstitions, Superstition^
(for so will I call them) that they write, as though man's milk, and young men's
blood were drinkable, which they will have drawn at the full Moon out of y^ left
arm, and y^ they be merry, te^perat and sound, and then use it sodden with sugar.


Just. No, this will I never do, I would choose rather to die, than live with
such vain trifles.


Soul. That which Auicen writes Young child.
to hold with him a young child to sleep, of the first age, male or female
whether it be, as David the Prophet did also use to recreate his natural
heat, will not displease me.


Just. These be of the same superstition, whereof I will not think, for I
think they be of men, that too much desire to live.


Soul. It were also good for the increase of this natural heat, that thou
should sometime make exercise, but Exercise.
no longer than thou feel sweat coming and a weariness, seeking in winter
warm and caulme places, as herds and flocks do, and in So^mer, pleasant and
fresh, as the birds do: It helps much to walk along the rivers running,
Rivers. Plants.
and among the plants green and odoriferous, because the course of water seem
to cause an appetite of eating, and the odor that the lively plants give,
helps much the vital spirits of man, and green color comforts much the
sight. Green color.



Just. Tell me the reason why writers use to have green about them, and every
one says, it comfortes the sight, but do thou know the reason?


Soul. Be it so, but thou must know that the nature of sight is clear, and
Sight.
friend of light, but is very easy to be put abroad and dispersed. Therefore
when it looks on things much light, it is dispersed to much, even as when it
looks in darkness, which is enemy to it, it flees and restrains the beams
into a small place. Wherefore sight desires to enjoy light, in such sort as
it delights, and not disperseth, and so it can take no comfort or little, in
those colors, y^ take more of dark than of light, because it can not there
delight nor spread: and of those that takes part too much of light, it can not
likewise take delight without hurt, for spreding to much: but the green color
only participating temperatelie of clear and dark, gives both of the one
and the other, that is delights and preserues with a plesa^t alteration, as
does also the clear water, which resists without offense of the eyes, not
suffering to spread al at once: for things that be hard and sharp do in a manner
cleave them, and those that be raw, give the^ way to pass: but those that have
a thickness in them, and with it a certain plesa^t shining, as glasses, do not
cleave, nor disperse them.


Just. When all is done, he that lives, shall ever learn.


Soul. I would also thou should comfort thy brain sometime with sweet Brain.
things: for think not that nature, the which as she never fails in things
necessary, nor abou^ds in superfluous, has made, y^ a man should only take
pleasure of odors (for other creatures take no pleasure in odors further than by
eating) without any cause, rather has she done it, that he with that should
temper the coldness of his brain the which though it be in all beasts cold
by nature, so a man has it most cold, because he has it greater, rate for
rate, than any other, for as much as he has to work by it more operations
than any other: and odors be all Odours.
hot in themselves, for they be naught else but euaporations that come from
things, and be dispersed by the air by the mean of heat.


Just. Oh how goodly be the secret things of nature? I do not marvel surely,
y^ the more part of them that begin to taste them, do for sake many times all
other doings.


Soul. The rule of the diet thou should use for restoring of the strength
of thy stomak, it self shall teach thee with desire Stomach.
or refusing of meat. But I would not for all that, that thou sholdst pass one
of those terms, in the which thou art wo^t to take meat, but that thou take
somewhat: for ye stomach, when he lacks to eat, either he wastes him self,
or he does digest of those humors, y^ make ill blood. And for this purpose I
think it very mete to take y^ yelke of an egg new laid, or the cru^me of new
bread in a glass of good wine, A soppe in Wine.
whereof I can not see a thing of nature made more perfect: for it heateth the
cold state of the body, it refreshes ye heated, it moysteth the dry, and
dries the moist, it receives y^ grouded moisture; and norisheth the heat
natural.


Just Certainly man may see by this how much Nature has been friendly to him,
having made for him only, so perfect, and so precious liquour.


Soul. Thou must also see, if thou will that we be long together, that thou
put away Melancholy and pensiveness, which draws the spirits Melancholy.
to the head, taking them from that part, where they should make digestion, and
other works appertinent to preserve thee.


Just. Certainly thou say truth, for when I have any care, I have no desire
to eat.


Soul. Flee to much watch, and too Watch. Solitariness
much solitariness, for the one makes thee weak, and the other causes in
thee, many times weariness and sloth: and if thou will needs live alone,
think on merry and pleasant things, which may recreate thee, and not destroy
thee. Seek sometime to play, yt may make thee pass the time, Play.
and do not altogether refuse ye things that pleased thee when thou were young.
For it is impossible to revive the body, unless the wit also wax young. But
understand thou not by this, that I counsel thee to give thy self to the
pleasures of Venus, for that is clean Venus.
contrary to thine age, and as much would hurt thee, as it would peradventure
help them that are to come: and it would hap to thee in vsyng them, as does
to the Grassehopper, Grasshopper.
which when the new comes out of the old, they leave their skin either
void or dead in the earth.


Just. Of this I have no care: for it were a great foolishness to diminishe
himself, to increase other.


Soul. Surely it were no small error, knowing that Nature that attends only
to save her kind, by and by as she has brought forth one, that can get an
other like him self, makes no more count but to save her self.


Just. Doubt not of this: for I will not swerve from thy will.


Soul. These be the things y^ I desire thou sholdst observe (yt we might live
as long as we could together) and do only appertain to thee: but to live
merrily Mirth.
there be certain other y^ appertain to us both, which although they proceed
principally from me, yet can I not do them without thy help, and if thou let
me not do the^: of the which I will say somewhat how thou oughtst to govern thy
self.


Just. I desire it much, seeing (as I have said unto thee) it seems unto me
that all the contentation and quiet that I feel, does rise of our living
together vnitedly, and in such perfectness of peace.


Soul. These years of age in y^ which thou art, being the last (for when thou
live til the age decrepite and impotent the strength is so diminyshed, that I
can not longer exercise in thy members perfectly my operations) even as the
end is ever more perfect, than the means that be ordained to it, so must it
be more perfect and more notable than all the rest, for as much as many
things in our young and lusty years, that were worthy of excuse, be now in us
doubly to be reprehe^ded. Wherefore because man ought, for that Nature so
requires, ever as he can, to help an other, in this age he ought Help
other.
most to do it, and taking the fashion of a Rose that can not remain shut,
Rose.
as thy Dant says in the last part of his Banquet, to put forth and spread
the odor that it has ge^dred in it self, whereby those virtues that he has
used in other ages, and that have been in him only proofs and purgations,
ought in this to be examples and lessons.


Just. Surely thou say truth: for now it seems that of every little error
that I commit, I get more blame, than of the great that I did in youth.


Soul. All vices be foul in every age, but in this they be most foul: Vice
in age.
and therefore thou ought first to spoil thee of all passions, and not to
give ear at all to the instruments of the senses, but for thy needs only:
for thou know we are so fastened together, that if thou suffer thee to be
carried away of other, I must suffer Passions.
my self to be carried away of thee.


Just. I am well disposed so to do.


Soul. Having thus subdued thy passions not reasonable, and attendyng only on
my services, I may exercise me with thy great delight, our honor, and the
profit of other, in all those virtues that be mete for our age, among the
which ye first is Prudence, which seems, that above all the other Prudence.
by long experience belongs to old men, directing al our operations to a
laudable and honest end, and neither to will nor speak any thing but honest,
and to provide to al our need with reason and perfect judgment. And beside
this, with the help of Memory Memory.
the preserver of things passed, to judge well the present, and to counsel and
admonish right others: then with Fortitude we shall not fear any Fortitude*
thing, but only evil and blame worthy, and fra^kly we shall bear adverse
things, and in prosperity we shall keep us firm and constant: with Temperaunce
Tempera^ce
we shall refrain desire of each thing that might afterward bring any
repentance of it: and with Justice finally, giving to every one (as well
Justice.
in our selves as in other) that that is convenient, we will direct al our
operations.


Just. Oh, what happy life? a God be he, that giving us of his grace may
mainteyne us in so quiet and caulme manner of living.


Soul. An other reason also constrains us to live virtuously, and that is
that it seems that to old men it is meet to be wise, otherwise they be
despised, and so where that age ought to bring them reverence and honor, it is
to them dispraise: and none seems wise, unless he be co^pted good, though he
be not good: for the beginning of Wisdom.
Wisdom is to fear God.


Just. That is most true: For as there can not a thing be found, that is
better and more profitable to men, than a good man, so can there not a thing be
found that more hurts him, than an unjust man, of leude and evil conditions,
of the which thing a certain philosopher considering, said, that one man was
the woulfe of an other, and not the Woulfe.


Soul. We ought also to consider, y^ this age brings with it a certain
authority, Authority in Age.
by the which it seems convenient, that other men should credit him:
wherefore we ought to be very gentle in speech, and to reason always of good,
to reprove young me^, yet with a certain sweetness, which may cause in them
rather a love of good, and an appetite of honor, than a fear of pain, or a
dread of shame, which we shall always well enough do, if we will remember that we
were once young men our selves, and subject to those wills that that age
brings with it.


Soul. Oh in how few reigns of like age such discretion?


Soul. Our talk must also be pleasant Talk.
but ciuilly and honestly, fleeing always to lament those incommodities that
old age brings with him, and not to praise more than needs, the time in the
which we were young men: for in that age it being pleasant of it self, a man
takes pleasure of every thing, which seem much better than they do in old age.


Just. Many times all old men falls into this error.


Soul. If we did otherwise, we should be eschewed of other, and so lack
Company, which is one of the Company.
greatest pleasures that this age has. Which thing Tullie knowing, in his
book of old age says, in the person of Cato the elder, a will and desire to
reason more than I was wont, is increased in me.


Just. These things be very true.


Soul. Yet this is not enough: for we must think there is an other life,
Other life.
to the which we go continually: for in this we be as pilgrims that have no
certain City, and we be in an age that can not long be from death, so as we
must study to gain some thing for that place, where we must always remain.


Just. This is nothing to my desire, every thing had gone well, if thou had
not spoken of death. Death.



Soul. Wherefore comes this, but that either thou art yet to much given to
the world, or that thou hopest not to go to a better life? The which shall
not chance to thee, if thou unite thy self to me: for I that am immortal,
shall show thee, that this that thou Shadow of life.
call life, is a shado^ of life, yea rather a great and continual death.


Just. I can not tell I, but it is sure a great thing to lose this being.


Soul. Yea, if it should be lost, but it is not lost, but rather woonne,
either a worse or a better: and it is in our power by the mean yet of the
grace of God, which gives to who so ever will have it, and already has showed
to us by his great liberality, the greatest part, in making us to be borne in
christian religion.


Just. It is true, and by this that thou speak, does diminish a little the
fear of it.


Soul. Let them fear death that have not the light of Faith: for to us
Christians, since our Savior died for us, it is become but a sleep* as he said
of those dead that he raised, that they were not dead, but they slepte, out of
the which sleep we being awaked by his grace shall return into a more free
being, without any perturbation.


Just. Well go too then, and be thou sure I will assuredly believe thee.


Soul. We then must do as that wise Merchant, which going into a certain
Merchant.
province to gain, and the time of his return to his country drawyng nigh,
does dispose and order all his things, and then satisfy either with deeds or
words, all them that he thinks be in any mean burdened by him, that
departing with good grace, he may be after of every man thankefully and with
more honor received in his country.


Just. This certainly does not displease me.


Soul. We must therefore dispose, that the substance which we have in our Our
goods.
hands, may come to them that they ought after our separation (that no
contention be for them, which thou know to be great and troublesome) but so
as we do never lack that is necessary, and so take from them the love, that
though we saw some not go well, it should not trouble us, thinking that those
should go evil that were theirs, and not ours. For he that lives in Riches.
Riches with fear to lose them continually, is poor. The^ discoursing with
memory, our life passed, we shall seek to satisfy al we have offended any way,
and as the good Mariner when he draws Mariner.
nigh the port, we will strike sail of our worldly operatio^s, and return, to
God. We will leave al study, and only y^ little, that this age will bear, we will
exercise in holy letters, of the study Holy letters.
of the which shall grow in us a lively Faith.
faith, informed of charity, by which Hope.
we shall love God above al things, and Charity.
our neighbor as ourself, with a certain hope of the merits of Christ, that as
sure of our health without any perturbation we shall go to death.


Just. Al these things but one do plese me, and that is, y^ calling again with
memory of y^ life passed, for in doing so I know y^ we shall find to have
offended God so sore and so often, that it will bring us fear, and not trust in
death as thou say.


Soul. This might well come unto us, if Christ had not, as he has, borne
Christ.
all our sins upon him, and had not promised to pardon us every time that we
return to him, and said unto us, that he loves us much more than the carnal
fathers do their sons.


Just. Wilt not thou, that he should be angry with us every time we sin?


Soul. When we sin? No: but when we persevere in sin, and will never
acknowledge him for our God. Yea, tell me if a Grauer will not be angry,
seeing his pictures, if they be not holden up fall and ever go down, because
he made them of a matter which has that inclination? would thou that God
should be angry with us, when we sin, which knows much better that he
has made us of this flesh so much inclined and prompte to sin, as we can
not but sin, rather doing otherwise, we should be no men? But because he
knows that to will, and not to will, is ours, it suffiseth Will.
him, after that we be sorry (so it be from the heart) that we have offended
him: and therefore let us take heed that the sin we do, do not rise in us of
malice, but be of the infirmities and inclination of the flesh: y^ returning
after to him, we may say for our excuse together with the Prophet.


Behold* in sin I was conceived,
And thereto by my mothers fault received.
Wherefore he regarding our intention, says of us as he did of him.

I have found a man according to my well. Just. With what boldness shall we
ever go before his face, having so often offended him, by our sin and
disobedience?


Soul. With that, with the which, the son always, goes to his father,
although he has been very disobedient, it he will yield himself in his fault.
For although the father whiles he is absent and sees him not, waxes cruel
against him, so sone as be sees him turn again to him, and repent that he
has offended against his will, he feels growing i^ him by the mean of
fatherly love, a pity so sweet, toward his son, that although he force to
show himself to be angry with him, yet he can not, but will show some sign
of love to his Son in his countenance, and in the end leave his Ire, and
receive him in the place of a son. Have thou not read Prodigal child.
in the Gospel of the Prodigal child, the which being departed from his fathers
cure, and having done away all the part of his heritage, which he had of his
father, fell into great misery and want, and remembering his fathers house,
determined to return thither, who being come before his Father, of two things
that he thought to have spoken; he said but one: that is, that he had sinned
before God and him, and that he asked pardon: the other that he would have
said, was, that if he would not receive him for his son, at least he would
take him for a servant, but he spoke it not?


Just. And why?


Soul. For so suddenly as he spoke, there apeered in his fathers face, so great
a fatherly love, that he knew he would never suffer him to be among his
servants, whiles he stood under obedience of his father, but would restore him
to the degree of his son: wherefore he put him self liberally into his arms,
leaving to him to think that that he would do.


Just. Thou do comfort me, and encorage me (my soul) with these thy
considerations, that I will not say I desire death, but I may well say that I
have not so great fear of it as I had.


Soul. The more thou shalt remember thou haste every hour followed thy
senses, and I following thee committed greater errors, the more shall we be
afraid of our selves: and as he y^ knows the more infirmities he has, with
so much more Sick man.
speed and care he runs to the physician, so with sincerity shall we run to
Christ, that can only heal us: and remembering that he that has suffered for
us, is our advocate, and he that shall judge us, we shall have no fear at all
of our condemnation, being for all that in continual fear, and in great care,
as much as lies in our power, no more to offend.


Just. Thou haste given me this morning, my Soul, so great comfort; that where
before there was nothing that more troubled me than death: now I have none
other fear, but that mine imperfect nature can not flee, the which forcing me
from henceforth not to dissent from thy commandments, I will submit me to thy
yoke, and will accord me to all that thou shalt counsel me, thinking that
that must be my health.


Soul. That is it that I desire above al thing: and in this good purpose I will
that thou rise and go to thy work, for the Sun is now a good height.


The.viij. Reasoning. SOLVE. JUST.
WHat aylest thou Just this night that thou sleep not? what means it that
thou turnest so often in thy bed and rest not, thou art well enough, and I
trouble thee not, we being this good while so well agreed together.

Just. Although I feel none evil, and thou my soul do not trouble ^e, yet
have I other cares that suffer me not to sleep.


Soul. What cares can they be? tell me seeing we be agreed, tell me what it is
(thanked be the liberty and the strength that God has given us) that can
hurt us, but only he? or who can work such grief or pain, as may take us
from our good purpose?


Just. Who? they that work woe to every man, the World and Fortune.


Soul. The World and Fortune, give World. Fortune.
annoyance only to them that can not guide their own life, for they either be
of such sort, as they may be avoided or no. And those that may be avoided, the
wise man shifts away with his wisdom: and of the other, foreseeing what they
be, he is not grieved.


Just. These be things easy to be spoken, but to do them, more is required
than words: tell me, how can a man flee Envy, which is ever borne against good
men, of the which ryseth every day a thousand things displeasant?


Soul. Does Envy anoy thee, and is ^auie.
it that that makes thou can not sleep.


Just. It is: for since by thy counsel I have brought my self to this merry and
quiet life, such Envy has been borne me that I can not endure. One says what
thinks he he is? is he any better tha^ a Couper? An other says, I esteem no
man, and nothing can please me. An other says, I think my self too wise, and
that I will reprove every man: and in effect I am so envied, that every man is
a grief unto me, and that I can abide in no place.


Soul. Thou art fallen into a talk, wherein before this time I have wished to
deal with thee, to deliver thee of this thy false opinion, for I perceived
well thou were awry, but now I will that we tell truth, and not one to deceive
an other, willing it to be understood, that we have done for the commodity of
other, that which we have done for our selves. And I will not do now, as our
neighbor did, which, after he was broken, being reprehended of some of his
creditours, that he spente too much, he would make them believe he did it for
their sakes, that he might be in health and able to pay them, for he that is
deceived of himself, shall easily be deceived of other.


Just. I do not desire other thing, but that thou would tell me truth, as I
am disposed to do to thee.


Soul. What Envy is it that thou say is borne thee?


Just. What envy? have I not told thee, that it seems that every one a while
since do disprayse me, and say evil of me, and do not esteem me as they were
wont? This can not be other wise but for the envy they bear me, because I
live so contented in this my state, as it is, and that I pass the time so
merrily, and with such quietness as I do.


Soul. All is, whether it be Hate or Envy that they bear thee.


Just. What is that the matter?


Soul. Yes, for Envy comes of an evil Envy.
intention of him that enuieth, and hatred of some fault that is in the thing
Hate.
hated: But know thou where of it comes theiseme to thee both one? because
both of them is contrary to love and benevolence, which is nothing else but a
will and desire of the weal of our neighbor.


Just. Surely I thought they had been all one thing, and that there was little
difference.


Soul. It is not to be marueled much, vices being, (as Plutarche writes) like
a multitude of hooks, whereof if a man touch one, many of the other cleaues
unto him. Nevertheless, if thou considerest well, they be much different: for
envy is only borne to them, whom thou think do lead their life happily,
and hate, to them that be faulty, or that have done thee some injury. And
therefore envy is borne only to men, but hate also to beasts. Bisides this,
beasts have hate, but not envy, and that comes, because not having the
discourse of reason, they can not judge of the felicity of other.


Just. O thou beginnest to make me understand the truth.


Soul. The hate may be sometime just and reasonable, but envy never. And that
is, because a man may justly hate the evil things, but he can not with reason
ever envy the good, but when they have it that do not deserve it: but that is
no envy. This judgment must be left to God, that can not err, and therefore
many shall confess they have some in hate, showing that he deserves it, but no
man, or seldom, will confess he bears envy to any man, but rather when he
does it, he will seek ways to cover it, saying he hates, affirming that he
which hates not evil, deserves blame.


Just. Certainly, all that thou tellest me, is true.


Soul. We see also, when they whom thou hate, fall in misery, or
infelicitie, thou ceasest to envy them. But hate does not so, but ever
follows him, who is hated, in what estate so ever he be.


Just. This also is true.


Soul. Further, hate fails as often as thou art persuaded, that he whom thou
hate is good, or that he has done thee no injury: where as envy, the
better he is spoken of, whom thou enuiest, the more thine envy increases.


Just. It is truth.


Soul. Hate also many times is quenched, when he to whom thou bear it, does
thee some benifite: whereas envy, (what soever benifite he does thee, that is
envied) never diminishes. And ye like is, when any gift is made thee.


Just. This is well seen true every day, yet gifts have many times such
force, as of enemies they make friends.


Soul. Then it is not to be marvelled, though they do many times corrupt
justice.


Just. Our friend said well, which was to pleasant with this devise, yt he only
ioyed in present state, because y^ time past was gone, and the time to come was
uncertain.


Soul. Hate finally, til the thing hated be utterly extinct, persecuteth ever,
as we see many times one enemy to an other, whereas envy so soon as felicity
fails in him whom he enuieth, cease straight: and thou know Just, when
it comes properly of envy, as of a house, the which because it is too high,
keeps y^ light from thee, which anoyeth thee, whiles it is so high, but when
it is made lower, thou carest no more,


Just. This similitude has well satisfied me.


Soul. Art thou yet certain, that hate and envy be not one thing?


Just. I am.


Soul. And that the cause of envy, or to say better, the fault, is in the
enuier, and rises in him of his nature evil, having envy (as I have said)
only to the felicity of an other, where in hate, it is in the thing hated, the
which is naught to thee or to an other, or so seems, hating only the evil,
or that does the injury?


Just. This I grant.


Soul. Then tell me, what be thy felicities, or what parts haste thou to be
envied?


Just. I can not tell, I live quietly, co^^ented with that little that I have,
and am not so careful for the world, as most men be.


Soul. This may every man do as well as thou.


Just. It may peradventure be, because I live quietly after my state. And
bisides this, I have some quality more than other, and have friends that make
account of me.


Soul. This is the less cause, for though thou art well to live, according to
thy calling, yet thou art not rich: and the rich be they that be envied.
Again, The rich envied.
though thou may be called witty, and of good judgment by my help and work,
yet thou art not excellent, that any man might envy thee therefore. If virtue
may be envied, if Nobility of blood, of parents, or of state, I am most
certain that thou doubtest not, unless thou be a fool, nor for thy friends,
not having such as might make thee to be repined, many of them being worse
tha^ thy self.


Just. Whereof comes it then, that they grudge at me?


Soul. That is the very thing I thought to tell thee, that we both
considering these things, and the occasions, might avoid the cares that come
thereby, the little time we have hereafter to live.


Just. And that is the thing that I desire to know, therefore tell me what I
must do, not to fail?


Soul. Know (Just,) among other things, of defecte and want which old age
brings with it. It breeds in him that knows not him self well, such an
opinion of him self, that makes him think him self wiser than he is, whereby he
cease not to praise him self, and his things, and to blame without all
modesty other men's, to reprove, without all discretion young men, not remembering
what he did when he was young, as they be.


Just. Is not an old man wiser than other, though for nothing else, but for
his experience?


Soul. Yes: but all is, wisely to use his wisdom in time, where and when it
is convenient. For doing otherwise, in change of reverence and honor, he
gets dispraise and hate, of the which thing y^ may well take example of thy
self


Just. What do I, whereof this should come?


Soul. I will tell thee, thou art so vainglorious of thy self, that thinking
thou have no peer, thou despisest and contemnest all men. And thou will stand
some time in reasoning, as one that deceue^t thy self much, that there is none
y^ knows so much as thou, and certain of thy friends: in manner, as by this
so vain arrogancy, thou have got a great sort of enemies, which stand always
with their eyes turned upon thee, to see if thou do amiss, that they might make
it evident to other: and they be those, thou say do bear thee envy, which
can not be, you having nothing, yt deserves to be envied, but hate they may
well, because of thy usage to them. Nevertheless, if you wilt follow my
counsel, thou shall make the most part of them thy friends, and of them that
wilnot, thou shall got some profit: Profit of enemies.
for to have some enemy i^ good.


Just. Whereto can an enemy ^e good?


Soul. There is nothing in y^ world so evil, but may be good for some
purpose. Tell how many Mines and Herbs venomous be in the world, which being
well used, be good to heal a thousand of our diseases. And so it is of enemies,
for as those beasts that abound with heat, do not only digest many
pestiferous things, but also nourishe themselves, where it would do many other
hurt, and as hunters do not only take heed that the wild beasts do not hurt
them, but also do feed of their flesh, and clad them of their skins: so wise
men do not only know how to deal with their enemies, as they can not hurt
them, but also can get profit by them.


Just. What profit can be gotten of enemies?


Soul. I will tell thee First thy enemies do thee this good: as the scoute and
guard of a city besieged, gives advise to him that has charge of all that
might offend, so they standing always waking to observe thy behauior, they
advise thee by speaking evil, and reprehendyng all that thou do, of all
that thou ought to take heed.


Just. So do also true friends.


Soul. They do: But because the love they bear thee, does sometime blind
them, they see not many times those wantes which the envious see. And although
they do see, yet being of thy part, they excuse the^. And so sometime they will
call craft policy, which thine enemy will call plain malice, or fraud. Is
not he therefore to be set by, that markyng all thy operation, might reprove
thee of all thine error? And is not this able to work a knowledge in thee of
such prudence, y^ thou may ever regard what thou do, and restrain thy self,
at the lest with fear, and ever live virtuously and honestly?


Just. It is true, that a man has more fear to err in the sight of his
enemy than of his friend.


Soul. Therefore it is good to have both friends and enemies, that at lest
fear may draw thee from that which might work thy shame. Which thing Scipio
Nasica well knew, when he heard one say, that the Roman estate was in most
surety, because the Greeks were brought to bondage, and Carthage overcome:
Rather is it (said he) now in most great peril, because they have now no more
whom to fear or reverence.


Just. Oh goodly saying, and worthy so good a man.


Soul. And so ennimies (doing as he that would have stryken Prometheus of
Thessalia, did cut an impostume that he had, and healed him) many times
believing to hurt, they do thee good.


Just. Will thou not grant me that it is better to have friends tha^ enemies?
Friends.



Soul. Yes, and specially when they are faithful, nothing in the world either
more sweet or profitable than true friendship. Nevertheless enemies serve many
times to stir thee with their bitter words, which friends with their gentle
reprehe^tion do not. Beside they advise a man of certain common faults, which
friends seldom know.


Just. Of this I know thou say well.


Soul. Enemies also help to this, that in suffering both them and the injuries
they do thee, a man is acquainted the better to bear the troubles that come
in the care of householde, and in rulyng either him self, or his family,
whereby it seems not so sharp unto thee, if Fortune give thee either a
shreude wife or children of evil condition, or beastly brethren, and so ar no
less profitable to thee tha^ thy friends: for as thou learnest of thy friends
by their conversation, benignity, magnanimity, and many other virtues, thou
learnest by bearing thy enemies, mildness and patience, which how nedeful it
is in this world, thou know, every hour somewhat happening that displeases
us.


Just. That is often seen, and be sure troubles inowe in every one.


Soul. Enemies be also profitable, because having sometime with whom to
contend, a man becomes more ware in his speech, more prompt in answer, more
quick in accusing, more sage in defending, more prudent in reprehending, and
more prompt in returnyng injurious words to him that speaks them. But I will
not they serve to y^ purpose, for being now in y^ age that we must shortly
change our country, every thing is meeter for thee than contention: but I will
have them serve thee only for one thing, whereby thou may with thy less
blame ease the part of anger (but with such modesty as thou may be praised)
that after thou may be to thy friends al gentle and courteous.


Just. How would thou then, that I should govern me, with these thou spekest
of, that have me so in hate, for I will now believe it is so, for the strong
reasons that thou have made therein.


Soul. I will tell thee: thou must do two things, one of the which, and the
more of weight, pertains to thy self and that is, that thou take away all
those customs and manners, of which may proceed this hate, which they bear
thee, as to despise or to contemn any person, and to blame other men's things,
and the present time, and those manners y^ be used now a days, though thou be
otherwise affected.


Just. Should I not blame things when they be not well? If I should do so,
they would say I understood nothing.


Soul. I will, if thou will get the name of a wise or prudent man, that thou
do it with woorkyng, and not with reproving, for that is the way which the
ignorant uses, and malicious: and when thou see a thing that stands not
well, it is enough not to praise it, and learn of our Punturino, who, though
there be few in this age, that can compare with him in painting, never blames
any other men's works, unless he be forced to say his judgment in a case.
Praise those that thou praisest, moderatly, y^ no disdayn grow among them of
that science, y^ are not praised of thee. And in sum, lay away y^ opinion
thou have of thy self to be wiser than other, for that would make thee little to
esteem other, and the things that do not depend of thee, whereby thou should
be called rash or proud: and thou may well do it, when thou think other
be men as well as thy self.


Just. This I can easily believe, for I never found man yet but in some thing
knew more than my self.


Soul. And when it shall happen that thou defe^dest an opinion against some
other, do it as modestly as thou can, praising always him that does as our
master Pier Francis Iambulari, a man certainly of no less good judgment
than great learning in his operation, wherein he has with marvelous art
found the site and measure of Dants Hell, where being forced to speak
against Anton Manetti, who has also written, but not so perfectly, says, that
if death had not prevented his honest travails, he should not have neded to
have taken this pain, Manetto being a man mete to bring a greater thing to
perfection than that.


Just. Surely this was a way, and a scuse, in reprouyng of his opinion, much to
be commended.


Soul. Thou must also, when thou reprouest any man, do it gently: and above
all, be sure, never to reprove any of them y^ be more cunning tha^ thy self:
for doing otherwise, thou shalt many times hear that thou would not. As it
hapt to Francis king of France, when he was in Bononia with Francis of France.
Pope Leo, whom reproving for his sumptuousness, and saying, the ancient
Bishops lived in more simplicity and poverty, Leo answered: that was when
Kings kept sheep. And the King replying, that he spoke of Bishops of the new
testament, and nor of the old: Leo again answered: that was, when kings
governed the poor in hospitalles with their own hands, meaning saint Jews
his predecessor.


Just. Surely, none other answer was convenient.


Soul. The^ thou must always speak honorably of them, and when it is told
thee that any speaks evil of thee, then do thou speak well of them, excusing
them saying, y^ they do not know thee, that so say of thee, and therefore do
not deserve to be blamed. And if this will not help with them, (which
absolutely will help, for to hear that one says well, although thou know
he says false, it delites thee) it shall help in the sight of the universal,
which hearing that thou say well of them that speak evil of thee, they
will think thee a man of a good mind: and then study to maintain this good
opynion with good behavior: and if thou would needs be revenged of the^,
whom thou think to be thine en^imies, this is the best way, because (as
Diogenes said) the true way of reuengemente with thy enemies, is to become from
time to time better.


Just. These thy counsels, although they be contrary to the common way of life,
yet they please me much.


Soul. Can not thou, being a christian man, be content to do it for every
man, as a man ought to do it? yea, I will further, that thou love thine enemies:
for in this only consists the perfection of our law, and in this, it
passes in goodness all other: for where the other grant a man may do injury
to him that does it to thee, our law, desiring to make man good, will not only
thou pardon thine enemies, but also thou love them.


Just. O how can a man do that? thou have told me, that he that does thee
injury, thou hate.


Soul. An enemy may be loved, not for him self, but for others cause, in
such sort, as thou love the children or servants of thy great friend,
although they have done thee injury. For thou considering that thy neighbor is
also the son of God as well as thou, and bought with the same price, that
thou were, although he be thy enemy, thou may love him for Gods sake: for
doing otherwise, thou should lose Paradise.
Paradise.


Just. How should I lose it, is it mine?


Soul. Thine? yea, and who douteth, that is a christen man?


Just. Which way?


Soul. Tell me, when does the inheritance of the father come to the sons?


Just. So soon as he dies.


Soul. Then Paradise was ours as soon as Christ died for us, if that reason
were good. But* thou have not said well in that, y^ the heritage of a father is
his sons as soon as he is borne, and that none other thing does make him
heir, but being a son, nor that the father seeks for other thing to have
children, but to have to whom to leave his inheritance. And so we, as soon as
we be borne the sons of God, and brethren of Christ by baptism and faith,
we be ioyntely heirs with him of the Kingdom of Heaven. And by this cause, a
babe that suddenly dies, so soon as he is baptized, goes to Paradise,
which is his only, because he is the son of God, and not by any other
merit, he never having done any meritorious deed.


Just. If Paradise be ours, what need we then do any good?


Soul. Yes, it is necessary, not to gain the heritage of Heaven, which is
ours by the merits of Christ, as I have said, but because that we should
not give an occasion to our Father of Heaven, to disenherite us, as all
children do, which behave themselves evil toward their fathers. Therefore a
man must do good works only to the glory and honor of God, following Christ,
which wrought well whiles he was in this world, only to do the will of his
father: so ought we to work well, to do his will (and not to degenerate and
want of that is convenient, we being children of a father so good, so
liberal, and so gentle) Works.
but not gain by them Paradise: for it is not convenient, that our works
which be temporal and have end, should have for reward the glory of heaven,
which is eterne and infinite: and it is not enough not to do evil, but thou
must do well, for he that is not with him, is against him, and besides shows
him self unkind of so great liberality, which God has showed toward us.


Just. Thou haste this morning my soul, kindeled in my heart such a love
toward my creator, that I am sorry I ever did thing that might displease him,
seeing he has been so liberal and so gentle toward me.


Soul. This is it that I desire above all other things: for this shall make
thee work as it behooves a free child, and not as a servant for scare: and in
this good purpose, I will that to the honor and glory of him, we make an
end of this mornyngs talk.


The.ix. Reasoning. JUST. SOVLE.
IN deed Proverbs be all proved: this old age (as we say all day by
proverb) comes with every evil amends, for she does deprive us not only of
delyghtes (for an old man is weary, and yrketh al pleasure and pastyme) but
also does take away a man's sleep, as it has done with me, which in best
part of the night, when other men sleep, I do nothing but turn me hither and
thither, werying my bones in such sort, that when I rise, me thynkes, instead of repose I have felt a great travail: And I think this happens unto
me, because my natural heat is so wekened, for lack of good moisture, whereof
Sleep.
it was nourished, that it has not so much strength, as it can send up to the
head such exhalations and vapors, the which being after made thick with the
coldenesse of the brain, fall down again, and filling those places, where the
spirits pass, which go from the heart to the head, do gender sleep. And
though it send some thither, they be so undigested and impure, that by the
coldenesse of the brain, they be turned into gross matter, and in change of
sleep, they breed in me catarres, ^^eumes, or other like things, and so in
steeede of sleep, I lie with evil contentation, spitting and coughing all the
night, as cursed be the years, and the time that be occasions of it.

Soul. Just, Just, what a fondenesse is this? Do thou suffer thy reason so
to be shadowed with Irethat thou cursest years and time on this fashion?


Just. Who would not curse, when they make things old? Old Age being nothing
else but a receptacle of troubles and griefs, and a privation of all
pleasures, which is worse, and a short way that leads al things to corruption?


Soul. How many times have I said, that all ages be good, to him that can
use them as is conueniente: but we use them so, many times, that when we
should blame our selves we do complain of other, and most times
wrongfullye, as thou do now of old Age, much lamenting she will not let
thee sleep, whereof thou ought to think thy self much bound.


Just. Why so my soul? thou will make me think that thou art not the same
thing that I am, as I did believe, since thou say I am bound to that that
kepes me from rest.


Soul. Sleep is a privation of the most part of our exercises, and
particularly of all plesures and delights.


Just. Rather it is a lightning of all our cares, and a most sweet repose to
all our troubles.


Soul. That is true, but that makes not against my sentence, and less
proves that sleep shall be good: for first, to me it is evil, taking from
me the power of contemplation and to consider the nature of things, occupying
all those parts that be necessary to me to use in that office, which
grieueth me not a little: for I am not weary, nor suffer pain of my works,
but rather, the more I work, the greater delight I have, because I am not
corporal, nor made of matter as thou art, which should cause me any trouble,
in making resistance to my operations.


Just. How, art not thou wearye as well as I, which as often as I have gone
about to read at night after supper, haste caused a sleep to come upon me,
that I must needs go to bed, and leave reading.


Soul. Ah Just, it is not I that has been weary, but these thy instruments,
(without the which, I can not understand any thing,) being shut within thee,
have been so wearyed, consuming too much of those spirits, by ye mean
whereof they do their operations, that it has been convenient for us to repose
us, to thee by nature, and to me by respect that I am in thee.


Just. I know not this, but I see that thou have as well slept as I.


Soul. I will not have thee say so, for I have been ever awaked, in such
manner as I can. Because sleep, (I not being corporal) has no place in me,
and that this is true, thou know that he that sleeps, does nothing: but I
fail not to work some way.


Just. What operations be they, that thou do when I sleep?


Soul. First I attend with my increasing power, to make digestyon much
better than when thou art awake, for not having the heart to send the spirits
to the senses, that they might do their office, he sendes them to the parts,
where digestion is made, and so I attend continuallye with greater force, to
turn the nutriments into thy substance.


Just. Oh, am not I also appertaining to do this operation?


Soul. Yes, as occasion, without the which it can not be done, and as a
pacient, but not as an agent and principal, for thou know well, that I have
told thee, that neither of us can work without the other. Although I
acknowledge my self so noble, that I think I could understand some thing
without thee. Go then further to my power sensitive, which though some of
them be bound with sleep, as the outward senses, and the sense common,
because those places where they be exercised, be full of fumositie, so as they
do not wake, till they be consumed of heat natural: and fancy never cease
to do somewhat: wherefore regarding to those visions and images of things that
have impressed the senses in the heart, or in the blood windy, whiles they were
awake, does cause Dreams, and so that is also never idle.


Just. What, there be some that dreams not, and some that dreams fearful
things and inordinate, in such sort, as thou art little bound unto them.


Soul. Very few.


Just. Be those men, that dreams not sometime, at least when they be old, if
not before: for not to dream comes of too moist a complexion, the which
fills the head with such fumositie, that they trouble it, and do not suffer
those Images that are seen in sleep, to gather whereof it comes, as of a stone
cast after an other in a firm water, making those circles and images that the
first had made. And therefore children, and such as go to sleep as soon as
they have eat and drunk, do seldom dream. But thou shall see them after in
their age, when this moisture is dried up, dream sometime of fearful dreams
whereof thou speak. Evil complexion is likewise the cause, which being
distempered, either of some infirmity, or of too much drink, or of some
melancholy or strange thought, genders spirits, (in the which the things be
impressed that men dream,) so confused and disordinate, as they bring forth
such monstrous apparitions as thou speak of. But what can be said worse of
sleep, if it, priuing you of al pleasures, do not suffer you to feel any
thing at all?


Just. If a man whiles he sleeps, feels no pleasures, he feels also no
displeasures: of the which I know not which he more and greater.


Soul. I know well there have been some of so timorous mind, that esteeming
more every little dolor, than every great contentation, have said that sleep
is one of the best and acceptable gifts that nature has given to man, because
it makes all equal and alike, whiles they sleep: for feeling nothing, the
poor is as happy as the rich, whiles he sleeps, the which opinion I never
allowed. For if it were so, it were better to be a stone, or a tree, which feel
not, than to be a beast or a man: and among beasts and men, he that ever
sleeps, or the most part of time, should be more happy than the other. Which
thing is most false, for sleep makes us like to dead men, which some other
considering, called it Deaths brother.


Just. Why do they call it so, they can Sleep, deaths brother.
not make it evil? Do we not see two brethren, the one good, and the other
naught, thou have red with me in the Bible, the story of Esau and Jacob.


Soul. Yea, but he that has called it deaths brother, has not considered it
as a brother by generation, but by similitude which it has, depriving you as
it does, of all your operations felicities and contentations, which consists
in operation. Wherefore, God, because he can ever understand himself, and not
sometime yea, and sometime no, is called most happy: and the like be those
intelligences that serves him, because they be never let of any thing, and
may always behold God, whereby they be reputed more happy and blessed than
we, which although we may well sometime taste by contemplation part of him,
we can not stand long in so happy estate, because we be hindered of many diverse
things: whereof that part which is in us, that understands, because it
understands not always, but sometime yea, and sometime no, is called
intellect by name of a power, and they because they understand ever, are called
intelligences, by name of operation, and of act.


Just. These thy reasons be very good, but they have not yet persuaded me, that
sleep is not good. And when I remember the great pleasure that I have in
sleeping one sleep of will, as when I am weary, (which thing chanced to me
oftener, when I was a young man, than it does now,) I can not but be sorry of
old age, that has taken it from me in such sort, that mine may for the most
part, rather be called a slumbring than a sleeping.


Soul. Ah, have thou seen that of thy self, thou haste confessed that sleep
is not good?


Just. Oh, in what manner? thou have understood me clean contrary.


Soul. Rather have I understood thee well.


Just. How?


Soul. Because those things that be not good of their proper nature, but only
for respect of other, be not called good absolutely, but by chance and
respect, and to them only that have need, among the which is sleep, the
which being as thou have said, a restoring of travails, and of the pains of
creatures, is only good to them, and yet not ever, but when they have need.
And if it seem, it brings them some delight, it is in respect of this
weariness, which were much better not to have, as those intelligences,
whereof I spoke before, to whom it were a great impediment and annoyance,
because they are never weary, for it should diminishe their felicity, at
least so much time as they were occupied of it. But that thou sholdst be more
clear of this, tell me, is eating and drinking to be put among good things?


Just. Who doubts of that, being a thing so good and so desired, to live, and
that without the^ nothing can be maintained alive?


Soul. Then what is the cause thou do not eat and drink always?


Just. Now hear a goodly matter that thou have spoken: because when I have
taken of them as much as my need requires, I have no desire, and having no
desire, I have no delight. Wherefore to eat or drink more, should as much loath
me, as before it did delight me.


Soul. Then see, that to eat, to drink, to sleep, and like things be good,
only to supply a want of them that have need: and the want of a thing
necessary, to the being or the well being of an other, is never good, and it
were much better not to have need. Whereof thou may clearly know, that if
old age had not taken away thy sleep, causing thee to have less need of
sleep than thou were wont, thou had wrongfully complained of her, as thou
do also, lamenting of time and years, which thou say, has brought thee
to this state, foolish and unkind that thou art.


Just. O why may I not reasonably complain me of time, it only being y^ which
has made me so to grow old?


Soul. First, because old age is not worse in it self, than the other be:
and further, because it is not time that co^sumeth and makes things old.


Just. Never tell me that, y^ it is better to be old than young, for certainly,
if I had.xxv. years less, I would think my self happy.


Soul. If thou had.xxx. less, thou sholdst be but Just the Couper, as thou
art now, and perhaps should be in an age much more perilous and full of
travail than this is, that thou art in now. But I will not speak of this: for
I will make thee know it manifestly, when I list. I^ I do not show thee first,
how false and foolish thy opinion is in complaining of time, and more, that
thou art old, being a natural thing to be old. And no man ought to lament of
those things that nature brings.


Just. Say what thou will, for seeing I ca^ not sleep, it shall grieve me less,
to look for day, and shall rejoice me of that good that thou say little
sleping brings.


Soul. Thou do Just, as the most part of men, the which not seeing
manifestly the cause, which consumes and wastes things, when they see any
present, they do attribute it to the time. Whereof if they see a man wax old,
or forget that he knew, they say it comes of time, and likewise when they see
an house fall. yet wha^ they see it builded, they impute it to the workman.
When they see a man grow, and come to perfect stature, they attribute it to
nature. And so when they see he learnes, they say his master has taught him.


Just. What meanest thou by this?


Soul. Let me first tell thee what Time is, and then thou shall see. Time,
Just, as I have often heard, is nothing but a measure, by the which all motions
be measured, which things corporal do, even as thou do with thy Brace,
wherewith thou measurest al things in thy shop: and as that in it self and
properly, is a piece of woodde, and intencionally in man's mind by
consideration, and as it serves for measure of things, it is a measure: so
Time in it self, and really, is the motion of heaven, and as it serves for the
measure of other motions, it is called Time.


Just. I understand thee, and not understand thee, and I would have thee
declare it better.


Soul. Hear me, and that thou may the better understand, thou must know
that a thing which must all be brought under a determined quantity, thou must
see it so neither more nor less in thy imagination, but with one of the very
self same sort, which thing thou prouest every hour in thy self: for when
thou will count the patens in thy shop, because they be things divided and
separated, thou must do it with numbers, which be also divided and separated.
And when thou will measure an Axiltree, thou must take a yard, that is joined
and continued, as that is.


Just. This is most true.


Soul. Wherefore, when men will measure motions, which they see continually in
these things, generable and corruptible, it was of necessity to do it
otherwise. And because in all measures, this condition of necessity is sought,
by reason they might be inuariable, and never change, otherwise things could
not be measured by them, (for if thy yard should sometime diminish and sometime
increase, thou could never measure any thing rightly with it) men not
findyng any motion among these natural things, that went alwais equally, not
varying, they went to them of heaven, and not finding among them any so
right, as that, which the starry Sphere makes, called of them by this
occasion, without error, they took that to be a measure for other, measuring
with it all other motions that be found within these things that be moved, the
which thing thy Dant dothso maruellously show in his.xx. chapter of Paradise,
when he speaks of this sphere.


The Nature of motion,
That in the midst does rest
And else where moves,
Has here about, her mark addressed.
And after says.

His motion is not by other mean distinct,
But other all by his, that never is extinct,
And how the time, has his foundation,
Thou may it know by this declaration.
Just. Truly he says very well. But we give so much love to this our Dant,
that I doubt we will make him seem more fair than he is.


Soul. Doubt not of that Just. For I tell thee, Dant is one of the best
writers, (as I have heard of many learned men that is in any tongue.


Just. I would not we should praise him so, as we should be dispraysed, as we
were once, in defending him that dispraysed him.


Soul. What say they whom thou say do reprove him?


Just. That we ought to have some respect to his good qualities: yet you know
he was on of y^ most excele^t in our time.


Soul. Surely he was a man in all other things to be honored, but in this not
having respect to Dant, we ought to have none of him, and chiefly of us
Florentines, y^ do defend our Citizen, and one that has been a chief light of
our country, and causes the name of Florence to go through the world. So thou
may answer them, that shall say any more so thee, as one did once, which
defe^ding him self a good while with the staff of a Partisane, and in the
end the dog biting him, he turned the point, and stroke him with y^ sharp,
whose Master saying to him, he should have been content to strike him with the
staff, he answered: then should he have bytten me with his tail. But let us
ouerpasse, these and turn to reasoning. This sphere not erring, called also
the first mouable, because it is the first and principal cause of al other
motions, turning every.xxiiij. hours about the earth once, makes the day
natural. And this motion as most regulate, is after taken by the measure of
other motions, for of him is made the week, and of weeks, months, and of
months years: as you make of farthings groates, of groates, shillings, and
of shillings crowns.


Just. Tell me, I have ever heard it called Day, all that time the Sun stands
over the earth, and not.xxiiij. hours as thou say.


Soul. Mark that days be divided Day.
into natural and artificial, and one turning Natural.
about of this Sphere in.xxiiij. Artificial.
hours is called a natural day, in the which is included day and night.


Just. This is a thing I never heard before, and I can not believe, that when a
man speaks of day, he shall include night.


Soul. It is as I have told thee, and ever when you speak of days in things
natural, you understand natural days, and in things artificial, days
artificial. Tell me, when thou ask thy Til man, seeing the year after thou
have sown, a field of thy corn growing, how many days has this corn ben a
growing? and he answers.viij. or.x. do thou understand by the day, only
the day alone, or the day and night together?


Just. The day and the night.


Soul. And when thou ask him, in how many days he sowed it, what
understand thou by the day?


Just. The day only.


Soul. See then that in things natural thou take days natural, and in
things artificial, days alike.


Just. Surely my soul thou have made me understand that I never did before.
Where have thou learned so many goodly things?


Soul. Of experience, because I have so long ben in thee, by the help of
knowledge that thy senses have given me.


Just. Now I know how time is the measure of the motions of these things of
the world, but I would have thee tell me better what the motions be.


Soul. The motion local, which is that, by which, things move from one place to
another: the motion of alteration, by the which one thing goes from one
quality to an other, from heat to cold, or from youth to age: and the motion
of quantity, by the which, things be made of greater and less quantity,
increasing or diminishing, thus to be borne and to die, called generation and
corruption. But these be rather mutations, than mouings, because they be done
in an instant, and seems they can not be measured by time.


Just. How are these mouings measured with the moving of heaven?


Soul. Do thou not see evidently of thy self, that one goes. 3. mile in an
hour? how can he, unless his moving be equal to the.xxiiij. part of the*
moving which the heaven makes about the earth, but understand it of equality
of duration? and as much is the one, as the other, and not of distance and
length, for in them is no comparison: and so is measured how much one is made
greater, or less than an other, and from the one to the other, as from sick to
hole, from young to old, to the which mouings, be subject these things
generable and corruptible, which ever vary, and none can be found, but y^ is
ever moved of one of these mouings. Thou think you sta^dest firm, and yet
thou mouest ever in alteration, for thou growest continually old.


Just. I understand thee well.


Soul. Therefore all worldly things they say be measured of time, which is as
much to say, as subject to moving, y^ is measured with the motion of heaven:
which things hap not to things divine and immortal, for not being neither
generable, nor corruptyble, because they be no bodies, and by that can not be
made less or more quantity, nor be changed, by reason that they be made of
no beginning, which have any contrariety in them, as the Elements, of the
which al natural things be made, can not be measured with time as they. Of the
mouings that be changed from place to place I speak not, for this belongs
only to bodies, and I know thou have heard preached a thousand times, that God
and Angels be not in place: but when it is said they be more here tha^ there,
it is understood, because they show more their operation there, than in
other place, but not as they be compassed of our outward form of an other body,
the which is proper to be in place, as all things be in this world.


Just. Then if I lament that the time has made me old of young, being a body,
why say thou I have not reason?


Soul. Because time as time is nothing, but in our cogitation. And therefore
they say, that if there were not intellect human, there should be no time,
though there were a moving of heaven: even as thy yard in thy shop, if thou
did not use it as a mesure, it should not be a yard, but a tree: whereby
it follows, a yard to be nothing but in our cogitation, and as a yard, can
do neither good nor hurt.


Just. Thou might ask my prentice if it can do hurt or no, yt so often have
laid with it good blows upon him.


Soul. This operation he does as a tree, as he is really, and not as a yard,
and so should an other have done, that served not for a measure. Therefore if
thou would needs lament, thou must do it of heaven, which with his moving,
makes al things to vary, that be included within the^, of the which thou
can not reasonably do it, because he with his moving gendring all things, is
y^ cause why thou also art. And though it seems the cause why thou and other
decay, this comes not principally of him, because his inte^tion is to
maintain this universal, but by reason yt he has none other manner to make y^
things whereof you be made, which goes continually chau^ging under diverse
forms, and therefore you wax old and finally decay. Yet can you not lament for
this of him that has made you, being better to be of a matter corruptible,
tha^ to be nothing at all, which thou oughtst not to do, for though thou art
mortal, thou art united with me which am immortal, in such sort as I shall
make thee also immortal, by the grace of him that has created me and sent me
unto thee, when we shall rise at y^ day of the great judgment. So see how evil
thou do to compain of time, and perhaps the more, because thou art waxen
old, the age wherein thou now art, being no less worthy to be esteemed, or
paraduenture better, than all they.


Just. To this I will say thou art cunning, if thou can make me understand it.


Soul. I hope it shall not be hard for me to do it, if thou will hear
reason, and follow it as thou oughtst. But it is now day, arise and go to thy
business, and as I shall see thee disposed another time of these things, I
will keep promise with thee.


The.x. Reasoning. SOVLE. JUST.
Just, O Just, awake, for it is now time, and complain not this morning, that
thine age has taken away thy sleep, for thou have slept this night as well,
as when thou wast a child.

Just. O my Soul, thou say truth, and I am so comforted, y^ me think I came
but now to bed. But what is yt cause I have slept better now tha^ I am wont? I
pray thee tell me the cause if thou can.


Soul. If I should answer thee, the disposition of the heaven, which
paraduenture now is in a being much appropriate to the temperature of thy
complexion, thou might answer me, that this is y^ answer of y^ ignorant,
which not knowing the particular causes of things, brings forth ever
universal, au^swering to the^ y^ ask the^, God and the heaven will have it so.
Wherefore coming to y^ perticularitie wherewith our desire is quieted, I say y^
thy temperate seeding has been the cause, which thou did use yesternight,
whereby the quantity of thy nutrime^t, not having overcome the force of the
heat, that ought to sees it, there has risen in thee no trouble, and every
power has been able to do his office liberally. So as if thou sleep not so
other nights, the fault is many times of thy fragilitie, and not of thine age,
which as I have said unto thee, does not deserve to be blamd more than the
other which thou have passed.


Just. Would thou make me understand, that old age, which is the receipt of
troubles, should be good?


Soul. I will not make thee believe any thing, but I will only show thee the
truth, which thing I shall well do this morning, because thou have so well
reposed thy self, as thou art more hable to understand reason now, than when
thou have by some accident altered thy humors, and troubled thy spirits.


Just. I will hear thee with a good will truly, for I know that of every
opinion be it never so much against reason, a man learneth somewhat. But I
shall desire thee, yt thou will not do as they, whose purpose is only to
persuade, using all reason and conjecture, being never so false, so it have any
mean to obtain their desire.


Soul. Doubt not of this, for I should do thee too much injury, and whom
should I deceive but my self, being so united with thee, that must have the
same fortune?


Soul. Then thou shall do thy duty, and when thou would do otherwise, I
should yield a recompense contrary, and do to thee, as he did to the friar
master of the reuestrie in the Anuntiata, who would have bought a candle to
have offered to that image for a vow, and the friar saying to him, take one of
these that be here in the church, and give the money which thou should spend,
to the reuestrie: then giving him a bunche of candles in his hand, said: take
which thou will, and it shall be as good as if thou had even now put it in
the altar. The man doing as y^ friar bad him, said: now touch you this purse,
wherein my money is, and it shall be eue^ as good unto you, as if you had it, and
so the one was even with the other.


Soul. Just, let these toys go, for I tell thee certainly, that I shall make
thee understand, yt old age does not deserve to be blamed, nor called a worse
age, tha^ any of the other. And that thou might better understand, mark what
wants it has, or whereof men do blame it, and I will show thee how much both
thou and they be deceived, for I otherwise could not defend it, not knowing any
want in it. And when I have delivered it of those blames, then will I show the
praises of it, and I hope in the end, that it shall no less please thee to be
old than young.


Just. If there were none other thing but this, yt we old men be not only little
esteemed, but rather scorned of every one, do you not think yt old age is an il
thing?


Soul. Yes if it came of her self, but if thou considerest well, to whom this
happens, you shall see it proceeds not of old age, but of them selves, which
having had little account of their honor in their life, have been cause that
me^ give them not that reverence yt they ought to have, whereby if they be in
little reputation with other, their behauior is the fault, and not their age. So
as if thou have none other cause to blame her, this is worth nothing, but
rather discovers what thy manners be, or have been, yt causes their blame in
their old age.


Just. Yes I have reasons too many, but because I see I ca^ never prove any
with thee, I will not speak them, but yield to thee, and will also (if I can)
force my self to believe thee, for if I could do so, it were much to my comfort,
for there is not a better thing in the world, tha^ for a man sometime to deceive
himself, thinking he is wise or fair, or such like. And he that is in this
case, enjoys the world, without any care.


Soul. Yea, to fools it happens so.


Just. And have not they pleasant days also? Do thou not remember of our
physician of Florence, which a while was frantike foolish, and being sought
unto of a pore woman, to help a son of hirs that was in like case, he
answered: good woman I will not deal in it, for I should do him to much
wrong, for I never had so pleasant time, as Folishnesse.
when I was so diseased my self.


Soul. Let these reasons go, for they be not convenient to our nature, and
much less to thy age: and since thou will not speak, hear me, for I will not
fail to do that I have promised.


Just. I shall gladly do it, for it is so much betwixt this and day, that I
should be so idle, and that would irke me.


Soul. Just, I have many times considered with my self y^ al those things where
by they blame old age, (for thou know with old men the other do not much
keep company, because they of one age, are ever glad to talk together) may be
reduced to four causes that be principal of all, and by the mean of age,
reputed noisome and grievous of every man.


Just. Which be they?


Soul. The first is, that it makes them unmeet to do things: y^ second, it
makes their body weak: the third, it depriueth them of pleasures: the fourth,
that he is nighe death.


Just. Think thou then, that they blame it without cause?


Soul. Yea sure, and that thou may know the truth with thine error, let us
first examine diligently this their opinion: and to begin with the first, tell
me, what things be they whereunto a man is made more unapt by age?


Just. What be they? even all.


Soul. I would not have thee say so, for thou art wrong: but will thou know
which they be, only they that be done by force, and they be rather meet for
beasts than for men, the greater part of the which be made of greater force
tha^ we be for our service, that they might case us of superfluous travail,
and to us she has given wit, to serve our selves with it. So if thou
considerest well, thou shall see that the greater part of these operations, y^
have need of much force, be things servile, and all wise men makes them to
serve for those turns. But the great things which be of importance, be not
done with force, but with council and wisdom, of the which things old age
does most abound.


Just. And what make thou of Art of war, think thou that can be done
without force?


Soul. No, but in this, many times council and prudence does more than force.


Just. Whom can thou make believe that, that where need is to do, he is more
profitable, that sits and says nothing, than he, that bestirreth his hands?


Soul. All they that have so much knowledge, or become so prudent by
experience of things, which know it is clear, that it is much more hard well
to know how to command and govern, than to do well and obey. For standing in
this thy opinion, there should follow that he were more profitable in a ship,
that roweth, or hales, or spread sails, tha^ the master that gouerns al, for
they work, and he stands and commands.


Just. What should he do, that commands, if he had not that did obey?


Soul. Fewer faults a great deal, than they should, if they had not one to
command them: therefore if thou consirest well, thou shall see few cities
maintained in felicity, but y^ be governed of old men. For although young men
sometime augme^t, yet ca^ they not maintain, for young me^ be carried with Will,
which in them is like the thirst y^ a great ague brings with it, whereby they
suffer themselves to be overcome of love, of anger, or of many other passions,
which y^ age has. And further, they be so ambitious and desirous of praise,
that many times they adventure inconsideratly upon enterprises so hard and
dangerous* that they bring away no less hurt than shame. And that that is
worse, they be cruel, and put hope in every little thing, they make little
account of their own, they import their secrets to every man, whereby it is
an easy thing to deceive them. The which thing happens not to old men, which
for their long experience, and for that they have often ben deceived of things of
the world, they put not so rashly themselves to peril, they tell not so
easily their mind, they believe little and hope less. And because they have
learned how hard a thing it is to get riches, they cast them not away as young
men do, but make store of the^, to have when need shall require.


Just. And so the most part become covetous, berieuing them selves of that
liberality, whereof there is nothing found so profitable for man, and chiefly to
the^ that shall govern other, for it causes that men serve them for love, and
every man knows that rule that is done by love, is much more sure and
durable, than that is done by force.


Soul. That thou think in young me^ liberality, is for the most part
prodigality: for young men give easily to them that praise them, or bring them
any delight, where old men because they are more prudente, and know things
better, give more to whom is convenient: in the which thing, liberality
proprely consists. So as thou see how much thou art deceived, to say, that
age makes a man less apt to do things, where as it makes them more expert
and prudent, with the which virtues (as I said before) only great affairs be
done.


Just. Well be it so as thou have said, which in deed I will not utterly deny:
for abiding of travel is rather a thing of beasts, than of men, to whom counsel
and discourse belongs: will thou deny me, that old Age does not bring with it
so many infirmities, as it so enfeebleth man's body, yt it is to be shoonned,
and deserves to be blamed.


Soul. All other ages do the like, rather worse than it. For those
infirmities that childhode and youth brings with it, be much more perilous.
For they be more sudden and sharp, i^ respect of the humors and blood,
which be more, and of greater force in young men, than in old.


Just. How will you prove that?


Soul. What need I labor in it, for experience will make thee certain? see
thou not that there die more children than young men, and how few they be that
come to old age?


Just. Certainly in this thou haste reason, for I do not believe, that of the^
y^ be borne, two of the hundred comes to fifty years.


Soul. And whereof think thou, comes that, but that those ages be subject
to more dangerous diseases than old age is?


Just. I ca^ not tell, but this I see, there dies so many young, y^ there
remains but a few old.


Soul. Now thou telst a pretty thing, must not all die at length?


Just. Well I will grant thee, that old age has not more of these dangerous
infirmities, than has any other age, but of certain coughes, catarres,
palseis, and other diseases which young men have not, and old men be full: what
say thou now?


Soul. I say unto thee, that they rather come of them selves, than of age.


Just. How so?


Soul. If thou considerest well the life of such as now be, or have been in
that age, thou shall know it of thy self, for thou shall find them men, which
either not considering their age, and how less their power is, to that they
were young, they will drink and eat as much as they were wont, or peradventure
more, whereby nature for that occasion not being hable to make disgestion,
genders in them that superfluity, that causes these accidents: or else in
their youth have made so many disorders, yt they have gotten these euyls, which
show them selves in age, when they be more weak of nature: but an old man that
considers well his virtue, how much and what it is, and lives orderly
thereunto, eating and drynkyng only so much as may restore his strength, and
not oppress him, would live much more hole, than a young man. And thou know
I have many times taught thee what way to use in it.


Just. Then if an old man will be hole, he must mark so many things, as he
shall lose all his co^tentation: for so thou have confessed of thy self, that
this other blame, which we give to this age, that it takes away all pleasure,
is not given for naught.


Soul. Let us proceed in order, that thou may se thou have not yet caught
me. Do thou not remember that that I have said an other time, that eating
and drinkyng, and other things coming of some lack, be no pleasures but as a
man has need, for when he is suffised, they be unpleasant to him.


Just. If these be no pleasures, there be ynow of other, that are taken from
her, that she may well be blamed, and without respect.


Soul. Rather ought she to be praised most, for if thou considerest well, she
depriues only those that be reprouable in other ages.


Just. That will not I grant: for a man that can have no pleasure in the
world, is as though he were not.


Soul. True: but what understand thou by pleasure?


Just. Those delights which the things of the world bring with them. Know
thou not, that thou art like one born yesterday, and yet there be many years
since we first met together?


Soul. If thou understand of those pleasures, that eating and drinkyng
brings, and idleness with those vain and wanton thoughts that proceed of it.


Just. Of what think thou I mean? of those that we have by fasting or labor,
or wasting our selves with study as some fools do?


Soul. Thou art much deceived, rather I say unto thee, that nature has not
given to men, as Archita the Tarentine Pleasures
said, (if thou remember of his life, for I know thou haste red it often) a
greater nor more hurtful evil than pleasure, and delight of the body.


Just. Thou say so perhaps, because the least part is thine.


Soul. Rather, because the truth is so, whereof comes for the most part,
treasons of the Country, ruins of cities, enimities of men, and other
wickedness, murders, rauine of richesse and adulteries, but of volupt and
delight? which so much blind men with their entisement and alluring, that
taking from them the use of reason, they he turned into beasts.


Just. O reason, yet it fears not them, as thou do say.


Soul. There is no such enemy as pleasure, which of good reason was called
of wise me^, the bait of al evil. For where the senses rule, reason has no
place, no virtue is found in them that be given to the pray of their gorge, to
wine, to sleep, and those idleness, of the which grows among us, a thousand
vain and unprofitable cares, which keep us always after with our face to the
earth, like the brute beasts which lack reason. Think thou then, that age
is to be blamed, when she defends us from greater enemies* taking from them
that force, wherewith they offend?


Just. If it were as thou say: but grant there is one man that has no
pleasure, is not he in deed, as he were not alive, or as a thing without sense?


Soul. Yes. But she takes not all always from men, but only those that be
common with other beasts.


Just. Then what be they, ye remain?


Soul. All they that be properlye meet for men, and be permitted is by
reason, which principally be those delights, that be taken of operations, which
rise in a man of those parts that haua in them divineness.


Just. Which be those?


Soul. All the speculatio^s and exercises virtuous.


Just. If I should always be occupied in like things after thee, my servitude
should be too great: thou know sometime I would have some comfort.


Soul. I will not deny thee it, so that thou pass not reasonable terms: but
I will say unto thee, that delight that is taken in eating and drinking, and
talking withthy friends, is much more acceptable to old age, than to the other
ages.


Just. What is the cause?


Soul. Because there is in old men more moderate appetite, they fall not into
drunkenness, or any other alteration of the mind, as young men do, (which have
their wills disordinate) if they have not in their youth, made the^ selves
worse. Further they know to reason of more things and better, by the mean of
time and experience, and better enjoy the conversation of men, and with much
more sweetness embrace the presence of them, than young men do. For of their
peers they be honored, and of their less they be reverenced. Which thing
bryngs them no small delight.


Just. If they have seen many things they remember few, because memory in that
age diminishes much.


Soul. Yea, in them that exercise it not, which is a vice of manner, not of
age, as in many of them to be suspicious, to be covetous, tedious, prayser of
time past, estemer of himself more than other, and other like wants: but when
she loses any of her strength, there increases so much for it in wit and
judgment, that they supply fully for her the fruits, which bring much more
pleasure to old men, than does armure, horses, huntings, daunces, and such
other that delites yo^g men. Of the pleasures of Venus I will not reason,
seeing there is nothing causes more errors in man than it. But these things
that I speak Just, come not to all old men, but to them only, that have so
lived in other ages, that their reputation and years have increased in them a
like.


Just. Which be they, tell me?


Soul. The greater part, that thou sholdest not think they were as white
crows, for who so ever lives in any age, though not all, yet in part
according to reason, (not being possible, but he that is a man, must err
sometime) so the errors he make, be comportable, he is excused of the most part
of men, and that age after of her self brings him such authority and
reputatatio^, that he is honored of every one, and the first place given him in
every assembly. And to this is memory also joined, and remembrance, yt he has
lived ciuilly, and like an honest man, which thing is more worth, than all the
pleasures of any age.


Just. Well I will prove thy opinion in this, for I know the pleasure I have had
some time, when I have seen my self honored for mine age sake. But to the
other, that more imports tha^ all the rest, what say thou?


Soul. What is that?


Just. That we be nigh death.


Soul. It is true that the term and end of old age is death, where
naturally to the other ages it haps not so: the end of childhode is youth, the
end of youth middle age, the end of middle age, old age. Nevertheless there
is none of all these ages can promise them selves life one pore day. Rather be
they more, (as I said unto thee,) that die in the other ages, than they that
be old, because of the multitude of great perrils, that do chance in life?


Just. Then an old man is certain to die, and soon, where a young man may at
least hope to be old.


Soul. The old man has possessed that the young hops for.


Just. What helps to have lived, seeing time past is not?


Soul. That that makes ye hope of the time to come, which is to come: but
what is.xv. or.xx. years more or less, seeing we must needs die, nothing
remaining unto us of things gotten in time, but only the acts of virtue?


Just. What is xv. or.xx. year? O my soul, thou she west to have tasted but a
little, how pleasant thing it is to live?


Soul. Thou seem not to know: for if thou had considered well the
things that haps in every age, thou should find there be many more that it
displeases, than pleases: and that a man must strive with so many things, as
our life has been well Life, a Warfare.
heretofore called, a continual warfare. But let us go further Just: If death
be to be feared, they ought only to fear, that by death think they shall
cease to be, which is desired and loved so much of all creatures, or to them
that doubt to go to worse, neither of the which ought to be in thee, thou being
a christian man.


Just. And what certainty have I, not to lose my being utterly, when I shall
die?


Soul. None of thy self, thou can not think otherwise, being by thy propre
nature mortal, and seeing that all other things like unto thee, must decay and
die: but I say unto thee, that when that time determined, shall come, appointed
by God, I that am immortal, shall be reunited with thee, whereby thou shall rise
with me by y^ grace of the immortal God, void of trouble and clear from all
quality, that now causes thee to change every day to an other, which in the
end shall cause me to be separate from thee, whereof shall come thy death.


Just. What certainty haste thou of this?


Soul. That that exceeds and passes all other, the light of faith.


Just. And that light thou speak of passes the certainty of things, by
mean of science. I have heard say that science is nothing but a certainty.


Soul. It passes far, for sciences be the inventions of men, which may
err, rather it never does thing, but there is found in it some imperfection,
Faith.
and the light of truth comes or God, which is the high and unspeakable
verity. But I will not bring thee more reasons for this, we having so many
times red together, that divine treatise that Jerome made, entitled the
Triumph of Faith, where is proved of him, all this that I have said, so as he
that has read, and does not believe, may say, either he understands not,
or else is obstinate in his opinion. Therefore lament no more Just, that thou
art old, for fear of short life, for if we be nigh death, we be nighe the
end of our Pilgrimage, and at the term to arrive in our country, and port
of our salvation.


Just. I have many times heard this, that we here be Pilgrims, and that this
is not our Country: and yet it seems very hard to me, to think I shall
depart.


Soul. This is full well known to me: for the end which I show thee, and to
the which thou art ordained by my occasion, does pass and exceed thy nature:
But suffer thy self to be guided of me, and let us dispose all our business,
that when it shall please him that gouernes all things, to loose this band, let
it grieve thee as little as may be, having a sure hope, to be united with me
again, in a far better state, and I rejoice to return to my maker. Therefore
complain no more Just of thy age, for none of these causes, wherefore thou
blamest her, has place in us, because we be sure (as I have said) to go to a
better life.


Just. Well, I will do all thou say, and in all things put my self to thy
will, without making any more account of my will: for I think that we having
so long ben together, thou have ought me so great love, that thou would not
counsel me but to my good.


Soul. Now it seems thou know thy weal: for of our discord should come
the evil of both us. Therefore let us apply to live together in the love of God,
and let us ever hold before our eyes these three things. The first, that God
was made man, to advance the nature of man to this dignity, that man might be
made God. The second, that he has been willing to dye to satisfy and pay the
pain of our debtes, we not being apt nor sufficient to do it, being made his
enemies, through the fault of our first father. The third is, that we be
mortal: wherefore the two first, like to spurs of love, do make us to go
chearefully to the uttermost of our power, through his most holy law, for he
should be very hard, that would not be kindled with the love of Christ Jesus our
savior, if he consider he was made man for us, and after died for our sins.
The third shall be a bridle of fear, that shall not suffer us to go from his
will. And though by the infirmity of nature, we commit sometime some fault, it
will make us straight turn to him, and humbly ask him pardon. For they only
be blessed, whose sins Blessed.
(as David says) be remitted of him.


Just. How shall we be heard of him, I remember I have red in the scripture, God
hears not the voice of a sinner.


Soul. We shall no longer be sinners, as often as we shall turn to God, and
run to him with true faith, seeing sin is nothing else, but to take our face
from God, and turn it to his creatures. But if we turn us to Christ with all
our heart, trusting that he has satisfied for all our defectes, as a very
mediator, and our Savior, it shall follow that we shall be united with him as
with our head, in such sort by love, that we shall become his members,
whereby we shall ever work, after his will. For as the eye, although it be an
eye, should not see, nor the tongue, although it be a tongue, should not speak
if it were not united with the head, which gives them strength to work, so we
Christians also, although we be christians should never work as we ought, if
we were not united with Christ our head, which grau^teth us by his grace to do
it. Of the which union rises, that his merits also shall come down into us,
and we shall cover our faults with his innocence, whereby going after so,
before the Tribunal of God, he shall say after the manner of the great
Patriarch Isaac, of us, although the voice be of Jacob, that is of sinners, yet
the members, that is their works be of Esau, that is of my first begotten
son, whereby he shall give us his benediction, and in the end the heritage
of God.


Just. Thou have given such a consolation this morning my Soul, that (as I
said to thee before) I let my self hereafter be guided of thee, and apply me
to all that thou do counsel me, for so I know is for my weal clearly.


Soul. God of whom comes all our good, long maintain thee in this purpose.


Rise therefore, for see it is day, and high is the sun, and go in his name
to do thy exercises, bearing in patience that that comes, never lamenting more
of any thing: for all that that follows, does follow by his will: nor he will
never suffer that any thing shall fall upon us, above our strength, and that
we shall not be able to bear, because he desires much more our salvation than
our selves.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight rider streate, at
the sign of the Marmaide. Anno. 1568.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


