THE Gallants Burden.

A Sermon preached at PAVLES CROSS, THE twenty nine of March, being the fifth
Sunday in Lent. 1612.

By THO. ADAMS, Preacher of Gods Word at Willington in Bedford-shire.

Published by authority.

LONDON Printed by W. W. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1612.

TO THE HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM GOSTWICKE Baronet, and his worthy Lady, the Lady
JANE GOSTWICKE.
HOnorable Sir, I acknowledge freely that the World is oppressed with the
Press, and the confluence of Books has bred a confusion of errors, of
Vices; so hard is it to distinguish betwixt profitable and vain Writings; and
having culled out the best, so easy is it with much good Meat to surfeit; yet
is not therefore Meat unnecessary: It is no sober inference, because both
Text and readers have been corrupted with false Glosses, to reject all
Expositions, all Applications: both are fit, this latter most necessary; for
our Understanding is better then our Conscience: there is some light in our
Minds, little warmth in our Affections: So against Nature is it true in this,
that the essential qualities of Fire, Light, and Heat, are divided; and to
say, whether our light of Knowledge be more, or our heat of Devotion less, is
beyond me: Let this (considered) plead for me, that I (do but) rub this
sowning Knowledge in us, to bring it back to some life of Obedience: If any
feel their thick eyes hence to receive any clearenesse, or their nummed
Affections to gather (the least) Spirit, let them at once, give God the glory,
and take to themselves the comfort. Sin has got strength with age, and
against all natural order, is more powerful, subtle, and fuller of active
dexterity now in the dotage of it, then it was in the nonage: Both Pulpit and
Press are weak enough to resist it. It therefore this small Arrow of Reproof
can wound (but even) one of his Limbs, it shall a little eneruate his tyranny.
Whatsoever this Sermon is, it is wholly yours, and he that made it: whose
Patronage, I could not be ambitious of, if I should only fix my eyes on my
own deseruinges: but in the affiance of your good natures, mature judgments,
and kind constructions of my weak endeauours, I have presumed to make you the
Patron of my Labors, who was freely the Patron of my self. I know, that Gods
word can countenance it self, and needs not the shelter of an human arm,
not, though it had as many Edomites to deride it, as it has Patrons to defend
it: But I find not only the best Writings of the best Men, but even some of
those Holy Books, inspired from Heaven, bearing in their foreheads (as from
the penmen) a dedication. I confess, it is not all for your Protection,
somewhat for your use; and you are blessed in favoring that, which shall be best
able to favor you: May I therefore entreat your Honors, to give it happy
entertainment to your own hearts, favorable protection to the worlds eyes;
so shall that, and my self be (yet more) yours. The God of all power and
mercy, be as f^ythfull a shadow of refreshing to your souls, as your
kindness has been free to my wantes, who must ever remain.

Your Honors in all faithful observance, Tho. Adams.

THE GALLANT'S BVRDEN.
Esaias 21. ver. 11. 12. The burden of Dumah. He calls unto me out of Seir,
Watchman, what was in the night? Watchman, what was in the night? The Watchman
said: The morning comes, and also the night. If ye will ask, enquire:
return, and come.
QVo breuior, ^o obscurior: the shorter this Prophecy is, the more mystical.
In holy Writ, these two things ever concur: (Sententia breuis* res ampla) a
finite Sentence, an infinite Sense: As in a little Map we see a world of
Countries, and what the Foot cannot measure in many days, the Eye peruseth in
a moment: this is the little Map of Idumea or Edom, (wherein we may survey
the state of that whole Region) not much unlike the situation of it, standing
in this Chapter betwixt Chaldea and Arabia: The Burdens against them both are
heavy, and the Plagues aggrauated with more circumstaunces: The burden of
Dumah, (though short) shall weigh with them grain for grain.

As you travail with me into this Country (by the guidance of that
inlightning spirit) tie your considerations to two especial things; Division.
the Map, the Moral. In the Map you shall find 1. an Inscription, 2. a
Description: In the Inscription observe, Map.
1. the name of the Country: 2. the nature of the Prophecy. The Description
restes it self on 3. Obiectes; 1. a Mountain, 2. a Watchman, 3. an Edomite:
where is shadowed 1. under the Mountain, Security: 2. under the Watchman,
Vigilancie: 3. under the Edomite, Scorn. Now, if you ask (as they did the
Prophet Ezekil) what these things mean? Morell.
the Moral directes you 1. by a Q^estion, 2. by an Answer: The Question would
know, what was in the Night: the Answer declares it 1. by a Resolution, 2. by
an Advice: The Resolution (Venit mane et vespe) The ^^orning c^mes, and also
the night: the Advice, If ye will ask, enquire: return, and come.

In the Inscription, Dumah.
we propounded to be considered 1. the name of the Country, 2. the nature of
the Prophecy: For the Country, there is some question what this Dumah should
be: some affirm it to be the Country of the Ishmaelites, and to receive the
name from Dumah, that son of Ishmaell, mentioned Genesis 25. 14. but that Dumah,
with other the sons of Ishma^ll inhabited Arabia, which is burdened in the
Prophecy following, distinctly severed from this: this Dumah then was the
Country of the Idumeans or Edomites, the place where Esa^ and his generation
dwelt: this is clear by the Mount Seir, which was an Hill of the Ed^mu^s:
Ezech. 35. 15.

This Idumea is here called Dumah: Pearphaer^sin.
thus God insinuates his contempt of that rebellious and accursed nation, by
cutting short the name, as unworthy to stand in his Book, graced with the full
length: the estimation which the wicked bear with God is here expressed: he
thinks the mention of them a blurre to his sacred leaves: now, shall their
persons sit in his Kingdom with honor, whose names may not stand in his Book
without disgrace? Sometimes they are concealed, as Dives: Luke 16. 19.
that real Parable gives no other title to the condemned churl: Luke 13. 32.
Christ allows the Tyrant Herod no other name then a Fox: Go tell that Fox,
etc. God calls those Princes, Amos. 4. 1.
the Bulls of Bashan on the Mountains of Samaria: they would be blottes to
his holy Book, if they were expressly named. Sometimes they are named, (but)
with abbreuiations; Dumah for Id^mae^: Ruth. 4. 19.
Thus Aram is called Ram: Ephesdam^im, a coast of the Philistines, never spoken
of without contempt, is twice thus curtalled. 1. Cro. 11. 1. Chron. 11. 13.
it is called Pasdaemmim: and 1. Sam. 17. Dammim. 1. Sam. (...).1.


Let not this Observation slip from us without our use, If God take letters
from the name, he intendes to take blessings from the person, Ier. 22. 28.
when Ieconiah's curse is written in the cutting off his Posterity from the
throne of David, and himself from the prosperity of the earth, he is called
Co^^^h: the reason is added, He is a despised person, let him have a shortened
name: a broken Idol, and an unpleasant Vessel, etc.

Thus God crosses the worlds fashion, by putting them in his Chronicle, which
are not here thought of, and leaving those out, which the world boastes of as
her glory: to a soul that has more Affection in her, then Religion, it
seems a great matter of pity: that Plato, Cato, Alexander, and some of those
mighty Roman Cesars, honored with the graces of Nature, the bounties of
Fortune, and the greatest glory, the fore'd world could yield them, should yet
want a name in Gods Book, a place in his Kingdom. Greatness is the fairest
object to the eye of the world, Goodness to the eye of Heaven: There is a
glorious splendor in pompous Honor, to draw the eyes of admiration after it;
it little affectes the sight of God, if Virtue gives it not a Luster: he that
is goodness and greatness it self (when others have it in the concrete, good
and great, he has and deserves it in the abstract) is pleased (to prefer his
title of Optimus, before that of Maximus) and first to be called Good, Exodus 14.
and then Great. His affections should be ours: he is the absolute precedent of
our imitation.

There are infinite ways that conduct to seeming Honor, excluding Virtue; the
end of them al is shame: since of a natural man it is true, that ( Quan^o
ornatior, tanto nequ^or) The more adorned, the more wicked: our Bonnets veil,
our Knees bow to many, whom the sight of Heaven and Virtue, scorns: This
imparitie of men living, is made even by death, who sweepes all (Beggar and
Prince) with his impartial Beesome, into one Bag: and when Judgment comes,
they are made odd and unequal again; for then, the least in the worlds
estimation, shall sit down with the blessed Kings and Patriarchs in Heaven,
when Kings and Patriottes without grace, shall be excluded. If you desire your
names to be registered with the pen of Eternity, write them your selves with
the pen of Charity: the Book of Grace, is the counterpaine to the Book of
Election: they are written in Heaven first, and there God reads them: We
cannot see into this Book through the thick clouds of the Air and Sin;
let us write them in the leaves of Obedience, and there read them: 1. Tim. 2.
19.
they stand sure with God before, not sure to us till now: 2. Pet. 1. 10.
Write them in the entrals of the Poor, in the ruins of the Church, by you
bettered, repaired, maintained, ( Non norunt haec monumenta more,) and you
shall one day hear the Judge himself, read them in the audience of all the
world, Math. 25.
to your joy, crown, eternity of bliss.

Christ diuerted his Apostles triumph to an other honor: they were little less
then proud, Luke. 10. 17.
that the Devils were subdued unto them through his name whom they served: True
(says Christ) I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning; nevertheless
rejoice not that the spirits obey you, but rejoice that your names are written
in Heaven. ver. 20.
Rejoice not of your innobled bloodes, admired with living praises, and rescued
from the jaws of oblivion by sumptuous Sepulchers: there is small matter of
joy, that the name lives in bright honor on Earth, when the Soul lies in the
rusting miseries of Hell: but rejoice on your assurance of memorial with God:
Prou. 10. 7.
The memory of the just shall be blessed; but the name of the wicked shall
rotte. A great name commonly arises either from Blood, 1. Descent*
popular applause, 2. Ho^our
or Golden trappinges: 3. Wealth.
the last uses a man like a Counter that stands now for a Million, instantly
for a Penny: The first finds Honor, perhaps deserves it not, leaves it by
succession: The middlemost is unconstant, as the causes are: the vulgar
opinions, whose distracted voices seldom hit on the same tune, or never keep
it long. The Monarchs of the world have large and tedious Titles, according to
their several Dominions: good luck have they with that Honor, which the hand
of God reaches forth unto them: there is a Title that betters all theirs;
those are foulded up in time, that perishes: this bringes Honor without end
or limits, to be a Christian; such have their names producted in Gods book, to
show that they stand written with Golden letters in the Lambs book of Heaven:
Abram shall be called Abraham: Jacob, Israel. The Hebrews well observe, that
God to those he loved, added a letter of his own name (that tetragrammaton)
Jehovah: as the letter He, to Abraham's and Sarahs name the letter Iod to
Iehoshua's, who was before called Hoshea.

It was happy for Mordecaj that his name stood in the Persian Chronicles, that
Ahashverosh might read him: his service shall be found out with rewards, array
him with the Kings Robe, set him on the Kings Chariot, and proclaim his name
through the popular streets, This is the man, Ester. 6. 9.
whom the King will honor. It is more blessed to stand in the Chronicles of
Heaven, registered by the Pen of that eternal Spirit; we shall one sit with
the King in his Throne (Vnicenti dabitur sedere, Revel. 3. 21.
etc.) and put on his robe of Glory; Philip. 3. ^1.
(Be fashioned like his glorious body, Psalm. 149. 9.
) Such honor have all his Saints. It is the decree and promise of him, whose
word is more stable then the foundations of the Earth: Those that hon^^r me, I
will honor. Reuolue then his sacred Name in your sanctified mouths: sing
Hosa^na's to it here, that you may ^ing Halle^uia's hereafter: and having
drunk hearty draughts of his Waters of Mercy, bless with David his great
and glorious Name: the honor of your own names is attained, nay consistes in
this: maintain the glory of it with your strengthes, sound it with your
praises, and (if need be) seal it with your bloodes; and God shall write your
Names (not shortened like Dumahs,) but at full length, in a Book never to be
blotted out.

The nature of the Prophecy follows, being that other branch of the
Inscription; Burden.
A Burden: a matter not easily portable, but will weigh heavy on whom soever
imposed: the Burden is in 2. respects: 1. of the Prophet that bear it: 2. of
the People that were to suffer it.

1. The Word of the Lord is to the Prophets a heavy Burden till they are
delivered of it: there is no rest in the bones to the surcharged Conscience, no
more then to the pregnant Woman till she be eased: I confess, that Security,
Vanity, abundance of Wealth, setting their shoulders to this Burden, make many
a Prophet forgo all sense of the weight: Jonas laden with his Commission for
Nineveh, lay as securely in the sides of the Ship, as if the God of Israel
had laid no Burden on him: but himself was a Burden to the Ship, and the
fury of the Waves, Winds, and his Anger that mooues all, was not appeased,
till the Ship was disburthened of Jonas, that had disburthened himself of
the Message of God. Let me speak it with grief and fear; We are the sons
of those Prophets, (I mean) their successors in Gods Ministerial work: and
the Word of the eternal God is no lighter a Burden to us then it was to them:
nay let me add (that, which is not to be thought of without trembling) there
is the Burden of a Curse threatened to them that neglect this Burden; Cursed is
he that does Gods business negligently. Least I should seem bitter in
applying this too generally, let me freely speak what Paul applies to his own
person, if he slighted this ponderous charge: A necessity (which is no less
then a Burden) is laid upon me, and woe unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.

I know that our Harvest aboundes with plentiful and painful Laborers, that
bear the heat and burden of the day, and according to their several offices
(whether in Ouerseeing, Planting, or Watering) with the sweat of their brows,
they labor in Gods Vineyard: but to complain o^ the evil that is, is no
wrong to the good that is: (...) excellent things are sp^ken of thee, Oh thou
City of God; Oh thou Church of England: Oh might it be no wrong to thy
Perfections, no stain to thy Beauty, to condole some wantes in thy Sons: It
is sin to be silent, where an impartial speech may take good effect: the
sweet deawes of holy Admonitions may from this place, (as the Liver) spread
into all the Veins of the Land.

The Ministry is a matter of both Honor and Burden: Are there none, that
catch at the Honor, will not meddle with the Burden? whose pined Flocks must
either content themselves with a bare Pasture, or else stray forth into
neighboring Commons; whiles they forget to break their Masters Bread; yea
perhaps to set the whole Loaf before his guestes: Are there none that load
their minds with the Burden of Cares, too heavy for a Christian soul to
bear? the load of Ambition, the burden of Covetousness so pressing them down,
as if they were exonerated of the Burden of the Gospel: But if any soul be
sensible of this Burden, (as one, into whose bowels God has put the compassion
of distressed souls,) Esaias. 62. 1.
for Zyons sake he will not hold his peace: yea, let me speak it of him, that
Job of himself; He is full of matter, and the spirit within him, compels
him: the word is in him, Job. 3^. 18.
like new Wine in Bottles, which must be vented, or will burst forth: And if
we slip our shoulders from under this Burden, God can make the whole world
too hot for us, and at last impose a Burden of another nature, on our then
weaker and more unable souls (the Mountains and Rocks (if weighed in the
balance) will be found lighter) the Burden of all their sins, whose souls
have bled to death by our negligence: We may, through our impatience and
weakness with Jeremy, curse the days of our Nativity, and cry woe worth the
time, Ier. 20.
that ever we were borne, to so troublesome an Office: but a greater woe and
curse attendes us, if we attend it not: passive Corruptions in our selves,
active Reproaches, Injuries, Oppositions of others, impulsive temptations of the
Devil, may make us weary of our callinges: but his Word is in our hearts, as
fire shut up in our bones, and we shall be weary of forbearing; we cannot
smother the flames of it, but with terms of defiance to the stoutest that
bear a forehead, we must declare it: God gives us the provision of this
Burden, before hand, that we may stoop the shoulders of patience and zeal to
it: Thus to Ezekiell: Son of man, Ezekiel* 1^
I send thee to Israel; What are they? I will not dissemble with thee: They are
a rebellious house: contumelies against thy self, blasphemies against thy
maker, the bitinges, smitinges, woundinges of tongues, hands, and swords:
this is the Burden thou must bear; if any lighter and better things come, let
them be (praeter spem) beyond thy expectation: Thus is the Word a burden to the
person that bears it.

2. It is no less to them that must suffer it: the Judgments of God are
heavy on whomsoever they light: a Millstone bound to the sinner, and thrown
with him into the Sea, will not sooner sink him to the bottom, then these
bound to the soul, will sink it to the depth of dephtes; Math. 18. 6.
therefore Christ says, B^tter a Millstone, because lighter. The wrath of the
Lamb, at the consummation of the world, is acknowledged more heavy then Rocks
and Mountains; Revel. 6. 16.
and happy were it for those reprobates, if such intolerable pressures could
dissolve them into emptines: These on the body are more sensible, on the soul
more miserable. In the infancy of the world, Gods blows were most outward; in
this ripe (or rather rotten) age of it, they are most inward and spiritual: We
have no Bears to devour the Mockers; no fiery Serpents to strike the
Murmurers: Gods punishments reach most to the Conscience: (T^^^plex circa
prae^^^^a ferrum,) a sensual and senseles heart without apprehension of Gods
incensed anger, (Cor nuliis violabile telis) not made of penitrable stuff: if
Gods finger touch the body, we groan under the weight; let his whole hand lie
on the soul, we feel nothing: If this be not our Burden and Misery, what is?
Like curious Visitors, will ye not believe this age to labor of this
Sickness, (unless you behold some Symptoms? Let your eyes take notice (and
that not without grief of soul) the deadness of heart among us: We ply the
World hard, dally with Religion: We serve God in jest; our selves, with all
respect and earnest: Our Devotions are like Winter, frosty, misty, and windy of
many natures, none other then cold: Nothing arms, charms, and confirms our
senses with attention, spirits with intention, active powers with contention,
but vanity. Are not the Benches in Tauernes, and Theaters, often well
replenished, when these Seats are thin and almost empty? Are not the Allies
in this Temple often fuller of Walkers, then the Quire of Petitioners?
Conference with profane ostentation of Clothes; perhaps plottes of
mischief, as frequent, as suits to God: (making it little less then a den of
Thieves:) If men stumble into the Church, as company, custom, recreation, or
(perchance) sleep inuites many, they feed their eyes with vanities; if any
drops he admitted into their ears, they are entertained under the nature of
conceates: Judgments (they think) be none of their lessons, they will not
suffer their consciences to apply them: Mercies they challenge and own, though
they have no right to them: If this estate be not a misery, judgment, burden,
there is none: The fire of the Pestilence is well quenched, the rumors and
storms of War are laid, the younger brother of death, Famine, does not
tyrannize over us: But here it is; our sins and Gods wrath (for them) meet,
and the heart is hardened: this is the sorest judgment. Let me speak a
Paradoxe, but a truth; it is the plague of many, that they are not plagued:
even this is their punishment, the want of punishment: and the hand of God is
then heauiest, when it is lightest: heauiest on the Conscience, when lightest
on the Carcass: it is true on them, what the Philosopher said of himself (
Perieram misi perijssem) they are undone, that they are not undone: God suffers
their bodies to possess, and be possessed of rest: they sing to Viols, dance
to Measures: their Heads ache not, Much less their Consciences: But (as to
Israel, fat with Quails) God withal, sendes Lea^nesse into their souls:
the present indulgence, gives sufficient argument of future woes: they surfeit
on pleasures, till death puts them out of breath: that worthy Father saw this
their (selfe-commended) estate, and prayed against it; Aug. Domine, hic ^re,
hic seca, vt in ^ternum parcas.
Lord, here plague, cut, massacre, burn me, so that for ever thou will spare
and save me. This is ( O^u^ grauissimum,) the most grievous Burden. Security
is the very suburbs of Hell: (Miseri^^ nihil est miser^, se non miserante,)
there is nothing more wretched, then a wretched man, that reckes not his own
miseri^: an insensible Heart is the Devils Anuile, he fashioneth all sins on
it, and the blows are not felt.

You wounder at the frequencie of Burdens, and that the Turtles of this Land
groan out of this place, the sad tunes of woe and misery. Alas, how should
we sing the songs of Syon to a strange people? The Pulpit (I confess) should
be the Mercy seat; but your sins have made it a Tribunal, or Bench of
Judgment: Nothing but the thunders of Sinaj, (and scarce those) can waken us
from our dead sleep: this is ( Ima S^curitas) deep Security, fitly applied
to us, whose is ( Sine cura aetas) an Age without care; or rather, if you will,
(Se curans ^tas) that love none but our selves, and that not enough to seek
our own peace: Let me speak it in the tune of Jeremy (Non habet vlterius,
quod nostris moribus addat posteritas) we flow with those sins, to which no
following posterity shall be ever able to add; so spreading, an infection of
sin is among us, that, as in a great Plague, we wonder not so much at them
which die, as at them whch escape; so there is nothing a Wonder, a Mirror, a
Miracle in Nature, but he that lives unspotted of this world. If you think I
speak too bitterly, I would to God, it were not worse then I speak: I would
your reformation might convince our shame, and give us cause to recant this in
the Pulpitte: this turns the Message of Edome upon us; the Burden of Dumah,
the Burden of England: we cast from our shoulders the Burden of the Law, God
lays on us the burden of Judgment: we load God with our sins, Amos. 2. 13.
and press him as a Cart with Sheaues: we pack up a bundle of Lies,
Blasphemies, Adulteries, Periuries, Extortions, Frauds, and then hasten to the
Cross of Christ to unload them; as if pressing our souls to Hell with wilful
sins, yet Christ on the least warning, must ease us: Math. 11. 28.
But the Promise is not to men laden with sin, but with sorrow for sins: It
is such a load as must make us weary, or we have no promise to be eased.

But alas, sin (which is Burden enough to sink the world) is made light by
custom; as if resting in man's heart, it did (Quiessere in propriam sedem)
settle it self in the own natural place: It is a philosophical Axiom
(Nullum elementum suo loco pondurat) no element is heavy in the proper place:
Though Sin be as weighty as a Talent of Lead, Zachar. 5. 7.
(says the Prophet) yet it is at the Center, (when) got into the corrupted
heart, and weighes light: and except the wrath of God fall upon the naked
Conscience, Sin lies at the door, and Cain never cries, It is greater then I
am able to bear. Judas had Burden enough of treason, hypocrisy, malice,
covetousness, to sink him down; it was no Burden, till the finger of Gods
wrath touched the tender heart-stringes, and then it pressed him down to his
own place. Act. 1. 25.
How many have in curuate and oppressed souls, bowed down with the spirit of
infirmity (nay of rank iniquity) more then 18. years, that are not yet
sensible of their own crookednes, nor the cause thereof: for it can not be,
but the de^owred Patrimonies of many Orphans, the ruins and depopulations of
Towns, the deuastation of Holy things, should be Burd^ns too heavy for a
poor crasie Soul to stand under: Piles of V^urie heavier then Ae^na, Burdens
of Bribes out ballancing the Axeltree, are more then the Giants, Geonaxo,
Monsters of Men, and Prodegies of Nature were able to bear. We could not see a
corrupted Lawyer, Citizen, Cormorant, go so nimbly, and so bolt upright under
such a mass of sin, if they had not some help: Here it is, the strong man
Satan (so it pleases Christ to term him) puts under his shoulder, and makes
the Vessel go tight and easy, with an equal Balance, which could not else
swim upon the Waters without sinking: Pride could not else carry a whole
Towneship on his back, which his father Covetousness had (but newly)
deuastate, clambring up to Honor, (as Jonathan to the Garrison of the
Phi^istens by the raggedness of these two Rocks, Bozez and Seneh; so these)
by the desolation of our two maine Rocks, the Church, and Commonwealth. The
unmerciful Monopolies of Courtiers, the unreasonable Prices of Marchantes, the
hoordes (if not transportation) of Grain with Cormorantes, the advantages made
of the poores necessities, unconscionable sins, and Rentes, wringing the last
Penny from their Purses, and drop of Blood from their Hearts, (Oh durum et
importabile pondus) an intolerable weight. These wretches were never able to
bear it without the aid of the Devil, who, whiles they draw with him in the
same yoke, is content to bear all the Burden.

At last, when Presumption has left the Stage, and Desperation begins to knit
up all with a direful catastrophe, the Pulses beating slowly, the Head akeing
vehemently, Body and Soul refusing all proffered comfort, then the Devil
castes the whole Load on them, that at once they may despair and die: then
that which was lighter then Cork and Feathers, becomes heavier then Lead and
Earth: God has often strove with them by his Word; they would never yield (
Avinces) Thou shall overcome Oh Lord: Now (perhaps with Julian too late) they
pant out ((...)) Thou have overcome: Our cryings in the day, could not wake
them; that cry at midnight, shall fetch them up, With the Burden of Envy,
Covetousness, Drunkenness, etc. And as it was doomed to Babylon; Reu^l. 13. 7.
Look how much her glory and pleasure has been give be^ so much torment and
sorrow. Nay, then the De^ill gettes up too (like a merciless lay our) with the
addition of his own weight, to aggrauate their woes. Strive then every one to
abate the Burden of Judgment, by lessening the Burden of Sin: Every
repentant Tear that falls, washes a Talent from this Burden: every
remorcefull sigh, and faithful Prayer, 2. Cor. 4. 9
diminishes the Load; that which remains, may press, shall not oppress:
Christ will put under his shoulder; Come all ye laden (exonerate animas) unload
your souls: he bore them on his Cross, and our believing souls shall never
feel the weight of them: the Cross only is left heavy to blood and flesh,
but to a heart (made) spiritual, Math. 11. 30.
Thy yoke, Oh Lord, is easy, and thy burden light: our own heavy, but thine
light.

We have perused the Map to the end of the Inscription, the Description
stands next to our speech; where we have an Edomite standing on Mount Seir and
calling to the Watchman, with the voice of derision, What he saw in the night,
etc. a proud Edomite securing himself the strength of his own arms,
deriding the Prophet of God, which came against him with the burden of Wars:
this is the sense I fasten on. I have read other Expositions, as if it was a
question of fear: I approve and dwell on the former: from the persuasion then
of immunitie, impunitie, and safe standing out of the reach of Earth, Seir and
Security.
of Hell, of Heaven, proceeds this Question. Edom has shaken off the yoke of
Israel, and begins to crown his days with the Rose buddes of Peace, and not
to fear the Sword of Egypt, nor Ashur, nor Gods himself in Heaven: their
conceit was (though faignedly) as strong of this Mount Seir, as the promise of
God was really true to Mount Syon, never to be moved, though the battlementes
of Heaven shot Thunder, and the pillars of the Earth quaked.

There is question about the name of this Seir; Hierom.
some affirm it derived from Esau, Genesis 36. 9.
as being the place where he and his generation dwelt: Indeed the nature of
Esau, and the name of Seir, agrees fitly, for both signify, Brisseled, or
Hairy: but it had the name of Seir, before Esau came thither. Some Hebrews
think the Mountain was called Seir, from the apparition of Devils, who showed
themselves in the shapes of hayrie men, such as the Fawnes were imagined to be:
Mercer,
But most like to take denomination from Seir the Horite, Genesis 36. 20. who
inhabited there long before Esau: Genesis 14. 6.
And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto the plain of Paran; it being the
Country of the Ho^i^s or Horites: Esau was drawn hither for many reasons; 1.
because that corner of Canaan about Hebron, Mercer.
where he and his brother Jacob dwelt, were too scant for their Flocks: 2.
because Mount Seir fitted Esau's mind, Perer.
being a place of excellent hunting: 3. his Wives were of that Country: 4.
Gods providence so disposed of Esau's remouall, that Jacob might live in
safety: And even in this, God wrought Esau's good, by putting him out of
Canaan; for then with the rest of the Canaanites they had been destroyed by
Israel; Genesis 27. 39. 40
but God made good that temporal blessing upon Esau and his seed, which his
father Ish^c gave him. Indeed the Amalekites (though derived from Esau) were
destroyed by Israel; but the reason may be thus gathered, because Amalek was
the Son of Eliphaz (the son of Esau) by a Concubine: Mercer.
the Idumaeans, that were legitimate successors, were preserved: such was the
different respects to the tight, and to the bastard seed; for God is said to
give Mount Seir to Esau; Ioshuah^ 4. 4
I gave unto Esau mount Seir to possess it; therefore the Israelites among
their spoils of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 2 5.
were expressly forbidden to destroy it: Ye shall not provoke them; for I
will not give you of their Land, so much as a foot breadth, because I have
given mount Seir to Esau for a possession: Such was Gods mercy to Esau for his
Fathers sake, that his posterity was made great and honorable: But if the
Horites first inhabited Mount Seir, how comes the posterity of Esau to enjoy
it? It is answered in the 2. of Deutr. Deuteronomy. 2. ^2.
The Horims dwelt in mount Seir before-time, whom the children of Esau chased
out, and destroyed them before them, and dwelt in their stead: So does Sin
quench the very cinders of natural affection, after it has put out the flames
of Religion, that the children of Esau ceased not till they had extinguished
their own kindred: the respect of blood must give way to Rapine and Malice:
too weak is Nature to restrain the fury of Sin, when it is stung by that
fiery Serpent, the Devil. The Romish Mountain does claim some kin of this
Mount Seir, (at least in the opinion of the Jews:) There is one place in Edom,
called Magdiell; this the Rabbines take for Rome, and say, that of the Idumeans
came the Romans: it is not so locally; it may be well spiritually; For, for
persecution of the Saints, there is no such Edome in the world, as Rome: But
Magdiell signifies, Praising God: Oh blessed were Rome, if in this, she could
be called Magdiell. This Seir was a Mountain of great strength, not infertile;
and as great probability gives it, graced with either one or many goodly
Cities: Who will bring me into Edom, Psalm.
who will lead me into the strong City? Neither may we think, that the
offspring of Edom, when once made Dukes, nay Kings, contented themselves to
dwell in Tents.

But what if a Mountain, what if a City, or the strength of Edom, is it able
to grapple with the Wrath of God, or buckle with his Judgments? If any piece
of the broad Earth were shot proof against the Anger of God (as they feign the
^arden of Hisperides against the Planets) it would not be unsought, unbought:
there have been Mountains and Cities before and after Seir, prouder and
stronger then she, that have measured their length on the ground, and been
dissolved to dust and rubbish; and Edom her self has daunced the same
measure. The world has gloried in her several ages of many goodly Cities;
(...) the pride of Assyria, Troy the pillar of Asia, Babylon more a Region then
a City, Carthage graced with 17. tributarie Kingdoms; and let not Jerusalem
be shut from both the glory and sadness of this relation: may we not say of
them all now (Etiam periere ruinae) That little of them is dissolved to nothing.
Thus God cooles and dampes the glory of Israel: Go you unto Calneh, and see:
and from-thence go unto Hamath the great: Amos. 6. 2
then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they better then these
Kingdoms, or the border of their land greater then your b^rder?

Constantius spoke of old Rome, that Nature had emptied all her forces on that
one City: the time came, she was overthrown, and her Walls made even with
the ground. The titles of new Rome are greater, not her Privileges: (she is
called, Vrbs aeterna,) yet that Eternal Babylon shall fall, and her honor be
laid in the Dust: her doom is past, and in the decree of Heaven, she is
already fallen for the more surenesse; and all her Merchants (petty Leases
taken out of her graund Lease) shall mourn bitterly for her: she shall be
made a Cage of unclean Birds, Owls and Vultures; as she is now a Den of
unclean Beas^es, Lions and Tigers. If any City on earth might boast her
Privileges, let Jerusalem speak; she was called the Holy City, and the City
of God: the Temple in her, a figure of the Church militant; as Salom^n the
buylder of it, was a type of Christ: Behold, her House is left unto her
desolate: Sin laid her Pinacles in the dust: At the murder of his Son, God
with his own hands, rent the Veil, and after gave the whole Fabric a
spoil to the Gentiles: They that have trauayled the lower Provinces, testify,
that the rude heaps of ruined Churches, Monasteries, and Religious places, are
no less frequent then pitied spectacles: Devotion built them, kept them;
Sin polluted them, Hostility subverted them: Sin prepared the way for Ruin
and Blood: the Idolatry within overthrew the Walls without: they could plead
more then Dumah, they and their pleas are perished.

Let me not speak as a Prophet, but as an Admonisher: Is it impossible for the
Sin of England, to have the like effect? We are ready to say in pride, what
David spoke in the assurance of Faith, I can not fall thou oh Lord of thy
goodness, have made my Hill (...) strong: Let us praise God for that we have,
and pray that our sins auert it not: Let Dumah speak with his pride; though
our Privileges be more, let our Presumption be less: it is wise and safe, to
possess more then we boast of: though Nature has bound up the loins of our
Kingdom witha girdle of Waves, and Policy raised another fence of wooden
Walls, yet God must put about us a third Girdle, the bands or circle of his
Providence, or our strength is weaker then the waters. It is an old and sure
rule against the Atheist, against the Worldling, that whole cannot be
perpetual, whose parts be alterable: If the members of this great body, the
World, change, faint and grow old, it argues a creeping decay to the whole: Let
the Cormorant know (that would build his neast here for ever) that parts of
this land are alterable, therefore the whole not permanent. If the Plague takes
away men, the fields grow barren; nay, the wearied earth (after much industry)
is dull in her fruits; like an unnatural Stepdame, she produces not good
things of her self: if a Deluge ouer-run us, we and our glory vanish: God
has more means then one, to inflict his judgments. It is with no less
admiration then truth reported, that a whole field in England, is turned in
one month from a fertile soil, to a most Barren wast: It lies from the danger
of innundation, from the reach of the hand of war; what then can turn it to
a perpetual barrennes? Thus, God raises a mighty wind, that vncouers a
mountain of sand, which ouerspreads the fruitful valley to a great thicknes;
and it is made worse then Carmell, which God thus threatens: I will turn
L^banon into Carmell, and Carmell into a Forest: Esaias.
it lies in the power of man's sins, to make God curse his very blessings.

The Burden of Dumah is war, Mount Seir fears it not: if the book of our
hearts lay open to be read, I think our fear of war is less then theirs.
God grant our presumption, our security be not as great: We sit under our
own Figge-trees, and eat the fruits of our own Vineyards: Our Children go
out by flocks and daunces, and flourish like the Olive branches round about
our tables: Our Oxen are strong to labor, our Sheep bring forth thousands
and ten thousands in our streets: There is no leading into captivity, no
dashyng of our Children against the stones, no complaining in our streets. If
this one blessing exceed not our thankfulness for all, my observation is
deceived; but what a bold inference is this? there is no war, therefore may
be none, nor can we be overthrown: It is a speech as common as the stones in
our streets, when consideration of war is offered: We need fear no Enemies,
if we be true amongst our selves: Vain security, that is built upon if's and
and's: Who shall make us true to our selves, that have been false to God? Are
there no sons of Behal amongst us, that curse the prosperity of Syon, and
gape for the day, to cry Down with it, down with it, even to the ground? we
know they have openly and privately with coat of Armor, and coat of Maile,
assaulted the peace of Jerusalem, but (praise to our God) received shame in
putting of their Harness: Let this make us thankful, not secure; as if God
could not reach his arm over our narrow Seas: Behold France made a Cock-pitte
for massacres, by the uncivil civil wars thereof: Think of the unquiet
bread long eaten in the Low Countries: and when thou say, we lay our heads
on the Pillowes of peace, and eat the Bread of plenty, kiss his hand with
praises that feeds thee with these blessings, but let not thy own strength
make thee careless. The Papists thus re-hearten themselves against all their
overthrows given them by this little Island, that our time is not yet come, our
sins are not yet full: That Ignatian Sectarie Pererius so notes in Genesis 15.
The wickedness of the Amorites is not yet full* etc. He gives it by way of
Comment; but it is a false gloss, I trust, and carries no more truth with it,
then other the fictions of Rome; his words are these: Let no man wonder why
God suffers the persecution of the Catholics in England, (the sins of the
Amorites are not yet full) their wickedness is not yet complete; when it is,
the divine revenge shall fall: They expected this day at the last change; God
changed their expectation to folly: and as it was our grief, Mira cano: sol
occubuit, nox nulla secura est.
that (Sol o^cubuit) our Sunne-set, so it is our joy, wonder, (Nox nulla secuta
est) no night followed. I hope his Prophecy is as false for the event, as I am
sure his application is for the thing: we are neither those uncircumcised
Amorites, unchristened Pagans, nor do we persecute the Catholics; except to
have liberty of Law grow rich, purchase Lands, beard and brave the Ministers
of God to their faces, be called Persecution: (Here I cannot but mention, what
is well observed by a most reverend and honored Judge of this land, L. Cook.
that) whereas have been 300. burnt by Q. Mary for Religion, there have scarce
30. Papists been executed by Q. Elizabeth for Treason: yet, I hope, there is
some difference betwixt 300. and 30. Religion, and Treason; betwixt the five
years reign of the one, and the 44. of the other. I know their rebellions,
treasons, conspiracies, meet with execution, no persecution to their Religion:
Happy would our Martirs have thought themselves, if on such terms they might
have redeemed their Consciences: no, the iniquities of Babel have filled up
their measure rather, and their judgment long ago was not far off, and
their damnation sleeps not. Pererius is his own Prophet against us, we
speak not against them of our selves, the Holy ghost speaks for us, Who shall
shortly consume that m^n of sin with the breath of his nost^^ls: Let their
eyes stare for our overthrows, till they fall out of their unfortunate heads;
Deuteronomy. 18. 32.
God has blessed, and the Balaam of Rome shall never be able to curse: only
let not our zeal be wanting to our God, to our Church, to our selves, and God
shall not be wanting to us, nor all the hosts, which he fightes with: and once
again, if need be, Coniurati venient in classica ven^^) the Winds and Seas
shall take our part: Let not our Peace make us wanton, nor our Wealth, proud;
our help stands, in the name of God, not in Fortes and Swords.

To speak more particularly, Be not too confident (who so ever) in thy Mount
Seir; every wicked soul has her Mount Seir to trust in: they that have no
assurance of rest in Heaven, have their Refuges and Mountains of help of
Earth; David so returns it upon the wicked: Psalm. 11. 1.
In the Lord put I my trust, how then say you to my soul, flee as a Bird to
your Mo^^taine. Why should I seek to foreign helps, that have settled my
self in the bosom of Rest it self? Riches are a Mount Seir to the Covetous,
they rest on them, as the Arc on the Mountains of Armenta: Honor is a Mount
Seir to the Ambitious, against all the beseeginges of riuals: Sensuality to
the Voluptuous, against all the disturbances of a clamorous Conscience: Pride,
Fraud, Drunkenness, is a Mount Seir to the lovers; but alas, how unsafe? if
stronger against, and further removed from the hand of man, yet nearer to Gods
hand in Heaven: though we acknowledge no place (Procul a^^o^e, or, procul a
fulmine) far from God, or from his thunder: But we say, it is not safest
sailing on the top of the Mast, to land on the mountainous height of a
temporal estate, is neither wise nor happy: Men standing in the shade of
humble Valleys, look up and wonder at the height of Hills, and think it
goodly living there, as Peter thought Tabor, but when with weary limbs they
have ascended, Bonum est esse hic.
and find the beams of the Sun melting their spirits, or the cold blastes
of Wind making their Sinews stark, flashes of Lightning, or crackes of
Thunder, soonest endangering their advanced heads, then they confess (decking
their proud Conceit,) the low valley is safest: for the fruitful Deawes that
fall first on the Hills, stay least while there, but run down to the
Valleys: and though on such a promontorie a man further sees, and is farther
seen, yet in the Valley, where he sees less, he enioyes more: Take heed then,
least to raise thy Mount Seir high, thou deiectest thy soul low: Am. 6. 1.
Woe unto them that are at ease in Zyon, and trust in the Mountains of
Samaria: If we build our Houses by Unrighteousness, and our Chambers without
^quitie, though as strong as Mount Seir, they shall not be able to stand in the
Earthquake of Judgment: God so threatens Iehoiakim: Ier. 22, 15.
Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in Cedar? did not thy father
eat and drink and prosper, when he executed judgment and justice. etc.
Think not your Houses, Fortresses; when your Souls are unarmed of Christian
weapons, Faith and Obedience: You had, and shall have peace, whiles you pursue
it with righteous lives, whiles your guide all your actions by the line of the
Sanctuary, and stir your Attempts by the compass of the Gospel: Plenty
shall spread your Tables, whiles Charity takes away, and gives to the Poor.
These holy courses, shall make you continue, in despite of Hell and Rome; your
Mountain shall be hedged about with the Mercies of God, and your Children shall
defy their Enemies in the Gates.

The Person must not be omitted, to whom this scoffing Question is moved; The
Watchman. It seems the Prophet had denounced against Edom, Watchman, and
Vigilancie.
War; they deride his message, as a leafing, and his person under the name of
a Watchman: nay, therefore they scorn him, because a Watchman. I will not
insist on the duties of Waich-men: every common Soldier can school the
Watchman: Many presume to teach us our duties, that will be ranged within no
order themselves: that which a Watchman is to the City, or Centinell to the
Leagure; a Minister is to the People: to Watch over your selves, is every
particular man's duty; to watch over all, (Opus Ministrj) is the work of the
Ministry: If our Eyes be blind in descrying Dangers, our Tongues dumb to give
Warning, the City or Fort is easily taken: ^reg.
Now, (Quam clamoris vocem daturus est praeco mutus?) What warning shall a
dumb Watchman give? Some will not speak, the Fountain of their knowledge is
shut up, like Labans Well, with a great Stone of security, saturity,
stateliness: others will speak too much, making the Pulpit a Pasquill, to
ease their spleenes, to traduce superiors: (Medio tutissimus ibis) The mean
and honest way, is the safest.

But what say we to Usurpers, Wolves, Tyrants, that call themselves Watchmen?
that (Bi-nominis, bi-linguis) Double-named, double-tongued, double-sworded; and
not single hearted. Demi-god of Rome, calls himself sometimes a Watchman,
sometimes a King: the Servant of servants, the King of Kings: as if there was
no difference betwixt the serviceable Watchman, and the commanding Prince;
betwixt the Centinell of the Leagure, and the General of the Army, (Ad duo
qui tendit, non vnum, nec duo prendit) Whiles he claims both, usurps one,
truth allows him neither: His actions show him no Servant, (F^riendo non
ferendo agit,) He gives blows, but takes none. To be such a Watchman as he
desires, possibility is denied him, since his eyes can not look so far, as
he would extend his arm; not to watch over Rome only, but so far as the
world is Christened: Behold, says he, I have two Swords; one of them he lets
rust, I mean, the sword of the Spirit: the other, he keeps bright with the
blood of Saints, and makes it shine with the Gall of Martirs: (Principa^is
principatus a triplici corona) the principal principality is from the triple
Crown: As the Sun exceedes the Earth, so the Pope all Christian Princes;
other Kings are but his Bayliffes. Did you ever hear a Watchman speak thus?
or arrogate to himself such a reign (In foro pol^, in foro pluij, in foro
conscient^ae) In the court of Heaven, in the court of Hell, and in the court of
every Conscience? If any resist his tyranny, he snacheth from Christ that his
Word, Luke 19. 27.
and usurps it: Bring those mine enemies, that would not have mereigne over
them, and slay them before me: If he can not behold it in action, he will see
it in picture, as the massacre of Paris on S. Bartholomewes night, was pictured
in the Popes Palace, to entertain his holy eye with pleasure: so would the
Powder Treason have been, if the matter had hit right: as horred, as the
thought of it is to an honest mind, the hoysting up of Buildinges, shiuering
of Bodies, tearing up of Monuments, dissipation, massacre, murder of old,
young, Prince people, Senators and Senate, drawn to the life by the art of a
Painter, would have been a contenting spectacle, for so holy an eye to
contemplate: sure there is honesty in Hell, if this be Religion: if the Devil
can devise more execrable stratagems, let him change Seats with the Pope.
Christ meddled with neither Herod, nor Emperor, King nor Caesar; no Emperors
held his Stirrup, no Kings kissed his blessed feet; he only fought with the
weapons of the Spirit against Sin and Satan. This is a Watchman indeed; but
he watches to invade, beseidge, enter and spoil the City of God: he liath
other Watchmen under him, Unclean birds, fluttring from that Vulture of
Babylon, and flying like Battes and Owls under the eues of night, to vomit
the poisons of Heresy and Treasons from their swollen gorges: Watchmen like
the Chaplens of Mars at Rome in the days of Idolatry, that practiced to toss
Fire-brandes from Camp to Camp, to inflame evil affections; that care not
whose blood they sacrifice to their Roman God, without distinction of Trojan,
of Tyrian: nor out of whose Sepulchers they dig themselves an estate: They
watch indeed, for they keep a Register of all our proceedinges against them,
in these ltaleyon days of ours; and if ever the S^nne of Alteration shine on
their faces, they will repay us ten blows for one upon our Burgonets: mean
time (our Praises to Heaven) they watch their own bane: and (as one writes of
Parry,) so I may of the end of them all (Itala gens sceleri te dedit, Angla
cru^^) Italy gives them their villainy, England their Gallows; this is (their
malus, but meritus sinis) the evil, but deserved end of them all: England is
sinful enough, but she professes not her self a Schoole-mistris of Sin,
This their Chamber of meditation does testify.
as Rome does of Treason: there it is professed, taught, learned, and (as on
the sandy Theator) exercised before it come to the fatal execution.

The Priests of perverted Israel, Hos. 6. 9.
were but shadows of these of apostate Rome: As Thieves wait for a man, so the
company of Priests murder in the way by consent. Hence that Proverb carries
no less truth, then antiquity with it: An Englishman Italianate, is a Devil
incarnate: these are those Jesuits, Iebusites, Incendiaries, Traitors, and not
less then Devils, but that they have bodies. God bless us from such
Watchmen: if these be Watchmen, who are enemies?

We see then the vanity of their labors, that would undertake to bring us to
a composition: if Heresy can be made Sincerity, Idolatry true Religion,
Treason Obedience, we may be united: but it is a sure rule, Contraries in the
abstract, can never be reconciled: God put an vn-appeasable Contention betwixt
the two Seeds of the Woman, and Serpent, when he put Enmity between them*
for an Enemy may be made a Friend, but Enmity can never be made Friendship: the
Air that is dark, may be made Light; but Darkness cannot be made
Brightness; a Papist may be converted to a Christian, but Papistry can never
be made Christianity, no more then Antichrist can become Christ: our strife
with them is not for the extention of Limits, but for the possession of the
Inheritance, whether Grace or Nature, the Popes Law or Gods, shall take place
in the Conscience: So I have read of that audacious and sottish Hermit, that
would undertake, to make God and the Devil friends: the impossibility of
which attempt, the Devil could tell him; God is all Light, and I am all
Darkness, that my foul nature can not be hidden: our affections, seats,
persons, are so opposed, that I have no hope of peace. They will not, we may
not yield; except the Sheep shall compound with the Wolf, or the Mise with
the Catte; which the old tale forbids, though the Catte get on a Monks Cowle,
and cries demurely through the creuices, Quod fueram, non suw, fra^er, caput
aspice tonsum. Good broth^r Mouse, creep out thy house, come forth, and let
us chat:
Behold my Crown is shaven down, I Am now a Priest, ^o Cat.
When Cats say Mass, the Myse (alas) must pray against their will:
Kind Pus^e, your pate is smoth of late, your heart is rugged s^^ll.


Experience would teach us the answer of the verse, though we had never read
it.

V^x ti^i ^raesto fidem, cor tibi restat id^m. To leave the incorrigible
Watchmen of Rome, since we would have cured Babel, and she would not be cured,
let us look home to our selves. The Wolves of Rome have not more honor, then
the Watchmen of England scorn: the Edomites of the world can not abide
Ministers: Heb* 1^.
the best is, they are but Edemites, heirs of Esau, and as profane as their
Father; that make Religion their Minstrell, to give them sport and sleep, no
jest in such laughter, as that which is broken on a Priest; the proof is
plain on every Tavern and Theater. We serve indeed contrary Masters; we
Christ, they Lust and Satan: and (Hinc illae rixae of theirs, hinc illae
laechrimae of ours,) hence their flowts, and our tears: we bite them with the
salt of Reproof, hence they storm: we cast Incke and Gall on their Tetters,
hence they startle: (Veritatem lucentem multi diligunt, arguentem reijciunt:
dum s^ ostendit columus, dum nos ostendit, odio habemus:) The truth shining*
many love; reproving, they reject: whiles it shows it self, we embrace it;
whiles it shows us, we can not endure it: even in this consistes at once, our
Happiness, their Damnation: our Happiness, Blessed are ye, when for me
porsecuted: their Damnation, That Light being in the world, they embrace and
are glad of Darkness: though their wrongs done us, be against the Law of
Arms and Nature; for an Ambassador should be (Inter hostium tela incolumis)
safe among the Weapons of the Enemies:

But do the Edomites only take up these Weapons of scorn against us? No, I
speak it betwixt shame and grief, even the Israelites scorn the Prophets.
There are some sick of a wantonness in Religion, so hot about the question, De
modo, that the Devil steals the matter of Religion from their hearts: if we
cannot wrangle with Forms and Shadows, and show our selves refractarie to
established Orders, we shall, Male audire, our Sermons shall be slighted, our
persons derided: thus, this is the mischief; men of name, professors of note,
when they speak bitterly of us, their credit carries it strong with our
scandals: one Arrow of these Israelites, wounds deeper then a hundred
Cannon-shot of the Edomites: I confess I speak Stones, but if they hitte, as
they are intended, they shall heal some, hurt none: (Dicatur veritas, rumpatur
inuidia) Let Truth be spoken, and Envy burst her Gall: let all these Scorners
remember, that the contempt done to us, redowndes to God himself: He that
despises us, despises men: he that Christ, despises his Savior: Is all
this nothing? But he that d^spiseth me and you, despises him thot sent me
and you: It comes to somewhat then, and more then ever mortal man shall be able
to answer; is it not enough for them, that they have drawn out the lifeblood
of our Liuinges, but they must expose our persons to contempt? So the Jews
spoiled Christ of his Vestmentes, and then mocked him with baseness. Our
poverty of flouted by them that have our Liuinges: surely, if repentance and
restitution prevent it not, they shall have a Tith one day, which they have
more right to, the tenth Sheafe of that Harvest, which is reserved for
Reprobates in Hell. The Turks lay it is an imputation on our Religion, that we
spoil our Gods: for shame, do not the Turks, and shall the Christians? David
would not have Areunah's Threshing-floore without money; if these men should
have no room in the Church, but what they pay for, I think they would quietly
suffer themselves to be turned forth of doors.

The last branch of the Map, and first of the Moral, are not unfitly
conjoined, the Edomite, and his Question: Edomite, and Question.
the Question then calls me from the Watchman, What is in the nigh^? And to
make the Derision fuller and fowler, it is doubled, like Phara^hs Dream, What
is in the night? Did they seek for some prodegie or portent? Some divine
Revelation, which should be received by Vision? Were the like Israel, of whom
Christ thus testifies; This adulterous generation seeks for a Sign? Math. 12.
39.
Thus Dives despayred of his brethrens belief, except one rose from the dead.
I confess we have some in the world sick of this disease, a Jewish
infection, The Jews require a sign, etc. (Plus ocu^o, quam oraculo:) 1. Cor.
1. 22.
miseries shall work more on them then mysteries: palpable actions of Gods
mercy, justice, power, shall convince them, the contemplation of them all in
the theory of the word mooues them not: astonish them with wonders, S. Thomas,
unless he felt.
heal their diseased, open their blind eyes, raise their dead, and they will
believe: Are there none among us, that couch a willing and close ear to the
charms of Rome, in admiration of their feigned miracles? lying Apostles, that
work strange things by exorcismes? but our Church now is not in the Cradle of
her infancy: One cup of wine brought by Christ, is worth all the cups of
cold water by Moses: as S. Augustine alluding to that Marriage in Galile,
says: All the adumbrations, tipes, figures, signs, were but that cup of
cold Water, Ioh. 2.
Christ reserved the good Wine (of the Gospel) till he came him self: and
they that will not believe without a Sign, without a Sign must perish. But I
travel no further in this, least it bring me out of my way.

It was no Sign they inquire for, no Prodegie they fear; they are only
pleased to make sport with the menaces of God: You talk of a Night, and an
hour of Calamity; but threatened men draw long breathes: You pretend Visions
in the night, which portend our ruins; come tell us the tale of the night:
What is in the night? There have been in all ages, some of these Frogs, to
throat it out against God, so long as the weather was fair, as if he could
not send a storm: the tempests of Gods Wrath have been derided to the last
moment of a calm: the venime of Prosperity so impoysons a carnal mind,
(Eilia diuitiarum superbia) the daughter of Riches is Pride: the Philosopher
could teach us that (Faelicitas and humillitas diuiduum haebent contubrinium:
raro bona men's and bona fortuna homini datur,) Happiness and Humbleness are
not chamber-fellows: seldom a good Mind, and a good Estate, is given to the
same man: God seemed to mistrust this in Israel, that the increasing of Goods,
and multiplying of Cattle, Deuteronomy. 8. 13. 14.
would lift up their hearts against him: The peaceable days of the Wicked,
and their lucky proceedinges in this world (by the testimony of Job,) durageth
their impudence against Heaven: Job. 21. 15.
Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? depart from us, we will none
of thy ways. That of the Psalm is of full strength to this: Psalm. 10. 5.
His ways prosper: thy judgments are far above out of his sight: therefore
defyeth he all his enemies: Man only? no, God himself: I shall never be
moved. Mal. 3. 14.
Let Malachi for all the Prophets, Peter for all the Apostles, make up this
cloud of witnesses: It is in vain to serve the Lord: 2. Pet. 3. 4.
and where is the promise of his coming? All things are still (Statu quo)
continued in the same course: there is no alteration, no new thing done (
Quaecunque sub axe) under Heaven. We say, ( Non bonum ludere cum sanctis) it is
no safe jesting with holy things: It is dangerous for an Edomite to make
himself merry with God; this is the way to come short home: thou had better
have mourned all thy life, then made God thy play-fellow. When the vessel of
Dust shall encounter with the arm of Omnipotence (Sieve percutiat, Imus gradus
and Limen ^nferni.
sieve percutiatur, frangi necesse est) whether it smite, or be smitten, it is
sure to be broken: The Chair of the Scorner, is the seat of Satan, the
lowest staire and very threshold of Hell, as David describes it: Psalm. 1. 1.
Blessed is the man that does not walk, etc. His first plot is, to get us, to
walk a turn or two with him: having persuaded this, he moves us to stand
still a little; but so long as we are standing, we are going, therefore at last
he intreates us (for our ease) to sit down: but if we take our seat in that
inchaunted Chair, we grow to that impudence to deride God, and his judgments.
I will single you out four fortes of these Edomites, Scorners (for I justly
parallel them) and propound their natures and conditions to your pity and
detestation.

1 Atheistes, such as have voluntarily, violently, extinguished to themselves,
the Sun-light of the Scripture, Moone-light of the Creature; nay, the sparks
and cinders of Nature, that the more securely (as unseen and vnchidden of
their own hearts) they might prodigally act the works of darkness; not
Athenian-like, dedicating an Altar to an unknown God, but annihilating to
themselves, and vili-pending to others, Altar, Religion, God; and suffocating
the breath of all Motions, Arguments, manifest Conuictions, that heaven and
earth have produced: for the reasons of Hell only shall one day euince it
(Deum esse) that there is a God: they affirm it impossible, that flesh should
be turned to rottenness, rottenness to dust, and dust to glory: Against
whom, Qui potuit formare nouum, non poterit reparare mortuu^? Facilior est
restitutio constitutione. Sect. 9. 4.
well, S. Augustine; He that could form us of nothing, can reform us decayed:
it is easier to repair, then prepare. That Atheism in the days of Solomon
was the same in opinion, that ours is in practice: we do (not say but) live,
as if it was better to a living Dog, then a dead Lion: which I would yield
true among Beasts; but among men, a dead Beast is better then a living
Atheist: let them ask Nature, it will tell them, (Insculptum est omnibus esse
deum) It is engraven in all hearts, that there is a Deity: let them ask the
Creatures, they will witness, they had a Creator: nay, let the Devil speak,
to shame and convince the Atheist, who believes a God, and trembles at his own
belief: the nature of his essence proves it: Qui negat esse deum, mihi negat
et tibi, non sibi. etc.
to know there is a Witch, may satisfy us, that there is a God; for if the
destroying power were not controuled, manacled, maistred, Oculos, quos culpa
clausit, paena aper^et.
how stand we vndeuowred? Let them ask (lastly) their own dying hearts; for
the eyes that sin has shut, Damnation shall open.

2 Epicures, that deny not a God, and a day of Judgment; Amos. 6. 3.
but put it far off, with ((...)) give me the present, take thou the hope of
future joys: these see a night coming, and therefore make haste to be drunk
with Pleasures: Let us eat and drink, for to merrow we shall die: 1. Cor. 15.
(Cras ridendo moriuntur, hodie bibendo sepeliuntur) they will not die till to
morrow, but be buried in Riot to day. They sleep on their Beds of Down,
rise to their Tables of Surfeit, and from thence to their sportes of Mischief;
sleeping, playing, eating, dancing, drinking, dallying, (Motu circu^^rj) they
run round in a Ring: only (Nulla interualla piando) no time must be spared
from Satan: they inuert the Order God has disposed to the times
preposterously, making the night day, and the day night; at midnight they
revel, at noone they sleep: though the day was created for labor, the night
for repose: The Sun is scarce beholding to their eyes to look upon him: the
Moon and Stars have (only) their attendance; the works and the hour of
darkness meet; they will be contrary to all men and all things but
themselves, because they will be contrary. If ever they begin any work with
the day, they dispose it on this fashion; First, they visit the Tavern, then
the Ordinary, then the Theater, and end in the Stews: from Wine to Riot, from
that to Plays, from them to Harlots, Iste dies pulchro distinguitur ordine
rerum. Here is a day spent in an excellent method: If they were Beasts, they
could not better sensualize, it would be but lost labor to tell them, that
their course shall be so proportioned below: from Snakes they shall turn upon
Adders, from both to Scorpions, from all to unquenched flames; where they shall
spend not hours but ages, nay that eternity of time, in waylinges and
howlinges, groans and torments; when for every ounce of Vanity, they shall
receive (down weight) a whole pound of Sorrow: Smoakes, blacknes, boiling
Cauldrons, fiery burninges of Brimstone and Sulphur, kindled and continued by
the breath of an offended God, shall have their interchanged courses: often this
torment, and then that, and indeed all, that a soul and body made immortal,
can suffer: Iste dies misero distinguitur ordine rerum. Here is a day to be
spent in a miserable method: Oh how (yet) was it some happiness, if in a day or
set time, these woes could be determined: these are the Epicures, not so
impudent as to deny the night, not so honest as to part with their sins.

3 Libertines, that neither affirm no Night, nor put it far off; but only
the strength of sin preuailes over all: and come Sorrow, Death, Grave, Hell,
they must have their pleasures: Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor, metam.
they have a pride in accomcomplishing their own wills, as she in the Poet;
I see the good, and give allowance to it:
The evil is my choice, I love and do it.
They can not be noted for Virtuous; but they will be Famous, though for
Infamy: as that wicked Church-robber, that to do some memorable act, pulled
all the Lead off the Churches roof, and thacked it: they must be mentioned,
though like a Traitors name in the Chronicles. These swear away all reproves,
and drink away all the chidings of their own Conscience: it shall be the worse
for them, that ever they had a conscience: their Hell shall be the hotter for the
multitude of their neglected motions to good: their Mercies have not bin more
numerous, then shall be their Miseries: their Nurture or Learning (to omit
those, that never read any other Book then Vanity) at once makes them better
and worse; better in understanding, worse in manners; whiles their
contemplation is a Theater, and their study, new sportes, new fashions: Oh how
far better is the simple, honest, innocent Soul without knowledge, then that
which is beautified with learning and debauched with vices?

Beatus ille qui procul negotijs, Horace.

Paterna rura bobus exercet suis.
More happy are those poor wretches confined and contented with a rural
charge: whiles they know not so much of good, they know less of ill: they
skill not what the studying of oaths, the tricks of pride, the policy of
Atheism means: they make not sense the rule of their belief with the
Gallant, but their Catechism: Religion is their Queen, the Gallants drudge:
they have not so much of reason, therefore abuse the less: their sins
proceed most from ignorance, the Gallants from knowing wilfulness: Now, which
of these shall be beaten with most stripes? they work out a poor living with
the sweat of their brows and nerves, these can play out a rich one from the
quicknes of their wits: they know not the detractions of slander,
underminings of envy, prouocations, heates, enluringes of lusts: the foul
secrecyes of Idolatry, hypocracy, sacrilege, cleave not to their consciences:
they have a kind of happiness, in that they are not so miserable: our
impudent, imprudent, insolent Youngsters look on these, betwixt contempt and
anger, call them Clownes, Idiots, and the dregs of Nature, and think
themselves Angels, if these be men; (Quorum prae^ crdia Titan de priore luto
sinxit) as if God had tempered them of a baser mould. But whiles Acteons
Bondslaue grindes securely (though laboriously) at the Mill, Heart. Hounds.
his brave riotous, gallant, Hunting-maister is turned to a beast, and for his
sensuallity eaten up of his own lusts: you all know the Story, this is the
Moral. Thus, this is the proper cause, that the ancient Houses fall; and what
the long Industry of the progenitors have gotten, the short Riot of the
Gallant, wastes: We are loath to hear of this; but it is too true, he needs
not drink up all the Sea, that will judge of the ^aste: hence young gentlemen
by wild unthriftiness become sports to Theators, and cannot sit on their
Fathers seats to do good in the Commonwealth: they abound with the guiftes
of Nature, but like Fig Trees growing over deep Waters, full of Fruit, but
the Iayes eat them: Ruffians, Harlots, vicious Companions enjoy those Graces,
that might honor God.

4 Common Profane persons, that will suffer themselves to wear Gods Livery,
though they serve the Devil: these are they, that make the profession of the
Gospel have an evil name: hence that Proverb, Pater noster, set up Churches,
Our Father, pulles them down. I will not favor (with a partial conuiuence)
these Scorners, though they nussell themselves in the Churches bosom: nay, I
will speak most plainly; these are the worst Edomites, if not to them selves,
to us. Let the Atheist deny, the Epicure remove, the Libertine forget, that
there is any other Day of peace or sorrow, besides or beyond the present; what
is this to believers? We are reedy to brand and howte at them (as they did to
the Lepers in Israel,) nay to rain them to death with a shower of Stones, (as
they served Idolaters and Blasphemers:) But be our own hands undefiled, that
take up these weapons of Death against others, as Christ charged the Jews,
that charged the adulterous Woman? If we be sick, our sickness is more
dangerous then theirs: Interius, and in cute malum.
The other Diseases are without the body, but this comes neere^ the heart of
the Church: we know what it is, to have a Sickness come near the heart: there
is more grief to the Mother of the Family, in the miscarying of one of the
Children, then of many Strangers, Edomites, unbelievers, or misbeleeuers: these
have learned to speak the language, to scorn the manners of Canaan; for,
their lives testify, that they believe not our report.

We have gone the better half of our Journey, The Answer.
let not your attentions fail to the end: We have seen the nature of Edom,
and Mount Seir, Atheism, Scorn, Abomination; we are now entering an other
Mountain, the Hill of Syon, the City of God. The Question of the Edomite was
not more perverse, then the Answer of the Watchman is grave and sober. The
Answers of God are not doubtful, like the Heathen Oracles; nor obscure and
tetricall, as Mahomets Riddles; nor ambiguous, like the mixed, the motley,
epicaene, equiuocating conclusions of Rome, but plain, sweet, profitable: I
call therefore the first part of it, The Resolution.
A Resolution: They ask as if they despised to know; he resolves them justly,
as if he would force them to know against their wills. They ask him what is
spiritually seen in the night of Vision? He tells them, what shall really come
in the night of actual Desolation: The Morning comes, and also the Night,
Let your understandings keep pace with me through these 4. Circumstances. 1.
The length of their Peace; Finitum pro indefinito, breuitatem temporis, dies
exprimit.
one whole day, the space betwixt morning and evening: a short time. 2. The
Certainty of their Judgment; The night (infallibly) comes. 3. The quality
of it, when it is come; ( Nox dicitur) it is called, a Night. 4. The Inuersion
of this, to the Righteous.

1. The Happiness of Edom is but a Day; The Morning comes, and the Night
follows: It is but the distaunce of the Sunrising from his setting. There is
to all things living, such an alternation decreed; a morn, a noone, a night:
a beginning, a strong age, a declination or full point: as the Historians
write of certain Flies bred by the River Hispanis, that are generated in the
morning, at noone in full strength, at night make their ends, and are gone:
Paul says, Our life is but a Tabernacle, it is all, if this stands a year:
Esaias calls it, Grass; which grows but a Summer: David, a Flower; that has
but his month: here it is called, a Day; that has but the Sunrising and
setting: Nay, Job compares it to a Shadow; that has (neither Year, nor
Summer, nor Month, nor Day,) but an Hour: Nay, Moses to a Thought; whereof
there may be a hundred in an hour: This is none of the shortest Comparisons, (
Mane et vespere) the measure of one day.

What then mean those Greedy Dogs in this Prophecy, Esaias. 56. 12.
to bark so madly, Bring more Wine, for to morrow shall be as to day, yea,
much more abundant. Me thinks, I hear the gallant Epicures (the christened
Atheistes) of this City, knock thus in Tauerns, for yet more Wine, crowning
the day with Riots, and blessing the morrow with promised Surfets, as if the
Night should never come: alas ( Nescis quid serus vesper ferat) thou know
not what sad news the Evening will bring: thou braggest with Caesar, the Day
is come; We tell thee, as Cesars friend, It is come indeed and begun; it is
not ended: the Lease of Vanity, is but a Day; it may be not a moment, the
tenure of this world is uncertain. Medio de font leporum, surgit amari
aliquid: From out of the midst of the fount of Delicacies, arises ever some
Bitterness: when you have spent your strengthes, your estates, bloodes,
souls, upon Vanity, all is but ( Vnius diej hilaris insanta) the merry
madness of a day; Non semper sequuntur viuentem, mori entem nunquam.
which to buy with the eternity of insufferable Torments, is a dear purchase:
If they be not short of content and satisfaction, I am sure, they are of
continuance: They do not always follow a man living, ever forsake him when he
dies.

2 You have measured the shortness of their day, hear the certainetie of
their night: The morning comes, and (without prevention) night follows. You
shall shake off the yoke of Israel, but put on you the yoke of Persia: The
Edomites were long tributaries to Israel, according to Ishae's prophecy and
blessing of Esau. Thou shall be thy Brothers Servant; Genesis 27. 40.
but it shall come to pass, when thou shall get the masterie, thou shall
break his yoke from thy neck: The Prophet here assures them of this
masterie. ( Israel rebels against God, therefore Edome against Israel.)
Ishae as Gods Prophet, subjects Edom to Canaan, the seed of Esau to the seed
of Jacob: Ambr.
(Intemperanti praefecit sobrium) he sets the sober man over the intemperate:
and this service of the elder Brother to the younger, lasted in the posterity
700 years. Yet twice after, they shook off this servitude: the first in
Iorams time, which liberty they made a troublesome shift to hold till
Hircanus, 2. King. 8. 20.
who subdued them, and made them be circumcised: this slavery they overcame
again, and held it, even till Herod, Joseph.
the son of Antipater, an Idumaean borne, obtained to be King of the Jews:
here Edom got the full mastrie. The first, was this Morning the Prophet
speaks of; this Morning of freedom shall come, but last for a Day, and then
be ouerclouded with a Night, a worse Captivity, because to a worse people, (
Qui Deum et misericordi^m nesciunt) that know neither God, nor Mercy: as those
priuations are inseparable, there is no Mercy, where no Religion.

Edom is but a particular instance of a general doom, which all the Sons of
Adam, as the Daughters of E^e, I mean, all the Glories of this World shall
bear; as sure as the Evening succeedes the Morning, Death shall seize on Life,
Judgment on Sin: you have the sap of Health in your Bones, the Riches of
the world in your Coffers, your Life is in the Noone of pride, but (we say)
praise a fair day at Night. (Happy are they, whose life is hid with Christ in
God, that this Night may not find them out:) Col. 3. 3.
your Sun shall set, Beauty, Riches, Glory, shall decay, as by the
inviolable law of Nature, night succeedes day; so by the eternal law of God,
Death Sin. If you could indent with the Sun to stand still, Josh. 10. 1^.
as in the days of Joshua; or to go back ten degrees, as to Hezekiah; or
with his Orb to move slowly, yet it shall set: Be the day never so long,
yet at last, comes euening-song. The Son of God himself, in this condition
of mortal descent, was equal to his Breathren. That great Sun of
Righteousness, had his rising and his setting: We must all walk into the
West, as well as he; and be our Day longer or shorter, Night must come, our
Privileges are not beyond others.

Hear this ye Edomites, that floute our presagings of a Night: you speak of
a Night, and hour of Judgment; When comes it? We tell you again, The Morning
comes, and also the Night. You have had a time of Light and delight, and what
your hearts could wish; you shall have a time of Sorrow and Darkness: Your
Noone shall be turned to Midnight. Tender and delicate Babylon, Esaias. 47. 7.
that boasted her self a Queen, and free from mourning, shall weep in the
wydow-hood of her glory; and hear at last, ( Aduenit sinis tuus,) thy end is
come. ver. 9.
You that will not set your minds to these things, nor remember the latter
end, miseries shall come on you in their perfection: so absolute as the Justice
of God, and the Malice of Satan can make them. So Solomon schools the
art-les, heart-les, supine courses of vain Youth: Rejoice, O Youngman, etc.
Eccl. 1^. 9.
Rejoice in your day of Pride, let Pleasure rock you on her indulgent knee,
you shall be brought to the night of Judgment: The Surfets of the old World,
the Mirth of the Philistines, (when Sampson was their laughing stock) the
carowsinges of that Caldean Monarch in the sacred Bowls of Jerusalem, had
their Night: Solomon with his 1000. Wives and Concubines, Belshazzar with his
1000. Princes, Ahashiuerosh with his 127. Provinces, had their Night:
High-looked Honor, and pursie Riches; the one diseased in his Eyes, the other
in his Lunges, shall have their Night: The favor of Noble men, is the favor
of moveable men; Favor nobilium, favor mobilium.
the Ignis fatuus of Riches is long ingendring, soon extinct: let Ioab and
Job, be our precedentes in both these: the first, was great and evil, the
chiefest Captain about David; yet by David designed to execution; The second
was great and good; yet behold, the mightiest man of the East, As poor as Job.
is poor to a Proverb: What ever flourished and had not this night? The rich
Churl enlarging his Barnes proportionably to his desires, Hiatu laborantes.
had his Night; he heard that soul knell, Thou fool, this Night, shall they
fetch away thy soul. The World it self shall have this Evening: the Morning
was in the days of the Patriarchs; Christ boore the heat and Noone of the
day, and we are those upon Whom the latter ends of the world are come. The
World grows old, and we grow old with it: 2. Esd. 14. 9.
the bodies of men in old age, wax cold and want the heat of Nature; the
souls of men in this decrepite age, grow cold in zeal, ( Deficiente feruore
charitatis) the nourishment of old age turns into cruditie, through want of
heat to concoct, digest, and drive it into the Veins; the nourishment of our
souls turns into Vanity, because we want the heat of Grace to digest it: By
all these symptones, you see the Sun of this World ready to set, and the
Night drawing on: the declination of Goodness, the fainting of Religion, says,
that the World lies bedrid, drawing on, looking for the good hour (to some,)
and fetching a thick, sick and short breath: I am no Prophet (or what if I
were, yet unable) to define the time: but this I conclude (though more
particularly) from the rule of my text; We had our Morning at the first
preaching of the Gospel: it now flourishes with us, as at high Noone; Who
shall say, the Evening will not follow, or our Sun is without setting.

3 That it shall come, you hear; hear shortly the quality of it, when it is
come: A Night. Misery is not fitlyer shadowed, then under the name of a Night:
Sorrow lastes for a Night, says the Psalmist, but joy comes in the Morning. A
sad, heavy, and disconsolate time, full of horror and amazement; when there
is no object to withdraw the eye, thereby to divert the mind from the thought
and meditation of bitterness. Satan himself is not said to be bound with any
other Chains but these of Darkness: as the Joys of Heaven are described by
that eternal daylight of glory and Sunshine of the Lamb, Revel. ^1.
and it is added in express words; There shall be no Night there: So the
torments of Hell are called by Christ, Mat. 8. 1^.
(...), Utter Darkness: No marvel, if there ensue, weeping and gnashing of
teeth, when misery shall be extreme, and no day-hole of hope, to afford one
glimpse of comfort: this is that Night of nights, Nox noctium. Io^l. 2. 2.
worse then the palpable Darkness of Egypt, as full of intolerable horror,
as Caliginous blackness: I find not only the time of Judgment general, but
of temporal and particular calamities, termed by the Night of horror: the
downfall of Dumah, a Night: the destruction of Israel, A season of blackness,
darkness, clouds and obscurities. Therefore (as Christ to the Jews, Pray
that your flight be not in the Night,) pray that your departure out of this
life, be not in the Night of your security and ignorance; and then fear not
this Night, for you are redeemed from the land of eternal Darkness.

Caligula (in im ta^on of Zerxes, that passed his Army over the straight of
Hellespont upon a wooden bridge) upon ships moared together with Cables and
Anchors, made a bridge of boords, with so much earth on it, that it seemed
firm ground, like one of the streets in Rome. Dion.
It was the foolish pride of that Roman Emperor, having made a Bridge of
grappled Ships over a narrow Arm of the Sea, and triumphing at midnight with
innumerable torches, to boast that he had (wrough two Miracles,) made the Sea
dry Land, and the Night Day: but our Emperor of Heaven and Earth, did perform
it indeed, when he dried up the Red sea of his Fathers wrath, and changed our
present Night of Ignonaunce, and future of torment, into the eternal daylight
of his Grace and Glory.

4 The last part to this Survey, is the inuerting of this upon the Righteous:
Where, behold the different beginnings and ends of both Holy, and Unholy: to
the children of Disobedience, the Morning is before the Evening; and this is
Dumahs woe at Sunset ( Fuisse faelicem) that she had her Day: To the
Faithful, the Evening is before the Morning; as at the Creation, The Evening
and the Morning were the first day. Genesis 1.
The Jews were commanded to begin their Feast of Reconciliation at Even;
Leuit. 23. 32.
and, From Evening to Evening, shall you celebrate your Sabbath. It was
Christ's comfortable Answer to his Church, intending the date when the
profanation of the Temple should cease, to set the Morning of their peace,
after the Evening of their troubles, by a sweet and mystical allusion: Unto
the Evening, and the Morning, Dan. 8. 14.
two thousand, and three hundred: then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed: and the
vision of the Evening and the Morning is true: ver. 26.
The Evening of their sorrow precedes the Morning of their joys. Our Prophet
so compares the tempest of the Assirians rage, to a Storm in the Night, which
vanishes at the rising Sun: Lo, Esaias. 17. 14.
in the Evening there is trouble, but before the Morning it is gone. Our Night
lastes during this wretched life: the troubles of Miseries, storms of
Persecutions, and rage of that great Leutathan, disturbes our Air, Per varios
casus, per tot discrimina rerum, tendimus in caelum.
darkens our Day, and makes it a gloomy Night; clouds, tempests, obstacles,
stumbling-blockes, temptations, machinations of Enemies, deceiuinges of
Friends, through so many dangers and difficulties sail we to our haven of
Peace: our assurance is, that joy comes in the Morning, when we shall rise in
the East, and behold the Son of Glory shine in our faces. The Morning of the
Edomites, Atheistes, Reprobates, comes first smiling on their brows; but ( Nox
sequitur) they have a Night behind.

This disparitie consistes not only in the counterposition of their order, but
in the circumstantiall difference of their length and shortness: Our Night is
irksome, but short; ( Compensatur acerbitas breuitate) What is ill in the
bitterness, is eased by the shortness: But our Day is everlasting, from new
Moon to new Moon, from Saboth to Saboth, we shall praise the Lord: Myriades
of years and ages, shall be expired, and our Sun as far from setting, as at
our first entrance; for time and mortality, and distinction of age, shall
cease: there is nothing but eternity above: It is not more blessed in being a
Day, then in being endless: Their Morning is short, their Night everlasting,
their Debt never p^yde, their Fire never quenched: Here is their unhappiness, (
Florent ad tempus, pereunt in aeternum: florent fa^sis bonis, pereunt veris
tormentis:) They flourish for a time, they perish for ever: they flourish with
false joys, perish with true and substantial torments: things that are
soonest bred, have the shortest continuance: Psalm. 73. 18. 19.
a puff of Wind rayseth the Chafe from the earth, and a puff scatters it
away: the Wicked are soon raised, and with like speed depressed: How quickly
is Esau's posterity advanced to a Kingdom, how immaturely cast down? The
Crown is scarce warm on their temples, their eyes have scarce taken a passing
glaunce of their glories, but all is dispersed: the Godly are long kept under
covert; but when they do rise, their elevation is permanent.

Lo, now cast a sober and intelligent eye on this strange opposition, and let
the very enemy of Heaven and Grace, judge, whether the vain shadows of Joy,
and those for a Day, liable to true and substantial torments, and those for
ever, be comparable with, or desirable before, a momentany Affliction (and that
not without the best of comfortes) followed with an excellent and eternal
weight of glory. It Is confessed; I speak for you, I think your Consciences are
convinced: but ( Vbi signa?) Where are the signs of it? If this be so, and you
so acknowledge it, why lead you so dissonant lives? shall the voice of your
own tongues, censure of your own hearts, witness against you? Tacitus
reports, that in the civil Wars betwixt Vitellius and Vespasian, a Soldier
had killed his own Father, which was of the enemies Army; no sooner was this
published, but every man begins to abhor, condemn, execrate that War, the
cause of such an unnatural fact; yet how little effect this wrought in their
proceedings, that Author describes; for their rage, rapine, cruelty, was not
lessened, in spoiling Neighbor, Friend, Kinsman, Brother, Father, when they
had slain them. We abhor the miseries and sins incident to this life; we
love it still, nay prefer it to Heaven: our condemnation will be easy and
just, what need is there of more Witnesses ( Ex ore tuo) thy own lips have
spoken against thee. For shame let our hearts and tongues be cut out of one
piece, that what we allow in opinion, we may prosecute in practice.

You hear how the Day slippes from us, and the Night steals on; what
remains, but in the Day to prepare for the Night. No marvel, if men sleep in
the Night; but in the broad day, to shut our eyes (with the Dormouse) is
unnatural. There is a Night, when thou shall rest, Esaias. 57. ^.
even on thy bed of Peace: only walk, work; loyter not in thy Day. Christ
taught and observed the Rule himself, to travel his Day and all his Day; For
the Night comes, wherein no man can work. There are things, which if the
Night finds undone, we are undone, because we have not done them: if we
defer to provide lodging, sustenaunce, safety, the Night finds and leaves
us destitute. How mad is he, that bound to some special designement,
confined to his day, and then furthered with light, aid, company, and
conueniencie of all things, spendes one hour in catching Flies, another after
Feathers, and all the rest in several toys and leasinges, that on a sudden
the Sun settes, and his chief work is not done, nay not begun.

The work of our day, is the working up our salvation; it is a special work,
Heaven and our Souls are upon it, and we have but our day to work it; (
Tempus vitae, tempus paenitentiae) The time of life, is the time of Repentance.
We spend one piece of our Day in Covetous scrapinges, another in adoring that
we have scraped; some hours of our Day in working vanity, and some in
sleeping security; instantly the Night of death comes, and we have neglected
the maine chance: our Salvation is not finished like Courtiers, that having
light to bring them to bed, play it out at Cards, and go to bed darkling: Woe
to them that go to their last rest thus: How unworthy are we of a Day, thus
to spend it? It is pity that ever the Sun of Grace shoone on our faces: Quake
and fear, what soever thou art, to suffer the sin of thy soul, and the end
of thy life to come so near together: If men stumble in the dark, it is not
strange; to fall at every stubbe in the day, argues wilful neglect, or want of
eyes. It is enough for those poor Romanistes, that live under that Egiptian
darkness of the inquisition, to fall into grievous absurdities, where the
Sun shines, to see men fall in heaps, is astonishing: Oh that every bait of
drunkenness, object of covetousness, presented glaunce of vanity, should
make us wander and stumble, stumble and fall, fall and content our selves
therein without rising: What (would we? what) will we do, if our Sun
settes? For shame cast away the deeds of darkness with the time: Ephe. 51. 4.
Awake and stand up, the light of Jesus Christ shines on thy face. As men from
sleep opening their eyes, and seeing day broke, cast away their clothes,
wherein they were wrapped warm, and starte up to their several callinges; the
Sins and Vanities of this world have kept us warm, as Caiphas kept Peter,
whiles we were folded in them; but our maine work lay dead for want of
execution: Provide then for this Night, Psalm. 118. 27.
oh thou whose cheek the Sun of mercy and forbearance, kisseth: The sleep
of him that trauaileth, is sweet, Eccl. 5. 11.
whether he eat little or much: but the satiety of the rich will not suffer
him to sleep. If the Day be well spent, the wearied bones rejoice in their
earned repose; and the contented Conscience, applaudes it self in the thought
of her careful obedience; body and soul receives rest. Whiles the Day is
slouthfully spent, Night bringes no reioycefull ease to either spirits or
corpse: The Day of thy life worn out in the well disposed hours of a
religious obedience, thy body shall rest in a perfumed Grave, and thy soul in
the bosom of Abraham, when Night comes: but whiles pride, surfets,
oppressions, wantonness, have shared the Day, the Night comes with no less
suddenness then sorrow; thy rest shall be unrest, neither easier then smoke and
thorns, and flames, nor shorter then the eternity of all these can make it:
Oh then, what folly, madness, selfe-enmitie is this, to play out our short Day,
and howl under the pressure of working torments for an everlasting Night.

We are come to the last fruit that I shall gather you from this Tree, The
Advice.
and it grows on three branches: the whole body of it, being applied to the
manner, not the matter of the Question: the matter is first satisfied, The
Morning comes, and the Night; the manner is now touched: If ye will ask,
enquire, return and come. You ask in derision, keep the Cloth, but reject
the Fashion: Ask still, but to repentance: Let your demaundes manifest your
desires of resolution: If ye will ask, and needs be acquainted with your
sorrows, Enquire, with humility, reverence, faith: Return from your sins,
by repentance, and come home to God by obedience, ( Triplex ex arbore fructus)
here is a threefold fruit from this Tree; whereon let your souls feed, and
then depart to refresh your bodies.

Enquire: Enquire.
We must not look, that God should seek us with his blessings; as Elias was
charged to run by the way of the Wilderness, 1. king. 19. 5.
in quest of Hazael to annoint him: No, Seek ye the Lord, whiles he may be
found: the rule of the Prophet is just: the Rich man comes not to the Beggars
door with relief in his hand; but the Beggar to his for it: there is small
reason, to expect it from God, that he should both give, and seek: I confess
he does, as Christ testifies of himself; I came to seek and to save that
which was lost; Luke 19. 10.
but withal he conueyes into our hearts, a (preventing) Grace to seek him:
Hence the Condition is annexed to the Grant, by the giver himself; Ask, and
you shall have: Enquire, and you shall be satisfied: But if any will be
ignorant, Resonant responsa roganti
let them be ignorant still.

If you ask me, 1. Where you should Enquire? Our Prophet directes you; To the
Law, to the Testimony: Where should a people enquire, Esaias. 8. 20.
but at their God? 2. If how? With Humility, Reverence, and desire of
Knowledge: ( Inter Iuuenile tuaicium, et senile praeiudicium multa veritas
corrumpitur.) There must be in us an equal avoiding of both Rashness, and
Prejudice: Young men apprehend not the necessity of Knowledge; Old men presume
of a plerophorie and abundance: hence neither young nor old enquire. 3. If
when? The Wiseman answers; Enquire, seek; Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy youth: Begin this search, in the Morning of thy years: ( Mane, is the
Lords Aduerbe, the Devils Verb:) the Lord says, Early; the Devil says,
Tarry: to whom you harken, judge your selves: One thing only, take heed you
stay not too long; the Devil is a false Sexton, and settes the Clock too
slow, that the Night comes ere we be aware: tarry not then till your piles of
Vsuries, heaps of Deceites, mountains of Blasphemies, have caused God to hide
himself, and will not be found. There is a ( Sera nimis hora) time too late,
which Esau fell unluckily into, when he sought the Blessing with tears, and
could not find it. It may be the Statues, Word, Minister, Understanding.
or the Guides, or thy own Eyes, may be denied thee, and then too late thou
Inquire. Whiles the Book of God is not perused, his Temples not freuented,
nor his Throne solicited by Prayers, hard heartedness steals on us, and like
Sampson bound by the Philistims, we would break their Bonds, and cast their
Cords from us; but our Dalilah, our Folly has beguiled us.

Is this all? no, there is second Fruit growing on this Tree, Return.
of equal necessity, greater use. After Enquiring, follows Returning: you
are gone wrong, return into the way of Peace; Enquire it first, and having
found it, Return, put your feet into it. God warnes you by the revelation of
his word, Math. ^. 12.
(as the Wisemen by the vision of a Dream) to Return into your Country,
whither you would arrive, and where only is your rest, another way. If ever
this exhortation was necessary for Edom, let me think it fitter for England:
(as sin-full as we are, let me yet say, there is more hope of our repentance,
then of Edoms:) our Iniquities as great, our Instructions greater then theirs;
what remains, but our Repentance? never more need: Our sins are not low,
slow, few, or slightly done; negligence sins, security sins, contempt
sins, presumption and hard-heartednes sins: here is the Scorners Chair, the
Drunkardes Bench, the Idle-mans Cushion, the Usurers Study: Oh where is
Repentance, to rowse these? God is angry; we have been smitten, not in the
Skirts and Suburbs of our Commonwealth only, our City, Body, and whole
unity has been pierced to the soul, The whole Head has been sick, and
whole Heart heavy: Where is the physic of Repentance? I can show you many
Actors presenting themselves on the Theator of this World; I see not Repentance
play her part: I can point you to Usury, robbing, grinding, sucking blood,
cutting throats, whiles he sittes in the Chimney corner, and hears of his
Zani's, whelps, underling Thieves ending their days at the Gallows. I can
show you Covetousness sweating for gain, crowching, ramping, playing Ape, Lion,
or Devil, for Money: I can discover to you Drunkenness, rising early to the
Wine, Malice making haste to the death of Ammon, Ambition running after Honor,
faster then Peter to the Sepulcher; Pride whirling in her Chariot, Wantonness
shutting up the windows; Bribery creeping in at the Keyhole, even when the
door of Justice is locked up against her. Among all these I see not
repentance: Does she stay till the last act? I fear the tragedy of many Souls
ruin will be done first. This land is full of sins, (let me speak
impartially) this City: as many Lines meet at the Center; so all sins by a
general confluence to this place: Glomerantur in vnum innumerae pestes Erebj:
The mischiefs of Hell are swarmed to one Crowde, and we have it. I know there
are some names in Sardj, some that make Conscience of their ways: the same
air is drawn by men of as contrary dispositions, as is the opposition of the
two Poles: that I may say of the lives of this City, as one does of Origen's
writings: ( Vbi been, nemo melius: Nil fuit vnq uam sic impar sibi. Hor.
vbi male, nemo peius,) Those that are good, are exceeding good, and those that
are evil, are unmeasurable evil: nothing was ever so unlike it self. You are
as contrary as fire to water; but all the water of the one's devotion, will not
quench the Fire of the others wickedness: This latter is so monstrously grown
on us with the times, that it is all, if the Idolatry of Rome, or the Atheism
of Turkey can go beyond it. They are rare hearts, that care not more to
seem, then to be Holy, if perhaps, they will either seem or be: Rare hands,
that are free and clean from either blood or filthiness: rare Tongues, that
do not vie Oaths with Words; making scoffs, scorns, flatteries, vain
speeches, the greater part of their tongues exercise; that if their Words could
be weighed, their Prayers of a year, are not so substantial and ponderous, as
their Oaths of one day: It were no wonder to see these abominations in Dumah,
Egypt, Babylon; to find them in England is matter of amasement. It was an
admirable and astonishing speech (the Prophet him self thought, by his
advertisement prefixed, Esaias.
) The virgin Israel has done filthily. If Harlots and Brothels be unchaste,
they do not degenerate from their kind; in so pure a Virgin, no imagination
would have dreamed it. It is no news to find the Devil in Hell: to have him
thrust into Paradise, tempting and preuayling with our first Parents, is
horrible. Let Rome and Turkey swell with the poisons of Satan till they burst,
who wonders? to find the sputteringes of his venime in the Church is grievous:
If we be accused for accusing of sins, let the Physician be blamed for
discovering Diseases in the sick body: we must speak; Oh yet -- Si nostra
sperem prece posse mouer^, that we could hope with any sayings to move you:
If the worst come, I can but speed, as others before me. Be there no Usurers,
that say to the Gold in secret, You are my Confidence? ( Populus me sibilat, at
mihi plaudo ipse d^mi,) Hor.
the world hisseth at me, but I hug and applaud my own soul, and fat my
spirits in the sight of my Bags. Is there never a Broker to comfort this sin
of death, in the distress of his Conscience with? Usury is no sin, many
learned men are of this opinion: But I ask him, if his Conscience can be so
satisfied: would he not willingly give one hundred pound bag, to be secured
in this point? Sure, it is (at the least) not safe wading far in a
questionable Water; if it could be safe to some, yet how many have been drowned
in this Whirlepoole? I confess that flesh and blood puts the Bladders of
Wealth and Promotion under their Arme-holes, and the Devil holds them up by
the Chinne, till they come to the deepest, and then, as the Priests served
Judas, they bid them shift for them selves; and wanting the help of Repentance
of swim, down they sink ( In profundum inferni) to the bottomless bottom
of Hell. These two, are not unfitly compared to two Milstones; the Usurer is
the nether Stone, that lies still; he sittes at home in his warm Furs, and
spendes his time in a deuillish Arithmeticke, in numeration of hours, days,
and moneys, in substraction from others estates, and multiplication of his
own, till they have divided the earth to themselves, and themselves to Hell:
The Broker runs round like the upper Millstone, and betwixt both these, the
poor is grinded to powder.

Usury (you say) is exploded among Saints, I would you would deal no worse
with covetousness: But alas, this is too general a fault, to give any hope
of amendment: He that railed on Beelsebub pulled al Ekrom about his ears: He
that slighted Melchom, provoked the Ammonites: But he that condemns Mammon,
speaks against all the world. This is the delight, the love, the solace of
many, the God of some: Poverty, sickness, age, are all the Devils they
tremble at, and Beliall, Melchom, Mammon, Pleasures, Honors, Riches, all the
Gods they worship: These three usurping Kings, like the three seditious
Captains in Jerusalem, or those three Roman Tyrants, Casar, Crassus, and
Pompey, have shared the world amongst them, and left God least, who owes all.
Lactantius speaks of one Tullus Hostilius, that put Fear and Palenes into the
number of Gods: It is pity that ever his Gods should go from him, it is (not
pity, but) justice, that these Gods, and the true God too, should forsake
such reprobates, that idolatrize the honor to Creatures, wherewith they should
worship the Creator. But alas, how is Pharaobs Dream verified among us? The
lean Kine eat up the fat: Gods lean blessings, riches, and pleasures,
deuowre his fat ones, Grace and Religion: How it dishonours God, disparageth
our selves, and our creation, to put Lead in a Cabinet of gold, base desires in
a fair and precious soul. We never yet attained the top of Mount Syon: He
that stands on the Tower of Divine meditation, will judge those Pigmeys, which
below he thought Giants: but we desire not Heaven, Ignoti nulla cupido.
because we know it not; we never look beyond our Horizon: we live in our
contented slavery of Egypt, and never dream of the freedom of Canaan, (Vbi
amor, ibi oculus:) where the love is, there is the eye. This S. Augustine
shortly and soundly reproues: ( Si sursum os, cur deorsum cor?) has Nature
given us an upright ^ace, Preaepostera dissimili^udo vultus et animae. etc.
and a groueling heart? this is a preposterous dissimilitude of the mind and
countenance: do but compare (as lifting up thy soul with thy eyes) heaven
with earth, and thou will change thy opinion: Through want of these
meditations, these earthly vanities carry away our inchaunted hearts, to
neglect those better things of our eternal peace: and by the testimony of our
Savior, It is hard for a rich man to get into Heaven: The Proverb says,
There is no earthly Gate, but an Ass laden with Gold can enter: and this only
loding, hinders our entering the gates of Glory. A wealthy and great man, served
up to Gods table in his kingdom, is as rare as Venison at our Boardes on
earth: there are sometimes such services, not often.

Is this all? no, Sen.
( Vidi Ebriosorum sitim, and vomentium famem) I have seen Drunkenness
reeling from Tavern to Tavern, (and not seldom,) from thence to his Stews.
It was the sin, nay the shame of Beggars; it is now the glory, the pride of
Gallants: They should daily be transformed to the image of God, they come
nearer and nearer to beasts, (let me say) to Devils: For Saint Bernard says,
( Ebrietas est manifestissimus Demon) Drunkenness is a most manifest Devil:
They that are possessed with Satan, or with drunkenness, fall alike into the
fire, Math. 17. 16. 21
into the water, they gnash alike, alike they foame: And as all the Disciples
could not cast out that one sort of Devils; so nor all the Preachers this.

Gluttony is not much less general, no less evil: Drunkenness makes a man
so giddy he can not stand, and Gluttony so pursie that he cannot go: That old
Verse and Rule is forgotten in our Feasts: Too soon, too fine, too daintily:
Too taste, too much, is gluttony.


There is an appetite natural, when the stomach can extract no more juice from
meats received, it couets more: There is an appetite sensual, when the rich
says, My Soul eat, not my Body: nay, are not some in this City, like those
Horace speaks of? when their estate can reach but to Herrings, Sed prohibent
grandes patinae.
they long for fresh Samon. We desire the strength of bodies, and the length
of days; our full Dishes forbid it: If ever that Verse was true, now is the
time: Non plures gladio, quam cecidere gula: The enemies Sword kills not more,
then their own Throat.

Swearing and Whoredom I will join together, (as most sins go by couples)
so the Prophet, The Land is full of Adulterers, and for Oaths the Land
mourns. Add unto Swearing, (the twin-brone brother of it) Cursing;
Carnificem and Lictorem vindictae nostrae.
a sin that makes God (the summum bonum the base executioner of our revenge:
How strange? when men grieve us, to turn our teene upon God, and rent him to
pieces. Blasphemers against mortal Princes are killed with the sword, and all
their estates confiscate: against the Prince of Heaven it is not regarded.
Gladio ^eriuntur, bonis f^co datis etc.


I must not forget my Edomite, the Gallant: If you would see an Impostume
conflate and swollen up with all these rank corruptions, all the former
mischiefs, reconciling themselves to a wretched unity in one soul, a pack
and bundle of sins, snatched from their several owners, (Envy from the
Malicious, Haughtines from the Proud, Derision from the Scorner, etc. and
engrossed to one heart, an Emblem, a Pageant, a short Commentary of all the
Deuilles proceedings, a Map of his walks, plottes, and actions; behold the
Gallant: I tax not the generous Spirit, whose birth and accoutrementes are
worthy and high, his mind humble. Oh how comely are good Clothes to a good
Soul, when the Grace within, shall beautify the Attire without; and not gay
Rags, impudently bear out Wicked actions: Far be it from me to think
these Edomites, or any other thing, then the Diamondes, that grace our Ring,
no, they are the gallant Esauites, the profane Roysters, to whom I speak, and
that from a text of Repentance, desiring from my soul, that they may escape the
Burden of Dumah, by rejecting the manners, and make more account of their
Birthright, then sell it for messes of Pottage, Lusts, and Vanities: But if
they will note themselves with the Cole and Brand of Profaneness, they must not
look to escape our Censures: we cannot hear their Oaths, beating the
vnvulnerable breast of Heaven, not see their Pride, testifying to their face,
if they should plead innocence; nor be unwillingly conscious of their
Atheistical Iestes, Hos. 7. 10.
Libertine Feasts, worse then Pagan Adulteries, and charm our tongues with
silence; when the glory of our God, the price of their Redemption, and the
danger of their own souls lie at the stake.

There are other open, and infinite secret sins, which they think no eye
sees: But there are witnesses, the Angels good and bad, the Conscience of the
committers, and the judge of the Conscience: Si nemo, non tamen nullus) if no
man, yet not none: therefore what thou dare not to do thy fellow servant
looking on thee, Quod non audes facere aspiciente conseruo: hoc ne cogites
inspiciente deo.
that dare not to think thy heavenly Master looking in thee. I confess, we
have a face of Religion, and looks of profession, making toward Jerusalem; but
how many make the noble Livery of our Master, a shelter to these abhorred
corruptions? and till the trial comes, it is not known whom many serve: A man
that follows two Gentlemen, is not discerned which to serve, till they part
company: so long as wealth and religion go together, it is not apparent, to
which of them most adhere, till the cross parts them, and then it is plain
and easy.

Were these the sins of Edom, and are they not the sins of England? The
sins said I? nay, the Gods of England: For the Usurer adores his mettalles,
the Epicure his Iunketts, the Drunkard his Gallons, the Voluptious his Lusts,
the Adulterer his Harlottes, the Proud and gallant Edomite his gaye Clothes,
and studied carriage: And as the Israe^ies cried to their Calfe made of golden
Ear rings, These are thy Gods oh Israel: So we may speak it with horror and
amasement, of these foolish, Exodus 3^. ^.
bestial, devilish, sins, These are thy Gods oh England: weak, wretched,
vnhelpefull Gods: For shame, what, where are we? could Edom ever be worse?
Have we devoured so many years of peace, ease, plenty, and saturitie, (if I
may so call it) of Gods word; and are we still so lame, le^ne, and ill favored
in our lives? what shall I say? has the sweet Gospel, and the sober
preaching of it, made us sensual, senseles; impudent, frantic? as the nature
of that Country is wonderful, Siccita^ dat Lutum, imbres puluerem. Plin.
if true, that Rain causes Dust, and Drought Dirt: Have the sweet Deawes of
Hermon, made the Hill of Syon more barren? Has the Sun of Plenty, from the
filth of our Security, bred monsters of sins? Have Gods mercies made us
worse? what shall I say?

Fathers and Breathren, help: Pity the miscarrying souls, that have no
mercy on themselves: our Words are thought air, let your Hands compel them
to the service of God: Verbum informans, virga reformans.
The word of Information has done his best, Where is the rod of Reformation?
Let Moses Rod, second Aarons Word. The loves of Sinners, the strength of
Sins; nay, Principalities and Powers are against us, and we come armed with a
few leaves of Paper: The keenest Sword is with us, but it is in our lips
only, The sword of the Spirit; and though it can divide the Marrow and the
bones, Heb. 4.
of an awaked Conscience, alas it moves not the stony hearts: it shall sooner
double upon our selves, then enter such Mayled Consciences: our blows are
filliped back in contempt: be not wanting ye that have the ordinance of God:
You are his surrogates, and the Preachers hopes: good laws are made, the
lifeblood of them is the execution: the Law is else a wooden Dagger in a
fair Sheath: when those that have the charge imposed, and the Sword in their
hands, stand like the picture of S. George, with his hand up, but never
striking: we complain not of the higher Magistrates, from the benches, of
whose Judgment, impiety departs not without disgrace, without strokes: the
blame lies on inferior Officers, who think their office well discharged, if
they threaten offenders: these see, and will not see: Hence Beggars lase
themselves in the fields of idleness; hence Tauernes and Tap-houses swarm
with Unthrifts; of whom, whether they put more sin into their bellies, or
vomit more forth, is a hard question; I mean, whether their oaths, or
ebrieties exceed: Hence we look to have Vagrants suppressed, Idleness whipped,
Drunkenness spoke withal; but the execution proves too often like the
Iuglers feast, the Guests set, the table's furnished, meat in dishes, wine
in flaggons; but putting forth their hands to take them, they apprehend nothing
but air.

The medecin to heal all this, both for Patient and Physician, is repentance;
not a iaculatory cry of Lord forgive me, nor the flash of a melancholy
passion, but a sound, serious, and substantial repentance. Rome has an holy
water of virtue, they say, to purge and wash away all her spots: England has
her holy water too, which, too many trust in for sufficient, we look up and
cry, Lord thy mercy, and wipe our lips, as if we had not sinned: yet by and
by to our former vomit. But the repentance, that resolves for Heaven, throws
away all impediments* if Gold, if pleasure, if a Throne were in the way, she
would fling them aside: she has an eye bent on the Mercie^seate, and a foot
that runs straight to it: she turns not into Samaria, because she is offered
lodging there, nor into the Court of Egypt, to be called the Son of Phar^os
Daughter: the pleasures of Babylon stay her not, the Good-fellowes of Sodom
make her not look back: she forgets what is behind, and never rests, like the
Kine that carried the Arc, till she comes to the fields of Bethshemesh, the
harvest of grace and goodness; nor cease lowing with sorrow till she be sped
of the mercies of God: she has felt the weight of sin and sorrow, and
abhorres the cause of them both: she hates not the devil worse then her former
iniquities, and if it were possible, she would never more offend: Thus, this
is to return; what you want of this, you come short of repentance.

The third degree follows to make up our perfection: Come.
If Returning might serve as a labor of (but) indifferent trouble, we could
afford it, but we must come: You have heard the Whence, Vnde and quo^
hear the Whither. Thou have not done with Enquiring, with Returning; Up and
e^te Elias, thou have a greater journey to go: strengthen thy heart, oh
Christian, R^stat tibi tertia meta) thou have a third mark to aim at. Come,
home to thy God, by a Chaste and Holy life; it is not current pay with God, to
part with our Vanities, except we embrace a Religious conversation. Paul makes
it as necessary a part of Christianity, to Put on the New man, as to put off
the Old: It is not enough to cease doing evil, but it is damnable not to do
well: He that gathers not with Christ, scatters. It was the threatening doom
in John Baptists Sermon, not to the Barren, but to the Euil-fruited Tree.
Christ's speech carries the same sense and force against the Pharisees, though
spoken to his Disciples: Except your Righteousness, etc. he says not, Unless
your righteousness be less then theirs; but, Except your righteousness be
more, exceed, you shall not see heaven. He that inquires the way to Heaven,
and turns toward it, has past two degrees of my Text, and his own
Pilgrimage; but he gets little of either praise or comfort, except he come home
to it: Here is not so much perseverance lessened, as perfection: there is
extreme wrong, extreme right and mercy. The 2. first, shall be shut out of
Heaven; the last only, has a promise of entrance. Summa iniuria, summum ius,
et mise^cordia.
Judgment without mercy, shall be to him that sh^wes no mercy; not to the cruel
only, but to him that is but merely just: The want of justice is not only
damned, Iam. 2. 13.
but the want of Mercy: the Rich Churl went to hell for not relieuing Lazarus,
though he wronged him not. If the usurer part with his extortions, the Wanton
with his Minions, the Cheater with his Frauds, the Tradesman with his Oaths,
he thinks himself by this time a high Christian, and that God must needs
bless him, he is so repentant. If the long persuasions of many Sermons, can
work this on us, that we abate of our former outrageous licentiousnes, we
strait sponge up our selves; and with a conceit, that we have done much for
God, outface all reproves: but he that has much forgiven him, loves much.
The Prodigal does not only turn from his Harlottes and vices, but comes home
to his Fathers house: There was no stinte in that sinful Woman's penitence,
till she had powered ^loods of tears on the feet of our Savior: The
conscience of Zacheus was not disburdened, by ceasing his extortion, but by
restitution to the wronged, commiseration to the distressed, even to one half
of his goods, and these are the commended penitents.

How sorts our practice with this Doctrine? show me a sacrilegious Patron, a
Pyrate of the Church, that (if his hand cease from spoiling God of his Tithes,
yet) will repair the breaches, his rapine has made: show me a Bribe-guilty
Officer, seek out with wette eyes, and reward with a full hand, the wronged
Suitors: how many are more cruell-hearted then Judas, that neither on
repentance nor despair will bring back the price of the Poores Blood, which
they have sucked? Behold the earthly Churl, to make his son a Gentleman,
prostituting his honesty, conscience, soul, and forsaking his own mercy: (as
the Proverb is vile, if ever true, Happy is that Son, whose Father goes to
the Devil:) After he has mowed Corn, or fatted his Ox, on the very place,
((...) Trotafuit) where the Town stood; nay, kenneled his Dogs within the
walls of the Sanctuary; Non ignota cano.
and turned the Hall of Charity into the Parlour of Pride; his Body sinkes to
the Grave, and (it is to be feared) his Soul to Hell, being rung thither with
the peales of Belles and curses. The better instructed Heir, (to omit those
that exceed the tyranny of their Fathers) seeing and detesting his dead Fathers
deader courses, Q^is talia (...) ^mperet a lad (...)? lud. 5. 23.
withdrawes his hand from extortion, from depopulation, but what reasons can
make him a restorer? it is enough (he thinks) to cease wronging. But curseye
Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord, curse the inhabitants thereof, because
they came not forth, to h^lp^ the Lord in the day of battle: Did they fight
against God? No, they helped him not: Math. 18.
that Servant was condemned for clayming his own debt: the Prayers and
Fastinges of the Jews were despised, for clayming their own debts; and
standing upon Sacrifice with men, Esaias. 58. 3.
Whiles they would have mercy with God. Neh. 5.
Nehemiah threatened the same people with a stricter taxation: They must restore
the extorted Lands and Houses of their breathren; nay, remit some part of the
debt, or they were cursed with that fearful sacrament, the shaking the lap
of his Garment, so to be shaken out of Israel, all the congregation crying,
Amen. Lastly, beyond all exception, the manner of the Lambs coming to
Judgment, testifies as much; Go ye Cursed: For what cause? Because ye denied
the Labourer his hire, or took Bread from the hungry, etc. No, these are
crying Sins, and Hasten before unto Judgment: But, You gave them not,
therefore, (lie maledictj) Go ye cursed; so Come ye blessed. What, because ye
dealt justly, and gave every man his due? no, these virtues may be in moral
men that want Faith and Christianity: But, You gave them your own bread;
Hungry, and clad them Naked, with your own clothes; therefore, Come ye
blessed.

What use you will make of this, I know not; what use you should make, I know:
If the Tree without good fruit shall be burned, what shall become of the Tree
that has evil? If Barrenness be cast into the fire, what does Rapine and
Robbery deserve? If it be damnation enough to deny our own Bread, what is it
to take away the only Loaf, Coat, or Cottage of our poor brother? Woe to
the Back that wears the Garment, to the Bellies that deuowers the Food, they
never sweat for; I mean, that by force or fraud, took them from the owners.
If Naball and Dives burn for not giving their own, what shall become of Ahab
and Iesabell, for taking away the Vineyard of Naboth? If the righteous be
scarcely saved, 1. Pet. 4. 18.
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?

Now if after this Physic given, I should ask many, how they feel the
Pulses of their Consciences beat? I presume on this reply: (Notum loq^eris)
you but guild Gold, and minister to us such Physic, as we have taken before.
All this we know; (we do not evermore ply your understandings with new
things; but lay old, almost dead and forgotten, fresh to the Conscience:) I
ask further, how much of this have you practiced? and still look for an
affirmative answer, All this, have I kept from my youth.

Let us reason and discuss this matter a little. To Enquire, is hearing, or
rather harkning to the word to Return, is repenting: to Come, is believing, or
rather looking more toward perfection, proceeding into the ripeness of Faith.
This latter is so necessary, that we can not come to God with his acceptance;
our comfort, if we leave our Faith behind us; without this, impossible to
please him, to be rewarded of him: This our Charter whereby we hold all our
Privileges, our Title in Capi^e to Earth and Heaven: But (Sub ^udice Lis est)
the great Judge of Heaven shall one day censure it: mean time, give me leave
to help thee, peruse this evidence of thy Faith, whereon thou so presumest.
Christ dying, made a Will, sealed it with his own Blood, wherein he bequeathed
a certain Inheritance to his breathren: the Conueyance is the Gospel, (this
his Testament:) the executor of this Will, is the Holy ghost: our Tenure and
Evidence, is our Faith. Now, thou layest title to Jerusalem for a child's part:
What Is thy title? in Christ's name and right: what conueyance did Christ ever
make thee of such a portion? Yees, he conveyed it to me by Will: What, by a
special name? no, but by a general title to all believers: That I am one of
these heirs, my evidence; my Faith. Let God alone to try thy Faith: If thou
come to me for counsel, says S. James, thou must show me another evidence:
Show me thy faith by thy works.

If thy heart be corrupt, thy hands filthy, thy tongue false, thy evidence is
but counterfaite. Christ gives not title of inheritance in Heaven, to such as
have no holiness on Earth: ^. Cor. 6. 9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be
not deceived, neither Fornicato^s, etc. Reu. 21. 27.
And there shall enter into it no unclean thing, nor any thing that works
abomination, or lies. Perhaps thou will yet stand upon it: produce thy
witnesses: they are only two, thy Life, thy Conscience: they cannot speak
with thee, against their maker and thine. Thy life speaks loud, and plain:
Thy pride, drunkenness, oppression, cousenage, lusts, blasphemies, manifest
thou have but a broken title: and Paul pleads against thee, Tit. 3. 8.
from this clear advantage: Protest to them ye believe in God, that they be
careful to show forth good works. They that have the evidence of faith, must
have the witness of works: It is a poor deed, without witnesses. Thy
conscience speaks plain too, that thy faith is but a carnal persuasion, bred
of security; a forged Evidence, made by a false Scriuener the Devil, to
deceive thy own eyes and the worlds, not Gods. Now where is thy claim? stand
upon good assurance, lest when that subtle winnower Satan, comes to fifth thee
grain after grain, thou prouest Chafe: we may come with this carnal
persuasion, little better then reprobate hope, to the Temples, to the Pulpittes
to the Sacraments, but if we come so to the tribunal of Christ, woe unto us:
the too much trusting to a verbal, lean, sick, starued faith, deceiues many
a Soul: whiles we covet to be solifidians in opinion, we prove nullifidians
in practice: no matter for wisdom in the Soul, grace in the conscience,
honesty in the life, if the profession of faith be in the tongue: but the Poor
may say as he in the Comedy: (Oculatae mihi sunt manus, credunt, quod vident:)
My hands have eyes, and they believe what they see: we carry the forms and
outsides of Christians, and think God beholding to us, for gracing his
material, earthly Temples; when in the Temples of our own hearts, we set
up the Idols of our own affections, H^s^e Deus templis gaudet. etc.
yet are these the Temples, wherein he is best pleased to dwell: But if we be
come to God by faith, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
he is also come to us by grace: The spirit of Christ is in us, Romans 8 9. 10.
if we be not Reprobates. And if this spirit be in us, the body of sin is
dead. At least has his deathes-wound: But alas, in how many of us does sin
live, dwell, (I would I might stay there, nay even) reign? as if Christ had
come to destroy the Devil, Dominandi vim*
and not the works of the Diuill, to free us from the damnation and not the
dominion of sin: Damnandi vim.
but he that took from sin the power to condemn us, took also the power to
reign in our mortal Bodies. And the second, is but a consequent of the first,
Romans 7 25. and 8. 1.
postscribed with that word of inference, now then* etc. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
Thus Christ came not only to bind the Devil, but to loose and dissolve his
works.

I have read and observed in the History of Scotland, a certain controversy
betwixt that Kingdom and Ireland, for a little Island that lay between them;
either claims it as theit due, and the strife growing hot, was falling from
words to blows: but reason moderated both sides, and they put it to the
decision of a Frenchman; who thus judged it: he caused lyning Serpents to be
put into that Island; if they lived and thriued there, he judged it Scotlands;
if they pyned and dyed, he gave it for Ireland. You can apply it easily: If the
venomous Serpents, poisons, and corruptions of our natures batten and thrive in
us, we are Satan's; if they languish and consume, we are Gods: thus is the
title ended for the freehold of our Souls, by what sure rule we may know,
whether they belong to Hell or Heaven. If our hearts be vnstabled of these
beastiall lusts, and trimmed up with Sanctimony to entertain our holy Guest,
there shall be a reciprocal and enterchangeable coming of us to Christ, and
Christ to us: and we shall as surely suppe with him in his Court of glory, Reu.
3. 20.
as he has supped with us, in our house of Obedience.

Let us only fear, least our want of Repentance hinder this. I should have
erst observed it, as a material instruction from this place, I could not find
a fitter time to insert it, then here, to draw your coming with more
alacrity. There is a reservation to repentance, even to abhorred Edom: let the
sons of the prophanest Esau repent, and they shall not be forsaken of mercy:
Return and come, and your night threatened, shall be made a joyful warning,
though it had as certain and defined a time, as ever had Jonas doom against
Nineveh, the set bounds of 40. days, with a Non vltra: yet be you humbled and
this judgment shall be dispensed with: If there be such mercy to Edom, let me
say boldly, repenting Israel shall not fail of it: the night shall linger,
and the Sun be kept from setting, if we will return in our day: the
threatenings of God have a condition included; that general, that promised,
that never refused interposition of repentance. As absolute as the speech might
seem to Abimelech, withholding Abraham's wife, thou art but a dead man, yet it
had an implicit condition, except thou restore her undefiled, as appears by
the sequel. It is a common Fountain where at every repentant soul may
drink, at what time soever, what sinner soever, repent of what sin soever,
etc. And if yet any feel themselves thirsty, weak, and not thoroughly
resolved, let him for ever confute the distrust of his own heart* the malice
of Satan, the present difficulties, Ier. 18 7.
with that of Jeremiah, Where in express words, our repentance is said to
make GOD repent, even of his threatened, and intended Plagues.

God has threatened to all sinners, a Night of sorrow, and it shall as surely
come, as ever Evening succeeded day: but there is an Except, that shall save
us, a seasonable and substantial repentance: if we turn from those winding
Labyrinths of sin, and come home to God, he will save us from this Night,
that we perish not: there is no coming to God, but in and by Jesus Christ;
through his Son must God look at us, and we at him; that he may be
merciful, we hopeful.

Come then beloved, to Jesus Christ: behold him with the eyes of Faith,
standing on the Battlementes of Heaven, and wafting you to him: come freely,
come merrily, come with speed; come betimes, least when you would, you cannot
for want of direction, dare not for want of acquaintance with him: he that
comes not till the last gasp of extremity, knows not how to come, because he
begins but then. How prone are our feet to forbidden paths? the Flesh calls,
we come* Vanity calls, we flock: the World calls, we fly: Let Christ call
early and late, and either we not come, or unwillingly, or late, or with no
purpose to stay. How justly may he take up that complaint against us, that
against the Jews: after all my Promises, assurances, real performances of
Mercies; Ioh. 5. 40.
You will not come unto me, that you might have life: Perhaps, when we are
weary of sin and sin of us, then let God take us; he will none of the
Devils leauinges. Some would come, but for some impediments; that either
Childs Portion to be made up; such a House to be builded, such a Ground to be
purchased: this same But, marres their coming, as he in the Gospel, But for
burying his Father; and that other, But for bidding his Friends farewell: so,
But for Mammon, and that we cannot be rich with a good Conscience; But for
Pleasures, that we cannot be wanton, yet nourish the hope of salvation: But for
these ( veruntamens) But's, they would come, ( S^d v^x sunt vsi, qui carnere
nisi,) we have all one But, one exception or other, to keep us from our
Christ: yet Paul countes all these but dross, but dung: And if any thing seem
fayrer in thine eye then Christ, ( Detur digniori) give thy soul to the
worthyer: We can extremely affect no earthly thing* but the Devil (at one
time or other) will bring it into opposition with Christ, as the Moon and the
Sun, to see which of them shall be eclipsed. Alas, how ordinary (yet how vile
is it ( Post-ponere Christum bonibus, qui nos ^qua^it angelis;) to set Christ
after our Oxen, that has made us equal to the Angels: yet all those Friends,
whom we so trust, shall soonest fail us, and at our most need run from us, as
Vermines from an house on fire. Give me lea^e to show you this indignity
offered to Christ by a metaphor; familiar comparisons give the quickest touch,
to both understanding and conscience.

A certain Gallant had three Friends: two of them flattered him in his loose
humors; if in this, I may not rather call them Enemies: The third, lovingly
desswaded him from his follies: on the two flatterers, he spent his Patrimony;
the third he castes off with contempt: his riot and wealth gone, his Friends
went too; for they were friends to the Riches, not to the Rich man: Debt was
required, he arrested, and the Prison not to be avoided: in this calamity, he
studies refuge; hence bethinkes himself of his two Friends, of whom he desires
relief: the first's answer is cold and short, Alas, I can not spare it, you
should have prevented this ^arst: The other speaks a little more comfort; I
have no Money to help you, yet I will bear you company to the Prison-doare,
and there leave you: The distressed man finds small satisfaction in all this;
therefore as his last refuge, he calls to mind his third Friend, whom he had
ever scorned, wronged; and after much wrestling betwixt shame and necessity,
he sendes to him, with no less earnestness, then humility, discouers his
exigents, requires help: the Message scarce delivered, he comes with speed,
pays the Debt, sets him at liberty, nay repayres the ruins of his estate.
The Rioter, is Man; the two flattering Friends, are Riches and Pleasures; these
the soul of man embraces, spends her strength and time, most precious Riches,
on them: The third Friend, that rebukes his sins, is Christ; this because
distastefull to blood and flesh, without regard to his saving health, is
rejected: at last, all the time of Grace spent, the soul (so far) in Gods
debt, is arrested by one of Gods Serieants, Sickness, or Calamity, or an
afflicted Conscience; then those Friends begin to slinke; Pleasure is gone
suddenly, so soon as the Head begins to ache: Riches (perhaps) will offer to
go with him to the Prison doare the gates of Death, the preparation to the
Grave: the fainting Soul foreseeing their falsehood, weakness, aggrauation
of his miseries; with an humbled Heart, remorsefull Conscience, Tears in his
eyes, Prayers and Cries in his tongue, sollicites his neglected Savior, to
pity his distress, and have mercy upon him: these Messengers have no sooner
pierced the Heavens, but down comes the spirit of Grace and Mercy, with
Pardon and free Remission, payment of all Debts, and discharge of all Sorrows.

If ever you meet with Friend more able, more willing, more certain, to do you
good, reject this counsel; The breath of all men is in their nostrilles, and
there is no help in them, Psalm. 146.
though they were Princes; when not only their material parts, Flesh, Blood,
Bones, and Marrow, but even part of the inward man, so far as their worldly
intendementes went, Their Thoughts perish. But GOD was, is, and is to come;
not only in Power, Heb. 13. 8.
but in Mercy, Sweetness, Protection. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and
the same for ever.

That Jesus Christ put into our mouths a tongue to Enquire, into our hearts a
purpose to Return, into our lives a grace to Come home to holiness, and
himself.

This God grant for his mercies sake, Jesus Christ for his merits sake, the
Holy ghost for his names sake, to whom be ascribed all honor and praise, for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

