Ieroboams SONS DECEASE: A FUNERAL SERMON ON PART OF 1 KINGS 14.17.

BY Thomas Gataker B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND. 1627.

TO MY LOVING FRIENDS AND COSENS, Mr. NICOLAS CRISPE, And Mris. ANNE CRISPE his
Wife.
GOod Cosens, I know not well, what should move, either others to be so
importunate with you, or you with me, for the making of this, preached at the
late burial of your little one, more public. Somewhat (it seems) you heard
therein handled, that you either had not at all before heard; or not delivered
(which is more likely) in that manner as then it was. And if it may bring any
further light than has formerly been given, to the clearing either of that
point so eargerly opposed by the Pelagians, of sin, and the guilt thereof in
Infants; or of that other doubt rather so much debated by many, concerning the
justice and equity of Gods proceedings in the punishing of Parents in
posterity; and may either in that regard, or any other way, be useful, either
to your selves, or others, it is enough. Let it, howsoever, remain as a pledge
of my continued love and affection to that Family, which since my first
acquaintance with, and alliance to, I have found so much comfort in, and
received so much kindness from; and upon which desiring God to continue, and
multiply his graces and mercies, I take leave, and rest

Yours ever in the Lord Jesus, Thomas Gataker.

Ieroboams SONS DECEASE.
1 KING. 14.17. The Child died.
IT was foretold by Gods Prophet of this Child, that it should die. And the
Prophet (you see) proved a true Prophet: For (says my Text) the Child died.

Now howsoever a Childs death may seem a matter of no great moment; Death of
Children.
yet the Death of Children, and more especially the Death of this Child, being
duly considered, Of this Child. Ieroboams.
may well afford much matter of good use.

The Child was Ieroboams, a good Son of a bad Father, for his Parents sin
by God smitten, before with sickness, and now with Death.

The story briefly is this. Jeroboam, The Story.
King of the 1 King. 11.31. and 12.20.
Ten Tribes rent from Salomons house, had out of 1 King. 12.26, 27, 28.
a wicked worldly policy, put down Gods true worship within his Territory,
and set up Idolatry in the room of it. For this the wrath of God being
incensed against him, the Lord smote with sickness Abijas his Son, 1 King.
14.1.
a child he had, which (it seems) was right dear unto him. Hereupon Verse. 4.
the Queen his mother, out of a motherly affection to her child, desirous to
know what was like to become of it, Verse. 2.
with the advice of her husband also, repaireth to one Ahias a Prophet of God,
1 King. 11.30, 31. and 14.2.
who had sometime foretold her husband, being then but Salomons servant, that
he should succeed his Sovereign in part of his Sovereignty. But because she
thought she should be no welcome guest to him, Verse. 2.
she disguised her self that she might not be known. Howbeit the Prophet
understanding from God who she was, told her, he had Verse. 6.
heavy tidings from God for her: That her husbands house should be utterly
destroyed; Verse. 10.
God would sweep it away, as a man sweepeth away doung, till none of it be
left. Verse. 11.
Those of his stock that died in the City, should be eaten with dogs, and
those that died in the field, should be devoured by the fowls. Verse. 12, 13.
This alone of all the rest should die in his bed, be laid in his grave, and
mourning made for him, because some good things were found in him, he had a
good heart to God, as a child might have. And as the Prophet foretold her, so
accordingly it fell out: For no sooner was the Queen his mother returned, but
Verse. 17.
even as she set foot upon the threshold of the Kings house, The child died.

Points.
Now from this childs death thus considered, diverse points of Instruction
readily offer themselves unto us, Some general, General.
Some special: Special.

:

I will pitch upon two of either. The two General points shall be; Children
are tainted with sin; Death is ever at our doors.
Children are tainted with Sin, We hence deduce it, in that death. For Romans
6.23.
Death is the wages of sin. And, (...), stipendium: a re militari translatum.
Mortis stipendium: vitae donatiuum. Tertull. de resurr. carn.
Romans 8.10.
For sin it is that the body dies. And, Romans 5.12.
Death came in by sin. And, (...) Propterea quod. Ibid. Ita potius quam, In
quo vti Vulg. and Aug. de peccat. mer. and rem. c. 10. and ad epist. Pel. l. 4.
c. 4. and de verb. Ap. 7. and 14. and alibi.
Because all have sinned, therefore all die. Mors and peccatum, vt acus and
filum. Sequatur necesse est poena peccatum. Aug. de praedest. and great. c. 3.
Sin and Death, are as Needle and Thread; the one entering before, is a means
to draw on the other, Intrare mors non posset, nisi intrante peccato. Aug. ibid.
nor would the one follow, if the other went not before. Genesis 2.17.
Before Sin was, there was no death; Apoc. 21.4. 1 Cor. 15.26, 54.
nor shall there be any, when sin shall be no more. It is apparent therefore,
that even Children are not free from sin, in that they are subject unto death.

That which may also in few words be further confirmed unto us, By their Birth;
By their new birth. Confirmation by Reasons 2.



1. By their birth, or their offspring. In vtero damnati ante quam nati, quia
de peccato and in peccato procreati and parti. Bern. de temp. 70.
They come of sinful persons, of parents stained with sin. And Job 14.4.
who can draw a clean thing out of tha that is unclean? how can fair water
come from a filthy spring? Yea even the Children of faithful and sanctified
parents; howsoever (for the comfort of those that have them taken hence in
their nonage) they are by virtue of their parents copy, and Gods gracious
entaile, Fidei candidati, Tertull. de monogam. and Hieron. ad Ocean. and ad
Paulin. quaest. 2.
within the compass of his covenant; it running in those terms, Tibi and
semini tuo. Genesis 17.7, 10, 11.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; and Vobis and liberis vestris.
Act. 2.39.
the promise therefore is made not to them only, but to their Children too:
and they are in that regard said in some sort to be Quomodo vasa in tabernaculo
sancta dicuntur, quia sacris vsibus destinata, cum vtique sancta esse non
possint, nisi ea quae sentiunt and venerantur Deum. Hieron. ad Paulin. quaest.
2.
holy; ( Romans 11.18.
If the root be holy, the sprigs also be holy:) and Quomodo Gal. 2.15. non
natura peccatores ex gentibus. Cartwr. Dum in Christo censentur, ex
parentumfide. Morton.
clean: ( 1 Cor. 7.14.
Else were your children unclean; but now they be clean:) And there is good
hope therefore of the Matthew. 19.14.
salvation of such; and much more comfort too, when they have received also the
seal of the same. Yet certain it is, that even the children of the faithful
also, (as David, who confesses as much by himself, Psalm. 51.5.
Even bred in iniquity, and borne in sin;) are of themselves as deeply
tainted with this corruption as any. For that De mundatis nascitur non
mundatus, quia tales non facit generatio sed regeneratio. A peccatis itaque
nemo nascendo, sedomnes renascendo mundamur. Aug. de pecc. mer. and rem. l. 3.
c. 9. Cum sit i^ progeny natorum generatio carnalis, in progeny renatorum
regeneratio spiritualis, vis vt de baptisato baptisatus nascatur, cum videas de
circumciso non nasci circumcisum? carnalis est certe ista generatio, and
carnalis est circumcisio; and tamen de circumciso non nascitur circumcisus: sic
ergo de baptisato non potest nasci baptisatus. Aug. de verb. Ap. 14. and
Albert. in Joan. 3. Vide and eund. de verb. Ap. 8.
procreation being but a natural act, the parents thereby can pass no more to
their issue, than what they had naturally themselves. So Peccatum quod mundatur
per baptismum manet in eis, quos genuerunt baptisati, quomodo praeputium, quod
per circumcisionem aufertur, manet in eis, quos genuerunt circumcisi. Aug. de
pecc. mer. and rem. l. 3. c. 8.
the Romans 4.11. cum Col. 2.11, 12.
circumcised father bred an uncircumcised son: and 1 Cor. 15.37. Seritur
solummodo granum sine folliculi vest, fundamento spica, numimento aristae,
superbia culmi: exurgit copia faeneratu^, compagine aedificatum, ordine
structum, cultu munitum, vsque^ quaque vestitum. Tertull. de resurr. carn.
corn though it be never so curiously severed and cleansed, from the straw by
threshing, from the chafe by winnowing, Pone granum purgatum; de grano purgato
frumentum cum palea nascitur, sine qua seminatur. Aug. de verb. Ap. 14. Palea
quae tanta diligentia opere humano separatur, manet in fructu, qui de tritico
purgato nascitur. Idem de pec. mer. and rem. l. 3. c. 8. Transmittere p^ssunt
ad posteros, quod ipsi non habent, vt paleam frumentum, circumcisus praeputium,
sic fideles infidelitatem. Est in illis remissione mundatum, quod est in istis
simili remissione, velat circumcisione, velut irituratione and ventilatione
mundandum. Ibid. c 9.
yet comes up again, if it be sown, with both, as before.

2. By their new birth. For Non ob aliud instiuta est regeneratio, nisi quia
vitiosa est generatio. Aug. encbir. c. 46. Si sanctificationascuntur de
fidelibus fil^j, quid opus habent baptizari? Idem de pecc. mer. and romans l. 2.
c. 26. Nemo renascatur in corpore Christi, nisi prius nas^atur in corpore
peccati: Ibid. l. 1. c. 29.
children should not regeneration, or baptism, the Sacrament of it, were they
not before, even by their first breeding, defiled and polluted with sin. For
(...). Chrys^st. in Tit. him. 3.
nothing can spiritually pollute or defile, but it only. Bernard speaking of
those words of the Apostle, (...). Ephesians. 2.3.
We were by nature children of wrath, even as well as the rest. Filij irae, non
furoris.
We are, says he, by nature, children of Gods wrath, but yet not children of
Gods rage, that is, of his implacable wrath, as 2 Pet. 2.4. Iudae 6.
the Devils are, irrecouerably therefore damned. For, says he, Si non filius
irae nascerer, non opus esset renasci: si filius furoris nascerer, aui non
contigisset, aut non prosuisset renasci. Bern. in Cant. 69.
Were I not by nature a child of wrath, I should not need to be renewed; but
were I a child of Gods rage, or his implacable wrath, either should I never
have been renewed, or I should never have been the better for being renewed.

Both by the first and the second breeding then it is apparent, that children
are not free from sin.

If any shall move doubt here, Quest.
how children can have sin, who neither are yet able to do, speak, wish, or
think evil, yea that do not so much as know what sin is.

Answer general 1.
1. I might answer with Infantes qui negat peccatores, neget and mortales.
Peccatum autem vt cum paruulis nascatur carnis oculis non videmus: sed quod
videmus paruulos mori, cogimur confiteri cum peccato nasci. Aug. de praedest.
and great. cap. 3.
Augustine, that albeit we could not conceive how Infants should have sin;
yet understanding out of Gods word, that Romans 5.12.
death came in by sin, and that it is an effect and fruit of sin, we must
acknowledge that they are not free from the one, when we see them subject to
the other.

Answer 2.
But 2. I answer, that it may well be conceived how even children may have
sin, though not able yet to act it, or to understand at all what it is.

brood of Aspes and Vipers, (for Psalm. 58.4. Esa. 11.8.
such are we compared to) (...). Plut. de prouid.
have a poisonfull nature, before ever they come to venom or to sting any: or
as the whelps of Lions, Wolves and Bears (for Esa. 11.6, 7.
such also are we said to be) Lupi catulus dum in lustris delitescit caecus,
rapinarum rudis and ignarus, ingenium tamen rapax in se haber. Zuingl. adu.
Calabapt.
have a ravenous disposition in them naturally, before ever they come to be
able to prey, or to apprehend what prey is.

wicked men Act. 28.3. (...). Dio Prus. orat. 74. Instrumenta illis explicandae
nequitiae desunt. Sic tuto serpens etiam pestifera tractatur; dum riget
frigore. Non desunt tum illi venena, sed torpent. Sen. ep. 42.
Paul's viper, that lay stiff with cold, and for the present therefore might
be handled without harm, and yet was it no less venomous all that while,
than before. For is a bad man the less evil, when he lies fast asleep? Or
does (...) Gyges apud Herodot. l. 1. Theano apud Laert. in Pytbag. and Plut. de
and. and de coniug. Mulier cum vest deponit and verecundiam. Hieron. adu.
Iouin. l. 1.
he lay aside his wickedness together with his weed.

3. Take it by the contratie: as (...). Epict^t. en^hir. c. 13. Stob. c. 7. Ita
Aristot. de anima. l. 1. c. 4. (...).
a godly man is good man still, though his senses be so locked up for the time,
and the use of understanding and reason so suspended, that he can neither
mind nor tend any good thing for the present. For it is no natural accident
that can impair spiritual grace in him; no corporal infirmity or disease
that can kill that incorruptible seed 1 Job. 3.9.
of God once conceived in the soul. And what should hinder, but that as much
may be in a young child, as in a godly man so affected?

4. To reason therefore from the state and condition children themselves. They
are capable of holiness, even while they are such. It is apparent in John the
Baptist, who was Luke 1.25.
filled with the Holy Ghost, even from the womb of his mother; and (as one of
the ancients well says) was In vtero priusquam nasceretur renatus. Greg. mor.
l. 3. c. 4. Quod tamen Aug. impossib^le censet. Nemo, inquit, ante renatus quam
natus. Et, Renasci nemo potest antequam sit natus. Aug. ep. 57. and de verb.
Ap. 14. Verum regenitum si dixisset Greg. contradictionis speciem omnem
su^tulisset.
new-bred, yet unborn. Yea so certain it is of all young ones, that belong to
Gods election, that they are Job. 3.3, 7.
regenerate and sanctified ere they go hence: since that Apoc. 2^.27. (...).
Clem. Alex. protrept.
no unholy thing can enter into Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.50.
nor (...). Isid. Pel. l. 1. ep. 477. Corruptelae nomen non naturae. Tertull.
de resu^r.
flesh and blood inherit the kingdom of God. And if children may have
habitual holiness in them, though they be altogether unable yet to do ought
that is good, yea though they know not so much as what it means; why may they
not as well have habitual (...) 1 Pet. 1.13.
naughtiness in them, albeit they be yet unable utterly to do ought that is
evil, or to In paruulis nec scientia est, nec conscientia* and est peccatum
tamen originis. Aug. ad. Iul. l. 5. c. 1.
understand so much as what it is?

This point then thus proved and cleared, the use of it it;

God from all imputation and aspersion of cruelty, or of iniquity, if he
should have taken every one of us, as soon as we came into the world, and
thrown us headlong (as some we need not doubt but he does) into hell. We
brought that into the world with us, for which he might justly have so dealt
with us. Nor is this discrepant from our own courses in the like, kind. Cant.
2.15.
Catch us (says he) the foxes, even the young cubs too. Lupus, catulus licet,
lupus est, and a venatoribus captus iure confoditur. Zuingl. ad Urban. Reg. and
Gualt. apolog.
We destroy the very breed of venomous creatures, when we can come by them,
as well as those that they come of; we kill the young whelps, if we light on
them, as well as the old wolf or the fox; not in regard of the hurt that they
have done, or are able yet to do, but in regard of the harmefull disposition
that is naturally in them. And just may it be with God to do the like by us,
in regard of that Videram nondum diem; vterique nondum solueram clusi moras;
Nox me occupauit, and nouae luci abstulit. Mors me antecessit, aliquis intra
viscera maternaletum praecocis fati tulit: Sed numquid and peccauit? abstrusum,
abditum, Dubiumque an essem, sceleris infandi reum Deus peregit. Senec. Theb.
evil disposition that is Peccatum cum homine nascitur. Olympius apud Aug. ad.
Iul. l. 1. c. 3.
bred and borne with us. For who can in equity deny the Creator that power
over the creature, that the creature has over its fellow creature.

difficult a matter to make a man good. Wisd. 13.1. (...). Menard.
Man is evil by nature; he is bred and borne such. And that (we say) that is
bred in the bone, will not out of the flesh. Wisd. 12.10. (...) Aristot. ethic.
l. 2. c. 1. Quae a natura sunt, aliter se habere non possunt. Idemque ethic.
magn. l. 2. c. 6. (...). Hippocrat. de leg. med. Custode and cura natura
potentior omni. Naturam expellas furca licet vsque recurret. Horat. epist. 10.
l. 1.
Those things that are natural cannot easily be altered. You may tie or mousle
a wolf, so that he cannot prey or bite; or you may beat him so bound, till he
be not able to stir; but (...). Pindar. Olymp. 11. -natura recurret Ad mores
fixa and mutari nescia. Horat. satyr.
you shall never be able to beat his woluish nature out of him. But sin it
is natural to us, and cannot therefore be removed, but by a supernatural
power. As Nemo bonus, qui non ex malo bonus. Aug. in Prosp. sint. 155. Ad
neminem ante bona men's venit, quam mala: omnes praeoccupati sumus. Sen. ep. 51.
and 76.
no man is good, but of bad made good; so no man can but (...). Pindar. Olymp.
9. Bonus vir sine Deo non est. Sen. ep. 41. Nulla fine Deo men's bona est. Idem
ep. 73.
by a divine power of bad be made good. Sin cannot be wrought out of us by
any means, but those that God himself has sanctified and set apart for that
purpose, and by his gracious blessing accompanying the use of them.

3. To admonish parents of their duty concerning children; to begin as soon
as they can with them, and as they are capable of ought, to use the good means
by God himself prescribed for the working of this inbred naughtiness out of
them. Be as careful for your children in regard of their souls, as you are
wont to be Vt corpora ad quosdam membrerant flexus formari nisi tenera non
poffunt: sic animos quoque ad plaeraque duriores robur ipsum facit. Quintil.
insti^. l. 1. c. 1. In cunctis fererebus citius assuescit omne quod tenerum
est. Pelag. ad Demetr.
for their bodies. If ought grow awrie there, you are forward enough to be
tampering about them, seeking help, and using means for them, while they age
yet young, and their bones gristly and Vt corpora ad quosdam membrerant flexus
formari nisi tenera non poffunt: sic animos quoque ad plaeraque duriores robur
ipsum facit. Quintil. insti^. l. 1. c. 1. In cunctis fererebus citius assuescit
omne quod tenerum est. Pelag. ad Demetr.
tender, before the Cerea flicti. Horat. art. (...). Plut. paedag. -argilla
qu^duis imitaberis (...)* Horat. 1. (...). 2.
joints be knit, and the bones grown stiff, that may make it the more
incurable. Oh be as wise and as provident for them in regard of their souls.
Since you are informed that they generally grow awrie by nature, use with all
speed; and all diligence, all good means to remove this enormitie, and to set
them right and strait as soon as possibly may be, before that nature and
custom (a (...). Aristot. thet. l. 1. c. 11. Videcund. s^p. ethic. magn. l. ^.
c. 6. consuetudo altera natura. Cic. fin. l. 5.
second nature) concurring, make Ierem. 13.23. (...). Dinarch. adu. Aristogit.
Dum feruitur libidini facta est consuetudo; and dum consuetudini non
resistitur, facta est necessitas. Aug. confess. l. 8. c. 5. Natura enim and
consaetudo vobustissimam faciunt and inuictissimam cupi ditatem. Idem ad
Simplic. l. 1. q. 1. Inueterata in nobis malorum omnium labe, aliter iam non
vitiosi esse non possumus, nisi vt omnino non simus. Saluian. de prouid. l. 6.
Longo quod vsu in peius vsque induruit, Mult^facilius fregeris, quam flexeris.
Bu^^an. Bapt.
the cure at least the more difficult, if not the evil irrecouerable.

original corruption further actual transgression. 1 Pet. 4.4.
It is sufficient (says the Apostle) that we spent the former time of our
ignorance in the lusts of the flesh, etc. So it was sufficient, yea and more
than sufficient for us, that we brought into the world with us that inbred
naughtiness, for which God might justly then have destroyed us. And if
therefore Romans 2.4.
concerning the (...).
goodness and long suffering of God, who has hitherto borne with us, and in
much mercy forborne us, we shall still wilfully run on in the practice of
sin, and so Deuteronomy. 20.19. (...) Aristat. Ethic. l. 7. c. 2. Quod Galen. sic
extulit, (...); Quod malim, quam (...) cum Erasm. chil. 2. cent. 1. adag. 8.
Nam and Aristot. (...).
add drunkenness to thirst; we shall but (...). Romans 2.5. Sicut mittentes
pecuniam in gazophylacium, quod vbi tam impletar confringitur, Stella in Luc.
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and make our judgment at length
the more intolerable.

The other General point, that from the death of children we observe, is,
Point 2. General.
that Death is ever at our doors.

Mors vbique nos expectat. Aug. de spir. and anim. c. 51. Erras, si in
nauigatione tantum existimes, minimum esse qua a m^rte vita diducitur. In omni
loco aeque tenue interuallum est. Non vbique se mors tam prope ostendit; vbique
tam prope est. Sen. ep. 49. Quod enim tempus morti exemptum est? A quo prope
non est, parata omnibius locis, omnibus momentis? Idem ep. 30. Mors vbique
praesto est: occurrit vndique. Idem not. quaest. l. 6. c. 2.
It lies in wait for us not in our fields, or our streets, or our shops, or
our beds only, but in our cradles to, in our swathing-bands, in the
childe-bed, in the childe-birth. Quomodo Sen. ep. 122. Nullum animal sine metu
mortis in vitam predit.
None come into life, but by peril of death. Death is near at hand with us,
Senibus mors in ianuis, adolescentibus in insidijs est. Bern. de conuers. c.
14. Et sub eodem pueritia fato est. Fuscus Sen. suasor. 2.
not in our old age, or our decaying time only, but in our man's estate also,
in our riper years, in our youth, in our childe-hood, in our infancy it
self. How many are carried Ab vtero ad vrnam. Job 10.19. and 3.11. -protinus
quosdom editos N^x occupauit, and nouae luci^ abstulit. Sen. Theb. In ipso
saepe lucis exordio mors nascentem sequitur. Hieron. ad Paul. Concord.
from the womb to the tomb, (as Job speaks) from birth immediately to
burial? yea, how many die Eccles. 6.3. Psalm. 58.8. Job. 3.16. -aliquis intra
viscera Materna letum praecocis fati tulit. Sen. Theb. Ita necessaria
crudelitate in vtero trucidatur infans, matricida, ni moriturus. Tertull. de
anim.
in the womb? how many perish unborn, before ever they come to light, ere
they know what life means, or Dubium an essem. Sen. Theb.
we know that they live. That young go as well as old, and children die as
well as others, we have as well a visible as a vocal sermon preaching it to us
at this present.

That it is so therefore, it is of it self evident, and daily experience is a
sufficient proof of it. The reason why it is so, is no less apparent.

For, to pass by that general reason from the former point, that therefore
Children also are subject to death, because they are not free from sin;
Reason general.


1. There is no certain stint, term, or lease of life. Psalm. 31.15.
Our times are in Gods hands. As for our Leuit. 25.23 Deus solus proprietarius
est: homines ad placitum coloni. St. Iun. vindic. l. 1. Aduenae nascendo,
incolae viuendo, quia migrare compelluntur moriendo. Aug. in Leuit. q. 91.
lands, so for our Vita da^a est vtenda, data est -- Mutua, nec certo
perso^uenda die. Pedo ad Liu.
lives we are but Gods tenants at will. And he may turn our souls out of
these 2 Cor. 5.1.
mud-walled cotages of our bodies, when he will. Prou. 20.27.
The (...)
breath of man (says Solomon) is as (...)
a candle of Gods lighting. And as we do with our lights, so does God with
our lives: we light candles, and put them out again as we list: some we do
out as soon as they begin but to burn; some we let alone, till the wax or
tallow be half wasted; some till week and wax all be spent. So does God with
us; he sets our Vita enim lucu vsura dicitur, Job 3.20. Mers nocti fimilis
perhibetur. Nobi^ cum semel ^xcidi^ breuis lux, Nox est perpetua vna dormienda.
Catul. epigr. 5.
life up as a light, and when he sees good, he does it out again, with some
sooner, with some later, but with each one when himself will.

bonds that tie soul and body together, are no stronger, if not rather more
tender, in children, than in others of riper years. Esai. 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.24.
All flesh is as grass. But children are as flowers, or blossoms, more tender
usually than any other part of the plant: The Esai. 40.7, 8. Psalm. 103.15, 16.
Job 14.2.
flower sooner fades, than the herb it self does: the blossom is sooner
blasted and blown away, that the fruit that follows it, is wont to be, when
it is once knit. Yea, to hold to our former resemblance; a candle is sooner and
more easily blown out again, when it is but new lighted, than when it has
burnt awhile. And with less difficulty is this light of life puffed out in
those, whom it is but newly, and scarce thoroughly yet, kindled in.

The Use whereof may be,

folly, that presume of long life, in regard of health and youth. They are but
young yet, and therefore they may live long and see many a good day. And they
are healthie and strong, and may therefore hold out as well as others, as long
as any. Yea, but there is none of those that thus say or think, so young, but
they have seen many younger go; none so strong, but that they may have seen
as strong, if not stronger, go than themselves. Psalm. 90.4, 5, 6. Vno die
totam hominis vitam conclusit. Philip. in Job 1. Instar totius vitae dies est.
Sen. Epist. 61. Vide Cic. Tuscul. l. 1. cum Ephemero bestiola hominem
committentem.
Man's life is as a day. And as we see that days are not all of one length;
there are Summer, and there are Winter days; some longer, some shorter; some
of more, some of fewer hours: So is there no less variety in the length and
size of men's lives, according to that time that God has pleased to allot each.
But herein again there is great difference between this natural day and the
day of man's life; that Nihil interest inter diem and seculu^. Sen. ep. 100.
Nihil enim habet longissimi temporis spatiu^, quod non in vno die inuenis,
lucem and nocte, and alternas mundi vices: plura, non alia facit ista nox,
alias contractior, alias productior, Idem ep. 12.
the natural day, be it never so short, it has a morning, a noone, an
afternoon and an evening; whereas the day of our life may have a morning, and
no noone, or a noone and no afternoon. Amos 8.9.
The Sun (as the Prophet speaks in another sense) may set with us at noone
day. We may be suddenly snatched away Job 15.33. and 21.23.
in the flower of our youth, in the prime of our age, in the height of our
health, in the chief of our strength. Yea, the Psalm. 129.6. Solstitialis velut
herba solet, Oftentatus raptusque. simul. Auson. profess. Allusit ad illud
Plaut. Pseud. 1.1. Quasi solstitialis herba paulisper fui; Repent exortus sum,
repentino occidi. Et ad illud Virg. Aen. 6. Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata,
nec vltra Esse sinent.
Sun may set with us, so soon as it is up; it may but peer out, and
twinckle awhile with a twy-light, and in the twinkling of an eye instantly go
down again. It is a vain thing therefore, for any in regard of youth, to
presume of long life, when as length of life no way depends upon youth, and
we see young go as well, yea as often as old do.

death is ever at our doors? Then it stands us in hand to live ever in
expectation of it. Mors te vbique expectat: and tu igitur, si sapis, eam vbique
expectabis. Aug. de spir. and anim. c. 51. Bern. medit. c. 3. and Ocul. moral.
c. 7. Incertu^ est, quo te loco mors expectet: Itaque tu illam omni loco
expecta. Sen. ep. 26.
Does death (says one) he every where in wait for thee? then thou also, if
thou be wise, wile be prepared always for it. Say thou as blessed Job
says, and do as he (no doubt) also did; Job 14.14.
All the days (says he) of mine appointed time here, I will wait till my
change come, that is, till the time come of my decease and departure hence. Nor
let the young man think that this lesson is for old men only. No: Eccles.
12.1.
Remember thy Maker (says Solomon) in the days of thy youth. Mors tam iuueni
ante oculos debet esse quam seni. Non enim citamur ex censu. Sen. ep. 12. Eata
seriem non servant. Jbid. 62.
It stands young men upon as well as old, to prepare for death, because youth
as well as old age is subject to death. And though there may be affirmative,
yet there are no negative signs of it. Of doomes-day there are both; of thy
deaths day but the one only. Of the general day of doom, there are signs
both affirmative, such Matthew. 24.32, 33. Luke 21.30, 31.
as show that it approaches and draws near; and negative, such as show that
it shall not be as yet, because they must go before it, and it shall not come
therefore, before they be fulfilled, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
was the revelation of the man of sin, and is yet Romans 11.25, 26, 31.
the Conversion of the Jewish Nation. But of the particular day of any man's
death, howsoever there may be signs affirmative, such as show the neerenesse
of it, as old age, decay of nature, some diseases, and the like; yet there is
no negative signs of it ordinarily, (howsoever Luke 2.26.
Simeon and Matthew. 16.28.
some others have had some extraordinarily given them) such as may show that as
yet it shall not be. A man cannot say, I am young, and therefore I shall not
die yet; for Mixta senum ac inuenum densantur funera, nullum saeuacaput
Proserpina fugit. Hor. carm. 1.28.
he may be taken away in his youth. A man cannot say, I am strong, and
therefore I shall not die yet: for with the sudden stroke of an apoplexy may
he be struck down Job 21.23.
in his chief strength. A man cannot say, I am healthie, and therefore I shall
not die yet: For Nunquid vt homo concidat res magni molimenti est? etc. Sen. ad
Marc. c. 11. Nihil tam exiguum est, quod no^ in pernicie^ generis humani satis
valeat. Idem qu. not. l. 6. c. 2.
there needs no long sickness, yea no sickness at all, to deliver a man up to
death. As a man may die well before he be old, so may he well die also, and
yet never be sick. Since that death therefore lies in wait for us, as well in
youth as in age, it behooves young as well as old to be prepared for it.

3. Are young children also subject to death? Let those whom God has blessed
with children then, children, while they are but young yet, away from them,
they may with the more comfort part with them, when they may be able to say of
them, as it is said Verse. 13.
of the child spoken of in my Text, As young as they were, yet there were good
things in them; some seeds and sparks of grace began to appear in them. We
are wont to be troubled, when God takes them away from us, if we have not
been so careful as we think we should have been, in something concerning
the health of their bodies: But we have more cause to be troubled, when our
hearts shall tell us, that we have been negligent and retchlesse about them,
in such things as concerned the state and welfare of their souls.

4. Are our children thus subject to death, and we know not how soon they may
be taken away from us? Then as the Apostle speaks in the like case, 1 Cor.
7.29. Nostros sic habere, sic amare debemus, tanquam nihil nobis de
perpetuitate, in o nihil de diuturnitate i^ sorum promissum sit. Sen. ad Marc.
c. 10.
Let those that have children be as if they had them not. Not that Parents
should not love and affect their children: they are Tit. 2.4. (...).
commanded so to do: and they are worse, I say not, than heathen, but than
(...). Plut. de amor. prol.
bruit beasts, that do otherwise: and it is well made a note therefore of men
(...). Romans 1.28.
given up to a reprobate mind, and cast behind even the government of nature,
as well as the guidance of grace, to be (...). Romans 1.30.
deuoid of natural affection. But that they should not so set and fasten their
affections upon them, that they should be unwilling Tulisti, quia tuus erat:
gratias ago, quod dedisti; non obmurmuro, quoniam abstulisti. Bern. de temp.
110.
to part from them, when God shall please to call for them, Josh. 24.3, 4.
Psalm. 127.3. Abstulit; sed dedit. Sen. ep. 63. Non moeremus, quod talem
amifimus; sed gratias agimus, quod habuimus. Hieron. epitaph. Paul.
from whom formerly they received them, and who has therefore best right and
title to them. So therefore must thou labor to have thy children, and endeavor
to stand so affected in regard of them, that if God should call for thine
Isaak, thy darling from thee, ( Genesis 22.1.
Take thine only son, says he, Isaak, thy Son that thou love:) thou
may be willing to offer him to God with thine own hands. If he call for one
of many, as Anytus.
he of Athens, when Alcibiades a young gallant came reuelling into his house,
as he sat with some strangers at supper, and took away the one half of his
plate; and his guests stormed and took on at it; Vise Plut. in Alcib. and in
Erotic. and Athen. dipnosop. lib. 12.
he told them, he had dealt kindly that he less them the other hal^^^, that
(...).
he took not all, when all was his; so repine not thou, for that that is gone,
but be thankful to God, for those that be left; he that takes one, might as
well, if he would, have took all, and it is his mercy if he leave thee any.
Yea; labor to be like Job, to be affected as he was. When God took not one
of them, but Percussus subita orbitate filio^^m, vt quos sigillatim susceperat,
simul perderet; tanquam eorum numerositas, non vnde foelicitas ernaretur,
extiterit, sed vnde calamitas augereti^^. Hugo Vict. de patient. c. 11.
all his children at once from him, Job 1.21.
The Lord (says he) has given; and the Lord has taken: Now blessed be his
name. He parts with them as one would do with a nurse child, that the
parents of it had sent for home again. And indeed (to speak as the truth is)
we are but as foster fathers and nursing mothers to those children that God
blesses us here with; their true Matthew. 23.9. (...). lib. 3.
Father indeed is above in Heaven. So therefore should we esteem of them, as
of children by God put to nurse to us; whom therefore, when he shall see good to
call for them home from us, we should be as willing to return to him, as we
would a nurse child, though we loved it as our own, to the parents of it,
when they should send for it; the rather, knowing that they shall be, and do
better with him, than they have done, or can do with us.

And thus much for the two general points that from hence we observe: Points
Special.


We pass now to the special: which shall be these two, that The good go
often before the bad, and that, The good die oft-times for the bad.

For the former, Point 1. Special
howsoever we might hence observe, that The good go as well as the bad. Yet
passing by that for the present, as having handled it on the like occasion See,
Abraham's Decease on Genes. 25.8.
elsewhere, the point that I purpose now to insist on shall be this, that Point
2. Special.
The good go often before the bad; die not only as well as they, but they die
often even before them. So the Prophet tells us, that Esai. 57.1.
The righteous perish, and good men are taken away: when the wicked meanewhile
are left behind still. And the Psalmist complains, that the godly were taken
away so fast, that there was scarce one good man left. Psalm. 12.1.
Help Lord, (says he) for there is not a godly man left, the faithful are
failed from among the children of men. But there is 1 Job. 5.19.
a world of wicked ones left still. Psalm. 12.8.
The wicked (says he) walk on every side. Here we see (to go no further)
Ieroboams good son taken away, when his ungodly father, Reasons 2.
and his wicked brethren, with the rest of that profane and irreligious family
still remain.

judgment, and mercy.

judgment sometime. For 1 Pet. 4.17.
Judgment begins at Gods house. Ier. 25.17, 28, 29.
The cup of Gods wrath is sent first to Jerusalem: she begins to the rest of
it. 1 Cor. 11.30.
The mortality at Corinth seized upon the Believers there for their abuse of
the Sacrament, s^^it some of them, and swepe away other some of them, when many
an Infidel escaped, and went scot-free the whiles. John 25.^. Planta ferax
falcem patiturque petitque frequ^entem, Cultoris (...) recisa mamu. Dum rigid^
r^bus inf^lix intalla mucrone Permanet, hibernis esca futura focis. Non pacitur
impi^s, (...) farmentis (...) ad (...): non (...) ad proficiendem purgationem.
Aug. ad Faust. l. 22. c. 21.
The fruit tree is often pared, and pruned, and trimmed* while the brier stands
by it unstirred and untouched, till it come at length to be f^^^od at once for
the fire. The stormy shower and rain lights first on the high bills, and
(...) 11.35.
having washed them, then runs down to the vale, and there Zach. 9.1.
setleth with all the filth in the bottom.

2. In mercy, (though in that judgment also there mercy; yea, it is not
Habb. 2.3.
mixed only with mercy, but even the very judgment it self also is a
mercy, because 1 Cor. 11.32.
it preuenteth a greater mischief; but this in mere mercy without admixtion
of wrath,) when (as the Prophet says) Esai. 57.1.
they are taken away from the evil to come. So was it foretold Josias that he
should be taken away, 2 King. 22.20.
that he might not see the evil that should befall that place and his people.
And so of this child, that Verse. 12-16.
he should die beforehand, that he might not see and suffer in those fearful
judgments that should betide his Fathers house and stock after his decease.
God does in this kind, as we would our selves in the like case, had we
children either at nurse or at school in some place, where some trouble were
like shortly to be; and so dangerous being and abiding there for them: For
example, had any of you had a child at Breda, abiding there to learn the
language, or for some other such end, and should have heard that Spinola had an
intent and purpose to come and sit down with all his forces, as he did also,
before it; what course would thou have taken in this case; but in all haste
to send away for thy son, and to cause him to come home to thee, where he
might be in better safety? (...); Plut. ad Apollon.
In like manner does God with his that he has at nurse or at school here,
when trouble and danger is toward those places where they make their abode, he
calls for them away, he takes them home to himself, where they are sure to
be safe, far from touch or view of evil.

Yea but, Question.
how does God (may some say) then make good Exodus 20.1^. Deuteronomy. 5.^^. Ephesians.
6.^^.
his promise of long life, made to good and obedient children? such as we need
not doubt but that this son of Ierobeams was; for where there is goodness to
God, there cannot but be a care of all good duty and due respect to those that
are as Itaque mandatu^ hoc (...) appellat Philo de decalog. and tabulae came
pri^r^ dicat.
in Gods room, and whom Matthew. 16.4.
God has enjoined honor to be given unto.

To this I answer;

long life is there promised so far forth as it may be a benefit and a
blessing. Now howsoever it may be a blessing to live long, to Psalm. 128.5, 6.
see Jerusalem in prosperity, and peace upon Israel: yet to live long, 1 Samuel
2.32.
to see the enemy in the gates of our people, to see Zech. 14.21.
the Canaanite in Gods house, Psalm. 74.4.
Gods adversaries roaring in the midst of his Sanctuary, and their ensigns
in way of triumph set up in his Temple: so to live long, I say, might be no
benefit at all, might be a curse rather than a blessing: because Sic diu
viuere, est diu torqueri. Aug. de temp. 113.
so to live long, were but to live long in misery, so to live long, were
rather (...). Plato apud Plut. de prouid.
to be long a dying, than to live long: For how can a man be said truly
Hincillud, Exigua pars est vitae, quam nos viuimus. Caeterum omne spatium non
vita sed tempus est. Sen. de breu. vit. c. 2. Potest fieri, imo saepe fit, vt
qui diu vixcrit, parum vixerit. Idem ep. 49. In longissima vita minimum est
quod viuitur. Idem ep. 98. Quem saeuaden, pestai a portu exceptum huc and illuc
tulit, (...) in orbem egil, non ille multum ^auigau^, sed mult^m (...) est,
Idem de (...) 8. Non illediu vixit, sed diu fuit. Ibid. Ita de disco^di
con^ugio ^hemis^ de^ anima. (...).
to live then, Genesis 27.46. Job. 7.25.
no comfort of his life?

2. God in such cases makes his word good, in that in stead of a less good,
he gives a better a greater. To use Chrysostomes comparison: Chrysostom.
alicubi. sed locus iam non fuccurrit.
Thou come to a Goldsmiths or a Ieweller, that has among other stones on
his stall, a sorry Achate, and a rich Adamant; thou cheapenest, and bargainest
with him for the Achate, and in stead of the Achate he delivers thee the
Adamant; would thou say, he did thee wrong? Or suppose thou come to a
great landed man, and dealest with him for some term of years in a farm; and
when the deeds come to be drawn, he makes over to thee the fee-simple of a
manor. Even so deals the Lord here. Psalm. 21.4.
The King (says he) asked life of thee, and thou gave him long life, even
for ever and ever. He promises long life, and for that lease of life of some
few years continuance, he bestows a perpetuity; in stead of a miserable
long life here, he gives a blessed and incorruptible eternal life elsewhere.
He makes them payment (says Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 7.
Chrysostom) in stead of (...).
black moneys in a strange Country, in (...).
good gold at home in their own.

Now the consideration hereof may

1. Teach and admonish us, to suspend our censures justify our selves in
regard of those that we survive in times of mortality, or that perish at any
time when we escape. They may go for the better, and we be reserved for worse
matters, to see and suffer more misery which they are taken away from. Malac.
3.17.
These shall be my (...) idquod in thesaur l^ praecipuum and primariu^ habetur.
jewels (says God by Malachy) in the day that I do this. God does, as men in
the like cases. If their houses be on fire, or in danger of fiering, their
jewels and their treasure is that that they have most care of, and that in the
first place therefore they will endeavor to remove: so does God with his, that
are his jewels and his treasure, (for so Exodus 19.^. Deuteronomy 7.6. and 14.^. and
26.18.
he terms them, and so he esteems them) when the fire of his wrath is
seized, or ready to seize on the places they abide in, he snatcheth them
thence, and remoueth them to places of better security. And what place more
secure than Heaven, his own house? Or where can they be safer than with
himself?

comfort parents, in regard of their children that God takes away from them,
especially having seen signs of grace and goodness in them, such as their
tender age and few years may afford: that it is no argument of Gods hatred, no
nor of his anger always, to be soon taken away. (...). Menand. Plut. ad
Apollon. (...). Dion. Prus. orat. 28. (...). Ibid. 29. Dij coeles^es quibusdam
pi^ssimis mortem, tanquam summis praemium persoluerunt. Julian. apud Ammian. l.
25.
They go soonest often, whom he best loves. Those children that their parents
most affect, though they put out from them upon necessary occasions, yet they
desire as soon as may be to have home to them again; especially if they be
not like to do so well where they are, or if some sickness and mortality
begin to reign in those parts. Nor may they doubt, being good children, but
that the change shall be with them for the better: he that has Exodus 20.12.
promised them long life, will make his word good to them with advantage. They
shall have (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 114.
true life indeed for that, which in comparison of it, is (...). Eur^p. (...).
Idem apud Plut. ad Apollon. Qualis est enim vita haec infulix, misera, qua
semper ad non esse, tendit. Chrysostom. in. Psalm. 143.2.
not worthy the name of life; and for this transitarie and temporal, that
everlasting and eternal. Besides that, they know not what a mercy it may be
to them, that they are so soon taken, and what misery they might have lived
either to fee or to suffer. That which, as the times are, considering how the
aduers^rie gets ground daily on Gods inheritance; and how the scourge has
run over a great part of Gods portion; and that we know not how soon it may
pass over unto us to; may serve much to mitigate the grief that parents are
naturally affected with for the loss of their little ones; since that they
know not (...). Plut. ad Apoll. O ignaros malorum suoru^, quibus non mors vt
optimum inuentum naturae laudatur? quae sieve faelicitatem includit, sieve
calamitatem repellit, sieve satiotatem aut lassitudinem senis terminat, sieve
iuuenile aeuu^, dum melio^a sperantur, in flore de ducit, sieve pueritiam ante
duriores casus reuccal, omnibus finis, multis remedium, quibusdam votum, de
nullis melius merita, quam de his, ad quos venit antequam inuocarctur. Senec.
ad Marc. c. 20. Cogita quantum boni^pportuna mors habeat, quam multis diutius
vixisse nocuerit. Ibid.
what evils their children are taken away from, or what they themselves may
live to see, which would be far Matthew. 24.19.
heavier unto them for such hanging upon them, than they would be for
themselves otherwise. Howsoever, they may assure themselves, that their
children gone to God, are In meliorem emittitur vitam, tranquillius tutiusque
inter diuina mansurus. Sen. ep. 71.
safer and better with him, than they either were, or ever could have been
with themselves here.

And thus much for the former special point, to wit, that The good go often
before the bad.

We pass now to the latter of them, which (as before you heard) is, that The
good go often times for the bad. Point 2. special.
And (if you please) yet a little more generally one way, though more specially
another; that The Child suffers often for the Fathers offense.

Let them be, whether you will, either two distinct points, or two several
branches of one and the same point: since that both of them alike arise from my
Text, and there is in it a pregnant example of either.

For the former of them, Point 3. special.
that The good go for the bad. We have a precedent of it in that good King
Jesus, ^ King. 23.25, 26, 27, 29.
who was cut off, and his life shortened for the sins of his people, and the
remainder of Manasses his sins rife still among them: as also in this good
Child taken away for the sins of Jeroboam.

Now the reason why the godly go thus for the wicked, is

perish with and among them, when some heavy judgment is coming in upon
them. As Genesis 19.12, 13, 15, 16, 29. 2 Pet. 2.6, 7, 9.
God sent his Angels to fetch Lot and his out of Sodom, when Sodom was to be
destroyed with fire and brimstone from Heaven, that they might not be (...) up
with the inhabitants of it: Genesis 6.13. and 7.1, 4.
He caused Noa to go into the Arc, as it were out of the world, when he was
determined to drown the world with a general deluge, that he might not with
the rest miscarry: So took he here Ieroboams son out of the way, 1 King.
14.^1. and 15.29, 30.
that he might not be either eaten with dogs, or devoured with the fowls, as
the residue of that impious house and race were.

preserve those from perishing, whom God is determined to destroy. It is said
of Moses, that Psalm. 106.23.
he stood in the gap, to keep out Gods wrath, from breaking in upon his
people, when God was minded to destroy them. And of Phineaz, that Psalm. 106.20,
30.
when the plague had made a breach in upon them, he was a means to stay it
from further proceeding. God therefore when he is res^lu^d, to proceed in
judgment against a people, he takes those away from them, that may intercede
for them, that by their Genesis 18.31, 32. Ier. 5.1. Ezekiel. 14.14, 16, 20.
presence or Ier. 7.16. and 11.14. and 15.1.
prayers, may stay his hand, as Moses, ( Exodus 32.10. Multum Moisi permittit
creator omnium; and feriendi licentiam quarit a Mose qui Moseui fecit. Bern. de
temp. 83. Sine me, ait, vt ille non sineret, Tertull. ad. Marc. l. 2.
Let me alone, says God to him, that I may destroy this people) and as Lot, (
Genesis 19.21.
I can do nothing, says he, as long as thou art here) that may turn away
the storm, as he did Genesis 19.20, 21.
from Zoar, that had else as well as Genesis 19.24. Amos 4.11.
Sodom, Gomorrha, Deuteronomy. 29.23. Hosh. 11.8.
Adamah, and Zeboim been destroyed; that may stand in the gap, when it is
breaking in, or make the breach up again, when it is broken in, and preserve
from perishing either in whole or in part. God, he does, as men are wont to
do with those they desire to destroy. He that would set upon a strong man,
(says out Savior) will Matthew. 12.29. Luke 11.22.
first, if he can, disarme him. They that would conquer a country, if they can
seize upon their munition, will not fail to make themselves first masters of
that; for they know then, they shall have no power to resist. Now the godly,
they are the munition, the strength of a state; i. vis and robur Israelis. Iun.
in not.
the chariots and horse of Israel; says 2 King. 2.12.
Elizaeus of Elias, and King 2 King. 13.14.
Ioas of Elizaeus. These therefore God takes away, and so disarmeth a state,
when he is bent to destroy it, that so his wrath may find no resistance. And
there be but any one good in Ieroboams house, go he must: Gods sentence
against it cannot be executed, till he be taken out of it.

The Use whereof may be,

1. To inform us, what we may justly fear and expect, when God picketh out
the good, and takes many of them away. It is a sign some fearful evil is
toward, where he so does. It is a presage of war toward, either with or in
a country, when men on all hands, such especially as are acquainted with
state-affaires, seek to get home with all expedition, whatsoever goods or
wares they have in those parts, and much more their friends and children, if
they have any resiant there. And it is a forewarning of little good toward a
place, where God does the like with those that be his dear ones, his darlings.

Besides that Somen sanctum statumen lerrae. Esai. 6.13.
The holy seed (says Esaias) vpholdeth the land. And, Job. 22.30.
The innocent (says Eliphaz) preserves the Island: (as Ita Verse. Geneu. post
David. Kimchi.
some read it:) or (as Ita Verse. Regia post Leon. Iud.
others) The Island of the innocent shall he deliver: (that is, God will save
it for his sake:) or (as others again, whom I should choose to go with, no
less agreeably to our purpose:) Ita post R. Solomon. and Menach. Elias in
Thish. Mercer. and Iun.
He shall save him, that is not guiltless himself; and even such shall be
delivered for the purity of thy hands: that is, some one good man, such as
Ezekiel. 14.14, 16.
Job was, may be a means to save and deliver a whole city of men, otherwise
guilty and ready for their sin to be destroyed. But to return again to that
of Esai: there seems Vise Iun. and Piscat. verse. and annot.
an allusion in it to 1 Chronicles. 26.16, 18. 1 King. 10.5. 2 Chronicles. 9.11.
a bank or a causey mentioned in the story, that went from the Kings house to
the Temple, and was borne up with trees planted on either side of it. Which
trees (says the Prophet) as they kept up the causey, so the holy and godly in
a land support and hold up the state. And as those trees, if they were removed,
the bank or causey would soon come down: so that holy seed, if it be once
taken away, that whole land or state is likely to come shortly after to ruin.
As it was a sign therefore, that Sampson meant to bring down the house upon
the heads of the Philistines, when Judge. 16.26, 29, 30.
he pulled down the pillars that bare up the roof of it. So it is a shrewd
sign, that God is about to ruin a state, when he plucketh away those that are
the shores and the props of it. As it is an argument of destruction toward,
when Esai. 3.2, 3. (...). Pausan. in Lacon.
he takes away the mighty, the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, the
prudent and the ancient, the Captain or Commander, the honorable and the
Counselor, the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator: So it is no less,
(if not much more) an argument of the like, (...). Plaut. apud Strigel. in 2
Reg. 23.
when he takes away the good and godly, the righteous and religious. Since the
one are the temporal, the other the spiritual stays of a state: the one
support it against the power and policy of man, the other protect wrath and
judgments of God.

2. This considered, may teach us, what cause we have to pray earnestly for the
life and continuance of good and godly men among us: and how just cause of
grief and sorrow is given us, when it seems good to God to take any such
from us. There goes a prop or shore of our state away, when any such goes.
How would we be grieved, if we should have news brought of some one of the
Kings ships lost or cast away at sea? and that not without cause: for our
shipping is the strength of our state; they are (as we term them) our (...).
Oraculum Atheniensibus datu^; quod ita interpretatus est Themistocles. Herodot.
l. 7. Plut. in Themist. Aelian. l. 12. c. 43. Galen. exhort. ad art Clem.
Strom. l. 5. Eusebius. praepar. l. 5. c. 24. Suid.
wooden walls. And no less cause have we to mourn, when we lose a good man;
(such an one especially as is in eminent place with us,) since that such are
indeed, (as he said sometime of his warlike Lycurgus interrogatus cur muris
vrbem non cinxisset, (...) Plut. apophth. Vide eund. sympos. l. 2. c. 5. and
Epictet. apud Stob. c. 5. Sed and Agesilaus quaerenti (...). ciues armatos
ost^ndens, (...) quod and idem de inuenibus Spartanis Antalcidas: adiecitque,
(...). Plut. ibid. Vide Plaut. Pers. 4.4.
citizens) the best walls and bulwarks of our state.

Point 4. special.
But leave we this, and pass on to the last Branch, which is, that Children
suffer often for their Parents: Children, I say, as well good as bad, suffer
ofttimes at Gods hand for their Parents offenses: God punishes the one
ofttimes in the other. So punished he Exodus 4.22, 23. and 13.29.
Pharao by the death of his firstborn, for his obstinate refusal to dismiss
his people. So he punished 2 Samuel 12.14.
David, by the decease of the child begotten in adultery, for that enormious
act of his. And so Jeroboam here 1 King. 13.33. and 14.1, 17.
for his idolatry, by the loss of a son, that no doubt to him was very
dear. Yea, it is that that God threatens, as well Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 5.9.
in the sanction of the second precept, as often also Exodus 34.7. Number. 14.18.
Ier. 32.18. (...). Eurip. apud Plut. de prouid.
elsewhere, that he will visit, that is, punish the iniquity of parents upon
their posterity, and that not unto one or two alone, but even to three or
four descents. So not Genesis 9.22, 24, 25.
Canaan only was cursed for his Father Chams offense; and Josh 7.1, 24, 25.
all Achans family destroyed for his fault; but 2 King. 5.27.
the leprosy of Naaman for Giezies falsehood stuck by him and his posterity
so long as any of them lasted.

The reason of this course that God takes ofttimes in punishing of the
transgressions of parents by pains inflicted upon their children is,

Children are Liberi inter, parentum suorum bona numerantur. Alibus. dicaeolog.
l. 1. c. 30. Sunt res parentum, and in eis etiam parents puniuntur. Tho. sum.
p. 2^.2^. q. 108. a. 4. ad. 3.
part of their parents possessions. It is reported of a Persian Emperor,
Artaxerxes the Long-handed, that (...). Plut. apophth. and Artaxerx. Hinc Dio
Prus. orat. 37. (...).
for such faults of his Nobles and Chieftaines, as their hair had wont to be
pulled, their head-tire or turbants should be openly so used, and for such
offenses as their bodies had wont to be beaten, their robes should publicly be
scourged; which was deemed to them no small disgrace. And in like manner (says
Theodoret, speaking of the plague of leprosy in men's houses and garments) does
God deal with men: (...). Theodoret. in Leuit. quaest. 18.
when they offend themselves, God punishes them not in their persons always,
but ofttimes in their possessions, in their goods and chattels, in their
worldly estate. And if in their possessions, no marvel if in their children
to, being part of their possessions, as is evident by the commission given and
granted to Satan, concerning power over Jobs possessions, Job 1.12, 18.
which comprehended his children as well as his chattels, as appears by the
execution of it.

2. Yea, children are not part only of their parents but they are Filij membra
parentum esse videntur. Saluian. de prouid. l. 3. Parsqu^e tui latitat corpore
clausa meo. Ovid. epist. 2. ex Phyllidis persona. Liberi sunt quasi vna persona
cum patre. Alihus. l. 1. c. 30. (...). Plut. de prouid.
part (in some sort) of the parents themselves; or Tanquam membra vnius
corporis. Aug. in los. q. 8. and Iun. in Josh. 7.
of one and the same body at least with them. As (...). Justin. nom. orthodox.
quaest. 137.
the Subjects and the Sovereign make jointly one body politic, and (...).
Ibid.
the loss of the subjects therefore is a punishment to the Sovereign: and God
does sometime punish the Sovereign so (witness 2 Samuel 24.10, 15.
David) in the subject. So the Father and the whole family make both as one
body; and evil befalling any of them is a punishment to him, especially
befalling one so near as a child: ( Matthew. 15.22.
Have mercy on me, Lord; says the mother: My daughter is distracted: Ad
seipsam petit adiutorium, quia in filia sua, velut in persona propria
^orquebatur. Simon, Cass. in euang. l. 5. c. 24. Filia malum suum reputat.
Petr. Richard in Euang.
her daughters pains were a punishment to her:) and God does often punish the
father or master so (witness Genesis 20.7, 18.
Abimelech) in his family, and those that be of it. He does (...). Plut. de
prouid. (...). Ibid.
as the Physician that opens a vein in the arm, or (it may be) in the foot
either, for some disease in the head. For so he let Pharao blood in the right
arm, when Exodus 12.29.
he smote his first borne for his fault: so he let 2 Samuel 24.15.
David blood in the feet, that is, (...). Justin. ^rthod. q. 137.
in his subjects, (for they are the Prou. 14.28. (...). Chrysostom. de statuis,
hom. 11. 1 Cor. 12.21.
feet that the Sovereign stands upon) for his offense.

Objection.
But how, may some say, does this stand with Gods justice to punish one for
another. Or how can threatening to punish sin so in posterity, stand with
that which God himself enacteth elsewhere, that Deuteronomy. 24.16.
the child shall not suffer for his fathers offense; or with his answer to the
people, that had gotten up a bad proverb, Ier. 31.29. Ezekiel. 18.2.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge:
thereby meaning that Patres peccant, and filij vapulant. Chald.
Their fathers had sinned, and they suffered: that, Ier. 31.30. Ezekiel. 18.4.
the soul that sins should it self die the death, and Ezekiel. 18.20.
not one suffer for another.

This question has not a little troubled many, both old and new Writers: and
that place in the Law, has very much puzzled many, yea, the most of the
Ancients, Euasions 3.
beside others; which in that regard

Some of them to divert by allegorical interpretations;

Some to avoid by ouer-violent and forced expositions;

Some to salve by strange and needless shifts.

Some of the^ (I say) expound the words allegorically;

Either Peccatores diaboli fi^ij, vnus ex ^^^ero per ordinem persuasionis
generatis hi iu carne pofiti p^^i^ntur, ne in aeternum pereant: pater autem
diabolus non in hoc seculo corripitur, vt in aeternum damnetur. Origin. in
Exodus hom. 8.
of Satan, and his sons, all wicked ones; 1 Cor. 11.32.
God punishes here that they may not be damned with him hereafter, Jude 6.
reserving the Devil their Father to the last day of doom:

Or Quidam ad animam humanam reserunt. Patrem primum vi^iorum incentiuum;
filiu^, vbi peccatum cogitatio concepit; nepose^, vbi ^ecc. opere perpetratur;
pronepote^, vbi in peccato quis gloriatur. Primos ac secundos stimulos Deum non
punire: actumtertium ac quarsum vindicare. Hieron. in Ezech. 18.
of degrees of sin in the soul, making the first of sin the Father; the
consent to sin the son; the act of it the grand child; and obstinacy or
glorying in it the great grandchild: that God spares men often for the first
and second, but Iam. 1.14, 15.
strikes home when sin is come to her height in the two last.

But to frame allegories thus without need or ground, is but Commentatoris
officium est, non quid ipse velit, sod quid sentide ille quem interpretatur,
exponere. Hieron. apolog. 1. de Ioum. Nihil quaerendum in verbis nisi
loquentium voluntas: cui demonstrandae inuigi^are d^bent omnes veridici
narratores and ^narra^o^es. Aug. de consens. Euang. l. 2. c. 46. Litera enim
suauiter excutionda est, non captiuorum m^re acerbe torquenda, donec restituat
quod non accepit. Joan. Sarub. metalog. l. 3. c. 1.
to wrong the Text; Exception.
to pervert the purpose of Gods spirit, and to make God himself speak that,
that he never therein meant, nor intended.

Others take the words literally; but expound them either nothing agreeably, or
even directly contrary Gods spirit in them.

Some not of punishing sins upon such descents, but (...). Theodoret. in
Exodus q. 40. Non est argumentum truculentiae tantis per iram tenere, sed signum
misericordiae poenam differ peccati. Hieron. in Ezec. 18. Idemque Thom. sum.
p. ^a. 2ae. q. 108. a. 4. ad 1. Misericordiae potius quam seueritatis, quod
cousque differt. and Ale^s. p. 3. q. 41. m. 4 a. 1. non inaequalitate iudicij,
vt alij peccent, alij puniantur: sed magnitudine clementiae, dum poenitentem
expectat. etc.
of deferring and putting off the punishment of sin to such a descent, as a
matter not of wrath and judgment, but of mercy rather and patience: which some
of them also in particular apply to the Jewish people; either (...) Aegypto
exeuntes in eremo cecideru^t. Theodoret. in Exo. q. 4^ Genesis 15.16. Exodus 12.41.
and 13.18.
in the first generation punished, after their departure out of Egypt, for all
their idolatries during that whole time committed; Ab Abr. ad David ae^^^ 1^. a
David ad transportationem Babylon. 2^* Concession. ^ transport. ad Christum 3.
inde ad (...) secull 4. ae^^^e ^. captiua fuit gens Iudaica, in 4. eradicata.
Aug. ad Adi^ant. c. 7.
or else (as some other) captiued in the third, and destroyed in the fourth age
of the world.

Concession.
Now howsoever it be true indeed, that God in mercy sometime deferreth judgment
from the Fathers days to the Sons, as he did in 1 King. 21.29.
Ahab. yea and in Jeroboam too; for his stock was not so destroyed as was 1
King. 14.10.
threatened, till 1 King. 15.29.
after his decease: yea he deferreth it, as with Iam. 1.15. Apoc. 2.^^.2^.
particular pesons, so with Genesis 15.16. Matthew. 23.32.38. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16.
whole peoples and states for many descents, till their sins be come to a
certain height. Yet the opposition there Exodus 20.6. Deuteronomy. 5.10. and 7.9. Ier.
3^.18.
of mercy to be showed to thousands on the other side, Exception.
that is, both to them and theirs, shows that the place cannot be so
expounded.

Others understand it of original sin only, deduced from Adam, is, and has
been from time to time for many descents punished in his posterity with
death; and In vtraque sententia diss^milis sensus, P^cantum quippe originale
quia a parentibus trahimus, nisi per gratiam bapt. solu^mur, etiam parentu^
peccata p^rtamus, quia vnum adhuc cum illis sumus. Reddit ergo peccata parentu^
in filios, dum pro culpa parentis ex originali peccato anima polluitur prolis:
Et nursus nou reddit, etc. quia cum ab orig. pecc. per bapt. liberamur, iam non
parentum culpas, sed qua^ ipsi committimus, habemus. Greg. mor. l. 15. c. 21.
which as the Parents fault the child stands charged withal, Psalm. 115.13,
14.
till by the new birth it be dissolved; Deuteronomy. 24. de natis, Exodus 20. de nandum
natis, propter peccatum originale quod ab Adam trabitur, and cuim^rs temp^ralis
redditur, Aug. in Deuteronomy. q. 42.
or at least until it come to have iniquity of it own.

But this will as evil hold as the former: For,

1. Neither is any one ordinarily punished for another original sin, but
for Est enim inherens quiddam proprium ac pecullaro tulque vittam originale,
non imputatio mera peccati anemi, vti delir^nt Pig^^^^ controu. 1. and Catharin
de pec. orig. c. 6. Vide Alex. Ales p. 2. q. 122. m. 2. a. 1.
his own:

2. Nor will the Parum enim solidum, quod Aug. vbi sup. Per numarum seplenarium
(qui 3. and 4. constat) vntuers^m intelligi.
stinting of descents to three or four on the one side, opposed to that Exodus
20.6. Deuteronomy. 7.9.
large extent exposition:

3. Nor is there difference in this kind between good and bad, or the
posterity of either; both alike tainted with original sin, and both alike
liable to temporal death:

4. Nor does it stand with the drift and scope of the place, Exodus ^0.4, 5.
to deter from idolatry an actual for fear of punishments upon posterity:

5. Nor are even the regenerate freed from sustaining such punishments for
their parents offenses;

6. Or the grown and great ones any more infants, howsoever having actual
sins indeed also otherwise of their own.

But the sense and meaning of the place is so plain and evident, that by no
means it can be avoided; and a very pregnant proof it is of the present
point, that children suffer often for their fathers faults.

Nor need we have recourse here for the acquiting Gods justice, or the
reconciling of his doomes, to those shifts and salues, that some other have
here used: as to say,

1. That it was (...). Theodoret. in Exodus q. 40.
threatened indeed, but never executed: God often in such cases is better than his
word: (...). Ibid.
he threatens to terrify, but intends not what he threatens: yea, (...).
Ibid.
that it were impious to take it as intended so, as the threatening seems to
import.

Non sunt van^ mina, dominicae. Polan. in Mal. 1.
Gods threatenings in vain; as Siimpune, vacat Ve. Tertull. ad Marc. l. 2.
they should be, should they never take effect; since that Matthew. 5.18. Ego iam
^lim mihi persuasi in sacri preti^sique eloquij textu nec modicam vacare
particulam. Bern. in. cant. 72.
no jot or tittle of his word is such:

examples, many a one, of the execution hereof; as has formerly been showed:

Esai. 38.1, 5. Ion. 3.4, 10. Ierem. 18.7, 8.
God in mercy sometime revoke his sentences, does he ever threaten ought that
he may not justly inflict.

impious to say, that God intends ought that he threatens: impious rather
it may seem to be, to say that it is impious to auow it.

Or 2. that it was for a time only enacted, Patram delicta ex fili^s exigit:
duritia populi talia remedia, vt velposterit (...) suis prospiclentes legi
diuina obedirent. Tertull. ad Marc. l. 2.
to stiff-necked people by fear of having their posterity punished, but was
Futurum vt post duritiam populi duritia legit edomitam, iustitia iam nou genus,
sed personas iudicaret. Ibid.
afterward reuersed, when they were amended. As if that in Ezech. 18.4.
Ezechiel were a reuocation of the former.

For 1. neither are the sanctions of the Law Moral, Law it self, Psalm.
119.89. Matthew. 5.17, 18. Luke 16.17.
which lasts for ever.

revoke or alter ought of his former courses, Ezech. 18.25.
the equity whereof he there auowes; and Ierem. 32.18.
this among the rest is auerred, by another Prophet of the same time, to have
been even then Gods wonted practice.

Ambae eiusdem voces: prior per Mosem ad Iudaeos. Optat. ad Donat. l. 7.
the Jews only, who Praeuidens parum dictures prae magnitudine culpae. Ibid.
beyond that Matthew. 27.25.
they wished themselves, should be punished for Christ's death, not in their
children alone, but in their childrens children too for many descents; but
concerns not Christians, Altera ad Christianos pertinet. Ibid. Vide de boc
and Aug. ad Julian. l. 6. c. 12.
of whom that other should be meant in Ezechiel.

For 1. both the former is more general.

2. Nor is there difference in Gods dealings between Jew and Christian in this
kind.

3. Not to add that even the faithful themselves suffered.

4. Nor does either this or the former any way assoile the doubt or untie the
knot, concerning the iustifiablenesse or equity of the point or practice
questioned, but restrain only the execution of it to some people or persons.

Or 4. that therefore God may justly punish children fathers offenses, because
Parentum peccatis paruulos obligari, non improbabiliter dicitur. Aug. Enchir.
c. 46. Parentu^ peccata modo quodam sunt aliena, modo quodam and nostra ^aliena
quippe proprietate sunt actionis, and nostra sunt contagione propaginis. Idem
ad Iul. l. 6. c. 4. Vise Le^^. ^. Pp. ep. 86. and Greg. mor. l. 15. c. 22.
they stand guilty of the same in Gods sight: which guilt yet Quousqua
implicetur proles statuere non audet Aug. Enchir. c. 47.
how far it goes, they dare not determine.

For 1. this is a conceit that Vide I^om. sum. p. 1 a. 2 ae. q. 81. a. 2. and
Alex. Ales, p. 2. q. 122. m. 2. a. 1.
has no ground at all Gods word: which if it be admitted, that of the Heathen
man of Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? Aetas parentum peior auis tulit Nos
nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem. Horat. carm. 3.6.
the world growing worse and worse, would be true, not only as he meant of it,
of the practice of sin, but much more in regard of the guilt of sin more
and more multiplied in each several descent.

2. Nor will Sed and si benedictio patrum semini quoque little destinabatur sine
vllo adhuc merito eius, cur non and rentus patrum in fillos quoque redundaret?
vt per totum genus and gratia decurreret and offensa. Tertull. ad Marc. l. 2.
Gods blessing of posterity for the ancestors well-doing, (a work of mere
grace and free only) prove a special guilt of an ancestors particular
misdeeds to adhere to any of his issue. A King may well 2 ^am. 9.5. Pa^
instr^^m qui ^spa^ apud to bena acta seruantur. Cuius (...) fides innotuerit,
h^reditatis iure, quod autori debueris, (...) refundis. Hacten^^ de maiorum
obse^^^is fructum, and tamen de suppli^ijs excessum non (...), etc. E^^^d.
Panegyr.
reward a man for service, done him by his Father. Yet it follows not thence,
that he may therefore in like manner either 2 King. 14.6. (...) ^^^^ldem damni
p^r (...) ^ffici p^^^st filius: quate^^^ bo^^m eius a parenti^ bono depe^idet:
sica^ in (...), filius amittit hareditatem pro peccato parentis. Them. p. 2 a.
2 a. q. 108.^* (...) 2. (...) Cic. ad Brut. ep. 13. Nec vere me fugit, quam fit
acerbum, Parentum scelera fisiorum (...) sed hoc praeclare legibus comparatum
est (de bona p^^^^candis) vt ^^^^lias libero (...) parents (...). radderet, At
non (...) flage^^. (...) multo minus gl^^ij.
condemn him or execute him for his Fathers offense.

sentence is never put in execution, but De eis qui in paternis versaniur
malis. Quis enim (...) and mali filium (...) execretur? quo^. bonum and boni
filium duplici quis honor honor andum tenseat. Aug. (...) vet. and nou. Test.
quaest. 14. Non hoc fit, nisicum fuerit (...). Aug. post coll^t. c. 7. Muta^^r,
si parentum facto non sapientur. ^2. ^ is quippe non reddicatur peccata
parentum, qui non imitantur mores illorum. Quemod modum autem bonorum (...)
fac^^, vt eliam propria peccata (...) facit, vt non (...) suo sed etiant little,
(...). Psalm. 10^. Non (...) parents fuerunt peccat^^^s, sed quis ipsi
peccatorum amidatores. Hibr^^ in Ezech. 18. Cum pr^nectiores ex parentum culpa
ferinutur, ill^rum poenas luunt, quorum opera secuti sunt. Greg. mor. l. 15. c.
21. Non nisi sit culpae particeps. Them. sum. 1 a. 2 a. q. 81. a. 1. and Alex.
Ales p. 2. q. 122. m. 1.
where the children tread in their Fathers steps, and do in impiety or
iniquity imitate their bad Parents: For that when they cease to follow their
bad Parents base practice^, they De^^nit esse filius iniquorum, qui non
imitatur mores illorum. Aug. in Psalm. 108. Eorum ^uim (...), quorum mores
imitamur. Origin. in Ezech. bom.
then cease to be their Sons. And that therefore is there mention made of
the third and fourth descent only, because that Quia^sque ad 3. and 4. prog^^,
eam quam imitentur filij, parentum vitam possunt videre, ^sque adeos vltio
extenditur, qui viderunt quod male sequerentur. Greg. Ibid.
parents may live so long, and their evil examples consequently be seen of
their issue.

example that we have here in hand, of a good Son smitt^n for his bad
Fathers offense, does directly prove the contrary.

third and fourth descent, so much, because Parents may live so long to give
evil examples to their issue, as because they may live so long to see Gods
judgments on it.

Or lastly, that it is then only executed, (...). Plato de leg. l. 9. Quod
idem cum isto facit, Eusebius. praepara^. Euang. l. 2. c. 39.
when impiety runs on so from descent to descent, as hereditarie, that the
whole race it self seems Quomodo milites Maximini percussores, Ex pessimo
genere ne catulum quidem esse relinquendum. Iul. Capitol.
worthy to be utterly rooted and raced out.

For besides the former exceptions, Exception.
which here also hold; the examples some of them before produced do evidently
euince the contrary.

Thus you see how about the Solution of this Question many have beaten their
brains, and those men of great note, and yet have given no good or just
satisfaction therein.

For the untying therefore of this knot, rather snarled more and entangled,
than by them unknit, and the reconciling of those seeming differences between
the texts of Scripture before mentioned, let me entreat a while your best
attention to that that shall be delivered, that I may not be in ought therein
mistaken.

First therefore let it be considered, Solution.
that Heb. 9.26. (...). Archin. Clam. Strom l. 6. (...). Eurip. Alcest. (...).
Antho^^g. Debemur m^^ti. H^rat. art.
all men (Father and Son, as well the one as the other) owe a death unto God;
Natura dabitum Deuteronomy repetit quomodo and quando vidi: homo tum dema^ r^petit,
cum i^^bet naturae Deus. Ius^. in Ios. 7.
which he may justly require whenever, and wheresoever, on what occasion,
and by what means soever he will. Josua 7.24. Deus hoc ipse mandauit, non
iudex, cui illud praeceptum est. Deuteronomy. 14.16. Aug. in Ios. q. 8.
God therefore for the sin of Achan, might command his whole household, and
his children among the rest, (though not Neque enim liquet, quod Iun. laborasse
faminam contagione conscientiae.
privy to, or guilty of that offense of his) to be put to death, and so
punish him in them as well as in his own person, because they ought all of
them a death to him, which on that occasion he might require. But 2 King. 14.6.
2 Chronicles. 25.4. Homine iudice nemo nisi ex eulpa propria poenas debet luere.
Aug. in Ios. q. 8.
Amazias may not put to death the sons of those traitors that slew the King
his Father; according to that Deuteronomy. 24.16. Reatus patris non obest liberis.
Althus. dicaealog. l. 1. c. 30. Filius pattis aniquitalem far non debet.
Petr. Fons leg. select. Sancimus ibi esse poenam, vbi and noxia est.
Propinquos, natos, familiates procul a calumnia sub^^oue^us quos reossceleris
societas non facit. Peccata suos teneant autores. Nec vlterius progrediatur
metus (...) re^atur delictu^. Arcad. Theodos. and Honor. Cod. l. 9. tit. 47.
leg. 22. Crimen vel poena paterna nullam maculam filio nifligere potest. Namque
vnusquisque ex suo admisso forti subijcitur, nec (...) criminis successor
constituitur. (...). Digest. l. 48.1.19. l. 26. Et ^rat. d^^r. c. 1. q. 4. c. ^.
Law which God had enacted between man and man to be observed: because they
were no way obnoxious to him, neither did they by any Law or Statute humane or
divine owe a death unto him otherwise.

Yea the justice and equity of Gods dealing in this kind may be further
cleared even by such courses as men also may lawfully take: For suppose we some
great Noble-mans only son and sole heir condemned to die, for some rape or
robbery by him committed. Howbeit his Sovereign considering that the young
man is one of good parts otherwise, and may hereafter do his King and Country
good service, though he were overtaken in that act; as also out of pity to his
Fathers house, loath to see an ancient family utterly extinguished in him; and
besides, having earnest suit made in his behalf by diners near about him is
inclining, yea and purposed to grant him his pardon. But in the interim, while
the matter hangs yet in suspense, it comes to be discovered, that the
Nobleman his Father has his hand in some foul treason, has entered into
conspiracy either with some foreign (...) or some domestical traitor
against the person of his Prince. Now hereupon his Sovereign, altring his
mind and purpose concerning his Son, causes him instantly to be brought
out and executed in the sight of his Father, whom after also he disposes of
according to his desert. In which case the Son (you see) is punished for his
Fathers offense, but for which he might have escaped: and the Father is
punished in the Son; his Sons death (no doubt) being no less punishment to
him than his own: and yet is there no wrong or injustice done either to Father
or Son, because both had deserved death, and death was therefore due to
either.

And herein erred those wicked Jews, that charged God with injustice, that
they complained that their Fathers had done amiss, and that Quomodo de Roman
is Hor. carm. 3.6. Delicta maioru^ immeritus lu^s, Roman, donec templa
refeceris Aedesque labentes Deoru^, etc.
they (themselves being no way faulty) suffered only for their Fathers
faults. Whereas indeed, vile wretches, Ezekiel. 20.30, 31. Ierem. 7.26. and 16.12.
they were every whit as bad, or worse rather than they, and Ierem. 3.25.
bare the burden of their own iniquities.

Secondly, let it be considered, that God lays judgment at any time upon
any, but he is able to turn the same Romans 8.28. Sicut nihil est, quod malis
non noceat. Quibus pestifera fiunt, quae profutura essent, si alijs darentur.
Sen. de benef. l. 5. c. 12. Ita. nihil est quod non bonis prodesse possit. Idem
de prou. c. 3. (...). Xenoph. apud Plut. de mimic.
to the good of the party upon whom it is inflicted. And that he does so, as
here also he did, when he lays any outward evil on a godly person for the
sin of some wicked one, and so punishes (as he does often also) the bad in the
good.

For the better clearing of this, we may well make use of that distinction so
rise in the Schools, that Panalia aliquando habent ratronem maledicti, ali^
habent rationers medicinae. Vide post Aug. in Ios. qu. 8. Thom. sum. p. 1 a 2
ae. q. 87. a. 7, 8. and p. 2 a. 2 ae. q. 108. a. 4. Simplic. in Epictet.
enchirid. c. 13. and Senet de prouid. c. 3. Hinc distinctio illa poenae, in
nocentem, and conferentem; sieve in suffocantem and promouen^em: item in poenam
vindictae, and poenam cautelae: sieve in condemnantem, and corrigentem: apud
Alens. p. 1. q. 39. m. ^^. 4. 1. s. 6. and p. 2. q. 115. m. 3. s. 1. and q.
122. m. 1. s. 1. and p. 3. q. 41. m. 4. a. 1.
these outward temporal evils, or penal sufferings are in the nature,
Sometime of a curse. Sometime of a cure.


Courses 4.
And accordingly there is a fourfold course of Gods dealings in these cases.

God punishes a bad Father in a bad Son; and then it is not a cross only,
but a curse to both. So God punished (we may justly deem) Exodus 12.29.
Pharao in his firstborn.

punishes a good Father in a good Son; and then it is, though a cross, yet
a cure to both. So punished he 2 Samuel 12.14, 15, 18.
David (i^e may well judge) in his young child.

punishes a good Father in a bad Son; and then it is a cure to the Father,
and a curse to the Son: So punished he the same. 2 Samuel 12.10, 11. and 18.9,
15, 33.
David in his son Absalom.

punishes a bad Father in a good Son; and then it is a curse to the Father,
and a cure to the Son. So punished he 1 King. 14.1, 3, 12, 17.
Jeroboam in his son here mentioned. And that which was no doubt a great and
grievous cross and plague to his Father, yet proved through Gods goodness in
mercy wisely so disposing it, no less Verse. 13, 18.
a benefit and blessing to the child.

Recapitulation.
Thus then I hope that by this time you see, how God without any the least
blemish to his justice, may by death take away the Son for his Fathers
Branches 4.


man may not ordinarily do therein as God does: and yet that in some cases men
do also, and may well do the same.

Jews had no just cause to charge* God with injustice for his dealings with
them, albeit that he should so have done.

And how God can turn to the good of a good child, evil that he suffers for
his bad Fathers default; though to his ungodly Parent the same be a fearful
judgment, and not a cross only, but a curse too.

Now a word or two of use, and so an end.

And first it may admonish Parents to be the shun sin, if not for their own
Vt vel posieritatibus consul^ntes diuinae leg^ob^dirent. Tertull. ad Marc. l. 2.
, for their childrens sake yet: because their sins may bring judgments upon
their children also, even as well as upon themselves. There is no Parent, if he
be not wholly stripped of natural affection, but desires the welfare of his
child. Yea, Quis non magis filiorum salutem quam suam curet? Tertull. Ibid. Ita
Leo Homericus Il. (...). 135. (...); Auisque apud e^nd. Il. (...). 324. (...).
Plut. de amor. prol. Catuloru^ amor in venabula impingit faeras Sen. ep. 74.
Parents are usually wont to be more charie of their childrens welfare than of
their own. Art thou desirous then of thy childrens well-doing? Do not wilfully
that that may any way impeach it. And nothing may sooner do it than thy sin.
As thine obedience and upright carriage of thy self in Gods sight may procure
Deuteronomy. 4.40. and 5.29. and 7.8, 9, 13. and 28.4.
a blessing even to thy posterity: so thy sin and transgression may bring
Deuteronomy. 28.18, 32, 41. Ier. 5.17.
evil also upon it. What a grief would it be to any of us that have children,
if in playing with one of them we should let it fall unwittingly, whereby the
child should get a knock, that it should lie long sick, and at length die
of? Take heed then how to satisfy some wanton lust or desire of thine, thou
do wilfully that that may provoke God to wrath, and cause him to lay the like
on thy child, as thou see that in the like cases sometime he has done. Yea,
consider with thy self, if shortly after some such wilful running out of
thine, and giving way to thine unrestrained corruption, some such thing should
befall thy child, and (...) (ex Eurip. Orest. Clem. Str^m. l. 7.) (...). Plut.
de tranquil.
thy guilty conscience shall then (as it may justly) suggest unto thee, This
may well be the hand of God upon my child for mine excess, or my sin;
(...). Plut. de sanit.
what grief and anguish of heart must it needs procure to thee, and possess
thy soul withal, when thou shall ever and anon be thinking, and saying
within thy self, (...).
All this torment does this poor infant endure for my sake, for my sin. We
cry out often of witches, when our children are strangely taken, and say such a
one has bewitched them, when we are the witches our selves; and, as he says
of the (...). Basil. Cas. de ebrietat.
wine, that men take above measure, it is our sin that has bewitched them.
Nor let Gods children think themselves priuileged in this kind more than
others. 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 14, 15, 18. and 13.1, 14, 28, 29. and 16.22. and
18.9, 15, 33. 1 King. 1.5, 9.
David (you heard) was so punished, as well as Jeroboam, howsoever God turned
it to his good; and that not in one only, but 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 14, 15, 18.
and 13.1, 14, 28, 29. and 16.22. and 18.9, 15, 33. 1 King. 1.5, 9.
in diverse of his. And if other of Gods children shall in like manner grow
wanton, and presuming on Gods goodness, shall take liberty to themselves, to
walk loofely, and run riot; God may justly by the like judgments call them
home again, and reclaim them, which may be also for their good.

Parents what use to make of Gods hand upon their children. That they take
occasion thereby to look home to themselves, examine their hearts, view and
sur^ey their lives, make inquiry what corruption of theirs either swaying
(without control) in the one, or breaking out by way given to it in the other,
might give God just occasion to lay that cross upon them: and in more special
manner, (because (...). Sapient. 11.13. In quibus peccamus, in eisdem
plectimur. In Hellogabali conscios saeuitum vario genere mortis, quum alios
vitalibus exemptos n^carent, alios ab ima part perfodederent, vt mors esset
vitae consentiens. Lamprid.
God often punishes us in those things that we offend in; as he punished David
in his children, for his overmuch 2 Samuel 18.33. and 19.4, 5, 6. 1 King. 1.6.
Verum ac seuerum illud Pi^ 2. Pp. Hostem in se nutrire, qui nimis filio
ignoscit. Platin.
indulgence toward them) wherein we have been faulty about them, and
defective in our duty toward them, either in fond affection, or neglect of
instruction and correction, or the like. Now, where is there almost any that
think in such cases on this? We are troubled to think, when our children are
evil, that we have let them go too thin clad, and so they have caught cold:
But we think not how careless we have been of clothing (not their bodies,
but) their souls. We are troubled when they are gone, to think that we
omitted this or that means of help for them. But we are not troubled to
think, that we neglected the best means with them, and those that concerned
not their temporal but their eternal good. Or we are not troubled for this,
that we brake not off, or humbled our selves for some sin, which repented of
might have kept them still with us. Neither yet do I, or dare I affirm
generally, that this is always the cause why God crosses men in their
children: He may do, and does it also (no doubt) many times, for the Ad examen.
trial and Ad exercitium. Exercitiasunt nobis ista, non funera. Cypr. de
mortal. Vide Alex. Ales p. 1. q. 39. m. 3. a. 4. 1. s. 6.
exercise of his gifts and graces in them, their patience, obedience,
confidence in God, and the like, and for other ends to himself best known, as
to make way for some other work of his. It was not for any special sin of
Job, that Job 1.18, 19.
his children were all at once so destroyed, though it were a: grievous cross
unto him. It was John 5.3. Vnde Alex. Ales p. 3. q. 5. (...) dupli^^^ (...) ad
(...), ad (...).
not for any special sin of his Parents (our Savior himself faith it) that
that poor beggar in the Gospel was borne blind. Howbeit, since that we
learn out of Gods word, that God does frequently inflict such evils upon,
children for the transgressions of their Parents, yea, and he has threatened
also so to do: it stands us upon, and it is one of the best uses that we can
make, as of those crosses that God lays on us in our goods and chattels, and
our worldly estates; so, much more of those that in our children (who are much
nearer than those to us) do befall us, that we take occasion thereby (...)
3.39, 40.
to sife and search out our ways, and to humble our selves in, the sight of
God for our sins. Had Iereboam so done, peradventure he might have saved his
sons life, he had at least prevented other judgments more fearful, that
for want thereof after befell him and his. And we by so doing, may either
remove Gods hand lying heavy on our children, and on us also in them, or at
least we may have the cross so qualified and sanctified, that it shall turn
to the good both of us and ours.

FINIS.

