THE Laws and Statutes of Geneua, as well concerning ecclesiastical
Discipline, as civil regiment, with certain Proclamations duly executed,
whereby Gods religion is most purelie maintained, and their common wealth
quietli governed: Translated out of French into English by Robert Fills.

Except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in vain. PSALM. 127. AFTER
DARKNESS, LIGHT.

POST TENEBRAS LVX



PRINTED AT LONdon by Rouland Hall, dwelling in Gutter Lane, at the sign of
the half Egle and the Keye. 1562.

To the right honorable, the Lord ROBERT DVDDELEY Master of the Queens
Majesty's horse, and knight of the noble order of the Garter, Robert Fills
wishes long life, with the increase of godly honor.
YOur good zeal (right honorable lord) to the aduau^cement of gods glory in
this realm, and the singular gentilnes and favor that you usually show to
the furtherers thereof, has moved and encoraged me to fly to ye protection
of your name, partlye to procure thereby some defense and co^mendacion to this
good work, which I have translated into the English tongue, and partly so
much as in me lies, to do you that honor which of right I think to to
appertain unto you: that is to acknowledge you by the dedication of this
work (as you are in deed to your great praise and renown) a worthy patron
of good and godly meanings. But there is nothing so well minded, or so godly
devised, but that it may, and commonly is, by evil taking misconstrued, and by
sinister talking depraved: such is the nature and property of the malicious
and slanderous tongue, that being but a little member, yet it is ever busye and
babeling, never quiet, barking always biting sometime, fynding great matter
where none is, making of nothing some thing, of some thing a great thing,
of a Mouse a Mountain, of a Gnat an Olephant, of a small spark, enkindlynge a
fire of much discord and dissencion. Therefore albeit ye Greek Poet
Aristophanes truly says, that there is no remedy against the biting of a
Sichophant or slaunderer: yet somewhat to stop the rage of this running and
ranging tongue, and to prevent and cure as much as may be this pestilent
poison, I have not only thought good to use the said mean, of your honorable
name, but also to express in this my preface, both the purport and substance
of the book, and ye mind and meaning of my self ye translatour, yt if the
malicious man will carpe or cauil at either of them, your honor and other that
by your example, shall judge well of things well intended, may have at hand a
true apology and defense. The book contains laws and statutes, without
which a common weal can no more be ruled, then the body live without the
soul, or a great ship in the boisterous sea, be governed without a wise and
skillful lodesman, and they are ye statutes of Geneua, a City counted of all
godly men singularly well ordered, as well for good policy, as also for the
gouernemente of the Church in all estates, orders, and vocations, where
sincere religion is wonderfullye advanced, error mightily beaten down,
virtue excedingly maynteyned, vice seuerelye repressed: such is the execution
of those laws, such straight discipline is practiced, that not only gross
crimes are punished, but common (faults as men take them) are narowlye seen
unto, as blasphemye, heresye, strange and pestiferous doctrine, fornication
spiritual and corporal, swearinge, sclaunderinge and such like, so yt in
deed that place may be a lantarne to many other, both of sincerity in
judgment, and of honesty in conversation, as this book presently does
witness, and the practice and example does much moore lively declare. Now, the
intent and mind of ye translatour is faithfullye to communicate to English
men, this treasure taken out of the French tongue, (obteyning the copye out
of the register book of the foresaid City) that thereby they may behold as
in a glass, a christian reformation, and employe them selves to the imitation
as far forth as they see best for them, as shall be most convenient. Hereby
may not be gathered that the Translatour is a new law maker, or author of
any innouacion, or that his industry and diligence is in any wise prejudicial
to the laws of this our realm, which are laudable, good, and godly: but as
the knowledge of all histories is to all such as desire to hear, see, and
know, things profitable and pleasant, and necessary, so beside the
observation of the common laws positive, the reading of this fruitful
work, shall bring to the private man godly instruction. If we have a
pleasure to read Josephus, Xenophon, Plutarche, Aristotle, Liuye, and such
other, and wyshe them to be turned into known and familier languages: that
thereby we may peruse and understand the laws, fashions and ordinances of
the Jews, Grecians, Romans, and others, how much more ought men to suffer
and take in good part this fact of him that brings home to us out of a
strange and far country, and foreign tongue, a form and patron, not only of a
well instituted common weal but of a well reformed church, not for Heathen to
gase on, but for Christians to follow, not so much for delectation as for
edification. Which fruit of my labor, God grant may turn to his
glory, and to the encreace of good nourture and discipline in Christ's scoole,
that true repentance and amendment of life may ensue, that by our works our
heavenly father may be glorified, and his people by the example of our faith
and mutual charity edified. And further, this work may serve for matter of
answer to those that inueying against the lives of men of our profession, do
more falsely speak evil of us, than they can trewlye speak well of their
own faction. They charge us with liberty and licenciousnesse most unjustly,
reportinge that we departed out of this realm in the late time of banishement
of Goods church, only to this end, to enjoy more vnchastised freedom of
sensual life: But when they shall behold these laws, and shall not be able to
prove, but yt the same are as virtuously followed, and as severely executed in
those places where we lived, as in this book they be here expressed: which shall
appear how small license is in our reformed churches left to sin, in
comparison of the realms drowned in their supersticion, where their trust in
man's pardon has quenched the fear of gods displeasure, and where horrible
sins are dispensable for money, I trust these slaunderours shall have their
mouths stopped, till they be able to show a common weal of their own,
where so good laws both of sincere religion and civil justice and honesty,
are so dewly put in practice, so reuerentlye obeyed, and so preciselye kept, yea
and by those that willynglye for the love of god, and tender care of their own
salvation, do forsake the lands of greater liberty of life, to thrall them
selfs to such seueretie. For the manner of translating I shall beseech your
honor, and all good readers to bear with the plain and simple rudeness
thereof, and for mine excuse to understand, that I considered these to be
laws and rules of life and religion, in expressinge whereof, I had rather be
to curiously faithful, then any thing neglygently or untruly fine, I have
given it word: for word rather following sometime ye French prase to much,
then at any time venturynge to presume or take to my self a judgment that I
attained the sense of the work, if I should swerve from the words. My
labor I beseech your honor to accept in good part, as I will not fail
to continewe in prayer to God for the continuance and encreace of your godly
zeal and Christian affection.

Your honors most humble to command Robert Fills.

A table to find the principal points in this present book.
THE order of the offices instituted by god for the government of his church.
fol. 1. To who^ the institution pertains. 2. The form of ye oath of ye
ministers. 3. The number, places, and time of the sermons. 6. The office of the
preachers. 7. The office of the elders appointed by the Seniorie in the
consistory. 8. Of the deacons and their offices. 9. Of Sacraments. 11. Of the
Supper. 12. Of Marriages. 12. Of Buriyng. 13. Of the visitation of the sick.
13. The orders which ought to be kept toward little children. 14. Of the
visitation of ye prisoners. 15. The order toward the aged. 15. The parsons
which the officers or Commissioners in co^sistorie ought to admonish. 16. The
visitation of ye ministers in parishes or villages perteynynge to the city of
Geneua. 17. The manner of their visitation. 18. Of the election of Seniours or
lords called Sendicques, and of the oath of the lower counsel. 19. Of the
election of ye small counsel. 21. The form of their oath. 22. The election of
the Treasurer. 23. The election of the Secretaries. 23. The form of their
oath. 23. The counsel of ye two hundred. 24. The auditors of the accounts.
24. The form of their oath. 24. The controler, the master of the money, and
the master of the ordinance. 25 Of the procurour general. 25. The form of
his oath. 25. Of the Captain general. 26. Of perticulers. 26. Of Banderettes.
26. Of their Lieutenaunts. 26. Of Dizeners. 26. Of their oath. 26. Of ye
geolyer and form of his oath. 27. Of the Saoultier. 27. Of the Haroldes. 27. Of
the waiters. 28. Of the kepers of towers and the Porters. 28. Of the Notaries.
28. The form of their oath. 28. The office, charge, and authority of the
lords Sendicques. 30. The office of the first in especial. 31. The office of
the three other Sendicques, that which two of them may do. 31. That which one
of them alone may do. 32. Of matters criminalls 32. The office, charge, and
duty, of the counsel. 33. For what cause they ought to call the counsel. 35.
The office of the Treasurer. 35. The office of the Secretaries. 36. The office
of the Captains, Band retts, and Dizeners. 38. The Auditors of accounts. 39.
The office of the Controler. 40. The office of the master of the artillery.
41. Of the office of the Procurour general. 42. Of the office of the
Saoultier. 44. Of the office of the Porters and kepers of the towers. 45. The
watches of the two steples. 46. The court of the Senior lieutenant and
adiutors. 46. The form of their oath. 48. The place of the Assistaunce. 48. Of
the two Secretaries of the Lieutenauntes court. 48. The form of their oath.
49. The office of the Lieutenaunte, and the order of the court. 49. Of ye
penalty of the^ yt be absent. 50. Of the summoning for appearaunce in civil
causes. 50. For default of appearaunce. 50. The summoning of ye witnesses. 52.
Of pleding. 52. Of the procedings and terms of delay. 53. Of causes above a
crown. 53. In causes of exceptions. 54. Of terms appointed to hear the
right. 55. Of the longest term that the process ought to endure. 55. Of the
two Feries. 55. Of causes extraordinary. 56 Of relation of the Judges in the
proceeding, as in sentence definitive. 57. The causes excusable. 57. The tax of
the reward of the Lieutenant and his assistaunce. 57. The taxes for the
Secretaries. 59. The taxes for the Sergeantes. 60. How the Lieutenaunt ought
to govern him self in matters of imprisonment. 60. The order which he ought
to keep in process criminal. 61. Of emolumentes and exactions of seals, the
vsaunce, and government, and guard of the same. 62. The tax and emoluments
which they ought to take of the three seals. 62. The seal to seal pupil
goods. 66. Five proclamations containing most necessary ordinances and
statutes. 67. The first proclamation. 67. The second proclamation. 69. The
third proclamation. 74. The fourth proclamation. 76. The fyfte proclamation.
79. The valuation of their coin. 87.
FINIS.
Here follows the ACTS AND STATVTES OF the City of Geneua.
IN the name of the most mighty God, we Syndicques, with the great and small
counsel of Geneua, with our people assembled by the sou^de of trompett and
the great bell, following our ancient customs, having considered yt it is a
thing worthy of commendation above all other that the doctrine of the holy
gospel of our lord god be conserved well in purity, and ye christian church
mainteyned accordingly, also that yougth in time to come be well and faithfully
enstructed, and ye hospital ordered in good estate for the sustentacion of the
poor, the which cannot be except there be established a certain rule and
manner to live, by the which every state may understand the duty of his
office. For this cause it seemed good to us that the spiritual government such
as god has showed unto us, and instituted by his word be brought in to good
form, to have place and to be observed among us, and we have ordained and
established to follow and keep in our town and territorye, ye ecclesiastical
policy following, which is taken out of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

First of all there are four orders of officers which our lord has
instytuted for the government of his church, that is to say pastors,
doctors, elders, other wise named commisioners for the Seniorie, and fourthly
Decons.

If we will have a church well ordered, and kept in ye purytie, we must
observe this form of government.

As concerning pastors which the scripture names some times watch men, and
sometime ministers, their offices are to declare ye word of god, to teach, to
admonyshe, to exhort, to reprove as well publikly as privately, to minister
Sacraments, and to do brotherly correc^yon with the elders or Commissyoners.

Now to the end that nothing be done confusedly in the church, no man ought
to thrust him self into this office without lawful calling: in the which
there are to be considered three things, that is to say, examinacion which
is principal, afterward, to whom it apperteyneth to institute ye mynisters:
thirdly, what Ceremonye or manner of doing is good to the induction of them to
their office.

The examinacion conteyneth two parts, the first is touching the doctrine,
that is to say if he which shall be appointed to the office have good knowledge
in the holy scriptures, and more if he be sufficient and meet to communicate
it to ye people to their edification.

Also, to put away or eschew all dangers, that he which shall be received hold
no euel opinions, it shall be good that he do protest to receive and reteyne the
doctrine approved in the church.

To know if he be meet to teach, they must proceed by interrogatories and to
have him treat of some part of the doctrine of our lord god.

The second part is of life: that is to say, if he have good conditions, and
if he have always governed him self without reproach. The rule to proceed by
is very well declared by S. Paul, the which ought to be kept and observed.

Here follows to whom it perteyneth to institute or appoint ministers.
IT shall be good in this point to follow ye order of the ancient church for as
much as it is but a putting in use of that which is declared unto us in the
scripture: that is, that the ministers first choose him which ought to be put in
office, giving understanding to the Seniorie, and after present him to the
counsel, and if he be found worthy, that the counsel receive and accept
him: and after having knowledge of him (as they shall se expedient) give him a
testymony that he may be brought forth, and finally presented to the people in
the sermon, to ye end he may be received by the common consent into ye
company of ye faithful.

If he be found unworthy, and so declared by lawful proves, that then they
proceed to a new election and chose another.

Concerning the manner of the induction, because the ceremonies in times past
have been turned into many superstitions by reason of the infirmity of the
time, it shall be necessary that one of the mynisters make declaration and
demonstracion of the office, to the which he is chosen, and after that ye
prayers be made for him, that ye lord give him grace well to discharge his
office.

When he shall be chosen, it is necessary that he be sworn before ye Seniorye
with such an oath as shall be convenient for a minister, as here follows.

The manner and form of the oath and promise which the enangelicall mynisters
admit and receive in the cyttie of Geneua, done before the Syndicques and
Counsel.
I Promise and swear that in ye ministry to the which I am called, I shall
serve faythefully before God: using his word purely to edify this church to
the which I am bound, and that I shall not abuse his word to serve my carnal
affectyon, to please any man living, but that I shall use it with a pure
conscience to serve to his glory and ye profit of his people, to ye which I am
bound.

Also I promise and swear to keep the ecclesiastical ordinances which are
passed and ordained by the small great, and general Counsels of this City,
as is given to me in charge, to admonyshe them which have failed, to execute my
duty lawfully, not giving place to hatred, favor vengea^e cor other fleshly
desire, and in general to do yt which apperteyneth to a good and faithful
minister.

Thirdly I swear and promise to keep and maintain the honor and profyt of
the Seniorye and the City, to endeavor my self with all possybilitye that the
people be kept and conserved in good peace and unity, under the government of
the Seniorie, and not to consent in any case to any thing against the same, but
to follow my said vocation as well in time of adversity as i^ prosperity, be it
peace, war pestilence or other wise.

Finally I promise and swear to be subject to the pollicye and Statutes of
this city, mynistring good example of obedience to all other, yelding my self
for my part subject and obedient to the laws and magistrates as much as my
office does bear, that is to say without prejudice to the liberty which we
ought to have, and teach according as god commands us, and to do all
things which apperteine to our office. Also I promise in such sort to
serve the Seniorye and the people, that I be thereby i^ no case let to render
unto god the service which I owe to him in my vocatyon.

Now even as it is required dyligently to examine the ministers when they
shall be chosen, so it is necessary to have good pollicye to hold and keep them
in their vocation: for the which first it shall be expedient that all the
ministers gather them selves to gether one certain day in the weke, to
conserve and keep the puritye and concord of doctrine, to have conference of
the Scriptures, and that none exempte them selves wtoute a lawful excuse: if
any be negligent, that he be admonnished.

For those which preach in the villadges parteyning to the Seniorie, it is
necessary that the mynisters of the city shall exhort them to come as often
as may be: and moreover if they be lacking one month together, the same to be
esteemed to great a negligence, except it be by sickness or other lawful let.

And if there happen to spring any difference in doctrine, ye ministers shall
treat of it together to hear the matter. After, if that need shall require,
they shall call ye elders or commisioners appointed by the Seniorie to help to
appease the contention. Finallye, if they cannot come to any amyable concord,
by the obstinacye of any of the parties, let the cause be referred to ye
magistrates, to set order therein.

For the avoiding of slaunderouse offenses of living, it shall be needful that
there be a form of correction upon the mynisters as shall be declared here
after, to the which al they without exception shall submytte them selves:
which shall be also the means to co^serue the ministry in reverence, and that
the word of god be not by ye evil report of the mynisters dishonored or
despised. For as correction is to be done upon him which has failed, so it
shall be needful to reprove the slanders and false reports which may be
iniustly made against Innocents.

But first it is to be noted yt there be crimes which utterly be intolerable
in a mynister, and also there be vices which some what may be borne with all,
so that there be given brotherlye admonicions.

The first be.
Heresy. Scisme. Rebellion against the ecclesiastylcal order. Manifest
blasphemye and punishable by civil peine, Simonie and al corruption of gifts.
Brybes to ocupie ye place of an other. To forsake his church without lawful
cause and just calling. Falsehoode. Perjury. Whoredom. Theft. Dronkennes.
Fighting worthy to be punished by the laws. Vsurye. Plays or Games forbidden
by ye laws and which be offensive. Dancing and such disolutenesses. Crimes
importing evil infamy. Crimes which deserve in another to be separated from
the church.
The second.
Strange manner of handling the scriptures, which may turn to offense.
Curiositye to search vain questions. Setting forth of any doctrine or manner of
doing not receued in ye church. Negligence in studing, and principally in
reding the holy scriptures. Negligence in reproving their neighbors vices to
flatter them. Negligence in doing all things belonging to their office.
Scurrulitye. Lieng. Detraction. Dissolute in words, Reprochefull words.
Rashness. Evil deceites. Avarice and to much nygardnes. Disordinate
angrynesse. Chiding and scoldinge. Dissollutnesse unseemly for a minister both
in apparel and gesture, and other fashions of living.
Concerning Crimes they ought in no case to be borne with, if they be ciuyll
Crimes, that is to say, if they ought to be punished by the laws. And if any
of the mynisters do fail, then the Seniorye ought to put to their hands,
and over and besides the ordinary punyshement with which they be accustumed
to punish other offe^ders, to take him, punish him, and depose him, from his
office.

As touching other crimes of the which the first inquisicion pertains to the
consistory eccleciasticall, let the commissioners or elders with ye ministers
take heed thereto: and if any be convicted let them make their report to the
counsel with their advise and Judgment, so that ye last Judgment for the
correction be always reserved to the Seniorie.

As concerning the offenses which ought to be corrected by simple admonicions,
let them therein proceed according to ye order of our savior christ, so that
the cause may be ended in the ecclesiastical Judgment.

To maintain this discipline in his estate, every three months let the
ministers specially enquiere if there be any thing to be talked of among them
selves, and remedy it according to reason.

Of the number* place and, time of the Sermons.
Upon the Sondayes there shall be morni^g sermons at the churches of saint Peter
and S. Gerueis, also at y^ hour accustumed, sermons through all the perishes.

At noone the catechism, that is to say instructions for the small children,
in three churches, and at three of the clock likewise Sermons in all the
churches.

Upon the week days over and beside a sermon i^ every perish, also there
shall be sermons at ye head churches Mondaye, Wedinsdaye, and Fridaie at four
of the clock in the morni^g. so that the sermon may be ended a good space
before the ordinary sermon be begone.

If there be made any extraordinary prayer in time of necessity, that the
order for the Sunday be observed.

To bear these and other burdens of the ministry, it shall be needful to have
v. ministers and iii. conductours which shall also be ministers, to aid and
help according as need shall require.

Here follows the second order which we call doctors.
THe proper office of doctors is to teach the faithefull with sound
doctrine, to the end that the puritye of ye gospel be not corrupted by
ignorance or wicked opinions: nevertheless according as things be dysposed in
these days, we do comprehend them under this title, to be aides and
Instruments to conserve ye doctrine of god, so that the church be not
desolate for fault of pastors and mynisters, but to use a word more
intelligible, we shall call them the order of scholars.

The next degree unto the mynisters and next conjoined to the government of
the church, is reding of divinity: which reding shall be out of the new or
old testament.

But because they cannot profytt in such lessons except they be first
instructed in the tongues and humayne scyences, also it is nedeful to raise up
sede for the time to come, to the end that the church be not left destitute
to our children, therefore it is nedful to erecte A college to enstructe
children, to prepare them as well to ye mynisterye as to cyuill government.

For the first there must be a place assigned as well for the lectures as for
the teaching of children and others which will proffyt in learning, also to
have a man learned and expert for to dyspose as well the house as the lectours,
which can him self teach and instruct others: and that there be under his
charge readers as well i^ tongs as in Logic if it may be: also for bachelars
to teach young children, ye which we will and ordain to be don: and that all
those which be there shall be subjects to the ecclesyastycall discipline, as
well as the ministers.

That there be no other schole in the town for children, but we will that
there be a schole a part for maiden children, as has been accustumed.

That none shall be received into this office except he be approved by the
mynisters, and first let him be known to the Seniors, and then again be
presented to ye counsel with his witnesses, for fear of inconveniences. And
always examinacions ought to be made before two of the Seniors.

Here follows the third order, which be elders otherwise called commissyoners
or deputes for the Seniors in the consistory.
THeir office is to take heed and to watch of the demeanor and be hauour of
all and every of ye people, to admonish loui^gly those which they see fall or
lead a dissolute life, or if it be nedeful to make ye report, or to do
brotherly correction, and that shall be commonly done by ye company that shall be
thereto appointed.

For the disposytion and government of this church, it shall be good to choose
two of the small counsel, four of the council of the three score, and six of
the council of the two hundred men of honesty and of good life, without
reprofe, and void of all suspection, and above all having ye fear of god,
learning, and spiritual wisdom: and so they ought always to be chosen that
there be of them in every quarter of the town, that their eyes may be over
all that is ordained or done.

Likewise we have determined that the manner of the election be on this wise:
that the small council shall deliberate to name the most mete that ca^ be
found, and the most sufficient, and so to do, it is necessary to call the
mynisters to communicate with them, and after to present them which they have
named to the council of the two hundred: which approving them if they be found
worthy, a particular oath to be made in form following.

The form of the oath.
I Promise and swear following the charge that is given to me, to hinder all
Idolatries, blasphemies, dissolutions and other things against the honor of
god and the reformacion of the gospel, and to admonish those to whom it
apperteineth as occasion shall be given me.

Item, when I shall know any things worthy to be brought before the
consistory, that I shall do my duty faithfully without favor or hate, only
to that end that the town be maynteyned in good order and in the fear of god.

Item as touching all things concerning the office to be discharged with a good
conscience, to observe the ordynaunces which be decreed by the small, great,
and general council of Geneua.

IN the end of the year after they have chosen ye counsel, these me^ shall be
presented to ye Seniorie to know if they be worthy to continue in their office
or to be changed for as much as it is not expedient that they be changed
without a cause.

The fourth order of the ecclesiastical government called deacons.
THere has been always two so^drye kinds or sorts of officers in the
ancient church, ye one were deputes to receive, to deliver, and conserve the
goods of the poor, as well daily Almeses, as possessions Stipends, and
pensions.

The other to feed and ouersee the sick, and to minister the portion of ye
poor. The which custume we do observe yet to this present, for we have
procuratours and masters of the hospital: and to avoid confusion, one of the
procurators of the hospital shall be receyuer of all the goods of ye same, the
which shall have sufficient wages the better to execute his office.

Also the number of the four procuratours shall continue as has been said.
Whereof one to have the charge to the end that the provisions may be the
better made in time conuenyent.

Also that those which do show any charity upon the poor, be the more
asserteyned that the goods shall be no otherwise employed but according to their
intention: and if the revenues or gifts be not suffycient and that there
happen any extraordinary necessity, then the Seniorie shall determine to
furnishe according as necessity shall require.

Concerning the election of the procuratours and masters of hospitalles, it
shall be like ye order of the elders or commissyoners in the consistorye: and in
chosing them to follow ye rule of Saint Paul touching deacons in the first
to Tymothie the third chapter, and to Titus the first chapter.

Touching the office and authority of procuratours, we shall keep ye articles
which be all redye by us ordained but specially in things urgent and where
there shall be danger to differ the time, but when there is no great
dyfficultie nor matters of great charge, that then they be not constrained to
assemble daily, but that one or two may ordain in the absence of the other
that which shall be reasonable.

Item it shall be necessary to take diligent heed that the common hospital be
well preserved and meet to receive the sick, also for aged persons which
cannot work, men or women, for wydowes, children, orf^lyns, and the poor,
always ye sick to be kept and separated a part in a several lodging from
the other.

Item y^ Almeses for ye poor which be dystributed throughoute ye town, shall be
brought to the hospital according as the procuratours shall determyne.

Item that besides the hospital it is necessary that strangers and way
faring men be relyeued, and helped: and that therebe an hospital aparte for
them as shall be convenient, and according to the especially order and rule of
charity, and therefore we ordeyne and determine that there shall be chambers
appointed to receive such as shall be directed thither by the procuratours, and
that such shall be received accordingly.

Item above all this it be remembered, that the famylies of the hospitallours be
honestly governed according to the rule of gods word, considering that they
have ye governance of the house of god.

Also that the ministers and ye commissyoners or elders with one of the
Sendiques shall of their part be diligent to enquire if in the aforesaid
administracion for the poor, there be any lack or necessity, to the end to
desire and admonish the Seniorie to set order, and so to do that every three
months some of their co^pagnions with the procuratours shall make visitacion
in ye hospital to know if al things be well ruled.

It is necessary both for the poor of the hospital and other of the town
which have not wherwyth to help them selves, that there be a Phisision and a
surgian meet for ye same, mainteyned by the wages of the town, yet
nevertheless they may practyse through the town, and notwtstanding to be
bound to have care over ye hospital, and to viset other that have need.

Concerning the pestilence in the hospital, ye such be separated a part, and
principally if it happen that the town be scourged of god by any such rod.
Moreover to eschew begging in ye town which is contrary to all good pollicye,
it is necessary and also we do ordeine that the Seniori shall appoynte
certain of their officers at their coming out of the churches from the
sermons, to take away and avoid from the place before the same churches, those
that be loyterors or those that be dissemblers and obstinate beggars, and that
they be brought before one of the lords Sendiques, and likewise at all other
times that the dysenars be dyligent and take heed ye this law for beggars be
well observed and kept. They use but one suertye be it man or woman child be
side the father being present.


Of sacraments.
THat baptism be not mynistered but incontinent after the sermon and only
mynistred by the ministers or coadiutours: and that they do register the names
of the children with their parents: and if their be found any basterde, the
justice to be advertised thereof, and therein to proceed according to reason.

Item that no stranger be received as godfather, but those that be faithful
people and of ^ure communion, consydering that others be not meet to make
promise unto the church to instruct the infantes as it is required.

Of the supper.
FOr as much as the supper has been instituted by our Savior Jesus Christ to
be frequented and used and also it has been observed in the primative christen
church, until such time as the devil turned al vpsyde down, setting up ye
Mass in sted thereof which fault ought to be corrected, and also the rare
celebratinge thereof we have determined and ordained yt it shall be ministered
four times in the year that is to say. At Christmas, Easter, Penticoste, and
the first Sunday in the monethe of September.

Item that the mynisters distribute the bread in good order with reverence and
that none other give the cup but only the Commissioners or Deacons with the
mynisters: and for this cause that there be no great number of cups and
vessels.

Item that the table be nere unto ye pulpytt, to the end that the minister
may more commodiously and plainly declare the use thereof nere unto the table.

Item that it be not celebrated but in the church, except it be in great
necessytie.

Item that the Sunday before the celebracion of the said supper, there be
declaration made, to the end that no child come before he have made
profession of his faith, according as shall be declared in ye Catechism, and
also to exhort all strangers and new comers, to come first and present
them selves unto the church, to be instructed if need shall be, and consequently
that none approcheto his co^dempnacion. the banes must be pronounced (...)
sondaies solemnly.


Of Marriage.
AFter the declaration of the banes accustomed, the Marriages to be made when
the party shall require it, as well on the sunday as working days, so that it
be done at the beginning of the sermon.

And as concerning the abstynence of the same, it shall be good that only upon
the day of the celebration of the supper, they absteyne for the honor of the
same sacrament.

Item it shall be good to bring in and use ecclesiastical songs or psalms, ye
better to stir ye people unto prayer and praise god.

Item first they shall teach their little children, and so in the process of
time all the church may follow.

Touching debate in causes matrimonialls, for that it is not only a
spiritual cause, but meddled with the civil order, the same to remain to the
Seniorie: nevertheless we are determined to leave to the consistorye the charge
to hear the parties, and so to make report of there advise unto the counsel,
therein to give Judgment, so that good ordinances may be from henceforthe made
and followed accordingly.

Of burying.
ITem that they do bury honestly the dead in the place appointed. And as
concerning ye train or company, we leave it to ye discressio^ of every one.

Item we have moreover ordained and determined that the porters appointed to
bury, eshalbe sworn unto the Seniorye to put away all supersticions that are
contrary to ye word of god, and not bear them by night, and also if any be
dead sodeinly, to make report thereof, to the end to avoid al
inconueniencyes which may follow thereof.

Item that after their death not to bear them to their burying before twelve
hours, nor to keep them above four and twenty hours.

Of the visitacyon of the sick.
BEcause that many be negligent to comfort them selves in god by his word
when they be in extremity of sickness, whereof it happens often times that
many dye without admonicion or doctrine, the which at that time is most
needful of all times, for this cause we have ordained and determined that none
shall tarry three days in their bed or ^icke, but that it be made known to
the mynisters, and that every one shall be advertised to call ye mynisters,
whenever they will have them at a convenient houer, they not to with draw
them selves from their office in ye which they serve in common to the church:
and to put away all excuses, we have determined that the same shall be
published, and moreover to be given commandment by proclamacion yt the
parents friends and kepers shall not tarry until the person be redye to yield
up ye spirit, for in such extremity the consolacion serves to small purpose
for the most part.

The order which ought to be kept for litell children.
THat all cytezens and inhabitauntes shall bring or send their children on the
sunday at twelve of the clock, to the Cathechisme, which has been spoken of
here before.

Item there shall be a certain form or manner composed in the which they shall be
instructed, and they shall be demanded and apposed in the same doctrine which
they have before learned, to see if they have well understood and kept it.

When a child shall be sufficiently instructed and have passed his cathechisme,
then he shall recite solempnely the su^me of that which is therein contained,
and also shall make as it wear a confession of his christianity in the
presence of the church.

Item before this be done, that no child be suffered to receive the supper of
the lord, and that the parents be aduertysed not to bring them before that
time: for it is a thing most perelous as well for the children as the parents,
to enter into it without good and sufficient instruction, for yt which it is
necessari to use this order.

To ye end that there be no defaute, it is ordained that the children which
go to schole shall come to gether before none, and yt the masters do bring
them in good order in every paryshe.

The others, that their parents do bring or send them.

And to the end to avoid all confusyon, they shall observe as much as may be,
the distinction of the parishes in ye case as has been said before of ye
sacraments.

Item that those which shall be by force constrained to come, shall be called
before the Seniors, elders, or co^myssioners, and if they will not be persuaded
by good counsel, ye report shall be made to the Seniorye. Also to take heed to
such whether they do their duty or not, and that the commyssioners have an
eye unto them to take order accordingly.

Of the visitacion of the prisoners.
Moreover we have ordained a certain day in the week, in the which shall be
made certain consolations to the prisoners, for to admonish and exhort them:
and that there be one of the Seniors of ye counsel deputed to be there
assistent, to the end there be no fraud committed, and if there be any
appointed to dye by the determynacion of the counsel, it shall be necessary to
call some certain mynyster to comfort the person, as need shall require, for
when they tarry until such time as they lead them to the death, they be
often times so occupied with horror, that they be not apt to receive or
understand any consolacion, and this day is ordained the satterday after
diner.

Of the order which ought to be kept toward the grown persons for to
observe good order in the church.
THe commissyoners aforesaid shall gather them selves together once a week
with the mynisters, which shall be on the thursdaye, to see if there be any
disorder in the church, and to talk together for the remedy thereof when and
how as shall be most couenient.

Because they have no authority or Jurisdiction to compel or to constrayne
any, we have advised to give them one of our officers to call any of those
persons before them unto whom they will give admonycion. If any by contempt
refuse to appear, their office shall be to advertise the counsel thereof, to the
end to give order therein.

Here follows the persons whom the elders or commyssyoners ought to
admonyshe, and how they ought to proceed.
IF there be any which teaches strange or false opinions against ye doctrine
received, that he be called to confer with them. And if he be comfortable
they shall suffer him to depart without defame or slander, and if he be
obstinate, yet they shall admonyshe him certain times until they see that
greter seueriite be needful: and then to forbid him the communion letting it
be known to ye magistrate.

If any be negligent in coming to church, so that there be perceived in him
a notable contempt of the communion of the faithful, or if any show him self
a contemner of the order ecclesiastical, that they admonish him. And if he
render him self obedient, yt they send him away gently. But if he do
persevere from evil to worse, after they have aduertysed him three times, that
then they shall separate him from the church and declare him to the Seniorye.

As concerning the lives and the correction of their faults which shall
happen, it is necessary to proceed according to the order which Christ
commanded.

That is to say for secreate fautes they shall reprove secreatly. Also that
none bring his neighbor before the church for to accuse him of any fault the
which is not notoriouse or slaunderouse, except he find him stubborn and
contempteouse.

Moreover those yt be contempners of particular admonytyons of their
neighbors, shall be warned by the church, and if they will in no ways come to
reformacio^ nor acknowledge their fault when they shall be convinced, that then
they command them to absteyne from the communion until the time they be
better disposed.

As concerning notorious and public offenses, the church may in no case
wincke at the^ or pass them over, but if they be fautes which deserve only
admonityon, the office of the Commyssyoners or elders shall be to call them
before them wc be culpable, exhortinge them amiablie that they may amend: and
if they see amendment, no further to moleste them, but if they persevere
further in their euel, again to be admonished: and at length if they profit
not, then to denounce them as contempners of god, and so to absteyne from the
communion until they see in them a change of life.

As concerning crimes which deserve not only declaracion and aduertiseme^t
by words but correction with chastisement: if any be faulen, according as ye
case shall require, they shall denounce that he absteyne from the communion for
a certain time, humbling him self before god, and better to know his fault.

If any by contumacye or rebellion will presume or preace in contrary to that
is commanded, and for bydden him, the office of ye mynister shall be to put him
back, for it is not lawful to receive such a one to the communion: and
nevertheless that it be so moderated that there appear no rigor, by the which
any person should be grieved or offended, namely such corrections be but
medicines to bring the sinners unto god.

Item that all this be done in such sort that the mynisters take not upon
them any Civil Jurisdiction, and that this consistory be in no case any
derogacio^ to the authority of the Seniorie, nor to ordinarye Justice: but yt
the Civil power continue in his full efficacye, and namely where it shall be
need of punishment or compulcio^ of the parties, but the ministers with ye
consistory having heard the parties and declared with such admonitio^s, as
shall be nedeful, then to judge theri^ according to ye weightinesse of ye case.

Item that this pollicye be not only for ye town, but also for ye villages
perteyning to the Seniorie.

Order for the visitacion of the mynisters and paryshes parteyning to Geneua
First of all to conserve unity and good pollicye especially in doctrine
through the whole body of the church of Geneua, as well in the town as ye
villages belonging thereto, the magistrates shall chose two of the council, and
likewise the ministers shall chose two of the congregation, which shall have
the charge to go and enquire in every parish once in the year if ye minister
have set forth any new doctrine repugnant to the puritye of the gospel.

Secondlye they shall enquire if the minister has preached to edificacion, or
if he use any slaunderouse manner of living, if he be not able to teach ye
people, or if he be obscure, or use superfluous questions, or be over rigorouse
in life and doctrine.

Thirdly to exhort the people to haunte the sermons diligently, to hear
them, and do there after, and live christianly also to declare what is the
office of a minister, that he may be instructed the better to serve.

Fourthly to know if the minister be dilligent both to preach and visit the
sick, and to minister perticulerly to those which have need, and to stay that
nothing be done contrary to gods glory: also if he lead an honest life
showing it by his good example, if he use any dyssolutnesse or lyghtnes either
in him self or in his household, if he be disdainful or agree well with his
paryshners.

The manner of the visitacion.
THat the minister being appointed to this office after he has preached and
admonished the people as is aforesaid, shall enquire of ye wards and
procurators of ye paryshe both concerning the doctrine, and life of the
minister, and likewise concerning his diligence and manner of teaching, desiring
them in the name of god not to suffer nor dissemble any thing which may
hinder the honor of god, the advancement of his word, or the wealth of the
commons.

Item according as he has found, yt he make report to ye co^gregacio^, to
the end that if there be any fault which deserves no greater correction then
by words, he shall be admonished according to the custume.

Item if he have offended more grievously then ought to be suffered, let them
proceed according to the form of ye articls before me^sioned, yt is to say, the
foresaid four deputes shall make the report unto the Seniorie, therein to
proceed according to reason.

Item visitacion shall not importe any determinacion of causes or kind of
Jurisdiction, but shall be only a remedy to avoid all offenses. And above all,
ye ministers shall not swerve from their duty nor be corrupted.

Item this shall in no case be any let to the course of Civil Justice, nor to
exempt the ministers from ye common subjection: but yt they answer in civil
causes as others do before the ordynarye Justice. And also for crimes not to
spare them but to punyshe them when they have offended and in sum, that their
state may co^tynue as it is at this present.

This has been the order in the primitive church in ye time of ye Apostles, and
at this day is observed in the churches well reformed, according to the pure
doctrine of the gospel.

Ordinances concerning election of offices and officers, and first of the
election of the lords Sendicques.
EVery year the tewsdaye before the sunday after candlemas day, the counsel
shall be holden expressly to chose the Sendicques: and before they begin, the
first Sendicque shall make some good exhortacion, exhorting the^ to chose men of
good conscience, regarding ye honor of god, loui^g equetie and truth, and the
profit of the town, me^ of a good life and good name.

Moreover they shall make their prayers unto god, They begin with prayer in all
their election and counsels.
and after that every counselor shall be sworn to chose those which they shall
think to be most meet and sufficient in form following.

The oath of the small counsel.
WE promise and swear before god between the hands of the Seniory, to chose
and name into the office of Sendiques, those which we know to be meet and
sufficient, for the maintenance of the honor of god and the christian
religion, in this town to guide and govern the people in good order and
pollicye, to conserve the liberties of the town, and in chosinge them we shall
have our respect to ye public wealth, and not to particular affections,
neither for favor nor hate, as god is our wytnes of this promise, and shall be
Judge therein if we do the contrary.

After that done, every one by order shall name four cittezens before the
Sendiques, and ye Secretaires shall be there present to write those that shall be
named.

The frydaye folowinge they shall hold the counsel of the two hundred, and
after exhortacio^ and prayer made, the form of their oath shall be recyted all
presently holding up their hands.

Also they shall declare eight of those which have been named in the election of
the small counsel, that is to say those which had the most voices, and upon
the same let them make the election of eyghte, or of the number which have been
proposed, or of other if it shall seem good, nameli that they be all citezens,
in such manner that ye election of the small counsel, be as an aduertisment
without prejudice to the liberty of the two hundred.

The sunday following the general counsel shall be assembled, and there they
shall pronounce unto the people the election made by the two hundred so that
out of eight which shall be presented to the people, they shall chose four, if
so be yt they shall like the^: but always when it shall seem good unto them
they shall have liberty to refuse as well all as any party.

And if it happen that out of that present number their shall not be found
four whom the people shall like, that is to say by the most voices, yt then
they proceed to a new election, for the number which has been refused: first
by the small counsel, and afterward by the two hundred, so that none be
received but such as shall be approved by the people.

Item this order shall be observed to take two to ye lower part of ye town and
two of the upper.

This election made and confyrmed by the people, the four new elected shall
come into the town house to make their oath betwine the hands of the four
au^cientes, and so be put in possession of their office.

The form of their oath.
WE promise and swear to acquit us faythefully in the duetye of our office,
and first to maynteyne and defend as much as in us lies the lybertyes and
ryghtes of the town, well and truly to minister y^ which we shall have in
our hands, to execute good and right Justice, rendering to every man that
which shall apperteine to him, susteyning ye good and punyshinge the evil,
without favor or hate, moreover we promise to do and observe that which is
contained in the office of the counselors, god bearing us witness in all ye same
to punnyshe us if we do the contrary.

Touching the place for to know who shall be the first or second, if those
which they chose have been before in the office, let them see who has been the
first, and let him go before the other, and so every one consequently and
after his order.

If they have taken any which have not been before in office, then to see
how they were in the counsel before the other, and according to their
au^cienty they shall be placed: by the counsel, we understand as well y^
threasorers and secretaries as cou^sellers, and he which has ended his year
shall not be chosen until he have rested three year.

If it happen that any of the Sendicques die during his office, and that there
rest yet four monethe of his time, let there be another chosen as soon as
may be: but if the time be shorter, to let the year pass without
substituting of any other.

The election of the petye or small counsel.
THe mondaie following, the four new elected Sendiques with the old, and the
threasorer, shall assemble together with the two hundred, and after they have
made exhortacion and prayer, and the oath, they shall recite the roll of the
year past: and whom they will have to continue in their office: the other to be
put of. Nevertheless ye four ancient Sendiques shall continue without
controuersye, except they have committed faults worthy of reprehension in the
time of their government.

If that any be put of by the most voices, there shall be no other put in their
places suddenly, but the small counsel which shall be chosen, shall name in
number double, yt is to say two for one, to take which shall seem good to the^,
or to chose by their judgment, as has been said of ye Se^dicques.

If it happen that any counselor dye, there shall none succeed him in place
until the next year, except it be by pestilence, or by other inconveniences,
yt ye number be so sore diminished yt the counsel shall be unfurnished.

The election done, all shall come and make their oath before they set down,
principallye the new elected as the other has done before.

The form of their oath.
WE promise and swear faithfully to apply and to do all y^ perteyneth to
our office, and first of al to do our diligence to conserve and maintain
the wealth honor and profit of the town, and to come together as often and as
many times as need shall be, to give good and faithful counsel touching that
which shall be required of us.

Item to advertise those to whom it shall aperteine, of al yt we shall think to
be to the profit of the town.

Item to keep secret all that which has been said and determined in the
counsel, except it be a public matter which ought to be published.

Item in no case to be preiudiciouse unto the honor or profit of ye town for
favor, or amytie, or hate, or any other carnal consyderacyon, whatsoever it
be.

Item not to be moved with bribes or any such practyse whatsoever it be, from
Justice, or rightly to do our duty, but contrarily to break and let with all
our power such enterprises.

Item not to take presents or bribes for favor of any, in that which
concerns our office, nor in general, all that may be presented unto us in
the respect of our estate, for to make us decline from the fidelity which
we owe to ye town, and the right which we be bound to render to all.

Item in all causes yt which we shall be required of, to pronounce with all right
and equity that which shall seem good unto us, wtoute fraud or hate to any of
ye parties, and above al to procure that the christian religion be puerlye
observed, and god honored and served as well in the town as in y^ teritoris
of the same, god being witness unto us in all these promises to be Judge therein
if we do the contrary.

Touching the appointement of all their places, y^ four ancient Sendicques
shall be the first, and so orderly ye other according to ye time y^ they have
been counselors, or in higher offices.

The election of the Treasorer.
ITem from three year, to three year, he shall be chosen with the Sendicques in
like order and fassion, moreover when he shall be chosen that he make like oath
with ye counselors, adjoining thereto this promise: to minister faithfully to the
profit of the town, the common monye which shall be delivered into his hands,
and in general to procure for the commonwealth as his own proper, as well in
recovering as in keeping and distributing.

The election of the Secretaries.
ITem their shall be two Secreataries the one superior and the other inferior,
whose office shall be for no prefixed term, but every year when the Sendicques
shall be elected, the counsel shall consider if it be good that they continue in
their office. And if it shall seem good unto them upon good consyderacion, to
put them of, y^ then they place other in their stead, referringe it always to
the Judgment of the two hundred, the which may do as seems good unto them:
and that there be ouerseing or suruieng every year over this office, to make
election when need shall require.

The form of their oath.
WE promise and swear to put in writing faithfully and diligently all that
shall be nedeful as our office shall require, and also to trauail that by our
defaulte or negligence there come no damage neither to the town nor to the
people.

Item not to reveal any of ye Seacreates of ye counsel, nor declare them to
any person except it be by ye ordynarie commandment of the counsel.

Item to make expedicion in all that shall be committed to our charge, as well
for the town as for private parties, and in general to observe with a good
conscience al y^ apperteineth to the duty of our offices.

Of the counsel of the two hundred.
ITem the small counsel shall the next day after ye election, peruse the roll
of the year past, to the end to chose the counsel of three score and
consequently the two hundred, continuinge those which they shall think to be
mete, putting of those which shall seem good to be put of, placing other in
their stead, to fulfill the number: moreover to command to swear or renew
their oath, y^ form thereof shall be the same which they of the small council
do make.

For the auditors of the accomptes.
ITem that every year the pety counsel shall chose four, whereof one shall be one
of the Sendicques for to co^tynue (if it shall seem good unto them) of those
which were the year before, or others: and that done they shall make their
report to the counsel of ye two hundred, the which have such liberty to
ratify them or put them of as has been said.

The form of their oath.
WE promise and swear to do in our office that which apperteineth to good
and faithful procurers of the publyke welthe, and to have such care thereof as
of our own propre famylye.

And principally in hearing the accomptes which shall be made unto us, neither to
over pass nor allow any thing, but that which seems unto us just and
reasonable.

Item to conserve and keep all the rightes and privileges of the town well and
faithfully* bringing all into good order as shall be needful.

Item if their be any thing amiss or out of the way, to make good and
diligent inquisision to bring again and recover it.

Item that all which shall be perteyninge to the town be it rent, pressed, fines,
confiscation, or other things whatsoever they be, to make good and diligent
inquisition and pursuit wtoute respect of person.

Finally to do our diligence that nothing perish or be alienated in manner
of wise by our fault negligence or dissymulacion.

For the Controuler, the master of the monye, the keeper of the town house
called the Saoulter and the master of the ordinance.
Item that every three year after the counsel is chosen, the petie counsel
shall chose these officers always upon this condition y^ y^ election shall be
referred to the two hundred, to be ratified by them: and if they do not
approve them, the petye counsel shall chose new, nevertheless the old may
continue if they shall see it good.

Touching the form of their oath it shall be sufficient that it be general, to
procure the welthe and honor of ye town as much as lies in their power, and
with all pain and diligence without fraud or gile to exercise their office, as
well toward every particular man as y^ whole public state.

For the procurer general.
ITem that this shall be a yearly office for as much as it shall be lawefull to
continue him which has served if it shall seem good, and namely it shall be most
expedient if he be a man meet and one that serves in his office diligently,
moreover the manner of his electyon shall be like unto the last above said.

Item being chosen he shall be sworn between the hands of the Seniorye as
follows.

The form of his oath.
I Promise and swear to maynteyne and defend with all my power the honor and
profit of ye commons, and diligently to watch for the conseruacion of the
rightes of the city, as if they were mine own proper: and to pursue those to
whom it shall apperteine, and likewise to recover without supporting y^ one or
greuing y^ other.

Item to have an eye that no particular person do encroche upon the
co^munaltie, and if any happen so do do, to reveal him or pursue him
according as mine office imports.

Item to make no bargain covenant or agreement in any wise for to dyminyshe
the profit of the town, nor to receive presents nor bribes, for to
dissemble, nor to hold my peace when my duty shall be to speak.

For the captain general
THis shall be an office perpetual, yet nevertheless there shall be a diligent view
had every three year, to provide for ye town a new, if he which is therein be
faulen into age, or long sickness, or other wise occupied that he cannot tend
to his office: and the election to be by ye counsel and also approved by the
two hundred as is before said.

For the particular captains.
THis shall be an office for term of life, and in every quarter of the town he
shall chose his particular captain in the presence of the captain general,
and two of the counsel deputed for the same, and after ye election shallbe
reported to the counsel, which shall have authority is ratifye him.

For the banderettes.
ITem ye banderettes general shall be elected as the captain and in such sort.
Touching the other banderettes they shallbe chosen as the particular captains,
except in stead of two counselors it shall be sufficient that the captain of
the quarter be there with their dizoners.

Of their lieutenantes.
EVery one may chose him his lieutenant so that it be by the consent of all
their bands in general, except in the time of danger this shall not be done
without the knowledge and express permyssyon of y^ counsel.

Of the dizeners.
ITem the petye counsel has full power to chose them, and to continue them
so long as they do their duty, or other wise to dispose them.

All shall be sworn between y^ hands of the Sendicques in this form, and to
renew it in time of necessitye.

The form of the oath.
I Promise and swear to endeavor my self faythefully for the defense of the
town, and in no case to forsake it in the time of necessity.

Item to be continually ready and pressed to bear arms against the enemies,
whenever I shall be appointed by my superiors.

Item to maintain and keep peace and tranquillity among the burge^es and
habitantes of the town: and to stay and let with all my power al sedicion,
strife, fighting, or chiding.

Item to make no evil conspiracy or enterprise, but the contrary, resisting
all those which do it, and to reveal them to my superiors.

Item to stope all dyssolucyons and outrages, and in general all which shall be
contrary to the order and policy of the town.

For the geolyer or Souldan.
THis office shall be for no certain time, nevertheless it shall be ouerseen and
vewed every three year, to see if he do well his duetye: the election shall be by
the counsel, the confirmacion by ye two hundred, as is aforesaid.

The form of the oath which they use shall be thus.
I Promise and swear to keep faithfully all that which shall be committed to me,
and to render account thereof without fraud.

Item to keep every prisoner committed to my charge chayned or at large, as
shall be commanded me.

Item in such cases as shall be forbidden and not permitted that any do speak
with a prisoner, I shall take such diligent head that none come at them to talk
with them.

Item not to permit the prisoners to use any bancketts, outrages, plaieng,
dissollutnesse, gamyng, or such other unmeet things.

Item not to exact or take above y^ which shall be due according to ye tax.

For the Saoultier.
THis shall be an office perpetual, he holds the bible open before the judges
at the time of Judgment.
if he which be once chosen do truly discharge his office, nevertheless he
shall be ouersen every three year, to see if he be meet or convenient to continue
or be deposed.

Item this election shall be made by the petie counsel, and confirmed by y^ two
hundred.

For the heroldes.
THis shall be an office likewise perpetual as of the Saoultier, the one shall be
a horse man, the other a foot man, the election shall be as is aforesaid.

The waiters or officers for the counsel, and the lieutenant.
THis shall be an office perpetual except there happen any notable fault,
also the petie counsel have full power to make them or depose them if need
shall be.

The number of the officers for the City shall be fourtene, and for the
lieutenant tower.

Touching their oath it shall be sufficient beside the oath of common burgeses,
they shall promise to be diligent assisting at all times, ready to wait upon
the commandment of ye Sendicques and counsel, serving them in their office.

Item to come incontinent when they shall be commanded, to execute all yt shall be
given them in charge.

Item to bear themselves faithfully in all that apperteineth to their office
without fault or delay, and to keep secreate all that shall be done and spoken
in the counsel, and diligently to watch and keep well the town house, and
all that is therein.

Item to make faithefull report of al messages or visitacions which shall be
committed to them.

The gardes of the towers and the porters.
ITem this office shall be perpetual so long as they shall do their duty, the
counsel shall over see them, and in their power to continue or dyspose them.

Item it shall not be needful to set any especial form of oath, for it
requires not but fidelity and diligence to keep the place, in the which they
be constituted, which may be briefly done by words.

For the notaires.
THe power to make them or depose them, shall be in the petie counsel,
nevertheless none shall be received without the report and witness of the
notaires of ye town, concerning their sufficiency, wisdom, and learning.

The form of their oath.
I Promise and swear to receive no act nor Instrument which shall be to ye
dishonor or damage of y^ town, or against the policy of the same.

Item to couche faithefully and set down by writing al such acts and
Instruments as I shall be required, without addinge or dymynishing to the
purity thereof.

Item to deliver to every one al such rightes as apperteine to him, and shall be
in my hands.

Item not to Concele or keep back any instruement to the prejudice of the one
or favor of the other, and also not to deliver into the hands of ye party
contrary, any documents to defraud him which I ought to help: but to
conserve and keep faithefully all acts which shall be committed to my charge.

Item to make expedicion to all me^ of that which may serve them according to
equity and reason.

The counsel have full power to ordeine al these offices, to constitute and set
in those which they will.

Now it is to be noted that to exercise these offices aforesaid, from the
petye counsel unto the Sendicques, and so down ward unto the Saoultier, it is
required yt he be a cittezen.

Item to be the lieutenant or one of the assistance.

Item for all the Captains and banderettes general.

Item the Controuller, Auditour of the counsel, master of the monye, procurer
general master of thartilery, and geoler, it shall be required that he be a
citezen: for the rest it is sufficient if he be a Burges.

As concerning that which has been said of term and space of time, it is to be
understand in this sort, that if it happen any fault worthy to be punished
by deposicion it shall always be lawful to depose the offender as he has
deserved.

Moreover the Burgeses or citezens which shall refuse to take the dignity of
office or estate unto the which he shall be called or ordained by the Seniorie,
and will in no case condissende and agree to take it, that he shall then be set
to pay.xxv. Crowns for fine for his contumacye, and constrained to absent the
town for a year except he have a lawful excuse well known to the counsel.

The office charge and power of the lords Sendicques.
THe four Sendicques shall be contynually resident in the town, during y^ year
of their Sendicate, not so much as any of them to depart out of the town,
to lodge out of ye town, not for one night, except he let it be known to ye
others: and that none of them do enterprise any far journey, to be six or
eighte days absent, without the leave of the counsel.

Item that every day they shall gather the^ selves to gether after dinner, yt
is to say at one of y^ clock, to consulte upon that which shall be to do, and
to put order their in, and also to put those things in execution which has
been concluded by the counsel.

Item upon the ordinary days that the counsel is holden, the Sendicques
shall be the first in the town house* as well to show good enspa^le unto other
as to deliberate together of those things which they will do.

Item if any thing happen which requires the assembly of the counsel, they
shall gather them selves together to do those things which shall be needful.

Item in things which shall require their presence in diverse places at one time,
they shall deuyde them selves in such sort as each of them may be where it
shall be expedient.

Item if it happen any public noise as fire, tumulte, or other like, that ye
first Sendicque shall come incontinent into the town house, and shall
continue there, waiting for the news which shall be brought him, to y^ end to
assemble the counsel from hour to hour if need shall be, or otherwise to
dispose according as necessity shall require: and that the other three shall
run hastily unto the place where ye dainger shall be, and moreover having seen
the thing, two shall disseuer, one on the one side of the town and the other
on the other side, to visyte and keep the streates, corners and ye gates if
need shall be, and the third shall continue upon the danger, until it shall be
apesed, or otherwise.

The office of the first and chief Sendicques.
THat every day when there shall be no counsel, he shall come into the town
house that is to say at the coming from the sermon, to se if there rest any
conclusion of the counsel to execute, or hear those plaintifes which shall
come.

Item that he receive the letters y^ shall be addressed to the counsel, but he
shall not open them but in ye presence of one of his fellows, or at y^ lest two
cou^sellers: but if it be a matter of have he shall call his other compagnions
to consulte at the hour, or otherwise to tarry until they shall be assembled:
and generally yt in all matters which are worthy to have consultacion at the
hour he shall assemble his compagnyons.

Item on the days of ye counsel incontinent after the sermon, he shall be in ye
town house to hear those which shall require audience.

Item at his co^mi^g forth he shall make answer upon those things that be
heard, and that ye same day he shall provide to put in execution that which
has been ordained, if they be things which may be executed so redilie.

Item that he shall sign y^ marriages before they be pronounced in ye church,
inquiring diligently if the marriage may be made according to the ordinances
of god.

Item y^ he shall have y^ town seal in his hands, and the charge for to seal.

Item he shall be president over ye second appellacions or supreme.

The office of the iii. other Sendicques.
ITem the one shall set in the consistory, the other in the chamber of
accomptes, and the third over the first appellacions.

Item there shall be one deputed or appointed to vilet the prisoners once a
week, and this charge shall be given him in the beginning of the year by y^
advise of the counsel.

What some of them may do.
ITem two may sign the commandments ordinary, to make paiementes for the
charges passed by the counsel.

Item to open y^ letters y^ be adressed to the counsel as is said.

That which one alone may do.
ITem that whatsoever complainte shall come, each one of y^ Sendicques has full
power to command those to whom it apperteneth to be examined, and to examine
them, and to imprison them if need shall be.

Item that al dissolutions, arrogansye, insolences, dronkennes, and such other
like, every one has power to impriso^ such, and after make report to ye
counsel, but he has no power to deliver the prisonner before he has made
report.

Of matters Criminalls.
IF they take a Criminal or a malifactour, that within xxiiii. hours they
shall commau^de the lieutenant to make him answer upon those points of the
which he shall be accused.

Afterward he shall be committed to the lieutenant, if the case be that the
matter may be easly proved, or namelye if he be already proved, and that there
be no difficulty, as of murder, theft, or such like, that incontinent they
shall do justice, and at the most they shall not keep him above x. days.

Item if it be a matter dyffycill to prove as concerning the act, or that it
require consultacion concerning ye sentence, y^ then a competent term shall be
given unto the lieutenant to bring forth his witnesses, according to ye place
where they be: nevertheless he shall not have above one monethe to do it at ye
most, although he seek his witness in other places.

Item if they be in the town or within two leagues, he shall have but fyftene
days.

Item if the criminal or malefactor demand to be admytted to his
Iustificacion, yt the counsel shall have respect if it be convenient and
according to reason or not.

Item if ye counsel shall perceive y^ he ought to be admitted, they shall give
him respit for.xxx. days.

Item the proof known and the examinations and defenses heard, in case that
they he admitted, ye Sendicques ought to order the matter so that the prisoner
have sentence within.xii. days, at ye farthest, albeit yt the matter require
consultacion, otherwise that they do it the first day.

Item the Sendicques shall be judges of all criminal causes being accompanied
with the counsel, and each of the four in his order shall pronounce the
sentences, nevertheless if there be many sentences to be given in one sytting,
there shall be but one to pronounce it, but if there be one or more absent, that
those which be the first set after them in counsel y^ they take the place with
the staf, e but yet they shall not pronounce the sentence.

The office, charge, and duetye, of the counsel.
ITem that iii. days in ye week that is to say Monday Tuesday and Friday, e
they shall come together at the sound of the bell without any other calling:
moreover if it shall happen any extraordynarye matters, that they shall appear
at the hour assigned by ye commandment of ye Sendicques, by night or by day.

Item in the ordinarye days from Easter, to Michelmas, they shall assemble at
seven of the clock. And from Michelmas to Easter at eight of the clock which
is at the end of the ^ermon: and he that appears not to be assistant shall
pay.

Item in matters of great importance and which require ye presence of the
whole counsel, the Sendicques shall command to seek the counsel by ye oath
which they owe to ye town, but this shall not be done but by good discreacyon.

Item whosoever shall be called upon his oath and appears not, he shall pay a
fine of five florence, except he have a lawful excuse, for ye which he shall be
sworn if he will have his excuse received, and moreover y^ he do signify in
his own person or his wife.

Item ye none shall depart before yt the counsel be ended wtoute asking leave.

Item whosoever shall depart without the leave of the counsel, and being
called again by the Saoultier, at the commandment of the first Sendicque,
if he come not, he shall be put to a fine five Florens, and three days
imprysonment.

Item after the praie^ be made none shall speak but in his order, All their
counsels begin with prayer
and if many speak at once, the first Sendicque shall impose Silence, the
silence imposed if their be any that cease not, he shall be put to a fine of v.
shil.

Item that every one shall keep his place to avoid confusion.

Item y^ noe man be so hardye to propose any thing of his own head but he shall
reveal the same to the first Sendicque before the counsel be set, that the
Sendicque may propose it, nevertheless if it seem good unto him, he may
command the other to declare it more at large the better to inform the
counsel.

Item if it happen that any have aduertysement after the counseyll be set, of
any thing perteyninge to the common welthe, that then being entered into the
house he shall advertise the first Sendicque a part.

Item that none shall reveal that which is entreated of or decreed in
secreate in their counseyll upon pain to be deposed, and for ever to be unable
for that estate: moreover according to the weighte of the case, to be punished
by the advise of ye counsel either by a fine of mouer or open penance, or else
by corporal punishment, but if it appear that he has done it to stop the
course of Justice it shall be open penance, if it have been to grieve the commonwealth it shall be pain corporal.

Item if any of them have ought to propose of his own case he shall let it be
written, or otherwise he shall tarry until they have dispatched the present
things.

Item that none swear or curse as to name the devil wtin y^ counsel upon ye
pain of v. shil. and if he continue after he has been corrected so^drie times
then to be deposed.

Item y^ none shall blaspheme god up on ye pain to cry god mercy solemynly,
that is with a torche burning in his hand, and to be put in prison, and if he do
it often times to be deposed and punished more rigorously.

Item y^ none reproach or mysname any other, nor to enter into any contenssion
or chiding, or brauling, that they speak no contumelious words or
dishonestie, but that each one telling his opinion shall speak with al modestye
without charging the other or speaking against their honor, upon the pain of
v. shill. and if he be accustumed so to do, after certain admonicions, and no
amendeme^t had, to be deposed from the counsel.

Item if any do charge another with a crime, he shall be bound to prove it
otherwise to cry him mercy: and to be deposed from ye counsel the rest of ye
year, and he which has been charged shall have his action.

Item this order shall be kept as well for ye counsel of sixty as in general of
ye two hundred, for ye avoiding of confusion, and y^ al things may be the
better observed, they shall read yt which is passed every year as well in ye
first counsel holde^ after ye election, as also of ye two hundred, and then al
shall swear to keep it.

Item ye nothing shall be set forth among ye two hundred before it has been
treated of by ye petye counsel, neither in the general counsel before it has been treated of before, as well of ye two hundred as of the petye counsel.

For what causes the councellers ought to retire them selves.
ITem that every one in his own proper cause shall retire him self before he
be commanded, and if he do it not they shall compel him to do it.

Item in that which apperteyneth to his, and not to his own person, as in
civil causes, the father shall not be present when the cause of his son
shall be denounced, neither brother nor uncle: moreover if any will not retire
him self of his own good will, to be admonished by the counsel.

Item in Criminal causes none shall tarry in the affairs of his parent or of
his Coosyn issued from his cosyn germayne, but shall be excluded.

Item in all causes which shall seem good to the counsel to exclude any,
immediately they shall depart.

The office of the threasorer.
THe threasorer shall be present eueri day in ye counsel upon pain aforesaid,
and have his voice as the other.

Item that he shall keep secreate y^ which shall be said or done in the counsel,
upon the same pain that is set upon the counselors.

Item to receive all the common money as well of the ordinarye revenue, as the
pains of fines or other extraordinarye sommes.

Item that he shall demand and receive in due time and also yield account of
that which shall be due, either by fermers, particular receyuers, or pains fines
or revenues, as of al ather things, so that the town have no lack by
negligence.

Item if he cannot be paid with a good will, he shall constreyne the detters
by imprisonment without any further delay.

Item he shall deliver no money to any person but by commandment, and having
received commandment he shall not delay the time, so that there comme any
complaynte against him.

Item he shall render accomptes every syxte monethe in the chamber of
accomptes, and not to dyfferre ye time above six wekes over his term.

Item in rendering of his accounts he shall show how he received it, with what
modiacio^, Act, or Ordinance, or by what virtue he has received it.

Item concerning the things received or paid, he shall show forth the
commandments with ye quittances upon every article.

Item y^ the accomptes may appear more clear, he shall set them down in
form of a register.

When he shall be deposed from his office he shall render the accomptes with in
three months: and if he be found debitour, he shall render the remainder
within six wekes, or otherwise he shall be kept in prison unto the last end of
the payment.

The office of the Secreataries.
ITem they both shall be continually in the counsel, except he have a lawefull
excuse: also they shall keep secreate that which shall be done in the counsel.

Item they shall not make out or deliver to any person the copye of any act
which ought to be kept secreate, nor to reveal any thing without the
knowledge of the Seniors: he that does the contrary shall be punished as is
aforesaid.

Item he shall have two Registers, the one for the public affairs, or in any
point touching the comminaltie, the other for particular men, which
appertain not to the town.

Item, the first Secreatarye shall write the first Register of those things
holden in the counsel, the other shall have that which appertains to
particular affairs.

Not withstanding the one shall write if need be, and read the letters,
instruments and acts, that the other shall make, to the end that there be no
delay.

Item, that each of them in his office shall make dispatche of the matters
which his Register imports, nevertheless, the first only shall have the
charge to sign all things when they shall be present.

Of the other part, when there shall be public matters to dispatche of great
importance, as instructions, and such like, the first shall comunicate with
his companion, the one to use the others counsel.

But in the absence of the one, the other shall have the whole charge, and the
second shall do the office of the first.

Item, there shall be a Register apart for the letters missiues, and shall
continue in the Secretaries place or closet, the which shall be common to them
both according to the necessity.

Item, a Register aparte for causes criminalls.

Item, a Register for causes of marriages.

Item, a Register wherein shall be enrouled the officers from the first day of
their office to the last.

Item, another to keep in order the statutes and proclamatio^s, which shall be
made according to ye necessity of time.

Item, a Register of the commandments with shall be made for the disbursing of
any monei, to ye end y^ the rendering of the acomptes may appear more clear,
and be better verified.

Item, another Register, wherein shall be drawn all the acts which import the
recoueryng of money for the communaltie, as of fynes, and other profittes.

Item, that all informacions shall be locked in a cheste or closet, of the
which the first Secretarye shall have the kaye, and in his absence the
second, of the which they shall render account: and that they may be found
when need shall be, each of them shall have a mark by number, and in another
coffer there shall be an Inventory marked, all the process concluded and
finished, shall be brought into another place.

Item, they shall make diligent dispatche as well for y^ particular matters as
common, and that nothing shall be left undone, they both shall comme together
after dinner, at the same hour that the Sindicques assemble, also at six of
the clock in the morning.

Item, they shall distribute equallye together all the profittes.

Of the office of Capitaines, Banderetts and Dyzners.
THE Captain general shall be diligente and vigilant over all the town, he
shall gather no assembly suspecte, nor make any conuenticle, which may be a
preparatiue to sedicion, tumulte, or mutinetie, and the particular Captains,
Banderettes and Dizners, shall do the like, every one in his office and
quarter.

Item, if any such like thing happen, or that there be beginninges of trouble,
the Captain general shall take heed to it betymes and advertise the counsel.

Item, if the particular Captaitnes shall first perceive it, they shall do
the like, enformyng the Seniors, or their General to make their report as
shall seem good to them.

Item, they shall watch every one in his office that there be no disorder or
insolence, and that the Burgeses and Inhabitants govern them selves honestlye
in their housholdes, without noise, trouble, or brauling, and if any do the
contrary, they shall admonish him, and if that admonission profit not, they
shall make their report to the Captain or Seniors.

Item, if there happen any danger or inconvenience in the town, they shall be
always ready for defense of the same, when commandment shall be given them.

Nevertheless, it shall not be lawful to the Captain or Banderet to assemble
men, or to arm any, without express commandment of the counsel, except
there happen some sodein assault without, in the which case they shall do
their office, while in the mean time, the counsel may provide more largely.

Item, to the end that the town shall not be unprovided, the Capitain general
shall not enterprise any far voyage, as to be above eight days absent
without special lycense.

Item, that each of them and especially the Dizners, shall be diligent that the
Proclamations and Ordinances of the counsel, as well for the reformation of
the church, as for the civil estate, that they may be well observed: and if any
do the contrary, they shall advertise the Seniorie.

Item that every Dizener shall make every half year a roll of all the burgeses
and inhabitauntes within his diznarie comprehended, with all the housholdes
making fire aparte, and to present the said roll to the counsel.

Item, that once a year the captain general accompanied with the captains
perticulers and Dizners, each in his quarter, shall make visitation from house
to house, to know if the Burgeses and Inhabitauntes be furnished with armor as
it appertains for the defense of the town.

The Auditors of accomptes.
ITEM, that three days in y^ weke that is to say Tewsday, Thursday and
Saterdaye, they shall assemble them selves together both morning and euenyng,
to do that their office requires.

Item, they shall put in writynge all manner of Instruments, and obligacions in
order, and set the^ down in Inventory, to the end that nothing be lost but
be found easily.

Item, they shall have an officer convenient appointed to seek parties when
need shall be.

Item, that without exception of person, they shall do their duty to all
men, to cause them to pay their duetye.

Item, when any refuses to pay, or denies the debt, or alleges any
excuse, which seems to them insufficient, they shall make report thereof to
the counsel within eyghte days folowinge.

Item, if by favor or frendshippe they spare any man, they shall be punyshed
upon their wages, for that which is paste, and to be bound for the debt and
charged therewith.

Item, to declare that they do truly discharge this office, every.iii.
months they shall present a roll of inventory of dettes and obligations,
which they shall find, to cause the parties to appear with diligence, and
those with dilyueraunce of their Register to confer with the same if need
shall requier.

Also concerning the profits of the town, they shall not concelethe
perticulers of their rightes, but when the Registers of the town may serve,
they shall communicate with them to make out copyes, when need shall requier.

Item, they shall note all the rights apperteyninge to the town, as rentes,
revenues, or causes, which be not paid, and after shall make report to the
counsel to the end to join them to the ordinarye inue^torie, and that upon
pain aforesaid.

Item they shall reuisite the comptes of the Treasurour incontinent after they
shall be presented to them, and close them up without delay, but if they do not
bring them in by the time appointed, that to is say at the end of six
months, they shall procure them, and not suffer them to pass the time
appointed.

The office of the controuler.
HE shall not pass one year without visiting all the buyldings apperteyning to
y^ town, but when he shall be advertised by the inhabitauntes that there is
necessity of reparacio^, that without long delaie of time he shall come upon
the place to see what lacks, and to set order therein: but if it happen any
inconuenyence by his negligence after he has been aduertysed, that then he
shall answer.

Item in all buildinges where as is no habitacion, as temples brydges, and
other like, he shall be dilygent to ouersee them without aduertiseme^t of other.

Item he shall provide and take order that nothing perish or decay for fault
of reparacions.

Item he shall have a register convenient to note all the day works of
massons, and carpenters, and that he fail not but to assygne the acquittance
of the threasorer when he shall be thereof certified.

Item whersoeuer there shall be massons carpenters or other workmen, he shall
not fail to have an eye to them, to know if they do their duetye faythefully.

The office of the master of the Artyllerye.
HE shall keep warely the keys and not to deliver them into y^ hands of any
other, nor put any in trust without express commandment of the counsel,
and if there happen any defaulte, he shall answer thereto.

Item he shall be diligent to keep nete and clean and in good point the
artillery, ready for to serve at y^ hour if need shall require.

Item he shall be dilygent and take heed in making clean, that nothing be put
out of order.

Item, he shall take heed that there be no disceyte, for the which cause he
shall be contynually present, and after he shall reuisyte and see that there be
no inconueniencie.

Item, he shall neither charge nor discharge any peace but in necessity,
except it be by express commandment from the Seniors, and that this be
observed in all the bulwarks.

Item he shall keep the powder well lockyd, so that no inconvenience happen,
upon pain to answer it, if it be his fault.

Item when need shall be to set abroad the artillery, his office is to do it by
the commandment of ye Seniors.

For the proctour general.
HE shall be assistant in ye court of ye lieutenant in ye time of pleading, to
know and understand if there be any cause or interest for ye town, and
there after to form his conclusions, and this to be done, audience shall be
given him, and the lieutenant shall demand if there be any thing to be said
which seems to be meddled with ye common interest, before he end his causes.

Item, in all causes which perteyne to ye wealth or profit of ye town, and to
the conseruacio^ of ye common weal, he shall insta^tly pursue it as a good
proctor of ye common wealth, and namely in criminal causes he shall be joined with
ye lieutena^t.

Item, in ye fault of parents and friends he shall solicit and pursue to make
gardens, or overseers for pupilles and orfelings, or to depose those which be
if need shall require.

Item he shall be a party to demand and call upon all fines in the name of the
town, of al those with offended: nevertheless he shall receive none, nor it shall
not be lawefull for him to make any pacte, or apointe any man his payement,
and those which be condemned in any payement he shall signify to the
thresorer every weke, that he may recover it.

Item he shall spare no manner of person in such cases upon pain to pay the
sum him self, nevertheless he shall not molest any man to bring him before
the Justice except he be well furnished with proves.

Item he shall take pain and do his diligence to know those which hold
ought of the town, as lands, possessions, meadows, houses, or which weholdeth
any thing from the town, to aduertyse the audytors of the accomptes therein.

Item when there shall be any buylding in the town he shall have respect that
they enterprise not nor incroche upon the street, but he shall endeuer him
self to let it, until it be determined by Justice.

Item if any house be ruynate or faulen down, so that the town be thereby
deformed, he shall pursue him which owes the place until they have builded
or forsaken the same.

Likewise if there be danger of any house to decay or faulen in ruin with the
common altie has interest in, he shall make pacte with the owner to shore it
or repair it..

Item, he shall suffer no house to be shorde upon the street to let the common
passage, except it be for a time mete to repair the same, but howsoever it be
it shall not pass eighte months, but if he be negligent and by favor of
any, dissemble the time he shall be put to fine.

Item, he shall have the ouersighte of the bread, which the bakers put to
sale, whether it be of just weight or not, and this shall he do every weke. And
where he finds defaulte, he shall proceed inform as follows, that is to say
if he find bread which has not his just mark and weight according to the
price of ye corn, that was the saterdaye before, he shall leuye v. shil. for
fine: of the which ye half shall be given to the town, and the thresorer to
receive it, the other to ye said proctor: and moreover ye bread shall be
co^fiscate to the profit of the hospital, and this for the first time.

For the second time.xx. shil. for a fine, and confiscacion of the bread to
be applied as is aforesaid.

For the third time.lx. shill. for a fine, and confiscacion of the bread as is
aforesaid.

For the fourth time ten florence to be distributed as is said, and the
offe^der to be deprived of his occupacion, and his oven raced.

Item, he shall make an Inventory of all the mouables, confiscacions, and
goods, where the Justice has laid hand upon, to the profit of ye town and
make report to the counsel.

Item, he shall take heed of ye houses apperteining to the town ye none usurp
upon them by any particular. Also he shall let them to the profit of the
commonaltie, nevertheless he shall let none: but by his aduertisme^t, ye
threasorer shall see if it be under.x florens, and for ye space of one year, or
whether it be longer term, or higher price, y^ he do according to ye custom
of the town.

For the Saultier.
HE shall have the charge of the town house, that upon ye days of ye counsel
he shall open ye great door of ye counsel in ye morning: and not shut it before
ye counsel be departed

Likewise when the counsel shall be holden extraordinarely, or ye two hundred
assembled.

Item, at such time as ye first Sendicque shall be there to hear complaints or
dispatche causes, or when the four shall be gathered together after diner.

Item, when the court of the lieutenant shall be holden above where the
appellacions be, all that day long he shall not open but the littell door.

Upon the eueninge he shall shut the doors betimes, and keep it shut* all the
night: but before he lock it, he shall search and vewe ye their be none
within, nevertheless when any of ye Sendicques come he shall open to him, at what
hour of the night it be.

Item, ye he shall keep ye house net and in good order, and if there be any
thing to be repared incontinent he shall aduertyse the controuler.

Item, he shall make a fire betimes in the morning to heat the hall, and the
chamber a certain time before ye first Sendicque and the Secreataries do come.

Item, he shall not fail to be first when the counsel shall be holden for to
keep the door.

Item, he shall keep secreate al which shall be said and done there within, upon
the same pain which has been said of the counselors.

Item, he shall accompanye the Seniors Sendicques in all acts of justice.

Item he shall accompanye the lieutenant in the executyon of all Acts
Criminalles.

Item, he shall present ye wine which the Seniors shall send to the
Imbassiadores, or others.

Item, he shall visit the houses ruinated with those that be sworn when it
shall be required, and make report to the counsel.

Item, to lymyte and measure the feldes, and possessions, with in the
Fraunchises.

Item he shall have a closset to lock and shutt in the goods which apperteyne
to the knowledge of the justice, tarying till the Inventory be made, that is
to say when the town shall take any interest, or when there be no heirs, or
when the heirs shall not agree, or when it is requisite that the justice seize
any thing.

Item, to take and keep the notaries chestes when any of them do die, to
conserve the rightes which are passed by their hands.

Item, when any watch man dies or is deposed he shall receive again his
halberte and his harnes and other secreate things which he has of ye
Seniorie, for to deliver them to their successors.

Item, when the watch shall take any by night in the streates, they shall
bring them to him, and he shall take and keep them until ye next day.

Item, if their be brought any thing to him to be delivered into his hands, he
shall receive it and keep it faithfully, nevertheless he shall have a regester
to write as well the prisoners which be brought him as all other things, and
that he write it immediately in ye presence of him which brings it to him, and
in the morning he shall sign it by the Secreatarie.

The office of the porters, kepers of gate^ and gardes of the towers.
ITEM, every porter shall shut his gate at the sound of the bell, and shall not
open it before ye hour appointed, be it morning or evening.

Item if any desire to come in, after the gate be shut he shall not open unto
him without license, except the passage for ye posts, and yet they shall not
open unto them except ye watch be there present for fear of danger.

Item in special necessity as in time of pestilence, the porter shall let out
the sick or dead as he shall have commandment, to open to him which shall be
admytted for the purpose.

Item that every one shall be dilligent to keep his keys, so that there happen no
inconveniences by his negligence, but that he shall answer it.

Item none shall commyte any other in his place wtoute asking leave of y^
first Sendicque, or in his absence one of his companions.

Item in the time of vproare* fire, or such accidents, they shall abide by
their gates, and not to depart thence except he have express commandment.

Item, in suspicious times the porter with the gardes shall shutt ye gate
incontinent after the watch has given them a sign, such as has been before
declared unto them.

Item, the gardes of y^ towers shall not fail but to lie each of them in his
tower, and he shall not bring in any multitude of people without leave or
commandment.

Item in their absence they shall put none other in, except they have lise^ce.

Item he that keeps the bulwark of the market place shall have the keie of the
cheyne of the lake, to shut up the passage of the botes, and open it in the
morninge.

The watches of the two steples.
ITEM, the watch men shall be night and day in the steples, of Sayncte Peter
and Sayncte Iarueis, and shall be dilygent to epsy within and without.

Item, if it happen any fire in the town, that he which is nerest shall cry
with a loud voice to the next houses without sounding his bell.

Item, in suspecte times each shall have a bell and a banner, and if he see any
great troop of men he shall sound his bell and and put his banner that way
that they be, to the end that y^ porters may be upon their gardes, and if need
shall be to shute the gates.

The court of the lord lieutenant and Adiuters of right, and the somnarye of
the Justice of Geneua. And first the electyon of the Lieutenant and of his
four Assystantes.
THE teusdaie before ye sunday after S. Martyne, ye petye counsel shall
assemble to make the election of the Lieutenant and: to have a good beginning,
the first Sendicque shall exhort the company to pray unto god, that he will
direct their ways and hearts, o chose me^ of a good conscience, loving
equity, and truth, men of prudence, and knowledge, to judge rightfully, and
after the prayer made they all shall be sworn in order, in form following.

We promise and swear before god to chose and name into this office those which
we think to be meet and sufficient for the mayntenaunce of y^ honor of god
in this town, and to render right to all without accepting of person, and in
chosing we shall have respect unto the commonwealth and tonoe particular
affection, neither for favor nor hate as god bearethe us witness in this
promise, therein to be judged if we do the contrary.

After this each shall name before ye Sendicques, the Secreataries being
present, to write their voices: ye Fridaye folowinge in the counsel of the two
hundred after prayer made, ye declaration and the oath, they shall propose
those two which have been chosen by the greatest part, and upon that ye two
hundred shall proceed in their electyo^, taking if it seem good to them one of
the two, or else another third, so that the first electyon be as an
aduertysement without prejudice to the liberty of the second.

The sunday following, the general counsel shall be assembled, there they shall
pronounce to the people the election made by ye two hundred, to know if ye
people be agreeable to have him, if the people accept him which is chosen,
then the election is fyrme, and shall continue, but if they refuse him they
shall proceed to a new electyon, first by the petie counsel, after by the two
hundred, so that none be in the office except he be confirmed and approved by
the people or by the greatest voice.

For the assistaunce
TOUCHING the Assistaunce two shall continue in their office the second year,
so y^ every year they shall make but two new in the place of those two which
have served two year, nevertheless the last election shall be by the two hundred,
without coming to the people: and the same day the lieutenant with his four
adiutors (as well ye ancients which were of ye year past as ye new elected)
shall come into ye town house to be sworn before the Sendicques and the
council, and to be put in possession.

The form of their oath.
WE promise and swear to execute our office in the fear of god and with a
pure conscience, and rightly to judge and pronounce those things which shall
come before us in all equity and justice, without exception of person,
rendering right to each one without bearing favor to those which have an evil
cause.

Item, not to receive presents, gifts nor corruption to decline from our duty

Item, we all pain and dilygence to make expedition of causes which shall com
before us, to ease the parties from troublesome charges.

Item, not to burdeine any person with any costs and charges more then reason
will bear, and namely to follow the tax which is made unto us.

Item, to be diligent to reprove and correct al insolences and dissolutnesse
contrary to good policy, and to cause that the ordinances of the town may
be well observed, as much as lies in us, calling god to wytnes therein, to
be Judged if we do contrary.

Moreover if it happen any lieutenant to dye before his year, if there rest
yet four months, they shall substitute another in form aforesaid: but if he
have less time, the most ancient of the Adiutors shall take his place.

The place of the Assistaunce.
THE two ancients shall go before the other, but as well y^ ancients as the
new among themselves, shall go according to their degree and dignitye of
office in ye which they have been.

For the two Secreataries of the Lieutenauntes court.
THE petye counsel shall chose them, to present them to the two hundred which
have authority to ratifye the election or to make another without prolonging
the time: and the office shall be three year at the least except there happen
death or a notable fault, enot wythstandynge in the term of three year there
shall be made a surueie, and the office perused if they ought to continue therein:
before they shall enter into ye possession they shall make an oath before the
counsel in manner following.

The oath of the Secretaries.
WE promise and swear to receive no act nor instrumente to the dishonor or
damage of the town, or against the polycye of the same.

Item, to couche faithfully by writing and to register all such acts and
instruments, as pertain unto our office, and to conserve that we have made,
to distribute in time and place, according to the order of Justice.

Item, not to reveal ought to any party to the prejudice of another, or stop
the course of the right.

Item, not to defraude any either of Act or instrument which may help them or
further them by reason.

Item, to make expedicion of all acts and copies, which we be bound to
deliver, without delaying the one to further the other.

Item, not to eracte or take greater wages than to us is due by the order of
the tax.

The office of the Lieutenaunt, and of his Assistaunts, and the order of their
court.
THE Lieutenau^t and his Assistantes be bound to hold their court, for to
render right three days in the weke: ye is to say Monday after dinner, from
twelve of the clock tarying till four, likewise Wednesdaye and Friday.

Moreover, every day from eyghte of the clock until ten, the Lieutenaunt or
one of his Assistauntes one after another, through out, shall be resident in the
benche, to hear the plaintyues, and set order among them, until they may
do justice: the Saturday they shall do the like, both in the morning and after
dynner, because of the strangers and multitude which come to the market.

Item, in matters of sudden provision the Lieutenaunt shall call the
adiutours, and assemble them extraordinarily, according to the necessity of
the case, and that there be no defaulte, the Lieutenaunte shall not enterprise
any long voyage, to be absent one court day without leave of the counsel.

For the pain of those that be absent.
HE that fails to be there in the time aforesaid, shall be deprived from such
profyttes as shall fall or chance that day, and if he have not a lawful
excuse, to pay two shillings for amend, and if it be one of the Assistauntes
to pay double, and the Secretarye shall note their faults faithfully, to
render the role to the receyuer of the fynes.

For the adiournement or summonning for civil causes.
WHO so ever will adiourne or summon his adverse party, may do it what day
he will, yea at the present hour, and this adiournement shall be available as
well by any of his household, or his wife, as of him self: moreover, if he be
absent or sick, and have any other lawefull let, his wife or any of his, as
his nieghbour, or his friend, may appear to the Assignation, and excuse him,
but before the excuse be received, they shall be sworn that the excuse is
lawefull which they allege.

For defaultes.
IF there be no excuse brought forth, and the action be ordinary, for debte,
or other cause, none reserved, as shall be said here after, and if between two
Burgeses: the demaunder shall make assignation thryse before he obtain the
default.

If then he do not appear, and there be no excuse brought forth, letters
shall be given out to leauye upon his goods, unto the furniture of y^ su^me
which the cause amounts: but if he do not deliver gage into the hands of the
Sargeant, or if he have not sufficient in his house for to gage the said
sum, then for defaulte of goods they shall take his person, and make him
prisoner, neuerthesse in case y^ he suffer his house to be searched and they
take such as they find, they shall not take him out to put him in prison,
but if he absent him self willingly, incontinent there shall be execution against
him: but if he have withstand the officer, the Sargeant shall bring him the
next day before the lieutenant there to pay all e^epences, assignations,
letters, and execusions of the same, other wise he shall proceed, whatsoever
matter to the contrary notwithstanding.

But if the defendant after he has been put back again, do not appear to
the first assignation, then letters shall be granted to the demaundaunt, to
adiorne him peaceablye, to the which if he obey not, there shall be granted
process against him to take his body, and put him in prison, to the end of
the pa^ment.

If it be a stranger which assigns a Burgese, then to proceed more spedily,
he shall demand if it seems him good, and shall have a iournement from the
lieutenaunt: but if the Burgese will not appear upon the day in which he is
assigned, then default shall be decreed against him, and immediatlye letters of
execution to gage it in his goods, or to take his person for fault of goods,
but if he have lawful excuse, either by absence or by sickness, it must be
declared in the first assignation.

Contrarywyse if ye demaunder appear not, the defendour shall obtain against
him default, and shall be freely at lybertye from his assignation.

Item, none shall be releued from his fault, except he come before the court
be risen, so y^ he come in time to answer to his assignation, and present him
self before the Judge, and that before he be risen, unto the end that this be
no occasion to prolonge the causes: before they be up, he shall swear y^ he
does it not to delay or to make frustrate his demaunder, but that he is come
as soon as he could.

But in such case if the time will serve, he shall be called again,
nevertheless if the demaunder be not there present in his own person or
Proctour for him, that this calling shall not turn to be prejudicial to put
him to defaulte, but only for a let, that he shall not leuye lettes of
execution against his party: moreover, none shall be received twyse to plead
such excuse, but such a relyfe shall be only for one time.

For the adiornement of witnesses.
INcontinent after that the term for the probation shall be given, the party
which ought to bring forth witness, shall do his diligence to call them, that
the examination may be made in time and that the adiornement be made with
express denomination that it is in case of witness.

If it happen, that he which they demand for witness, be absent or sick,
that his wife or one of his shall come and excuse him with an oath, as has been
said.

If he appear not, or there be no excuse at the first assignation, he shall be
assigned the second time, and if yet he make defaulte, then letters of
compulsion shall be granted to the party, to constrayne him to comme before
the time be expired, up on the pain of gage or imprisonment: and if he suffer
to be gaged, they shall take as much of his goods as the principal of the
cause may amounte.

But if he be sick, there shall be deputed one of the assistaunce, to go and
examine him in his house, and the adverse party shall be called thither to see
him sworn, as if he were in the court.

For the pleding.
ITEM, following our ancient custom, the pleding shall be holden in the common
language of the country, and not in Latyne: but for to avoid all excess of
expenses, as prolonging and troubling of ye parties, following our ancient
custom, that all causes which amount not above five Florence shall be
dispatched with the greatest expedicion that may be, without writynge, but
only by words, as well the propositions, and answers of the parties, as the
proves and witnesses.

Item, to avoid all vain delays that in causes which exceade not above ten
Florence, the principal sentence that is given by the lieutenant and his
assistauntes shall stand for the last, without appellation: but for the other
of higher sums, it shall be lawful to appeal, that is to be understand only
for debte, and not for cause of rentes.

Item, that all sentences not passing ten Florences, shall be given by mouth
only, and in general, all sentences interlocutoris shall be vnwritte^ but the
Secretary to put them in his register.

For terms and delays.
TOVCHYNG the causes which ought to be dispatched without writing as is said,
that the demaundant by him self, or by his Proctor, shall make redilye at ye
first his true demand, at the first assignatio^, namely y^ the adverse
party be there to answer like wise, and the defendour shall answer redily and
directly, either affirming or deniyng, protesti^g the cause if it be his own
proper act, if it be the cause of another (for the which nevertheless he is
bound) he shall have delay for two days only, to give informacion, if the
other be in the town: but if he be without, he shall have competent term,
according to the place where he is.

If it be nedeful to be proved, and ye he will prove his intension by
instrument or by writing, he shall bring it out incontinent, and thus doing
he shall not come without furniture: if it be for witnesses, he shall have term
co^petent, having respect to the place where they be.

Of causes exceeding five Florence.
TOUCHING other causes that excede five Florence, if the demand be certain,
as a debt proved by obligation, byll, or such other debt, where it is not need
to have a byll in writing, the demand shall be made by word, with the proof of
the obligation, bill, or other instrument, to end the cause briefelye, in
such form as has been said.

If the cause be such, that it requier the demand to be put in writing, as
when there be many reasons to allege, and that the deduction be^ long and
difficill, than the demaunder the first day of his assignation shall bring
furthe his demand by wrytinge, and shall have a copye of the same ready to
communicate with his adverse party, and ye to be done at the costs of the
demaunder according to the tax of charges.

For to answer, the defender shall not have above eight days respite, and
then to answer, denying or affirming the declaration of the cause: after ye
defender has answered, and the cause declared, if the plaintyue will set his
cause by articles, to come to probation, as the day of his contestation, he
shall have eyghte days to do the same, and then if he have right either by
wrytinge or instrumente for to serve his purpose, he shall bring them furthe,
and declare them with his articles.

This done, the Defender shall have eyghte days to answer upon the articles
and no more.

If the probation lie in wytnes, after the Defender have answered, the
demaunder shall have yet eyghte days term to bring furthe his witnesses, if
they be in the town, if they be without, he shall have a competent term to
bring the^, or examine them upon the place, by the virtue requisitorie, so that
eyghte days after the term given, the witnesses shall be published, so that
ordinarilye they shall have but fiftene days.

This ought so to be understand, that after the beginning of y^ term, ye said
party shall one certain day cause his witnesses to be sworn against the day of
his publication exclusiuely, nevertheless calling his adverse party as right
and reason requires.

Item, in the day of the publication if the parties pretend to propose any
obligation or sedule to declare their fact or right, they shall have eight
days delay to do it.

In case of exception.
IN case that the Defender in his answer use exception, the which requires
proof, as if he alegeth payment, or such like thing, that the same term
shall be given him, as has been said of the Demaunder.

Item, upon the exceptions which shall be made, there shall be one replication,
and it shall not be permittted to ye defender to reioyn against him, nor ye
Plaintyue to surreioynder, nevertheless, it shall be lawefull as the matter
shall require, to oppose diverse exceptions in one cause, according to the
diversity of the proves, or demaundes, so that one of the exceptions let not
another.

For terms to here the right.
IN causes which mount not above five Florence the principal, and all other
which be easy, and need no long consultacion, as if Judgment may be given
upon an obligation or other certain proves: the Lieutenant and his Assistaunts
shall not take above eyghte days term at the most.

Item, in causes of great importance, which requires further repecte, and
specially require consultation, they shall take such term, as they think by
their judgment to be necessary, nevertheless so standing continuallye for
briefnes, as much as in them is possible, so that for the most highest term,
they shall not pass above a month.

For the longest time that process ought to continue.
THAT this order shall serve to dispatche al processes in the briefest manner
that may be, to avoid all prolongings and delays, so that in causes of
great importance the which shall be brought by wrytinges, although there be
acception of the party Defender, a process shall not continue above four
months and an half, but shall be always ended and finished in the said
term, namelye that they be constrained to seek their witnesses out of the
town, for in such case they must join to it such times as is ordained to
call them as has been said, and so the term shall be so many days prolonged.

Of the two Feries or vacations.
THERE shall be two Feries in the year, in the which the causes and suit shall
sease: that is to say, in corn harvest and wine harvest, the which shall dure
each one a month.

For the beginning there is no certain time to continewe, but they shall
ordeyne it according as the year and season will bear, so in the end of the
month of May, the Lieutenaunt with his assistauntes, shall consulte when corn
may be ripe, and there after the day shall be appointed, the which shall be
published in the court the weke before, and in the wine harvest the like to be
done.

The rest of the year, there shall be no another vacations to stop the course
of the audientes, except there happen some necessity extraordinary in the
town, for the which the counsel shall ordein according to reason.

Moreover, concerning the examination of the witnesses, as has been said,
they may change the days, as the Sunday ought to be exempt, and likewise
other acts judicial, as to adiorne, to leuy goods, and such like.

Now, also because the feries may come often before one process may be ended,
as has been said of times and delays in the term, while the causes shall
duer, that is to be understand by this exception, that the feries shall not be
comprised in ye same time of delay.

Of causes extraordinary.
TOVCHYNG causes, which may not suffer delay, as matters of provision of
fruits hanginge or standing on the ground, and such like, because it is
needful to provide more briefly, it shall be said in the place and order of
each one.

Of exception against Judges in the process and sentence difinitiue.
THAT no Judge shall be holden suspecte except he be refused of one of the
parties, but in case the parties consent both to have him, he shall not refuse
to do his office.

Item, it shall not be lawefull to refuse without allegacion of the cause, and
to be known to the rest of the bench, and he that will refuse shall be heard
upon his reasons.

The causes to refuse, be such as follows.
THAT is to say to have been proctor or counselor or first Judge in the cause.
Also parentage, as father to son, brother to brother, or Uncle to neuew, or
cosyn germayne, likewise affiniti unto ye degree of uncle or neuew, and so to
the contrary.

Item, when the cause touches him which is refused, as if the process were
touching merchandise, in the which he was a peartener in, or if he were
suertie or in any, case have had to do in the same.

Item, if he bear manifest favor to the one party, or hate to the other,
which may be known or perceived by vehement presumptyon, it shall not be
needful to prove the same thoroughlye.

Here follows the taxes of fees or stypendes, in which it shall not be
lawefull to excede or pass.
FIRST the lieutenant or assystantes shall not exact nor take of the parties
above this which follows.

In the first audience when the demand shall be formed. Note that in shill* is
a grote or 4. d. English money or there about.
i. shil. ITEM, in the examinacions of the witness, briefly without settinge
down in writing, where every wytnes shall be examined. i. shil. Item, if it
ought to be written, and yet briefly without articles, then shall he take for
every witness. ii. shil. Item, if it be by articles, that for every leaf of
articles which ye proctor shall present, for eueri witness. 3 shil. Item, for
the oath. iii. shil. Item, if the sentence difinityue of ye su^me be less
then.5. florens. i. shil. Item if it be a higher sum, and yet under a hundred
florens. iii. shil. Item, above a hundred, unto five hundred. vi. shil. Item
from five hundred florens, to the highest su^me. Note a storen is xii. sous.
i. floren Item they shall take nothing in short processes, where there is no
productyon of the case, and generally in all processes which requires no
consultacion, but in such matters when there needs consultacyon, they shall
take no more then they disbource, reserving nothing to their own profit.
Item, in commyssyon where there needs a long informacion, the lieutenant for
him self, and for one offycer which he shall content, shall not take above.
iiii. florens Item for the tax of expenses in breife causes. i. shil. Item in
causes of greater importance. ii. shil. Item for every decree made upon ye
sales, as upon goods of gardenships or gouernaunces. iii. shil. Item for a
plaintiff. i. shil. Item all these profyttes shall be divided among them, except
any be depryued by his own negligence, as has been said, they shall make
six porsions whereof the lieutenante shall take two, and each Assistante one.
Item if there ought to be view taken of a place in processes of heritage, or
other wise, if it be in the town, that those that shall be deputed for ye same,
each one of them shall not take above. ii. shil Item if it be without the town
in the feldes. v. shil. Item for the estymacion or prising of goods if their be
mouables which mou^te not above ten florens. ii. shil. Item, from ten unto
five and twentye iiii. shil. Item, from.xxv. unto fifty. vi. shil. Item from
fifty to a hundred. viii. shil. Item, from a hundred to the uttermost. i.
floren. Item if they be immovable which ought to be cried three Saterdaies, he
shall not take above. vi. shil. Item ye lieutenant or his Assistantes which
shall be present at the making of an Inventory, shall have for the first leaf.
iii. shil. Item, Note that a denier is the twelfe part of a shil.
for every leaf beside. 6. deniers
Upon this condicyon that every leaf shall conteyne four and twentye lines,
and that every Item shall conteyne or comprehend ye things of one sort
together.

In causes criminalls.
THE Lieutenant for every examination which he shall make before he shall bring
forth the malefactor, shall have. iii. shil.
Afterward the Journey shall be taxed by the proctor, and levied upon ye goods
confiscate of the malefactor.

Here follows the tax of the Secretaries.
IN every audience they shall take of ye plaintiff for ye register. iii.
deniers In commyssyon for Ioureneies. ii. Floren. For to enregister the
constitution of the proctor. i. shil. Item, for every percell of letters. i.
shilling Item for brief examynacyon upon the writing of each witness. iii.
Deniers Item, for examinacion by writing and yet brief and without articles, for
every witness. i. shil. Item, for examynacyon upon Articles for every leaf
presented by the proctor. iiii. shil. Item, for every relacion of execucio^ of
letters. vi. Deniers Item for the Iourneyes taken out at the request of any
party, for each. vi. deniers Item for every leaf of copye, y^ side
containing. xxv. lines. x. d. Item for sentence difinityue without copye. iii.
shil. Item for copieing of the request of any party. v. shil. Item for ye
tax of expenses in short causes. i. shil. Item in long causes. iii. shil.
Item for instruments of tuteles and gardians. x. shil. Item, for to Regyster a
playntyfe. i. shil. Item, to Register a seisoure or a rest. i. shil. Item to
register Relasions of damages or other small things. i. shil. Item ye register
of submissions which be made in case of rest. i. shil. Item for all fyances
made by justice. i. shil. Item for praising of mouables, the deputy shall have
as much as y^ Assistante, as well for the presence as for the instrument. Item
for vnmouables where there is need to levy instruments of decre, if the sum
do not excede a hundred florens. x. shil. Item, from a hundred florence
upward. xx. shil. Item for Inuentories, for the first leaf as has been said.
iii. shil. Item, for every other leaf folowinge. i. shil. Item, for
informacions, as well upon the plantiues, as others, in causes criminalls, for
every witness. iii. shil. Item for every answer, in criminal causes, until the
malefactor be dyspatched. iii. shil.
Nevertheless they shall take nothing until ye end, then if ye party be found
culpable, or have wherewith to satysfie, it shall be disboursed.

For other instruments, which be also made by the notaryes, it shall be said
in the tax common.

The tax or fees of the Sergeantes.
ITEM for every citacion, as well of the party as of ye witnesses, if it be in
the town. iii. d. Item if it be without the town with in the fraunchises. i.
shil. Item for a rest of barrage and to make the relacion. i. shil. Item for
execusion of letters if it be in seasure of immovable goods. 3. shil. Item if
it be to levy mouables under ten florens. i. shil. Item if it be above. iii.
shil. Item, for taking the arest of a man's body. iiii. shil. Item, for
praysynge of mouable goods, of every floren. iii. d. Item, for visytacyon upon
any place. i. shil. Item, to be assistant at any question. i. shil. Item, to
accompany ye justice to the execusion of a malefactor. ii. shil. More over
there is a common profit to be divided among them, that is to say of every
difinityue sentence in brief causes. iii. d. Item, in those of greater
Importance. vi. d.
How the lieutenant ought to govern in matters of imprisonment.
FOR the execusion of his letters and for default or contumasye as has been
said, he has aucthorytye to imprison.

Item for the transgression of cries or proclamations, in case that the
offender deserve punnishement, for the lieutenaunt is the executour of
proclamacions.

Item at the request of any which will be party accuser against another he
shall set him prisoner with him.

Item in matters of crimes, be it strife, fighting or violence, if ye plaintiff
come to him and the person whom he complains of be suspect of flieng, except
it be a man resydent in the town having goods and houses, he shall not lay
hand upon him before he have notified it to one of the Sendicques, and has had
his permission.

Moreover he has no power to deliver or set at liberty a prisoner which has been taken for other causes then civil, and apperteyning to his tribunal, but
incontinent as he has shut up any in case as has been said, that he notyfie
it.

The order which ought to be holden in process criminalles.
WHEN he has put in prison any man complained on, or that the Sendicques
notifye to him that they have taken any: that within xxiiii. hours he shall
examine them, and deliver ye examinacio^ to ye Sendicques

If the offender be found faulty, wtoute any dificultye, or that he render him
self so, y^ there be sufficient cause against him, he shall make expedicion of
his process.

Item if the first answers be not found sufficient by the Sendicques, he
shall continue his examinacions, until such time as he may render unto the
Sendicques such answer, as reason requires: but how so ever it be, he shall
not deferrre the time for to render it above two days.

Nevertheless, this shall not be holden for his last conclusion, but after y^ he
has rendered him self, and submitted his cause unto the proctor general, unto
such time as sentence be given, and as shall be found in the deduction of his
processes, he shall make up and fynishe his conclusions.

The sentence pronounced to him, shall be committed to the charge of the
executyoner, and he shall go into the place being accompanied with the
Saultier and the sergeants, and there shall remain til ye execusion be done.

Item for lack of the Lieutenante, whether he be absent or sick, the first
Assystaunte shall take his part, and supplye all that shall apperteyne to his
office.

Ordinances upon the emolumentes and exactions of seals of Geneua, thuse,
government and keeping of the same.
The keeping of the Seals.
IT has been ordained and determined that the lord first Sendicque (which
every year according to the custom shall be elected) ought and is bound to
have the keeping and government of three seals, and those suerly to keep, and
with the same to seal and use truly and faithefullye all things reasonably
as follows.

The use of the seals And first of the common seal.
ALL manner of Instruments with what name soever they be named, being long or
short received in judgment or without, al sales co^pactes, bargani^gs,
acquittances, releases, Ratyfications, Bargaynes, testamentes, Causes,
Promyses, Accordes, Exchaunges, Confessyons, Tutels, Curatels, Abridgementes,
Commyssions, Ordinance paste by counsel, Marriages, Gifts, Attestacions of
proctors, proof of notaries, Suppreme sentences, executions upon the same,
Sauegardes, Commandments to leuye, Instruments, Requisitories, Burgeses,
Attestasions, lisence by writings past by the counsel, saufecondite,
ordinances for marriages.

The seals of right.
ALL patentes as the leuyinge of possessions, citacio^, brief, attestations,
co^missions to examyne the witnesses, requisitories, Contumacies, presice
letters, ordinances of sentences, as well interlocutories, as difynityues,
declared in the ordinary and brief court of the Justice of Geneua,
Executoriables of the same prising or estimacion, in the said ordinary
court, submissions, letters or sentence for money, Appellacions, or other
like, al these ought to be sealed with the small seal.

For the Casshett or privy seal.
ALL instructyons and charges which shall be given to Imbassadours, namely that
his charge is not passed by general counsel, that then they shall use the
great seal, al letters missiue reserved, that be before said ought to be
sealed with ye seal called casshet, and they shall apply ye to none other,
except instructyons and missiues, as well in favor of the Seniorie as for
perticulers.

The manner and tax which ought to be leauied upon the iii. seals
respectively of every one of them.
First for the great seal.
FOR sales not exceeding i. hundred Florens. iii. shil. Item, from one hundred
to v C, Florens.x. shil. Item, from five hundred to a thousand, so that it does
not comprehend ye just su^me of a thousand.xx. shil. Item from one thousand
florens, to a number of thousands for every thousand. i. floren.
Transactions.
ITEM for all transactions so ye instrument be made in favor of both the
parties, and of the goods in which both the parties have right, namely that the
goods do not a mount to M. florens. v. shil.
Quittaunces
FOR all quittaunces and sums of money, and other things amou^ting to a C.
florens. i. shil. From a hundred to a thousand florens. v. shil. From one
thousand upward.x. shil. For all quyttances in matters of controuersye or
others. iii. shil.
Releases.
FOR all resignacions and releases to be paid after the form of sales,
according to the su^me of money.
Ratifications.
FOR all Ratifications. iii. shil
Bargeynes.
FOR all bargains for time. iii. shil For all bargeines perpetual. v. shil
Testamentes.
FOR all testamentes amount inge to v. C. florens. v. shil. Item from five
hundred, to a M. Florence.x. shil. Item, from one thousand upward. v. Florens
Item, for all clauses of testamentes according to the valuer and tare as the
sum amounts, to be paid as the Testament.
Compromises.
ITEM, for all compromises. iii. shil
Accordes.
ACCORDES pronounced and brought by wryttyng briefly. iii. shil.
Exchaunges.
FOR all exchaunges. v. shil.
Confessing of bands.
WHEN any will seal a bond or obligation, for all such obligacions or
bonds to ye sum of a hundred Florens, so that it do not co^prehende the
whole sum of the hundred in paper or perchement. i. shil. From a hundred to a
thousand..v shil. Item, from a thousand upward. x. shil.
Gardenships of orphans and other.
FOR all tutelles or gardyans shipes x. shil. for all Tutels governance. v.
shil.
Abridgmentes.
FOR all abridgementes unto the su^me of a hundred florens. iii. shil. Item
from a hundred to.v. C. Florens. v. shil. Item, from five hundred to a M.
Florens.x. shil. Item, from a thousand vpwardes. v. florens Item, those which
shall be made by the Seniorie unto the sum of a thousand. v. shil. Item, from
a thousand upward. x. shil.
Commission of recognisaunces.
Item, for the seal of the said commissions. i. floren
Ordinances of the counsel of matters both small and great, the supreme
sentence reserved.
FOR all ordinances between party and party. iii. shil.
Joining of marriages.
FOR all instruments of marriages, not compting of apparel, or jewels, unto
C. Florences. 3. s. Item, from. C. to. D. v. shil. Item, from. D. to. M. xx.
shil. Item, from. M. Florence upward, v. Florence. Item, donations to be
paid after the form of testamentes. For all attestations of the probate of
Notaries. i. shil.
Commandments to leuye instruments and other contractes.
ITtem, for such commandments. i. shil. Item, for instruments leuyed by
commission. ii. shil. Item, for placettes upon the requisitories, without the
territory. iii. s. Item, for burgeoys. ii. shil. Item, for atestation upon the
birth of cytezins. iii. shil. Item, for license passed by the counsel. iii.
shil.
Supreme sentences in appellations.
FOR all supreme sentences unto five hundred Florence.x. shill. Item, from. D.
to. M. xx. shil. Item, from. M. upward. v. Floren. Item, for all executio^s of
ye same. iii. s. Item, for all protections, xx. shil. Item, for all
transsumptes in favor of private men. iii. shill. Item, for ordinances in the
causes of marriages. iii. shil.
Consequentlye for the seal, called the seal of justice ordinary.
ITEM, for all letters to leuye possessions and citations for each, two
shillinges. Item, for every witness in breife atestations, named in the same
for the seal one shilling. Item, for commission to examine the witnesses, for
each. iii. shil. Item, for all citacions with requisitories, iii. shil. Item,
for all letters for contumacie, i. shil. Item, for all letters called presice,
two shillinges. Item, for all ordinances interlocutories upon the accessaries,
three shillinges. Item, for all sentences difinitiue unto five hundred
florence, iii. shil. Item, from. D. to. M. v. shil. Item, from. M. upward. v.
floren. Item, for all submissions. iii. shil. Item, for citations to appear at
the first appellation, ii. shil. Item, for ordinances upon appellacions, iii.
shil. Item, for sentences upon the same appellations unto. D. floren. v. shil.
Item, from. D. to. M. x. shil. Item, from. M. upward. xx. shil.
For the Catchet or pryuye Seal.
ITEM, for all letters myssiues granted in the favor of any particular
stranger, ii. shil. Reserved the Citezins and Burgeses, which ought to pay
nothing.
For the kepinge of the seal, to seal the goods of pupilles, or other things
at the instaunce of perticulers.
THE keeping of the said seal shall apperteyne to the first Sendicque, and when
he shall happen to seal any thing, the Saultier shall come and demand the
seal, and also shall demand of the Lieutenaunte, one of his assistauntes, or a
Secretary, to keep him company, and whether he has few, or many he shall
not take for the lesser sort above. iii. shil. And if the goods be of great
importance. vi. shil.
Finis.
Post tenebras lux.
Here follows the Proclamations, published by the sound of a trompet.
BE it known to you, on ye party of our most redouted Seniour Sendicques, and
counsel of this city of Geneua.

Where as here tofore on the party of our most redoubted Seniours and
Superiors, there has been made many statutes, defenses, commandments and
cries, published conformed and drawn forth according to the word of God and
his holy laws, and yet by the instigation and craft of Satan, and the malice
of many wicked people, having the same statutes and form of holy and pure
living, have despised, contempned, mocked, and set at naught the Magistrates,
the Ministers of the word, and the holy word of God it self, so that the
observation of the same laws and commandments be restrained, put back and
hindered by certain malignaunte and wicked persons, and the right course of
justice let and hindered, so that many troubles and great offenses be
happened, so that vice and sin so increase, that with good right we can not
look but for ye judgment and wrath of god for such ingratitude. Now, for as
much as god by his singular grace, has so helped in troubles, yt the
principal authors of such iniquity have been revealed, and put by their
purposes and intentes, by the which they have purposed to do hurt, for the
which we all ought to render most hearty thanks to god, humbling our selves
before him, preventing his deuyne vengeance, in amendynge our lives, hauntynge
the sermons and preachinges of his most holy word, reuerencynge the Justices
and Magistrates, obeyinge Gods most sacred word, laws, and commandments.
Wherefore our most redoubted Seniours willing from hence forth to employ all
their power and industry, y^ the honor of god may be mainteyned, the justice
to have his right and true course. Now to all officers, Justices, Citezins,
Burgeses, inhabitauntes, and subjects, of what estate or quality that they
be, young or old, men or women, lords, masters or servants, rich and
poor, do charge and expressly command from henceforth to haunt and come
diligently to the sermons of the word of God, according to the proclamations
heretofore made, to honor and fear the Justice, and Magistrates, to live
holily and peaceablye, to be obedient according to their duties to Magistrates,
Fathers, Mothers, Lords and Masters, defending and inhibiting all blasphemy,
dispisinge of god, and his ministers, dishonest words, vain songs,
dronckennes, dissollutions, erces, arrogancy, and insolency, plays, or
games, idle runnynge from house to house, cut or broydered hosen, chydinge,
dissension, fighting or braulynge, iniuryng of other, and all other things
not lawful and contrary to y^ holy word of God, and his commandments, and the
acts and proclamations heretofore made, the which expressly we the said
Seniours, will and command to be put in execution, and against the offenders
and repugners of the same of what estate, manner, or condition so ever he be, to
proceed by punishment, correction, and justice, without savor, aid, or support,
whatsoever it be: to the end that the honor of God may be mainteyned, and
advanced, and his wrath turned from us, his justice feared and reverenced,
and generally to live as the people of god ought to live, and that the good
policy and tranquillity of the common might be observed and mainteyned, as
far as god will give his grace, upon pain to incur the indignation of our
most redoubted Seniours Sendicques, and counsel, as their affectuous desire
wills, and intent emporteth, of the which every one ought to be advertised.

Made and passed in the counsel under the common seal of the foresaid
Seniours.
Published in Geneua by the sound of trompet after the accustomed manner,
decreed in the counsel, hoping for better god willing.
LET it be known to you by the commandment of our redoubted Seniours
Sendicques, and counsel of this city, yt every one ought, and is bound to
come to hear the word of God, principallye upon the Sondayes, and the days
of prayer, and other days, when they may have time and leisure. Also that
every one ought and is bound, to govern and guide him self after the same
instructions, upon pain to be reprehended by justice.

Item, that all men ought and are bound, to send their children to the
Cathechisme, for to be instructed, that is to say, those which be of age, and
have knowledge to learn, upon pain to loose when they shall be found lackyng.
iii. shil.

Item, that none shall be so hardye to swear by the name of God, upon pain for
the first time to kiss the ground: and for the second to kiss the ground,
and three shillinges: for the third time three score shillings, and three days
in prison with bread and water: for the fourth time to be depryued, and
banished the town for a year and a day.

Item, that none shall blaspheme the name of god, upon pain for the first time
to kiss the ground, and four and twenty hours in prison, with bread and
water, and. v. shil: for the second, to kiss the ground and two days in
prison with bread and water, and x. shil. For ye third time, to be put in
prison three days with bread and water, and xxiii. shill, and otherwise to be
punished, and chastised according to the extremity of the fact.

Item, that none shall renounce, despyte, A vile custom among the French
nation.
or maugre God, upon pain of amend honorable, with a torche in his hand,
and in case that any do rebel or repugne against such good statutes and
ordinances, that he shall over and beside the said pain and punyshement be
put in prison three days.

Item, that none shall play, or run ydlye in the streates, during the time of
the sermons on Sondayes, nor days of prayer, nor to open their shoppes during
the sermon time, under pain without any favor. five shyllinges.

Item, that none shall play at any manner of game, for gold, silver, or money,
under pain of three days imprisonment, and lx. shill.

Item, that none shall make, nor cause to be made or imprinted, neither to
buy, nor sell, cards nor dyce, or any papisticall things, concerning the
art of pryntynge, nor other things, contrary to the bolye christian
reformation, under pain of the loss of the marchaundise, and three score
shillings.

Item, that none be hardy to committ whoredom, or fornication, either to be
droken, to run ydlye about, loosing their time, nor run away from their
masters, or from their occupatio^s, but y^ every one shall be occupied and
traueil in his vocation according to his quality, under pain to be punished
by justice, according to their demerites, and made an example to all others.

Item, that none be so hardy in no manner wise to practice or procuer secretly
or openly, to abolishe, stop or hinder, the preachinge and service of god
and of his holy gospel, nor to advance set forth, or bring in any manner of
papisticall law or doctrine, under pain to loose his life.

Item, folowinge the same statute passed in the general counsel, that no
manner of person dares, or be so hardye, to move, speak, practice, or
procure, to solicit or use any mean what so ever it be, to alienate,
transport or change in any manner of wise, the Seniorie, and principality, and
state of Geneua, otherwise then God has ordained it, and as it is at this
present, but that every one according to his power ought and is bound to
mainteyne the liberty and fredome of this city, upon pain to lose body and
goods.

Item, if any do perceive any manner of conspiracy, or practice, against the
said principallitie, or against the word of God and his holy gospel, that
he ought and is bound, to come incontinent to the Seniorie, to reveal and
declare it under the pain aforesaid.

Item, that none say, or do, nor contract or put in ure, any thing without the
city, which he dares not do nor speak within the same, concerning the word
of God, and his law, and the reformation of his gospel, upon pain to be
punished according to his demerit.

Item, that no man of what estate, quality or condition so ever he be, dares
be so hardy to make, or cause to be made, or to wear, hosen or dooblettes
cut, iagged, embroydred, or lyned with silk, upon pain to forfeyte.lx. shill.

Item, that none be so hardye to misname, or report evil of the princes and
magistrates, upon pain to be put in prison, and chastised according to equity
and justice.

Item, that none be so hardye to speak evil, or misname, or slander, the
ministers of the word of God under the same pain.

Item, that no manner of person of what estate quality or condition soever he
be, shall not take or join unto him any suspect person or of evil life nor
vacabou^ds what soever they be, but such people that have no mean to live
shall withdraw them selves within three days next following, upon pain to be
chastised according as the case requires.

Item, that none shall let any manner of house or chamber to any unknown
person, without license of the Seniorie, and their captain or dyzener, upon
pain to forfeyte for every time, lx. shil.

Item, that none be so hardye to walk by night in the town after nine of
the clock, with out candell light, and also a lawefull cause, except those
which be appointed for the watch, upon pain to be put in prison three days
and to pay, lx. shil.

Item, that every one according to his quality and power ought to be furnished
with armor and weapon, and to be obedient to his captain, lieutenant and
dizener and other officers appointed for the affairs of the wars under pain
of three traictes with a cord.

Item, that none shall forsake (...) city, to serve any foreyne prince in his
wars, without license of the Seniorie, upon pain of the indignation of the
said Seniorie.

Item, that none of what estate or quality so ever he be, dares be so
hardye to oppropriate to him self that which is common, upon pain to be
punyshed according to the exigent of the case.

Item, that no stranger shall sell any marchaundise, but upon the three market
days openly, and in the common places, upon the pain comprised in the text
of the fraunches.

Item, that no manner of person transport or carry out of the city any manner of
buyllion, except he have first presented it to the master of the mynte, upon
pain of loss of the said buyllion, and for every time so doing, to forfeyte
three score shillynges.

Item, that none shall bye nor contract with any of the city, being within
the age of.xxv. years, without the license of his Tutour or Gardein appointed
for the same, upon pain to loose the money delivered, and the contracte to be
void, and to be reproved by justice.

Item, that no manner of persons, what so ever they be, shall singe any vain,
filthye, or dishonest songs, neither dance, or make maskes, mummeries, nor
any disguysinge in any manner of wise, upon pain to be put three days in
prison, with bread and water only, and for euetyme.lx. shill.

Item, that none be so hardye, but expressly defend generallye ye none do
outrage, injury or wrong, to another in any manner of wise, nor also to move
or raise up, any rumor, chiding, brauling, stryuing, questions, or debate, in
no manner of wise what soever it be, upon pain of.lx. shill. and to be put in
prison and punished according to the demerit and exigent of the case, by ye
extremity of justice.

Item that no cittezen burgeoys or inhabitau^t of this city of what estate
quality or condition soever he be having house or household resydent in this
city, dares be so hardye to go from henceforth to eat, or drink, in any
tavern, Note.
Celler, shop, in any manner of wise: and also that no hosts nor Tauerners
shall give to eat, or drink, any of the aforesaid citezens burgeois or
inhabitau^tes, upon pain for every time three score shillinges, payable as well
for ye host as ye other.

Item that every notarie sworn to this city ought and is bound to cause to
be sealed all and singnler public Instruments, which he shall receive
according to the ordynaunces of the town, and make expedicion to the parties
upon pain for every time, three score shillings.

Item y^ none do producte to help him self with any judicial act,
ordinance, letters, patentes, nor public instruments, made and set forth in
this city, except they be first sealed upon pain of.lx. shil

Item that al notaries be sworn to this city ought and are bound in
receyuinge the Instruments of any things recovered, dilygently to enquire
and know of the parties what title, or by what means, they come by those
goods of which those instruments be made, and to reveal it, and bring the
designacions of all such instruments, which by them shall be received into the
hands of the Seniors, committed for the chamber of accomptes for this city,
every three months, upon pain for every time.lx. shil.

Item that every one is bound to reveal unto our most redoubted Seniors,
all those persons, which they shall perceive or know, to be offenders against
these present ordinances and proclamacyons, of our most redoubted Senyors, in
all or in any manner of part, upon pain to be reproved by the oath which
they owe to the town.

Made and passed in the ordinary counsel of Geneua.
WE let you to weete on the party of our most redoubted Seniors Sendicques,
and counsel of this City, for as much as here to fore many statutes edictes
and laws has been published, and proclamacions made and reiterated, to incyte
and move al persons the better to frequent the sermons and to pray unto god in
the churches and common assembling: nevertheless seeing that this has not had
such effect, as has been desired, and of the contrary part, that god does
now give us such warning and admonicions as all men may see, therefore let al
people of what estate and condition soever they be, have a better respect to
do their duty, then has been here to fore, and from henceforth not to
dispyse the commandment which is given unto them: yt is forasmuch as god by
ye great troubles, seditions, and wars, which is now risse^ all most over
al, does solicit, move, and stir us, to return unto him, and to humble
our selves before him, for as much as the dangers be not far from us, and
on the other part the enemies of the gospel show them selves more vehement
and more enuenimed and cruel than ever was seen, to extermynate and rote out
the true and pure faith, and religion of Jesus Christ.

Therefore to the end that all may be diligent to come to the preachings, to
frequente and haunte the prayers, to cause their family to come thereto to be
exhorted, to prevent ye scourges of god, which be very nere unto us as we may
see except he have mercy upon us, and that this may be continued until such
time as we may perceive that al do obey with a good affection vnfeynedlye,
upon pain to be noted, punnished, and chasticed, as rebels, contempners of
god, and dispysers of his commandments, and the Seniorye.

Item especyally upon the wednesday, which is ordained for the day of
extraordinary prayer, that al works set aparte, as well the heads of
housholdes, as their families, shall assemble them selves to hear the word of
god, and those which have housholdes shall so part the hours y^ they may be
al, either at the first or second sermon, there to call upon god with one
accord, that he would have pitye upon us, and take us into his sauegard, and
return from us all those dangers, which other wise be nere unto us, under
the said pain.

Item generally that they pray unto god, and cause their famylies and
householdes to pray with them, that he will have pitye of his church, and of
this common welthe, and that it may please him to fortifye us in these
dangerous times, and turn away from us those dangers of wars and
troubles, which be prepared against us.

Item that al citezens, burgeois inhabitauntes, and continuers here y^ be able
to bear armure, ought to be ready furnished and appointed thoroughly with
armor and weapon, according to their power, preparing themselves to live and to
die for the defense and maintenance of the holy reformacion and euangellicall
doctrine, which god has given, and also for the liberty of this commonwealth.

Item that all shall be ready and pressed incontinent at the sou^de of the great
bell, be it by day or by night to be found in his place and quarter, under
their Captain and dizener, or other wise when they shall be commanded by the
Seniorie, under ye pain of their indignacion and displeasure.

Item, that al, as well inhabitau^tes as other that be passyngers, which have
not made their oath before the Seniorie, and have not license to inhabyte and
continue in this city, shall retire them selves and depart within three days
upon pain to be put in prison and chasticed as rebels.

Item that from henceforth no hosts nor hostesses, nor other of this City,
whatsoever they be, shall not receive unto them any stranger or passanger,
nor to keep him above two nights in their houses, nor procure them lodging in
any other place, without demaundinge leave expresslye of the Senyorye, under
pain of three days impirsonment and to pay three score shyllynges for amends.

Made and passed in the ordinary counsel of Geneua.
Another proclamacion.
BE it known unto you on the part of our most redoubted Seniors Sendycques,
and counsel of this City, that the aduertysementes, which contynuallye be
given by the preaching of the word of god, ought well to suffyce and to
content al people, as well men as women to use themselves in all modestye,
honestye, and temperaunce, and to walk christenlye in deeds, words, and
gesture, as the holy scripture teaches us: nevertheless experience teaches y^
contrary, that is to say, many by excess which they do commyte in meats,
drinks, and apparel gyuing offense to other, and small apparaunce of any good
reformacion, for some there be which so do seek their own pleasure, that it
seems they are determined to preuerte the order of nature, to satysfye their
own pleasure and dissolunes, much exceeding the superfluytie of the panyms
and infydelles, which is intolerable among Christianes, for these causes
our most redoubted Seniors having here before prevented other excesses, and
vices, by statutes and proclamacions, for ye reformacion, profit, and wealth,
and the greater aduaunceme^t of this commonwealth, and principally to the
honor and glory of god in the same, and being steadfastly purposed and with
deliberation, to provide firmly and dilygently for the obseruacyon of the
same, have now once again, advised to provide for ye aforesaid excess, to
the end that by repentance, and amendment of life, the wrath of god coming
upon us which we worthilye have provoked, may be forseen and turned from us.
In consideracion of their part it is expressly forbidden and defended to all
and every one of what estate quality and condition soever they be, yt they
shall not commyt any excess in meats, or drinks, be it at marriages,
bankettes, feasts, or other wise, whether in apparel or clothing: but every
one ought and is bound in these cases to bear him self modestly, and clothe
him self honestly, soberly, and simply according to his estate, upon pain of
three score shillinges for every time when it shall be known they do the
contrary, and moreover those that do persevere and continue obstinate and
rebellyous against this proclamacion, to be chastyced according to their
demerytt.

Item, that no manner of person of what estate qualitye or condition soever
they be, men nor women, shall wear any chains of gold or silver, But those
with have been accustomed to wear them, shall put them of and wear them no more
after this proclamacion, upon pain of three score shillings for every time.

Item that no women of what quality or condition soever she be, shall wear
any verdugales, gold upon her head, coifes of gold, billimentes or such
like, neither any manner of embroiderie upon her sleues, or other apparel* upon
pain for every time three score shillings.

Item, that no manner of person of what estate condicyon or qualitye so ever
they be, men or women, shall wear above two Ringes upon their fingers, saving
that upon the day of their marriage, they may wear more, And the day after
likewise: upon pain for every time three score shillinges.

Item that no manner of person what soever they be making brydales, bankettes,
or feasts, shall have above three Coorse or services to the said feasts. and to
every course or service not above four dishes and yet not excessyue, upon
pain of three score shillings for every time, fruit excepted.

Made and passed in the ordinary counsel of Geneua.
Enstructions to govern Christian householdes, and principally Innes,
tauernes, and victuallinge houses, in Geneua.
WHAT so ever he be that shall receive people in to his house, let him govern
him self pryncipally according to the word of god, and al other persons
which shall resort to him, he shall instruct them to live holily according
to the same, and also to enstructe his household in the fear of god and his
commandments, governing al his affairs reasonably and keeping his house in
good order.

Also that he lodge not within his inn by his knowledge any people of of a
wicked life, as whoremongers, herlottes, drounkerdes, murderers, thieves,
sorcerers, heretics, nor such like, and suffer not within his presence the
name of god to be blasphemed, nor irreverently to dishonor god by naming the
devil, nor yt the sacred word of god be in no wise slau^dered or blasphemed:
and also not to be forgotten to render graces and thanks to god before meat
and after. Also not to do in any case to others that thou would should not
be done to thee remembering that thou must make account to god for all things:
also lodge thy people well and safely, and call upon god with all thye
compaygnye before they go to bed, and make their prayers.

Sell reasonably, and compte faithfully, discharging thy conscience before god
suffer no wicked plays, nor unlawful games, but maintain and advance the
honor of god, excercising ye reading of his holy word, keep no excess in
table, meats, and drynkes, neither use over late drynkinge, or bancketing,
walk uprightly in verity, and truth, in all thy affairs, following Jesus
Christ and his holy doctrine, thus doing the lord shall aid thee, and in the
time of need shall not fail thee.

Other proclamations published by the sound of a trompet, the.xxviii. day of
Februarye, and the.xxv. day of March, the year of our Lord God.M.D.LX.
BE it known on the behalf of our most redoubted lords Sendicques and
counsel of this City, that every person, ought and is bound to come to
hear the word of god, That is wednsday and fridaye.
principally upon sunday and the days appointed for prayer, and at other times
when they may have laisour, and that every person shall govern and rule them
selves according to the same upon pain to be reproved by justice. On sondais
at after none


Item that every person shall send their children and (such as be of age) to
the cathechisme there to be instructed and taught upon pain of three shillinges
when they shall be found lackinge.

Item, that all such as come with ye children to baptism, shall be there
assistant and to hear the sermon, upon pain of.lx. shil.

Item, that no manner of person do play or run Idely about the streets during
the time of the sermon, upon the sondayes, nor none to open their shoppes upon
the sondayes or days of prayer, during the sermon time, upon pain of five
shillinges without any pardon.

For children.
Item it is commanded to every person of what estate soever they be, to fetch
home their children, be it sons or daughters that they have, or may have in
the papisticall country: and it is expressly commanded and defended yt from
henceforth they send none thither, nor suffer any to go thither according to
the co^mau^dements heretofore given in yt behalf: upon pain to encur the
indignacio^ of our aforesaid lords and counsel.

For swering.
Item that no manner person be so hardy to swear by ye name of god, under
pain, the first time to kiss the ground, the second to kiss ye ground and
to pay.3. shil: for ye third to pay lx. shil. and.3. days in prison with bread
and water, and for ye fourth to be banyshed ye town for a year and a day,
according to ye commandments heretofore given in that behalf.

For blaspheming.
Item y^ no manner of person do blaspheme ye name of god upon pain, the first
time to kiss ye ground and 24. hours in prison with bread and water and to pay
five shil: for ye second time to kiss yt ground and two days in prisonme^t with
bread and water and.10. shil: for yt third time to be imprisonned.3. days with
bread and water and lx. shil: and further to be pu^ished and chastised
according as y^ case requires. Item ye no manner of person do renounce or
dispit god, upon pain of a great fine and to stand with a torch i^ his hand, and
if any do resist these ordinances, yt beside ye same pain or forfeit to be
imprisoned and chastised according as the case requires

For playing or gaming.
Item yt no manner person do play at any manner game for money upon pain of lx.
shil. and.3. day imprisonment.

Against printing or making of cards and dies.
Item ye none do make or cause to be made or printed either to bye or sell
cards, dies or any other papistical things, ye be imprinted contrary to the
holy christian reformacio^, upon pain of lx. shil. and loss of the
merchandise.

Item that no manner of men shall go to the bathes or stoufes appointed for
women, and also women not to go to those that be appointed for me^ upon pain
of.lx. shillings for whosoever shall be so found, and as much for ye master of
ye stoufe for suffri^g it.

Item that no manner person do sing any vain dishonest or rebaudye songs,
neither to dance, nor make masks, or mommeries, or any disguisinges in no
manner or sort whatsoever it be, upon pain to be put three days in prison with
bread and water and.lx. shillynges for every time so offendyng.

For reverent using of the magistrates and ministers.
Item that no manner person do misname or raylle upon the princes or
magistrates upon pain of imprisonmente, and to be further chastisied according
to the factes.

Item, that no manner person do misname or raylle upon the mynyster of the
word of god under ye same pain.

Item, that no manner of person of what estate soever he be, shall in no manner
of wise procure nor practice secretly or openly to abolishe, let, or stop, or
cause to hinder ye word and service of god and his holy euangelly, neither to
advance or bring ageine the papisticall law, upon pain of death.

Against dissolute and wicked behavior.
Item yt no manner of person be so hardy to use whoring, dro^kenes, or ru^ne
idely by ye streats, or to spend his time folishly, or to wtdraw them selves
from their occupacio^ or faculty, but y^ every person shall travail and be
occupied in his vocacio^, upon pain to be pu^ished by justice, according as ye
case requires.

For the preseruacion and liberty of the city.
Item that no manner person (according to the act made by the whole counsel)
shall or dare be so hardye to speak, practice, move, procure, or use any
means whatsoever it be, touching alienation, change or alteracio^ of ye
seigniory or government of the state of this City of Geneua, otherwise then
god of his goodness has ordained, and is established at this present, but that
every person do his endeavor as he is bound, to maintain the holy
euangelycall reformacion, ye liberties and Franchises of the city, upon pain
to loss body and goods.

Item if any do perceive any manner of practyse or conspiracy against the
principalite of this city, or against the word of god, and his holy Gosgelly
that he is bu^nde to come and reuele it incontinent unto the lords of ye
council, upon the said pain.

Item that no masters of crafts, or prentises, of what occupacion soever they
be, shall be so hardye to gather or make any unlawful assembly, neither to use
from henceforth any manner of ordinances or statutes heretofore made among
their companyes, but that they shall first present and show them to the lords
Sendicques, to be reformed by them according to their discrecions, upon pain
to forfeyt for every time offe^ding.lx. shillings and otherwise to be punished
as the case shall require.

For brauling and scolding.
Item it is expressly defended, and forbidden, to every person particular, and
to all ingenerall, to braull, skolde, misname, slander, or stir up any
rumors or false tales, either to quarrel, or do wrong to any person, upon
pain of imprisonment and to be further punnished according as the case
requyrethe, with the extremity of Justice.

For tauarnes.
Item that no citezen, burgeoise, nor inhabitant of this City, of what estate
or quality soever he be, having a householde or residence in the same, shall
from henceforth eat nor drink in any manner tavern, seller, nor cabyn
whatsoever it be, nor any hosts hostesses, nor tauerners shall give to eat or
drink to any of the said Citesyns, burgeoyses or inhabitants upon pain
of.lx. shillynges, for every of them, and for every time to be paid as well by
the hosts as the geestes, as is aforesaid.

Against danger of fire.
Item, yt no manner person do bear any candell light, into any stabyll, barn,
or grange, or any place where lies wood, coal, or straw, where is danger
of fire, except it be with a lantarn, upon pain of.lx. shillinges for every
time.

Item that no manner person do shute of any handgun, harqueboushe, or dag,
within the walls of the city upon the same pain.

For suspicions and suppressing of suddein tumultes.
Item that all citezens, burgeoises, and inhabitants shall take diligent head
as well by night as by day (every man for his own part) for all manner of goers
or comers, and in this behalf every one has aucthorite, to examine any
suspected person, and to discover and reuele them to the lords.

Item that no person shall take to them any manner of person suspected of any
euell-conuersacion, or vagabondes whatsoever they be: but such as have no
means to live, shall depart within three days following.

Item when need shall require either for fire, commocio^, or other trouble that
every man, shall incontinent repair to his quarter armed with his armor and
weapon, under the common officers appointed for that charge by the lords, upon
pain of ye indignacion of the aforesaid lords.

Item that no strangers which have not given their oaths to the lords, and be
not inhabitants in the town when such case shall happen (from the which god
defend us) shall not be found in any place abroad in the town, but being abroad
shall incontinent retire into their lodging, under the custody of their host,
upon pain being found to be imprisoned, punished and chastised corporally, and
otherwise at the discrecion of the aforesaid lords.

Diverse other good ordinances to be observed as well of inhabitauntes as
passingers.
Item that all persons as well inhabitants as passingers and strangers which
have not given their oath to ye lords, nor have licens to dwell and keep house
in the town, shall retire within three days, and depart ye town upon pain
of imprisonment and to be chastisyd as rebels.

Item, that no citezen, burgeoise, or inhabitant of this city, of what estate
soever he be, shall lodge nor take into their houses any strangers whatsoever
they be, neither let them any house, except first they have given their oath
to the lords and be received inahbitants, having to show ye letters and seals
of our said lords, upon pain of.lx. shillings for every time yt they shall be
found lodging, or receiving or letting houses to any, contrary to these present
proclamacions, and further to be punished and chastisyd as the case requires.

Item yt no manner person shall keep any Inn, tavern, or seller, neither to
bake bread to sell, except first they be admitted by ye lords, with license to
set up a sign, upon pain to be punished accordingly, and being received they
shall sell out their wine to every one for their money.

Item that from henceforth no host, nor hostesses, or any other of this city,
whatsoever they be, shall receive any trauayler, or passanger, to keep him
longer then two days, another procure them lodginge in any other place,
without axing license of the lords upon pain of three days prisonment, and
to pay a fine of lx. shillinges according to the former proclamacions.

Item it is commanded to al hosts and hostesses that every day they shall come,
and reuele or declare to ye lords al such gestes as do come into their
houses, and declare their names and surnames, and from whence they do come,
and this to be done the same time they do come, or incontinent after.

Item the said hosts and hostesses, shall take all such armours as their
gestes have, as shertes of Maill, gons or pistoletes, and to keep them until
they depart, and to bare them, but only their swords.

Item, if any such gestes show them selves obstinate, that incontinent the
host do declare it to the lords, that they may take order therein
accordingly.

Item, that all hosts and hostesses shall aduertyse their gestes and expressly
forbid them, not to be out of their lodging, after ye trompet sou^de to the
watch, or ringing of the bell (which is at.ix. of the clock) upon pain of ye
indignacion of the aforesaid lords.

Item that no strangers be found upon the town walls, either old or new,
neither upon the rampares or town ditches, but shall walk on their way
directly, and do that they have to do in the town, upon pain aforesaid,
except in those cases the said stranger be lycensyd by us the lords
Sendicques.

Item that all hosts and others, shall make their prayers to god and give
thanks before meat and after upon pain of.lx. shillings, and for every time
being found or prouid, and if ye hosts or hostesses be found negligent and
not doing it, to be punished further* as the case requires.

For streets and common places.
Item that no manner person shall enclose or appropriat to him self any part of
the common or streate, upon pain to be punished as the case requires.

Item, that whosoever shall find any thing that is lost, not knowing the
owner thereof, to bring it to ye common crier, appointed by the lords, who shall
bring it incontinent to the said lords, they to keep it until he that owes
it shall have knowledge thereof, and to render it again, upon pain to be
punished as it follows.

Item that none shall keep within the city nor limits of ye same, gootes,
Hogs, or Gese, upon pain of three shillinges for every time.

Item that none shall bie any victualles or merchandise in the street of ye
city, nor follow those that bye them to any such intent, but shall bie them in
the accustomed market places, upon pain of five shillinges, and loss of the
things so bought.

Item that no such as do bie victualles to sell again within the City, shall
bie any victualies, before.xi. of the clock, nor in any other place then in ye
common market places accustomed for the same, upon pain of five shillinges,
and loss of the things so bought every time.

Item that no victuallers do bring into the town, any manner of victual, and
especially chese, butter, and fyshe, yt is not lawful or good, neither to
unload the same, but in ye market places appointed for that purpose, upon pain
of five shillynges and loss of the goods.

Item that no person shall enter up on an others bargain, nor come between him
and the seller, to defeat him of his bargayne, upon pain of five shillinges
for every time.

Item that no baker, cook, miller, or any that sells again, shall bye nor
cause to be bought any corn, until it be.x. of the clock, the prise being
set by ye offycer, as the manner is, upon pain of five shil. for every time.

Item, that all corn that is to be sold, which shall be brought into this City,
shall be sold at the next market place to the gate, that it comes in at, and
shall not be carried to any other market, nor sold by the way, upon pain of
lx. shillinges.

Item, that upon the corn markets, the byer nor seller shall not be arrest^d for
civil matters, nor committed prisoner, from thence.

Item, that no butcher shall sell any flesh, but upon those market places
appointed for the same, upon pain of lx. shillinges for every time.

Item that none do bring any infected or corrupted flesh upon pain of.lx.
shillinges and loss of the things.

Item that no person do sell any flesh, before it be seen and tared by ye
clark of the market, appointed by the lords after the accustomed manner, upon
pain of.lx. shillinges and loss of the flesh.

Item the said flesh to be sold by just and true weights upon pain yt he
that shall be found with false weyghtes, to pay.lx. shillinges, and to be
chastyced for desceyt and falshode.

Item, that no butcher sell the heads of any beast by wayghte, nor yet by
piece mele, but wholly and by estymacyon, upon the pain aforesaid.

Item that no butcher do dysguyse his flesh, of oxen, steres, kyne, sheep or
other bests whatsoever they be, neither to cut in pieces the kyne to make the^
seem to be ox beffe, or stiere beffe, nor to conterfaite any manner of flesh
to make it seem other then it is, upon pain to bear a torche in his hand
through the City with the said pieces upon him, and to be depriuid from the
exercise of butchery for ever.

Item that no butcher do choke any best to make the blood to stay in the
flesh, neither to sell any blood from May to September.

Item that every person shall keep just and true weightes and measures upon
pain to be reproved and chastisyd for deceyt, according as the case requires,
and to pay five shillinges to him that reuealeth it.

Item that no manner person shall contract or bargain with any of the town
which is under the age of.25. years, wtoute licens of his governor appointed for
him, upon pain to lose the money delivered, the bargain to be frustrate, and
to be reproved by Justice.

Item that al commyssaries having charge, dizeners and other officers of this
city shall diligently take heed to the execucion and obseruacio^ of these
present proclamacions, every one in his quarter, wtoute fayll, upon pain to be
punished as the case requires.

Item that none do enterprise to do, say, nor contract any things out of
this City, that he dare not do or say within the same, concerning the law
of god and reformacion of the Gospel, upon pain to be punnyshed, according
as the fault requires.

Item that every person is bound to reveal to the Magistrates all such as
they do know to be offe^ders i^ any of these present statuts either in part or
in the whole, upon pain to be reproved upon the oath that they have made unto
the City.

Item that no manner of person do contemn any of these present ordinances or
statutes of our aforesaid lords Sendicques, neither do absent themselves,
nor depart yt town but to appear when they shall be lawfully called, either in
their persons, or by some of there is, or their householde, upon the losses and
confiscacion of their goods, and further punnyshement when they shall be
apprehended.

FINIS.
For the knowledge of their coin or money.
Note that the shilling named here in this book, is but a souce of their money,
whreof three make four pence of ours.

A deniere is noted thus (d) ix. of them make but a penny of our money.

A floren conteyneth.xii. souce which make.xvi. d. of our money.

A Frank is.xxv. souce of theirs, which amounts to ii. shillings ix. d
farthing of our money

Printed at London by Rouland Hall and Thomas Hacket, the 16. of April, in the
year of our lord 1562.


