THE TRAGEDY OF Antonie.

Done into English by the Countess of Pembroke

Imprinted at London for William Ponsonby 1595.

The Argument.
AFTER the overthrow of Brutus and Cassius, the liberty of Rome being now
utterly oppressed, and the Empire settled in the hands of Octauius Caesar and
Marcus Antonius, (who for knitting a straiter bond of amity between them,
had taken to wife Octauia the sister of Caesar) Antonius undertook a journey
against the Parthians, with intent to regaine on them the honor won by them
from the Romans, at the discomfiture and slaughter of Crassus. But coming in
his journey into Siria the places renewed in his remembrance the long
intermittedloue of Cleopatra Queen of Aegipte: who before time had both in
Cilicia and at Alexandria, entertained him with all the exquisite delights and
sumptuous pleasures, which a great Prince and voluptuous lover could to the
uttermost desire. Whereupon omitting his enterprice, he made his return to
Alexandria, again falling to his former loves, without any regard of his
virtuous wife Octauia, by whom nevertheless he had excellent children. This
occation Octauius took of taking arms against him: and preparing a mighty
fleet, encou^tred him at Actium, who also had assembled to that place a great
number of Galleys of his own, beside, 60. which Cleopatra brought with her from
Aegipt, But at the very beginning of the battle Cleopatra with all her Galleys
betook her to flight, which Antony seeing could not but follow: by his
departure to Octauius the greatest victory which in any Seabattell has been
hard off. Which he not negligent to pursue, follows them the next spring and
besiedgeth them with in Alexandria, where Antony finding all that he trusted to
fail him, begins to grow iealouse and to suspect Cleopatra. She thereupon
enclosed her self with two of her women in a monument she had before caused to
be built, thence sends him word she was dead: which he believing for truth,
gave himself with his Sword a deadly wou^d: but died not until a messenger
came from Cleopatra to have him brought to her to the tomb. Which she not
daring to open least she should be made a prisoner to the Romans, and
carried in Caesar's triumph, cast down a cord from an high window, by the which
(her women helping her) she trussed up Antonius half dead, and so got him into
the monument. The stage supposed alexandria: the chorus first Egiptians, and
after Roman soldiers: The history to be read at large in Plutarch in the life
of Antonius.

The Actors.
Antonius. Cleopatra. Eras and Charmio^. Cleopatras women Philostratus a
Philosopher. Lucilius. Diomede Secretary to Cleopatra. Octauius Caesar.
Agrippa. Euphron, teacher of Cleopatras children. Children of Cleopatra,
Dircetus the Messenger.
ANTONIUS
SInce cruel Heavens against me obstinate,
Since all mishappes of the round engine do
Conspire my harm: since me^, since powers divine
Air, earth, and Sea are all injurious:
And that my Queen her self, in whom I lived,
The Idol of my heart, does me pursue;
It Is meet I dye. For her have I forgone
My Country, Caesar unto war prouok'd
(For just revenge of Sisters wrong my wife,
Who mou'de my Queen (ay me!) to jealousy)
For love of her, in her allurements caught
Abandoned life, I honor have despisde,
Disdained my friends, and of the statelye Rome
Despoilde the Empire of her best attire,
Contemned that power that made me so much feared,
Aslaue become unto her feeble face.
O cruel, traitres, woman most unkind,
Thou do, forsworn, my love and life betraie:
And give me up to ragefull enemy,
Which soon (o fool!) will plague thy periurye.
Yielded Pelusium on this countries shore,
Yielded thou have my Ships and men of war,
That naught remains (so destitute am I)
But these same arms which on my back I wear.
Thou should have had them too, and me vnarm'de
Yielded to Caesar naked of defense.
Which while I bear let Caesar never think
Triumph of me shall his proud chariot grace
Not think with me his glory to adorn,
On me alive to use his victory.
Thou only Cleopatra triumph have,
Thou only have my fredome servile made,
Thou only have me vanquished: not by force
(For forste I cannot be) but by sweet baits
Of thy eyes graces, which did gain so fast
upon my liberty, that naught remained.
None else henceforth, but thou my dearest Queen,
Shall glory in commanding Antonie.
Have Caesar fortune and the Gods his friends,
To him have Jove and fatal sisters given
The Scepter of the earth: he never shall
Subject my life to his obedience.
But when that death, my glad refuge, shall have
Bounded the course of my unsteadfast life,
And frosen corpse under a marble cold
Within tombs bosom widdowe of my soul:
Then at his will let him it subject make:
Then what he will let Caesar do with me:
Make me limme after limme be rent: make me
My burial take in sides of Thracian wolte.
Poor Antonie! alas what was the day,
The days of loss that gained thee thy love!
Wretch Antonie! since Maegaera pale
With Snakie hairs enchain'd thy misery.
The fire thee burnt was never Cupids fire
(For Cupid bears not such a mortal brand)
It was some furies torch, Orestes torche,
Which sometimes burnt his mother-murdering soul
(When wandering mad, rage boiling in his blood,
He sled his fault which folow'd as he fled)
kindled within his bones by shadow pale
Of mother slain returned from Stygian lake.
Antony, poor Antony! since that day
Thy old good hap did far from thee retire.
Thy virtue dead: thy glory made alive
So often by martial deeds is gone in smoke:
Since then the Baies so well thy forehead knew
To Venus mirtles yielded have their place:
Trumpets to pipes: field tents to courtly bowers:
Lances and Pikes to daunces and to feasts.
Since then, o wretch! in stead of bloody wars
Thou should have made upon the Parthian Kings
For Romain honor filde by Crassus foil,
Thou threw'st thy Curiace off, and fearful healme,
With coward courage unto Aegipts Queen
In haste to run, about her neck to hang
Languishing in her arms thy I doll made:
In sum given up to Cleopatras eyes
Thou breakest at length from thence, as one encharm'd
Breaks from th'enchaunter that him strongly held.
For thy first reason (spoiling of their force
the poisned cups of thy fair Sorceres)
Recur'd thy sperit: and then on every side
Thou made again the earth with Soldiers swarm
All Asia hid: Euphrates banks do tremble
To see at once so many Romans there
Breath horror, rage, and with a threatening eye
In mighty squadrons cross his swelling streams.
Naught seen but horse, and fire sparkling arms:
Naught heard but hideous noise of muttring troops,
The Parth, the Mede, abandoning their goods
Hide them for fear in hills of Hircanie,
Redoubting thee. Then willing to besiege
The great Phraate head of Media,
Thou campedst at her walls with vain assault,
Thy engines fit (mishap!) not thither brought,
So long thou stai'st, so long thou do thee rest,
So long thy love with such things nourished
Reframes, reformes it self and stealingly
Retakes his force and rebecomes more great.
For of thy Queen the looks, the grace, the words,
Sweetness, alurements, amorous delights,
Entered again thy soul, and day and night,
In watch, in sleep, her Image followed thee:
Not dreaming but of her, repenting still
That thou for war had such a gods left.
Thou car'st no more for Parth, nor Parthian bow,
Sallies, assaults, encounters, shocks, alarmes,
For ditches, rampires, wards, entrenched grounds:
Thy only care is sight of Nilus streams,
Sight of that face whose gilefull semblant does
(Wandering in thee) infect thy tainted heart.
Her absence thee besottes: each hour, each hour
Of stay, to thee impatient seems an age.
Enough of conquest, praise thou deem'st enough,
If soon enough the bristled fields thou see
Of fruitful Aegipt, and the stranger flood
Thy Queens fair eyes (another Pharos) lights.
Returned lo, dishonored, despisde,
In wanton love a woman thee misleades
Sunk in foul sink: mean while respecting naught
Thy wife Octauia and her tender babes,
Of whom the long contempt against thee whets
The sword of Caesar now thy Lord become.
Lost thy great Empire, all those goodly towns
Reuerenc'd thy name as rebels now thee leave:
Rise against thee, and to the ensigns flock
Of conquering Caesar, who enwalles thee round
Cag'd in thy hold, scarce master of thy self,
Late master of so many Nations.
Yet, yet, which is of grief exrreamest grief,
Which is yet of mischief highest mischief,
It Is Cleopatra alas! alas, it is she,
It Is she augments the torment of thy pain,
Betraies thy love, thy life alas!) betraies,
Caesar to please, whose grace she seeks to gain:
With thought her crown to save and fortune make
Only thy foe which common ought have been.
If her I always loved, and the first flame
Of her heart-killing love shall burn me last:
Justly complain I she disloyal is,
Nor constant is, even as I constant am,
To comfort my mishap, despising me
No more, then when the heavens favored me.
But ah! by nature women wau' ring are,
Each moment changing and rechanging minds.
Unwise, who blind in them, thinks loyalty
Ever to find in beauties company.

Chorus. The boiling tempest still
makes not Sea waters foam:
nor still the Northern blast
disquiets quiet streams:
Nor who his chest to fill
sails to the morning beams,
on waves wind tosseth fast
still kepes his ship from home.
Nor Jove still down does cast
inflamed with bloody ire
on man, on tree, on hill,
his darts of thundering fire.
nor still the heat does last
on face of parched plain.
nor wrinkled cold does still
on frozen furrows reign.
But still as long as we
in this low world remain,
mishapps our daily mates
our lives do intertaine:
and woes which bear no dates
still perch upon our heads,
none go but straight will be
some greater in their steads.
Nature made us not free
When first she made us live:
When we began to be,
To be began our woe:
Which growing evermore
As dying life does grow,
Do more and more us grieve,
And tire us more and more.
No stay in fading states,
For more to height they retch,
Their fellow miseries.
The more to height do stretch.
They cling even to the crown,
And threatening furious wise
From tirannizing pates
Do often pull it down.
In vain on waves untried
To shun them go we should
To Scythes and Massagetes
Who near the Pole reside:
In vain to boiling sands
Which Phoebus battry beats,
For with us still they would
Cut seas and compass lands.
The darkness no more sure
To join with heavy night:
The light which guildes the days
To follow Titan pure:
No more the shadow light
The body to ensue:
Then wretchedness always
Us wretches to pursue.
O blessed who never breathed,
Or whom with pity mou'de,
Death from his cradle reau'de,
And swadled in his grave:
And blessed also he
(As curse may blessing have)
Who low and living free
No princes charge has prou'de.
By stealing sacred fire.
Prometheus then unwise,
prouking Gods to ire,
the heap of ills did stir,
and sickness pale and cold
our end which onward spur,
to plague our hands too bold
to filch the wealth of skies.
In heavens hate since then
of ill with ill enchain'd
we race of mortal men
full fraught our breasts have borne
and thousand thousand woes
our heavenly souls now thorn,
which free before from those
no! earthly passion pained.
War and wars bitter cheer
now long time with us stay,
and fear of hated foe
still still increases sore:
our harms worse daily grow,
less yesterday they were
then now, and will be more
to morrow then to day.

Act. 2.
Philostratus. What horrible fury, what cruel rage,
O Aegipt so extremely thee torments?
Have thou the Gods so angered by thy fault?
Have thou against them some such crime conceived.
That their engrained hand lift up in threats
They should desire in thy heart blood to bathe?
And that their burning wrath which noght ca^ quench
Should pittiles on us still lighten down?
We are not hew'n out of the monst'rous mass
Of Giantes those, which heavens wrack conspired:
Ixions race, false prater of his loves:
Nor yet of him who fained lightnings found:
Nor cruel Tantalus, nor bloody Atreus,
Whose cursed banquet for Thyestes plague
Made the beholding Sun for horror turn
His back, and backward from his course return:
And hastening his wing-footed horses race
Plunge him in sea for shame to hide his face:
While sulleine night upon the wondering world
For mid-daies light her starrie mantle cast.
But what we be, what ever wickedness
By us is done, Alas! with what more plagues,
More eager torments could the Gods declare
To heaven and earth that us they hateful hold?
With soldiers, strangers, horrible in arms
Our land is hid, our people drowned in tears.
But terror here and horror, naught is seen:
And present death prising our life each hour.
Hard at our ports and at our porches waits
Our conquering foe: hearts fail us, hopes are dead:
Our Queen laments: and this great Emperor
Sometime (would now they did) whom worlds did fear
Abandoned, betrayed, now minds no more
But from his evils by hast'ned death to pass.
Come! you poor people ti'rde with ceasles plaints
With tears and sighs make morunfull sacrfice
On Isis altars: not our selves to save,
But soften Caesar and him piteous make
To us, his pray: that so his lenity
May change our death into captivity.
Strange are the evils the fates on us have brought,
O but alas! how far more strange the cause!
Love, love (alas, who ever would have thought?)
Has lost this Realm inflamed with his fire.
Love, playing love, which men say kindles not
But in soft hearts, has ashes made our towns.
And his sweet shafts, with whose shot none are killed,
Which ulcer not, with deaths our lands have filled,
Such was the bloody, murdring, hellish love
Possessed thy heart fair false guest Priams son,
Firing a brand which after made to burn
The Trojan towers by Graecians ruinate.
By this love, Priam, Hector, Troilus,
Memnon, Deiphaebus, Glancus, thousands mo.
Whom redd Scamanders armor clogged streams
Rolled into Seas, before their dates are dead.
So plaguie he, so many tempests raises,
So murdring he, so many Cities raises,
When insolent, blind, lawles, orderles,
With made delights our sense he entertaines.
All knowing Gods our wracks did us fortell
By signs in earth, by signs in starry Sphaeres,
Which should have moved us, had not destiny
With too strong hand warped our misery.
The Comets flaming through the scat'red clouds
With fiery beams, most like vnbroaded hairs:
The fearful dragon whistling at the banks:
And holy Apis ceasles bellowing
(As never erst) and shedding endless tears:
Blood raining down from heaven in vnknow'n showers:
Our Gods dark faces over cast with woe,
And dead men's Ghosts appearing in the night.
Yea even this night while all the City stood
Oppressed with terror, horror, servile fear,
Deep silence over all: the sounds were heard
Of diverse songs, and diverse instruments,
Within the void of air: and howling noise,
Such as mad Bacchus priests in Bacchus feasts
On Nisa make: and (seemed) the company,
Our City lost, went to the enemy.
So we forsaken both of Gods and men,
So are we in the mercy of our foes:
And we henceforth obedient must become
To laws of them who have us overcome.

Chorus. Lament we our mishaps,
Drown we with tears our woe:
For Lamentable happes
Lamented easy grow:
and much less torment bring
then when they first did spring.
We want that woeful song,
wherewith wood-musiques Queen
does ease her woes, among,
fresh springtimes bushes green,
on pleasant branch alone
renewing ancient moan.
We want that monefull sound,
that prattling Progne makes
on fields of Thracian ground,
or streams of Thracian lakes:
to empt her breast of pain
for Itys by her slain.
Though Halcyons do still,
bewailing Ceyx lot,
the Seas with plainings fill
which his dead limbs have got,
not ever other grave
then tomb of waves to have:
And though the bird in death
that most Meander loves:
so sweetly sighs his breath
when death his fury proves,
as almost softs his heart,
and almost blunts his dart:
Yet all the plaints of those,
nor all their tearfull larmes,
cannot content our woes,
nor serve to wail the harms,
in soul which we, poor we.
to feel enforced be.
Nor they of Phoebus bredd
in tears can do so well,
they for their brother shedd,
who into Padus fell,
rash guide of chariot clear
surueiour of the year.
Nor she whom heavenly powers
to weping rock did turn,
whose tears distill in showers,
and show she yet does mourn,
wherewith his top to Skies
mount Sipylus does rise.
Nor weping drops which flow
from bark of wounded tree,
that Mirrhas shame does show
with ours compared may be,
to quench her loving fire
who durst embrace her fire.
Nor all the howlings made
on Cybels sacred hill
By Eunukes of her trade,
Who Atys, Atys still
with doubled cries resound,
which Echo makes rebound.
Our plaints no limits stay,
nor more then do our woes:
both infinitely straie
and neither measure knows
In mea sure let them plain:
Who measnr'd griefs sustain.

Cleopatrra. Eras. Charmton. Diomede. Cleopatra. That I have thee betraide,
dear Antonie,
My life, my soul, my sun? I had such thought?
That I have thee betraide my Lord, my King?
That I would break my vowed faith to thee?
I aue thee? deceive thee? yield thee to the rage
Of mighty foe? I ever had that heart?
Rather sharp lightning lighten on my head:
Rather may I to deepest mischief fall:
Rather the opened earth devour me:
Rather fierce Tigers feed them on my flesh:
Rather, o rather let our Nilus send,
To swallow me quick, some weeping Crocodile.
And did thou then suppose my royal heart
Had hatched, thee to ensnare, a faithles love?
And changing mind, as Fortune changed cheer,
I would weak thee, to win the stronger, loose?
O wretch! o caitiue! o too cruel hap!
And did not I sufficient loss sustain
Loosing my Realm, loosing my liberty,
My tender offspring, and the joyful light
Of beamy Sun, and yet, yet loosing more
Thee Antony my care, if I loose not
What yet remained? thy love alas! thy love,
More dear then Scepter, children, freedom, ligh^
So ready I to row in Charons barge,
Shall leese the joy of dying in thy love:
So the sole comfort of my misery
To have one tomb with thee is me bereft.
So I in shady plains shall plain alone,
Not (as I hoped) companion of thy moan,
O height of grief! Eras why with Continual cries
Your griefull harms do you exasperate?
Torment your self with murdering complaints;
Strain your weak breast so ost, so vehemently?
Water with tears this fair al ablaster?
With sorrows sting so many beauties wound?
Come of so many Kings want you the heart
Bravely, stoutly, this tempest to resist?

Cl. My eu'lls are wholly unsupportable,
No humain force can them withstand, but death.

Eras. To him that strives naught is impossible.

Cl. In striving lies no hope of my mishapps.

Eras. All things do yield to force of lovely face.

^^ My face too lovely caused my wretched case.
My face has so entrap'd, so cast us down,
That for his conquest Caesar may it thank,
Causing that Antonie one army lost
The other wholly did to Caesar yield.
For not enduring (so his amorouse sprite
Was with my beauty fir'de) my shameful flight,
Soon as he saw from rank wherein he stood
In hottest fight, my Galleys making sail:
Forgetful of his charg (as if his soul
Unto his Ladies soul had been enchain'd)
He left his men, who so courageously
Did leave their lives to gain him victory.
And careless both of fame and armies loss
My oared Galleys followed with his ships
Companion of my flight, by this base part
Blasting his former flourishing renown.

Eras. Are you therefore cause of his overthrow?

Cl. I am sole cause: I did it, only I.

Er. Fear of a woman troubled so his sprite?

Cl. Fire of his love was by my fear enflamed.

Er. And should he then to war have led a Queen?

Cl. Alas! this was not this offense, but mine.
Antony (ay me! who else so brave a chief!)
Would not I should have taken Seas with him:
But would have lest me fearful woman far
From common hazard of the doubtful war.
O that I had believed! now, now of Rome
All the great Empire at our beck should bend.
All should obey, the vagabonding Scythes,
The feared Germans, back-shooting Parthians,
Wandering Numidians, Brittons far removed,
And tawny nations scorched with the Sun.
But I cared not: so was my soul possessed,
(To my great harm) with burning jealousy:
Fearing least in my absence Antony
Should leaving me retake Octauia.

Char. Such was the rigor of your desteny.

Cl. Such was my error and obstinacy.

Chapter But since Gods would not, could you do withal?

Cl. Always from Gods good haps, not harms, do fall.

Chapter And have they not all power on men's affairs?

Cl. They never bow so low, as worldly cares.
But leave to mortal men to be disposed
Freely on earth what ever mortal is.
If we therein sometimes some faults commit,
We may them not to their high majesty's,
But to our selves impute; whose passions
Plunge us each day in all afflictions.
Wherewith when we our souls do thorned feel,
Flattering our selves we say they dest'nies are:
That gods would have it so, and that our care
Could not empeach but that it must be so.

Char. Things here below are in the heavens begot,
Before they be in this our wordle borne:
And never can our weakness turn awry
The stailesse course of powerful destenie.
Naught here force, reason, human providence,
Holy devotion, noble blood preuailes:
And Jove himself whose hand does heavens rule,
Who both to gods and men as King Commands,
Who earth (our firm support) with plenty stores,
Mouses air and sea with twinkling of his eye,
Who all can do, yet never can undo
What once has been by their hard laws decreed.
When Troyan walls, great Neptunes workmanship.
Enuiron'd were with Greeks, and Fortunes whele
Doubtful ten years now to the camp did turn,
And now again toward the town returned.
How many times did force and fury swell
In Hectors veins egging him to the spoil
Of conquered foes, which at his blows did fly,
As fearful sheep at feared wolves approach:
To save (in vain: for why? it would not be)
Poor walls of Troy from adversaries rage,
Who died them in blood, and cast to ground
Heaped them with bloody burning carcases.
No, Madame, think, that if the ancient crown
Of your progenitors that Nilus ruled,
Force take from you; the Gods have willed it so,
To whom often times Princes are odious.
They have to every thing an end ordained;
All worldly greatness by them bounded is:
Some sooner, later some, as they think best:
None their decree is able to infringe.
But, which is more, to us disastred men
Which subject are in all things to their will,
Their will is hid: nor while we live, we know
How, or how long we must in life remain.
Yet must we not for that feed on despair,
And make us wretched ere we wretched be:
But always hope the best, even to the last,
That from our selves the mischief may not grow.
Then, Madame, help your self, leave of in time
Antonies wrack, left it your wrack procure:
Retire you from him, save from wrathful rage
Of angry Caesar both your Realm and you.
You see him lost, so as your amity
Unto his evils can yield no more relief.
You see him ruined, so as your support
No more henceforth can him with comfort raise.
Withdraw you from the storm: persist not still
To loose your self: this royal diadem
Regaine of Caesar.

Cl. Sooner shining light
Sall leave the day, and darkness leave the night:
Sooner moist currents of tempestuous seas
Shall wave in heaven, and the nightly troops
Of stars shall shine within the foming waves,
Then I thee, Antony, Leave in deep distres.
I am with thee, be it thy worthy soul
Lodge in thy breast, or from that lodging part
Crossing the ioyles lake to take her place
In place prepared for men Demy-gods.
Live, if thee please, if life be loathsome die:
Dead and alive, Antony, thou shall see
Thy princess follow thee, follow, and lament,
Thy wrack, no less her own then was thy weal.

Char. What helps his wrack this euer-lasting love?.

Cl. Help, or help not, such must, such ought I prove.

Chapter Ill done to loose your self, and to no end.

Cl. How ill think you to follow such a friend?

Chapter But this your love naught mitigates his praine.

Cl. Without this love I should be inhumaine.

Ch, Inhumaine he, who his own death pursues.

Cl. Not inhumaine who miseries eschues.

Chapter Live for your sons.

Cl. Nay for their father die.

Chapter Hardharted mother!

Cl. Wife kindhearted I.

Chapter Then will you them deprive of royal right?

Cl, Do I deprive them? no, it is dest'nies might.

Chapter Do you not them deprive of heritage,
That give them up to adversaries hands,
A man forsaken fearing to forsake,
Whom such huge numbers hold inuironned?
T'abandon one against whom the frowning world
Banded with Caesar makes conspiring war.

Cl. The less ought I to leave him lest of all.
A friend in most distress should most assift.
If that when Antonie great and glorious
His legions led to drink Euphrates streams,
So many Kings in train redoubting him;
In triumph raised as high as highest heaven;
Lord-like disposing as him pleased best,
The wealth of Greece, the wealth of Asia:
In that fair fortune had I him exchaung'd
For Caesar, then, men would have counted me
Faithles, unconstant, light: but now the storm,
And blustering tempest driving on his face,
Ready to drown, Alas! what would they say?
What would himself in Platos mansion say?
If, I whom always more then life he lou'de,
If I, Who am his heart, who was his hope,
Leave him, forsake him (and perhaps in vain)
Weakly to please who him has overthrown?
Not light, unconstant, faith less should I be,
But vile, forsworn, of treachrous cruelty.

Chapter Cruelty to shun you selfe-cruell are:

Cl. Selfe-cruell him from cruelty to spare.

Chapter Our first affection to ourselfe is due.

Cl. He is my self.

Chapter Next it extends unto
Our children, friends, and to our country soil.
And you for some respect of wiuely love,
(Albee scarce wiuely) loose your native land,
Your children, friends, and (which is more) your life,
With so strong charms does love bewitch our wits:
So fast in us this fire once kindled flames.
Yet if his harm by yours redress might have,

Cl. With mine it may be clos'de in darksome grave.

Chapter And that, as Alcest to her self unkind,
You might exempt him from the laws of death.
But he is sure to die: and now his sword
Already moisted is in his warm blood,
Helples for any succor you can bring
Against deaths sting, which he must shortly feel.
Then let your love be like the love of old
Which Carian Queen did nourish in her heart
Of her Mausolus: build for him a tomb
Whose stateliness a wonder new may make.
Let him, let him have sumptuous funerals:
Let grave thereon the horror of his fights:
Let earth be buried with unburied heaps.
Frame their Pharsaly, and discoulour'd stream's
Of deep Enipeus: frame the grassie plain,
Which lodged his camp at siege of Mutina.
Make all his combats, and courageous acts:
And yearly plays to his praise institute:
Honor his memory: with doubled care
Breed and bring up the children of you both
In Caesar's grace: who as a noble Prince
Will leave them Lords of this most glorious realm.

Cl. What shame were that? ah Gods! what infamy?
With Antony in his good haps to share,
And ouerliue him dead: deeming enough
To shed some tears upon a widow tomb?
The after-liuers justly might report
That I him only for his Empire loved
And high estate: and that in hard estate
I for another did him lewdly leave?
Like to those birds wafted with wandering wings.
From foraine lands in springtime here arrive:
And live with us so long as Summers heat,
And their food lasts, then seek another soil.
And as we see with ceaseless fluttering
Flocking of seelly flies a brownish cloud
To vintag'd wine yet working in the tonne:
Not parting thence while they sweet liquor taste:
After, as smoke, all vanish in the air,
And of the swarm not one so much' appear.

Eras. By this sharp death what profit can you win?

Cl. I neither gain nor profit seek therein.

Er. What praise shall you of after-ages get?

Cl. Nor praise, nor Glory in my cares are set.

Eras. What other end ought you respect, then this?

Cl. My only end my onele duty is.

Eras. Your duty must upon some good be founded?

Cl. On virtue it, the only good, is grounded.

Er. What is that Virtue?

Cl. That which us beseemes.

Er. Outrage our selves? who that beseeming deemes?

Cl. Finish I will my sorrows dieng thus.

Er. Minish you will your glories doing thus.

Cl. Good friends I pray you seek not to revoke
My fixed intent of following Antony.
I will die. I will die: must not his life,
His life and death by mine be followed?
Mean while, dear sisters, live: and while you live,
Do often honor to our loved Tombs.
Straw them with flowers: and sometimes happily
The tender thought of Antony your Lord
And me poor soul to tears shall you inuit,
And our true loves to doleful voice commend.

Chapter And think you Madame, we from you will part?
Think you alone to feel deaths ougly darte?
Think you to leave us? and that the same sun
Shall see at once you dead, and us alive?
We Will die with you: and Clotho pitiless
Shall us with you in hellish boat imbarque:

Cl. Ah live, I pray you: this disastred woe
Which racks my heart, alone to me belongs:
My lot longs not to you: servants to be
No shame, no harm to you, as is to me.
Live sisters, live, and seeing his suspect
Has causlesse me in sea of sorrows drowned,
And that I cannot live, if so I would,
Nor yet would leave this life, if so I could,
Without his love: procure me, Diomed,
That against poor me he be no more incensd.
Wrest out of his conceit that harmefull doubt,
That since his wrack he has of me conceived
Though wrong conceived: witness you reverent Gods,
Barking Anubis, Apis bellowing.
Tell him, my soul burning, impatient,
Forlorn with love of him, for certain seal
Ofher true loialtie my corpse has left,
Tencrease of dead the number numberless,
Go then, and if as yet he me bewail,
If yet for me his heart one sigh fourth breathe
Blessed shall I be: and far with more content
Depart this world, where so I me torment.
Mean season us let this sad tomb enclose,
Attending here till death conlude our woes.

Diom. I will obey your will.

Cl. So the desert
The Gods repay of thy true faithful heart.

Diomed. And is it not pity, Gods, ah Gods of heaven
To see from love such hateful fruits to spring?
And is it not pity that this firebrand so
Lays waste the trophes of Phillippi fields?
Where are those sweet allureme^ts, those sweet looks,
Which gods the ^ selves right heart sick wuld have made
What does that beauty, rarest gift of heaven,
Wonder of earth? Alas! what do those eyes?
And that sweet voice all Asia understood,
And sunburnt Afric wide in deserts spread?
Is their force dead? have they no further power?
Can not by them Octauius be suppriz'd?
Alas! if Jove in middst of all his ire,
With thunderbolt in hand some land to plague,
Had cast his eyes on my Queen, out of hand
His Plaguing bolte had fallen out of his hand:
Fire of his wrath into vain smoke should turn,
And other fire within his breast should burn.
Naught lives so fair. Nature by such a work
Her self, should seem, in workmanship has past.
She is all heavenly: never any man
But seeing her was ravished with her sight.
The Allablaster covering of her face,
The coral coullor her two lips engraines,
Her beamy eyes, two Suns of this our world,
Of her fair hair the fine and flaming gold,
Her brave straight stature, and her winning parts
Are nothing else but fires, fetters, darts.
Yet this is nothing th'enchaunting skilles
Of her celestial Sp'rite, her training speech,
Her grace, her majesty, and forcing voice,
Whither she it with fingers speech consorte,
Or hearing sceptred kings ambassadors
Answer to each in his own language make.
Yet now at need it aides her not at all
With all these beauties, so her sorrow stinges.
Darkened with woe her only study is
To weep, to sigh, to seek for lonelines.
Careless of all, her hair disordred hangs:
Her charming eyes whence murthring looks did fly,
Now rivers grown', whose wellspring anguish is,
Do trickling wash the marble of her face.
Her fair discovered breast with sobbing swollen
Self cruel she still martirith with blows,
Alas! It Is our ill hap, for if her tears
She would convert into her loving charms,
To make a conquest of the conqueror,
(As well she might, would she her force imploie)
She should us saftie from these ills procure,
Her crown to her, and to her race assure.
Unhappy he, in whom selfe-succour lies,
Yet selfe-forsaken wanting succor dies.

Chorus. O sweet fertile land, wherein
Phoebus did with breath inspire
man who men did first begin,
formed first of Nilus mire.
whence of Arts the eldest kinds,
earths most heavenly ornament,
were as from their fountain sent
to enlight our misty minds.
whose gross sprite from endless time
as in darkened prison pente,
never did to knowledge clime.
Where the Nile, our father good,
father-like does never miss
yearly us to bring such food,
as to life required is:
visiting each year this plain,
and with fat slime cou'ring it,
which his seven mouths do spit,
as the season comes again.
making thereby greatest grow
busy reapers joyful pain,
when his floods do highest flow.
Wandering Prince of rivers thou,
honor of the Aethiops land,
of a Lord and master now
thou a slave in awe must stand.
now of Tiber which is spread
less in force, and less in fame
reverence thou must the name,
whom all other rivers dread,
for his children swollen in pride,
who by conquest seek to tread
round this earth on every side.
Now thou must begin to send
tribute of thy watery store,
as sea paths thy steps shall bend,
yearly presents more and more.
thy fat skumme, our fruitful corn,
pill'd from hence with theuish hands
all vncloth'd shall leave our lands
into foreign country borne.
which puffed up with such a pray
shall thereby the praise adorn
of that scepter Rome does sway.
Naught thee helps thy horns to hide
far from hence in unknown grounds,
that thy waters wander wide,
yearly breaking banks, and bounds.
and that thy Skie-coullor'd brooks
through a hundred peoples pass,
drawing plots for trees and grass
with a thousand turn's and crookes.
whom all weary of their way
thy throats which in wideness pass
power into their mother Sea.
Naught so happy hapless life
in this world as freedom finds:
naught wherein mor sparks are rise
to inflame courageous minds.
but if force must us enforce
needs a yoke to undergo,
under foraine yoke to go
Still it proves a bondage worse.
and doubled subjection
see we shall, and feel, and know
subject to a stranger grown.
From hence forward for a King,
whose first being from this place
should his breast by nature bring
care of country to embrace,
We at surly face must quake
of some Roman madly bent:
who our terror to augment.
his Proconsuls axe will shake.
driving with our Kings from hence
our established government,
justice sword, and laws defense.
Nothing worldly of such might
but more mighty Destiny,
by swift Times unbridled flight,
makes in end his end to see.
every thing Time overthrows,
naught to end does steadfast stay.
his great sith mowes all away
as the stalk of tender rose.
only immortality
of the heavens does it oppose
against his powrefull Deity.
One day there will come a day
which shall quail they fortunes flower
and thee ruinde low shall lay
in some barbarous Princes power.
when the pittie-wanting fire
shall, O Rome, thy beauties burn,
and to humble ashes turn
thy proud wealth and rich attire,
those guilt roofes which turretwise,
justly making envy mourn,
threaten now to pearce Skies.
As thy forces fill each land
haruests making here and there,
reaping all with ravening hand
they find growing any where:
from each land so to thy fall,
multitudes repair shall make,
from the common spoil to take
what to each man's shaire may fall.
fingred all thou shall behold:
no jot left for tokens sake
that thou were so great of old.
Like unto the ancient Troie
whence derived thy founders be,
conquering foe shall thee enioie,
and a burning pray in thee.
for within this turning ball
this we see, and see each day:
all things fixed ends do stay,
ends to first beginnings fall.
and that naught, how strong or strange
chaungeles does endure alwaie,
But endures fatal change.

M. Antonius. Lucilius. M. Ant. Lucil. sole comfort of my bitter case,
The only trust, the only hope I have,
In last despair: Ah is not this the day
That death should me of life and love bereave?
What wait I for that have no refuge left,
But am sole remnant of my fortune left?
All leave me, fly me: none, noe not of them
Which of my greatness greatest good received,
Stands with my fall: they seem as now ashamed
That heretofore they did me ought regard:
They draw them back, showing they folow'd me,
Not to partake my harm's, but coozen me.

Lu. In this our world nothing is steadfast found,
In vain he hopes, who here his hopes does ground.

An. Yet naught afflicts me, nothing killes me so,
As that I so my Cleopatra see
Practice with Caesar, and to him transport
My flame, her love, more dear then life to me.

Lu. Believe it not: Too high a heart she bears,
Too princely thoughts.

An. Too wise a head she wear
Too much enflamed with greatness, evermore
Gaping for our great Empires government.

Lu. So long time you her constant love have tri'de.

An. But still with me good fortune did abide.

Lu. Her changed love what token makes you know?

An. Pelusium lost, and Actian overthrow,
Both by her fraud: my well appointed fleet,
And trusty Soldiers in my quarrel armed,
Whom she, false she, instead of my defense,
Came to persuade, to yield them to my foe:
Such honor Thyre done, such welcome given,
Their long close talks I neither knew, nor would,
And treacherous wrong Alexas has me done,
Witness too well her perjured love to me.
But you O Gods (if any faith regard)
With sharp revenge her faithless change reward.

Lu. The dole she made upon our overthrow,
Her realm given up for refuge to our men,
Her poor attire when she devoutly kept
The solemn day of her nativity,
Again the cost and prodigal expense
Showed when she did your birth day celebrate,
Do plain enough her heart unfeigned prove,
Equally touched, you loving, as you love.

Ant. Well; be her love to me or false, or true,
Once in my soul a cureles wound I feel.
I Jove: nay burn in fire of her love:
Each day, each night her Image haunts my mind,
Her self my dreams: and still I tired am,
And still I am with burning pincers nipt.
Extreme my harm: yet sweeter to my sense
Then boiling Torch of jealous torments fire:
This grief, nay rage, in me such stir does keep,
And thorns me still, both when I wake and sleep.
Take Caesar conquest, take my goods, take he
Th'onor to be Lord of the earth alone,
My sons, my life bent headlong to mishapps:
No force, so not my Cleopatra take.
So foolish I, I cannot her forget,
Though better were I banished her my thought.
Like to the sick whose throat the feauers fire
Has vehemently with thirsty drought enflamed,
Drinks still, albee the drink he still desires
Be nothing else but fuel to his flame.
He cannot rule himself: his health's respect
Yealdeth to his distempered stomachs heat.

Lu. Leave of this love, that thus renewes your woe.

An. I do my best, but ah! can not do so.

Lu. Think how you have so brave a captain been,
And now are by this vain affection fallen.

An. The ceasles thought of my felicity
Plunges me more in this adversity.
For nothing so a man in ill torments,
As who to him his good state represents.
This makes my rack, my anguish, and my woe
Equal unto the hellish passions grow,
When I to mind my happy puisance call
Which erst I had by warlike conquest won,
And that good fortune which me never left,
Which hard disastre now has me bereft.
With terror tremble all the world I made
At my sole word, as Rushes in the streams
At waters will: I conquered Italy,
I conquered Rome, that nations so redoubt.
I Bare (mean while besieging Mutina)
Two consuls armies for my ruin brought.
Bathed in their blood, by their deaths witnessing
My force and skill in matters Martial.
To wreake thy uncle, unkind Caesar, I
With blood of enemies the banks embru'd
Of stained Enipeus, hindering his course
Stopped with heaps of piled carcases:
When Cassius and Brutus ill betide
Marched against us, by us twice put to flight,
But by my sole conduct: for all the time
Caesar hart-sicke with fear and fever lay.
Who knows it not? and how by every one
Fame of the fact was given to me alone.
There sprang the love, the never changing love,
Wherein my heart has since to yours been bound:
There was it, my Lucill, you Brntus sau'de,
And for your Brutus Antony, you found.
Better my hap in gaining such a friend,
Then in subduing such an enemy.
Now former virtue dead does me forsake,
Fortune engulfes me in extreme distress:
She turns from me her smiling countenance,
Casting on me mishapp upon mishapp,
Left and betraide of thousand thousand friends,
Once of my suit, but you Lucill are left
Remaining to me steadfast as a tower
In holy love, in spite of fortunes blastes.
But if of any God my voice be heard,
And be not vainly scatt' red in the heavens,
Such goodness shall not glorilesse be lost.
But coming ages still there of shall boste.

Lu. Men in their friendship ever should be one,
And never ought with fickle Fortune shake,
Which still remoues, nor will, nor knows the way,
Her rolling bowl in one sure state to stay.
Wherefore we ought as borrowed things receive
The goods light she lends us to pay again:
Not hold them sure, nor on them build our hopes
As on such goods as cannot fail, and fall:
But think again, nothing is dureable,
Virtue except, our never failing host:
So bearing sail when favoring winds do blow,
As frowning tempests may us least dismaie
When they on us do fall: not ouer-glad
With good estate, nor ouer-grieu'd with bad.
Resist mishap.

Ant. Alas! it is too strong.
Mishappes often times are by some comfort borne:
But these, ay me! whose weights oppress my heart,
Too heavy lie, no hope can them relieve.
There rests no more, but that with cruel blade
For lingering death a hasty way be made.

Lu, Caesar, as heir unto his fathers state.
So will his Fathers goodness imitate,
To you ward: whom he know's allied in blood,
Allied in marriage, ruling equally
The Empire with him, and with him making war
Have purged the earth of Caesar's murderers.
You into portions parted have the world
Even like coheirs their heritages part:
And now with one accord so many years
In quiet peace both have your charges ruled.

Ant. Blood and alliance nothing do prevail
To cool the thirst of hot ambitious breasts:
The son his Father hardly can endure,
Brother his brother, in one common Realm.
So fervent this desire to Command:
Such jealousy it kindles in our hearts,
Sooner will men permit another should
Love her they love then wear the crown they wear.
All laws it breaks, turns all things vpside down:
Amity, kindred, naught so holy is
^ut it defiles. A monarchy to gain
None cares which way, so he may it obtain.

Lu. Suppose he Monarch be and that this world
No more acknowledge sundry Emperors,
That Rome him only fear, and that he join
The east with west, and both at once do rule:
Why should he not permit you peaceably
Discharged of charge and Empires dignity,
Private to live reading Philosophy,
In learned Greece, Spain, Asia, any land?

An. Never will he his Empire think assur'de
While in this world Mark Antony shall live.
Sleepeles Suspicion, Pale distrust, cold fear
Always to princes company do bear
Bred of reports: reports which night and day
Perpetual guests from court go not away.

Lu. He has not slain your brother Lucius,
Nor shortened has the age of Lepidus,
Albeit both into his hands were fallen,
And he with wrath against them both enflamed.
Yet one, as Lord in quiet rest does bear.
The greatest sway in great Iberia:
The other with his gentle Prince retains
Of highest Priest the sacred dignity.

An. He fears not them, their feeble force he knows.

Lu. He fears no vanquished ouerfill'd with woes.

An. Fortune may change again.

L. A down-cast foe
Can hardly rise, which once is brought so low.

Ant. All that I can is done: for last assay
(When all means failed) I to entreaty fell,
(Ah coward creature!) whence again repulst
Of combat I unto him proffer made:
Though he in prime, and I by feeble age
Mightily weakened both in force and skill.
Yet could not he his coward heart advance
Basely affraide to try so praisefull chance.
This makes me plain, makes me my self accuse,
Fortune in this her spiteful force does use
Against my gray hayres: in this unhappy I
^epine at heavens in my happes pittiles.
Aman, a woman both in might and mind,
In Mars his schole who never lesson learned,
Should me repulse, chase, ouerthow, destroy,
Me of such fame, bring to so low an ebb?
Alcides blood, who from my infancy
With happy prowess crowned have my praise
Witness thou Gaul vnus'd to servile yoke,
Thou valiant Spain, you fields of Thessalie
With millions of mourning cries bewailed,
Twice watered now with blood of Italy.

Lu. Witness may Afrique, and of conquered world
All four quarters witnesses may be.
For in what part of earth inhabited,
Hungry of praise have you not ensigns spread?

Ant. Thou know rich Aegipt (Aegipt of my deeds
Fair and foul subject) Egypt ah! thou know
How I behau'd me fighting for thy king,
When I regainde him his rebellious Realm:
Against his foes in battle showing force,
And after fight in victory remorse.
Yet if to bring my glory to the ground,
Fortune had made me overthrown by one
Of greater force, of better skill then I:
One of those Captains feared so of old,
Camill, Marcellus, Worthy Scipio,
This late great Caesar, honor of our state,
Or that great Pompei aged grown in arms;
That after harvest of a world of men
Made in a hundred battles, fights, assaults,
My body through pearst with push of pike
Had vomited my blood, in blood my life,
In amidst of millions fellows in my fall:
The less her wrong, the less should my woe:
Nor she should pain, nor I complain me so.
No, no, whereas I should have died in arms,
And vanquished often new armies should have armed,
New battles given, and rather lost with me
All this whole world submitted unto me:
A man who never saw enlaced pikes
With bristled points against his stomach bent,
Who fears the field, and hides him cowardly
Dead at the very noise the soldiers make.
His virtue, fraud, deceit, malicious guile,
His arms the arts that false Ulysses vs'de,
Known at Modena, where the Consuls both
Death-wounded were, and wounded by his men
To get their army, war with it to make
Against his faith, against his country soil,
Of Lepidus, which to his succors came,
To honor whom he was by duty bound,
The Empire he usurped: corrupting first
with baits and bribes the most part of his men.
Yet me has overcome, and made his pray,
And state of Rome, with me has overcome.
Strange! one disordred act at Actium
The earth subdu'de, my glory has obscured.
For since, as one whom heavens wrath attaints
With fury caught, and more then furious
Vexed with my evils, I never more had care
My armies lost, or lost name to repair:
I did no more resist.

Lu. all wars affairs,
But battles most, daily have their success
Now good, now ill: and though that fortune have
Great force and power in every worldly thing,
Rule all, do all, have all things fast enchaind
Unto the circle of her turning wheel:
Yet seems it more then any practice else
She does frequent Bellonas bloody trade:
And that her favor, wavering as the wind,
Her greatest power therein does oftnest show.
Whence grows, we daily see, who in their youth
G^tt honor there, do loose it in their age,
Vanquished by some less warlike then themselves:
Whom yet a meaner man shall overthrow.
Her use is not to lend us still her hand,
But sometimes headlong back a gain to throw,
When by her favor she has us extolld
Unto the topp of highest happiness.

Ant. well ought I curse within my grieved soul,
Lamenting day and night, this senseless love,
Whereby my fair entising foe entrap'd
My hedelesse Reason, could no more escape.
It was not fortunes ever changing face:
It was not Dest nies chaungles Violence
Forged my mishap. Alas! who does not know
They make, nor mar, nor any thing can do.
Fortune, which men so fear, adore, detest,
Is but a chance whose cause vnknow'n does rest.
Although often times the cause is well perceived,
But not the effect the same that was conceived.
Pleasure, naught else, the plague of this our life,
Our life which still a thousand plagues pursue,
Alone has me this strange disastre spunne,
Fallen from a souldior to a chamberer,
Careless of virtue, careless of all praise.
Nay, as the fatted swine in filthy mire
With glutted heart I wallowed in delights,
All thoughts of honor trodden under foot.
So I me lost: for finding this sweet cupp
Pleasing my taste, vnwife I drunk my fill,
And through the sweetness of that poisons power
By steps I drove my former wits astraie.
I made my friends, offended me forsake,
I help my foes against my self to rise.
I robbed my subjects, and for followers
I saw my self be set with flatterers.
Mine idle arms fair wrought with spiders work,
My scattred men without their ensigns strai'd:
Caesar mean while who never would have dar'de
To cope with me, me suddenly despis'de,
Took heart to fight, and hop'de for victory
On one so gone, who glory had forgone.

Lu. Enchaunting pleasure Venus sweet delights
Weaken our bodies, ouer-cloud our sprights,
Trouble our reason, from our hearts out chase
All holy virtues lodging in their place:
Like as the cunnig fisher takes the fish
By traitor bait whereby the hooks is hid:
So Pleasure serves to vice in steed of food
To bait our souls thereon too liquorishe.
This poison deadly is alike to all,
But on great kings does greatest outrage work,
Taking the royal scepters from their hands,
Thence forward to be by some stranger borne:
While that their people charged with heavy loades
Their flatt'rers pill, and suck their mary dry,
Not ruled but left to great men as a pray,
While this fond Prince himself in pleasur's drowns
Who hears naught, sees noght, does naught of a king
Seming himself against himself conspirde.
Then equal Justice wandreth banished,
And in her seat sitts greedy Tyranny.
Confused disorder troubles all estates,
Crimes without fear and outrages are done.
Then mutinous Rebellion shows her face,
Now hid with this, and now with that pretense,
Provoking enemies, which on each side
Enter at ease, and make them Lords of all.
The hurtful works of pleasure here behold,

An. The wolf is not so hurtful to the fold,
Frost to the grapes, to ripened fruits the rain:
As pleasure is to princes full of pain.

Lu. There needs no proof, but by the Assirian king,
On whom that Monster woeful wrack did bring.

An. There needs no proof, but by unhappy I,
Who lost my empire, honor, life thereby,

Lu Yet has this ill so much the greater force,
As scarcely any do against it stand:
No not the Demy-gods the old world knew,
Who all subdu'de, could Pleasures power subdue.
Great Hercules, Hercules once that was
Wonder of earth and heaven, matchles in might,
Who An^eus, Ly^us, Geryon overcame,
Who drew from hell the triple-headed dog,
Who Hydra killed, vanquishd Achelous,
Who heavens weight on his strong shoulders bare;
Did he not under Pleasures burden bow?
Did he not Captive to this passion yield,
When by his Captive, so he was inflamed,
As now your self in Cleopatra burn?
Slept in her lapp, her bosom kissed and kiste,
With base unseemly service bought her love,
Spinning at distaffe, and with sinewy hand
Winding on spindles threde, in maids attire?
His conquering clubbe at rest on wall did hang:
His bow vnstringd he bent not as he vs'de:
Upon his shafts the weauing spiders spunne:
And his hard cloak the fretting mothes did pierce.
The monsters free and fearles all the time
Throughtout the world the people did torment.
And more and more increasing day by day
Scorned his weak heart become a mistress play.

An. In only this like Hercules am I,
In this I prove me of his lignage right:
In this himself, his deeds I show in this:
In this, naught else, my ancestor he is.
But go we: die I must, and with brave end
Conclusion make of all foregoing harms:
Die, die I must: I must a noble death,
A glorious death unto my succor call:
I must deface the shame of time abused,
I must adorn the wanton loves I vs'de,
With some courageous act: that my last day
By mine own hand my spots may wash away.
Come dear Lucill: alas! why weep you thus!
This mortal lot is common to us all.
We must all die, each does in homage owe
Unto that God that shared the Realms below
Ah sigh no more: alas! appeace your woes,
For by your grief my grief more eager grows,

Chorus. Alas, with what tormenting fire
Us martireth this blind desire
to stay our life from flieng!
How ceasleslie our minds does rack,
How heavy lies upon our back
This dastard fear of dieng!
Death rather healthful succor gives,
Death rather all mishapps relieues
That life upon us throws:
And ever to us death unclose
The door whereby from curelesse woes
Our weary soul out goes.
What Goddess else more mild then she
To bury all our pain can be,
What remedy more pleasing?
Our pained hearts when dolor stings,
And nothing rest, or respite brings,
What help have we more easing?
Hope which to us does comfort give,
And does our fainting hearts revive,
Has not such force in anguish:
For promising a vain relief
She often us fails in midst of grief,
And helples lets us languish.
But Death who call on her at need
Does never with vain semblant feed,
But when them sorrow paineth,
So riddes their souls of all distress
Whose heavy weight did them oppress,
That not one grief remains.
Who feareles and with courage bold
Can Acherons black face behold,
Which muddie water bears:
And crossing over in the way
Is not amazed at Perruque gray
Old rusty Charon wears?
Who void of dread can look upon
The dreadful shades that Rome alone,
On banks where sound no voices:
Whom with her firebrarnds and her Snakes
No whit afraid Alecto makes,
Nor triple-barking noises:
Who freely can himself dispose
Of that last hour which all must close,
And leave this life at pleasure:
This noble freedom more esteems,
And in his heart more precious deemes,
Then crown and kingly treasure,
The waves which Boreas blasts turmoile
And cause with foaming fury boil,
Make not his heart to tremble:
Nor brutish broile, when with strong head
A rebel people madly led
Against their Lords assemble:
Nor fearful face of Tirant wood,
Who breaths but threats, and drinks but blood,
No, nor the hand which thunder,
The hand of Jove which thuder bears,
And ribbs of rocks in sunder tears,
Tears mountains sides in sunder:
Nor bloody Marses butchering bands,
Whose lightnings desert lay the lands
Whom dustie clouds do cover:
From of whose armor sunbeams fly,
And under them make quaking lie
The plains whereon they houer:
Nor yet the cruel murth'ing blade
Warm in the moistie bowels made
Of people pell mell dieng
In some great City put to sack
By savage Tirant brought to wrack,
At his cold mercy lieng.
How abject him, how base think I,
Who wanting courage can not dye
When need him thereto calls?
From whom the dagger drawn to kill
The cureles griefs that vex him still
For fear and faintnes falls?
O Antony with thy dear mate
Both in misfortunes fortunate!
Whose thoughts to death a spiring
Shall you protect from victors rage,
Who on each side does you encage,
To triumph much desiring.
That Caesar may you not offend
Naught else but death can you defend,
Which his weak force derideth.
And all in this round earth containd,
Powr'les on them whom once enchaind
Auernus prison hides:
Where great Psammetiques ghost does rest,
Not with infernal pain possessed,
But in sweet fields detained:
And old Amasis soul likewise,
And all our famous Ptolomies
That whilome on us reigned.

Act. 4
Caesar. Agrippa. Dircetus. the Messenger. Caesar. You everliving Gods which
all things hold
Within the power of your celestial hands,
By whom heat, cold, the thunder, and the wind,
The properties of enter changing mon'ths
Their course and being have; which do set down
Of Empires by your destinied decree
The force, age, time, and subject to no change
Change all, reserving nothing in one state:
You have aduaunst, as high as thundering heaven
The Romans greatness by Bellonas might:
Maistring the world with fearful violence,
Making the world widow of liberty.
Yet at this day this proud exalted Rome
Despoiled, captived, at one man's will does bend:
Her Empire mine, her life is in my hand,
As Monarch I both world and Rome command;
Do all, can all; forth my command'ment cast
Like thundering fire from one to other Pole
Equal to Jove: bestowing by my word
Happs and mishappes, as Fortunes King and Lord.
No town there is, but up my Image settes,
But sacrifice to me does daily make:
Whither where Phoebus join his mourning steedes,
Or where the night them weary entertaines,
Or where the heat the Garamants does scorch,
Or where the cold from Boreas breast is blown:
All Caesar do both awe and honor bear,
And crowned Kings his very name does fear.
Antony knows it well, for whom not one
Of all the Princes all this earth do rule,
Arms against me: for all redoubt the power
which heavenly powers on earth have made me bear.
Antony, he poor man with fire inflam'de
A woman's beauties kindled in his heart.
Rose against me, who longer could not bear
My sisters wrong he did so ill entreat:
Seeing her left while that his lewd delights
Her husband with his Cleopatre took
In Alexandria, where both nights and days
Their time they passed in naught but loves and plays
All Asias forces into one he drew,
And forth he set upon the azur'd waves
A thousand and a thousand Ships, which filled
With Soldiers, pikes, with targets, arrows, darts,
Made Neptune quake, and all the watery troops
Of Glanques, and Tritons lodged at Actium,
But mighty Gods, who still the force withstand
Of him, who causles does another wrong,
In less then moments space redus'd to naught
All that proud power by Sea or land he brought.

Agr. Presumptuous pride of heigh and hawtie sprite,
Voluptuous care of fond and foolish love,
Have justly wrought his wrack: who thought he held
(By ouerweening) Fortune in his hand.
Of us he made no count, but as to play,
So feareles came our forces to assay.
So sometimes fell to Sons of mother earth,
Which crawled to heaven war on the God to make,
Olymp on Pelion, Ossa on Olymp,
Pindus on Ossa loading by degrees:
That at hand strokes with mighty clubbes the might
On mossie rocks the Gods make tumble down:
When mighty Jove with burning anger chafed,
Disbraind with him Gyges and Briareus,
Blunting his darts upon their bruised bones.
For no one thing the Gods can less abide
In deeds of men, then Arrogance and pride.
And still the proud, which too much takes in hand,
Shall fowlest fall, where best he thinks to stand.

Caes. Right as some Palace, or some stately tower,
Which ouer-lookes the neighbor buildings round
In scorning wise, and to the stars up grows,
Which in short time his own weight overthrows.
What monstrous pride, nay what impiety
Incenst him onward to the Gods disgrace?
When his two children, Cleopatras bratts,
To Phaebe and her brother he compared,
Latonas race, causing them to be called
The Sun and Moon? Is not this folly right
And is not this the Gods to make his foes?
And is not this himself to work his woes?

Agr. In like proud sort he caused his head to leese
The Jewish king Antigonus, to have
His Realm for balm, that Cleopatra loved,
As though on him he had some treason proved.

Caes Lidia to her, and Siria he gave,
Cyprus of gold, Arabia rich of smelles:
And to his children more Cilicia,
Parth's, Medes, Armenia, Phaenicia:
The kings of kings proclaming them to be,
By his own word, as by a sound decree.

Agr. What? Robbing his own country of her due
Triumphed he not in Alexandriae,
Of Artabasus the Armenian King,
Who yielded on his perjured word to him?

Caes. Nay, never Rome more injuries received,
Since thou, o Romulus, by flight of birds
With happy hand the Romain walls did build,
Then Antonyes fond loves to it has done.
Nor ever war more holy, nor more just,
Nor undertaken with more hard constraint,
Then is this war: which were it not, our state
Within small time all dignity should loose:
Though I lament (thou Sun my witness art,
And thou great Jove) that it so deadly proves:
That Roman blood should in such plenty flow,
Watring the fields and pastures where we go.
What Carthage in old hatred obstinate,
What Gaul still barking at our rising state,
What rebel Samnite, what fierce Phyrrhus power,
What cruel Mithridate, what Parth has wrought
Such woe to Rome? whose common wealth he had,
(Had he been victor) into Egypt brought.

Agr. Surely the Gods, which have this city built
Steadfast to stand as long as time endures,
Which keep the Capitol, of us take care,
And care will take of those shall after come,
Have made you victor, that you might redress
Their honor grown by passed mischieues less.

Caes. The seely man when all the Greekish Sea
His fleet had hid, in hope me sure to drown,
Me battle gave: where fortune in my stead,
Repulsing him his forces disaraied.
Himself took flight, soon as his love he saw
All wanne through fear with full sails fly away.
His men, though lost, whom none did now direct,
With courage fought fast grappled shipp with shipp,
Charging, resisting, as their oars would serve,
With darts, with swords, with pikes, with fiery flames.
So that the darkened night her starrie veil
Upon the bloody sea had ouer-spred,
Whilst yet they held: and hardly, hardly then
They fell to flieng on the wauie plain,
All full of soldiors ouerwhelm'd with waves.
The air throughout with cries and groans did sound:
The sea did blush with blood: the neighbor shores
Groned, so they with shipwracks pestred were,
And floting bodies left for pleasing food
To birds, and beasts, and fishes of the sea,
You know it well Agrippa.

Ag. Mete it was
The Romain Empire so should ruled be,
As heaven is ruled: which turning over us,
All under things by his example turns.
Now as of heaven one only Lord we know:
One only Lord should rule this earth below.
When one self pow're is common made to two
Their duties they nor suffer will, nor do.
In quarrel still, in doubt, in hate, in fear;
Mean while the people all the smart do bear.

Caes. Then to the end none, while my days endure,
Seeking to raise himself may succors find,
We must with blood mark this our victory,
For just example to all memory
Murder we must, until not one we leave,
Which may hereafter us of rest be reaue.

Ag. Mark it with murders? Who of that can like?

Cae. Murders must use, who does assurance seek.

Ag. Assurance call you enemies to make?

Cae. I make no such, but such away I take.

Ag. Nothing so much as rigor does displease.

Cae. Nothing so much does make me live at ease.

Ag. What ease to him that feared is of all?

Cae. Feared to be, and see his foes to fall.

Ag. Commonly fear does bread and nourish hate.

Cae. Hate without power comes commonly too late.

Ag. A feared Prince has often his death desired

Cae. A Prince not feared has often his wrong conspired.

Ag. No guard so sure, no forte so strong does prove.
No such defense, as is the peoples love.

Cae. Naught more unsure more weak, more like the wind,
Then Peoples favor still to change enclinde.

Ag. Good Gods! what love to gracious prince men bear!

Cae. What honor to the Prince that is severe!

Ag. Naught more divine then is Benigntie.

Cae. Naught likes the Gods as does Severity.

Ag. Gods all forgive.

Cae. On faults they pains do lay.

Ag. And give their goods.

C. Often times they tak away

Ag. They wreake them not, o Caesar, at each time
That by our sins they are to wrath prouok'd.
Neither must you (believe, I humbly pray)
Your victory with cruelty defile.
The Gods it gave, it must not be abused,
But to the good of all men mildely used,
And they bethank'd: that having given you grace
To reign alone, and rule this earthly mass,
They may hence-forward hold it still in rest,
All scattered power united in one breast.

Cae. But what is he that breathles comes so fast,
Approaching us, and going in such have?

Ag. He seems afraid: and under his arm I
(But much I err) a bloody sword epsy.

Cae. I long to understand what it may be.

Ag. He hither comes: it is best we stay and see.

Dirce. What good God now my voice will reenforce,
That tell I may to rocks, and hills, and woods,
To waves of sea, which dash upon the shore,
To earth, to heaven, the woeful news I bring?

A. What sudden chance thee toward us has brought

Dir. A lamentable chance. O wrath of heavens!
O Gods too pittiles!

Caes. What monstrous hap
Will thou recount?

Dir. Alas too hard mishap!
When I but dream of what mine eyes beheld,
My heart does freeze, my limbs do quiuering quake,
I senceles stand, my breast with tempest tossed
Killes in my throat my words, ere fully borne.
Dead, dead he is: be sure of what I say,
This murdering sword has made the man away.

Caes. Alas my heart does cleave, pity me rackes,
My breast does pant to hear this doleful tale.
Is Antony then dead? to death, alas!
I am the cause despair him so compelld.
But soldior of his death the manner show,
And how he did this living light forgo.

Dir. When Antony no hope remaining saw
How war he might, or how agreement make,
Saw him betrayed by all his men of war
In every fight as well by sea, as land;
That not content to yield them to their foes
They also came against himself to fight:
Alone in court he began himself torment,
Accuse the Queen, himself of her lament,
Called her untrue and traitresse, as who sought
To yield him up she could no more defend:
That in the harms which for her sake he bare,
As in his blisfull state, she might not share.
But she again, who much his fury feared,
Gat to the tombs, dark horrors dwelling place:
Made lock the doors, and pull the hearses down.
Then fell she wretched, with her self to fight.
A thousand plaints, a thousand sobbes she cast
From her weak breast which to the bones was torn.
Of women her the most unhappy called,
Who by her love, her woeful love, had lost
Her realm, her life, and more the love of him,
Who while he was, was all her woes support.
But that she faultles was she did inuoke
For witness heaven, and air, and earth, and sea.
Then sent him word, she was no more alive,
But lay enclosed dead within her tomb.
This he believed; and fell to sigh and groan,
And crossed his arms, then thus began to moan.

C. Poor hopeles man!

D. What do thou more attend
Ah Antony! why do thou death defer.
Since Fortune thy professed enemy,
Has made to die, who only made thee live?
Sone as with sighs he had these words up closed,
His armor he vnlaste and cast it off,
Then all disarmed he thus again did say:
My Queen, my heart, the grief that now I feel.
Is not that I your eyes, my Sun, do loose,
For soon again one tomb shall us conioyne:
I grieve, whom men so valorous did deem,
Should now, then you, of lesser valor seem.
So said, forthwith he Eros to him called,
Eros his man; summond him on his faith
To kill him at his need. He took the sword,
And at that instant stabbed therewith his breast,
And ending life fell dead before his feet.
O Eros thanks (quoth Antony) for this
Most noble act, who pow'rles me to kill,
On thee have done, what I on me should do.
Of speaking thus he scarsce had made an end,
And taken up the bloody sword from ground,
But he his body piers'd; and of red blood
A gushing fountain all the chamber filled.
He staggred at the blow, his face grew pale,
And on a couche all feeble down he fell,
Sounding with anguish: deadly cold him took,
As if his soul had then his lodging left
But he revived, and marking all our eyes,
Bathed in tears, and how our breasts we beat
For pity, anguish, and for bitter grief,
To see him plong'd in extreme wretchedness:
He prayed us all to haste his lingering death:
But no man willing, each himself withdrew.
Then fell he new to cry and vex himself,
Until a man from Cleopatra came,
Who said from her he had commandment
To bring him to her to the monument.
The poor soul at these words even rapt with joy
Knowing she lived, prayed us him to convey
Unto his Lady. Then upon our arms
We bare him to the Tomb, but entered not.
For she who feared captive to be made,
And that she should to Rome in triumph go,
Kept close the gate but from a window high
Cast down a cord, wherein he was impackt.
Then by her women's help the corpse she raised,
And by strong arms into her window drew.
So pitiful a sight was never seen.
Little and little Antony was pulled,
Now breathing death: his beard was all unkempt,
His face and breast al bathed in his blood.
So hideous yet, and dieng as he was,
His eyes half-clos'd upon the Queen he cast:
Held up his hands, and help himself to raise,
But still with weakness back his body fell.
The miserable lady with moist eyes,
With hair which careless on her forhead hong,
With breast which blows had bloudily benumbed,
With stooping head, and body down-ward bent,
Enlast her in the cord, and with all force
This life-dead man courageously vprais'd,
The blood with pain into her face did flow,
Her sinews stiff, her self did breathles grow.
The people which beneath in flocks beheld,
Assisted her with gesture, speech, desire:
Cride and encouraged her, and in their souls
Did sweat, and labor, no whit less then she.
Who never tired in labor, held so long
Helped by her women, and her constant heart,
That Antony was drawn into the tomb,
And there (I think) of dead augments the sum.
The city all to tears and sighs is turned,
To plaints and outcries horrible to hear:
Men, women, children, hoary-headed age
Do all pell mell in house and street lament,
Scratching their faces, tearing of their hair,
Wringing their hands, and martyring their breasts
Extreme their dole: and greater misery
In sacked towns can hardly ever be.
Not if the fire had scal'de the highest towers:
That all things were of force and murder full;
That in the streets the blood in rivers streamed;
The son his sire saw in his bosom slain,
The sire his son: the husband and rest of breath
In his wives arms, who furious runs to death.
Now my breast wounded with their piteouse plaints
I left their town, and took with me this sword,
Which I took up at what time Antony
Was from his chamber carried to the tomb:
And brought it you, to make his death more plain,
And that thereby my words may credit gain.

Cas. Ah Gods what cruel hap! poor Antony,
Alas have thou this sword so long time borne
Against thy foe, that in the end it should
Of thee his Lord the cursed murderer be?
O Death how I bewail thee! we (alas!)
So many wars have ended, brothers, friends,
Companions, coozens, equals in estate:
And must it now to kill thee be my fate?

Ag. Why trouble you your self with bootles grief?
For Antony why spend you tears in vain?
Why darken you with dole your victory?
Me seems your self your glory do envy.
Enter the town, give thanks unto the Gods.

Cae. I cannot but his tearefull chance lament,
Although not I, but his own pride the cause,
And unchaste love of this Aegiptian.

Agt. But best we sought into the tomb to get,
Lest she consume in this amazed case
So much rich treasure, with which happily
Despair in death may make her feed the fire:
Suffering the flames her Jewels to deface,
You to defraud, her funeral to grace.
Send then to her, and let some mean be used
With some devise so hold her still alive,
Some fair large promises: and let them mark
Whither they may by some fine cunning slight
Enter the tombs. Caesar. Let Proculeius go,
And feed with hope her soul disconsolate.
Assure her so, that we may wholly get
Into our hands her treasure and her self.
For this of all things most I do desire
To keep her safe until our going hence:
That by her presence beautified may be
The glorious triumph Rome prepares for me.

Chorus of Roman Soldiers. Shall ever civil bate
gnaw and devour our state?
shall never we this blade,
our blood has bloody made,
lay down? these arms down lay
as robes we wear always?
but as from age to age.
so pass from rage to rage?
Our hands shall we not rest
to bath in our own breast?
and shall thick in each land
our wretched trophies stand,
to tell posterity,
what madd Impiety
our stony stomachs led
against the place us bred?
Then still must heaven view
the plagues that us pursue.
and every where descrie
Heaps of us scattred lie,
making the stranger plains
fat with our bleeding raines,
proud that on them their grave
so many legious have.
And with out fleshes still
Neptune his fishes fill
and drunk with blood from blue
the sea take blushing hue:
as juice of Tyrian shell,
when clarified well
to wolle of finest fields
a purple gloss it yeeldes.
But since the rule of Rome,
to one man's hand is come,
who gouernes without mate
her now united state,
late jointly ruled by three
enuieng mutuallie,
whose triple yoke much woe
on Latins necks did throw:
I hope the cause of jar,
and of this bloody war,
and deadly discord gone
by what we last have done:
our banks shall cherish now
the branchie pale-hew'd bow
of Olive, Pallas praise,
instead of barraine baies.
And that his temple door,
which bloody Mars before
held open, now at last
old Ianus shall make fast:
and rust the sword consume,
and spoild of wauing plume,
The vseles morion shall
on crook hang by the wall.
At least if war return
It shall not here soiourne,
to kill us with those arms
were forged for others harms:
but have their points addressed,
against the Germans breast,
The Parthians feigned flight,
the Biscaines martial might.
Old Memory does there
painted on forehead wear
our Fathers praise: thence torn
our triumphs baies have worn:
thereby our matchles Rome
whilome of Shepeheards come
raised to this greatness stands,
the Queen of foreign lands.
Which now even seems to face
the heavens, her glories place:
naught resting under skies
that dares affront her eyes.
So that she needs but fear
the weapons Jove does bear,
who angry at one blow
may her quite overthrow.

Act. 5,
Cleopatra. Euphron. Children of Cleopatra. Charmion. Eras. Cleop. O cruel
fortune! o accursed lot!
O plaguey love! o most detested brand!
O wretched joys! o beauties miserable!
O deadly state! o deadly roialtie!
O hateful life! o Queen most lamentable!
O Antony by my fault buriable!
O hellish work of heaven! alas! the wrath
Of all the Gods at once on us is fallen.
Unhappy Queen! o would I in this world
The wandering light of day had never seen?
Alas! of mine the plague and poison I
The crown have lost my ancestors me left,
This Realm I have to strangers subject made,
And robbed my children of their heritage.
Yet this is naught (alas!) unto the price
Of you dear husband, whom my snares intrap'd:
Of you, whom I have plagued, whom I have made
With bloody hand a guest of mouldie tomb:
Of you, whom I destroyed, of you, dear Lord,
Whom I of Empire, honor, life have spoiled.
O hurtful woman! and can I yet live,
Yet longer live in this Ghost-haunted tomb?
Can I yet breath! can yet in such annoy,
Yet can my soul within this body dwell?
O Sisters you that spin the thredes of death!
O Styx! o Plegethon! you brooks of hell!
O Impes of Night!

Euph. Live for your childrens sake:
Let not your death of kingdom them deprive.
Alas what shall they do who will have care?
Who will preserve this royal race of yours?
Who pity take? even now me seems I see
These little souls to servile bondage fallen,
And borne in triumph.

Cl. Ah most miserable!

Euph. Their tender arms with cursed cord fast bound
At their weak backs.

Cl. Ah Gods what pity more!

Euph. Their seely necks to ground with weakness bend

Cl. Never on us, good Gods, such mischief send.

Euph. And pointed at with fingers as they go.

Cl. Rather a thousand deaths.

Euph. Lastly his knife
Some cruel catiue in their blood embrue.

Cl. Ah my heart breaks. By shady banks of hell,
By fields whereon the lonely Ghosts do tread,
By my foul, and the soul of Antony
I you beseech, Euphron, of them have care.
Be their good Father, let your wisdom let
That they fall not into this Tyrants hands.
Rather conduct them where their freezed locks
Black Aethiops to neighbor Sun do show;
On wauie Ocean at the waters will;
On barraine cliffes of snowie Caucasus;
To Tigers swift, to Lions, and to Bears;
And rather, rather unto every coaste,
To every land and sea: for naught I fear
As rage of him, whose thirst no blood can quench.
Adieu dear children, children dear adieu:
Good Isis you to place of safety guide,
Far from our foes, where you your lives may lead
In free estate deuoid of servile dread.
Remember not, my children, you were borne
Of such a Princely race: remember not
So many brave Kings which have Egypt rul'de
In right descent your ancestors have been:
That this great Antony your father was,
Hercules blood, and more then he in praise.
For your high courage such remembrance will,
Seeing your fall with burning rages fill.
Who knows if that your hands false Destiny
The Scepters promised of imperious Rome,
Instead of them shall crooked shepehookes bear,
Needles or forkes, or guide the carte, or plough?
Ah learn to endure: your birth and high estate
Forget, my babes, and bend to force of fate.
Farewell, my babes, farewell my heart is closed,
With pity and pain, my self with death enclosed,
My breath does fail. Farewell for evermore,
Your Sire and me you shall see never more.
Farewell sweet care, farewell.

Chil. Madame Adieu.

Cl. Ah this voice killes me. Ah good Gods! I swound.
I can no more, I die.

Eras. Madame, alas!
And will you yield to woe? Ah speak to us.

Eu, Come Children.

Chil. We come.

Eu. Follow we our chance.
The Gods shall guide us.

Char. O too cruel lot!
O too hard chance! Sister what shall we do,
What shall we do, alas! if murthring darte
Of death arrive while that in slumbring swound
Half dead she lie with anguish ouergone?

Er, Her face is frozen.

Chapter Madame for Gods love
Leave us not thus: bid us yet first farewell.
Alas! weep over Antony: Let not
His body be without due rites entombed.

Cl. Ah, ah.

Char. Madame.

Cl. Ay me!

Chapter How fainte she is?

Cl. My Sisters, hold me up. How wretched I,
How cursed am: and was there ever one
By Fortunes hate into more dolours thrown?
Ah, weeping Niobe, although thy heart
Beholds it self enwrap'd in causefull woe
For thy dead children, that a senseless rock
With grief become, on Sipylus thou stand'st
In endless tears: yet did thou never feel
The weights of grief that on my heart do lie.
Thy Children thou, mine I poor soul have lost,
And lost their Father, more then them I wail,
Lost this fair realm; yet me the heavens wrath
Into a stone not yet transformed has.
Phaetons sisters, daughters of the Sun,
Which wail your brother fallen into the streams
Of stately Po: the Gods upon the banks
Your bodies to banke-louing Alders turned.
For me, I sigh, I ceasles weep, and wail,
And heaven pittiles laughes at my woe,
Reuiues, renewes it still: and in the end
(Oh cruelty!) does death for comfort lend.
Die Cleopatra then no longer stay
From Antony, who thee at Styx attends:
Go join thy Ghost with his, and sob no more
Without his love within these tombs enclosed.

Eras. Alas! yet let us weep, lest sudden death
From him our tears, and those last duties take
Unto his tomb we owe.

Chapter Ah let us weep
While moisture lasts, then die before his feet.

Cl. Who furnish will mine eyes with streaming tears
My boiling anguish worthily to wail,
Wail thee Antony, Antony my heart?
Alas, how much I weeping liquor want!
Yet have mine eyes quite drawn their Condits dry
By long beweeping my disastred harms.
Now reason is that from my side they suck
First vital moisture, then the vital blood.
Then let the blood from my sad eyes outflowe,
And smoking yet with thine in mixture grow.
Moist it, and heat it new, and never stop,
All watring thee, while yet remains one drop.

Chapter Antony take our tears: this is the last
Of all the duties we to thee can yield,
Before we die.

Er. These sacred obseques
Take Antony, and take them in good part.

Cl. O Goddess thou whom Cyprus does adore,
Venus of Phaphos, bent to work us harm
For old Iulus brood, if thou take care
Of Caesar, why of us take thou no care?
Antony did descend, as well as he,
From thine own Son by long enchained line:
And might have ruled by one and self same fate,
True Trojan blood, the stately Romain state.
Antony, poor Antony, my dear soul,
Now but a block, the booty of a tomb,
Thy life thy heat is lost, thy coullour gone,
And hideous palenes on thy face has seaz'd.
Thy eyes, two Suns, the lodging place of love,
Which yet for tents to warlike Mars did serve,
Locked up in lidds (as fair days cherefull light
Which darkenese flies) do winking hide in night.
Antony by our true loves I thee beseech,
And by our hearts sweet sparks have set on fire,
Our holy marriage, and the tender ruthe
Of our dear babes, knot of our amity:
My doleful voice thy ear let entertain,
And take me with thee to the hellish plain,
Thy wife, thy friend: hear Antony, o hear
My sobbing sighs, if here thou be, or there.
Lived thus long, the winged race of years
Ended I have as Destiny decreed.
Flourished and reigned, and taken just revenge
Of him who me both hated and despisde.
Happy, alas too happy: if of Rome
Only the fleet had hither never come.
And now of me an Image great shall go
Under the earth to bury there my woe.
What say I? where am I? o Cleopatra,
Poor Cleopatra, grief thy reason reaues.
No, no, most happy in this happles case,
To die with thee, and dieng thee embrace:
My body ioynde with thine, my mouth with thine,
my mouth, whose moisture burning sighs have dried
To be in one self tomble, and one self chest,
And wrapped with thee in one self sheet to rest.
The sharpest torment in my heart I feel
Is that I stay from thee, my heart, this while.
Die will I straight now, now straight will I die,
And straight with thee a wandering shade will be,
Under the Cypres trees thou haunt'st alone,
Where brooks of hell do falling seem to moan.
But yet I stay, and yet thee ouerliue,
That ere I die due rites I may thee give.
A thousand sobbes I from my breast will tear,
With thousand plaints thy funerals adorn:
My hair shall serve for thy oblations,
My boiling tears for thy effusions,
Mine eyes thy fire: for out of them the flame
(Which burnt thy heart on me enamored) came.
Weep my companions, weep, and from your eyes
Rain down on him of tears a brinish stream.
Mine can no more, consumed by the coals
Which from my breast, as from a furnace rise.
Martyr your breasts with multiplied blows,
With violent hands tear of your hanging hair,
Outrage your face: alas! why should we seek
(Since now we die) our beauties more to keep?
I spent in tears, not able more to spend,
But kiss him now, what rests me more to do?
Then let me kiss you, you fair eites, my light,
Front seat of honor, face most firce, most fair!
O neck, o arms, o hands, o breast where death
(O mischief) comes to choke up vital breath.
A thousand kisses, thousand thousand more
Let you my mouth for honors farewell give:
That in this office weak my limbs may grow,
Fainting on you, and fourth my soul may flow.

At Rams bury. 26. of November. 1590.
Printed at London by P. S. for William Ponsonby. 1595.


