A JUST DEFENSE OF CERTAIN PASSAGES in a former Treatise concerning the Nature
and Use of LOTS, Against such Exceptions and Oppositions as have been made
thereunto by Mr. I. B. Wherein the insufficiency of his Answers given to the
Arguments brought in defense of a Lusorious Lot is manifested; The imbecillitie
of his Arguments produced against the same further discovered; And the Point it
self in Controversy more fully cleared; BY THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Author
of the former TREATISE.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Bible in Cheapside. 1623.

TO HIS LOVING and much respected Friend, Mr. THOMAS GATAKER Bacheler in
Divinity.
SIR,
I have perused your Answer to Mr. B. his Pamphlet against you; wherein you
have so cleared the point in controversy between you; that I much pity your
opponents hard lot to fall upon such a subject and tenet concerning Lots, as
afforded him so small store of Objections against your Opinion, that he was
even constrained, according to the manner of some old Roman* Orators noted by
Quintilian, Caussarum vacua convitijs implere. Neither the matter in hand,
about which learned Protestants may differ in judgment without breach of
Charity, or prejudice to Christian unity, nor your handling it dog matically
and scholastically without any gall at all, could occasion such heats. I cannot
imagine therefore, what should so much move him, but the badnesse of his cause,
and the weakness of his own Arguments, which he sees by your handling them
to be like wier-strings ill-nealed, which would not endure the least straining.
For albeit I confess that we are all apt to take too much hold of any point of
liberty reached unto us out of Gods word; and in particular I cannot but
deplore sortem sortis, the Lot of Lot it self, which has been and is too
much by the licentious abused, and thereby in a sort defamed, especially in
Carding and Dicing: yet Gods truth must not be suppressed because of man's
errors; neither is it a safe way to go about to cure an error in practice, by
another error in judgment; I mean, to reform the abuse in Lusorie Lots by
totally condemning the use it self of them. Though a Surgean mean never so
well in letting his Patient blood who needs it, yet if he strike not the
right vein, he had better have spared his pains. The sin too regnant in
sports and games now a-daies is not in using the Lot, but in not observing
those Rules and Cautions in these and other Recreations, which are iudiciously
and piously set down by you in your complete Treatise of Lots. Let those
Cautions be observed, and set aside the authority of some Divines, whose
persons they have in admiration above others; what is there in the casual
falling of the Dye, or dealing of the Cards, more than in the fall of a Coyte,
or lighting of an Arrow nearer or further, or the turning of a Boule, to
ensnare the Conscience? Art more rules the one, and Nature the other; Gods
providence and concurrence being equal in either. For to conclude, that
because some Lots have been consecrated to an holy use sometimes, therefore
all Lots are sacred, is a feeble kind of arguing. And to impose a special and
immediate work of Gods providence, upon the casual event of the Lot, more
than upon other natural accidents and deliberate actions of men, is a
temerarious and groundless assertion. And furthermore to charge all those
servants of God, who moderately use their Christian liberty in these Games,
with so heinous a sin, as is the profaning of a thing sacred, or taking in
vain Gods deciding Judgments, is an uncharitable censure. The Lord open the
eyes of all that seek to serve him in sincerity and singleness of heart,
that neither by enlarging their Christian liberty they open a gap to
licentiousness, nor yet by too much restraining it lay a snare on weak
Consciences. To deliver you my judgment and advice in a word; Satis actum est:
you have sifted this point of Lots to the bran. Let me advise you hereafter non
reciprocare serram contentionis de ludis sortiarijs, but rather to employ your
able pen against the Sorcerers of Egypt now abounding in every place, and
making advantages of the least differences among us, who hold the like precious
faith purged from the dross of their superstition. This advice, I know, you
will take in good part, as proceeding from

Your true affectionate friend and fellow laborer in the Lords harvest, DANIEL
FEATLY*
Croydon Sept. 2. 1623.
This Discourse or Defense consists of three Parts.
1. An Answer to Mr. Bs. Preface, and his Postscript. 2. A Reply upon Mr. Bs.
Answer to Mr. Gs. Arguments. 3. A Rejoinder to Mr. Bs. Reply in defense of his
own Arguments.
Mr. Bs. entire Context is without omission of ought inserted; as also Mr. Gs.
own Arguments and Answers are out of his former Book transcribed, that
neither of them may be wronged, nor the Reader enforced to run from Book to
Book, to search for that that is either confirmed or confuted, or otherwise
dealt with, having all represented here together unto his view.

THE FIRST PART. Mr. BALMFORDS PREFACE, WITH ANSWER TO IT.
To the Christian Reader, being none of I. B.
those men, who (according to S. Paul's Prophecy) 2 Timothy 3. 4.
love pleasures more than God.

To the same Christian Reader, being T. G.
none of those men, who (contrary to S. James his Rule) Iam. 2. 1.
hold the Faith of Christ, or the Truth of God, with respect of persons.

I Could have wished, good Reader, that Mr. B. had observed those two Rules
sometime prescribed their Orators at Athens, that they should speak when they
spoke, (...). Lucian. de gynmas.
without preface, or passion. For if any (...). Plato de rep. l. 4. Nimis
^diosa pempa res Circensibus. Se^. praefat. controvers.
Preface whatsoever, as Plato says, seem long to those that desire to come to
the maine matter; much more must a prolix and impertinent Preface, needs be no
other than a mere Purgatory to the studious Reader, either diuerting or
withholding him from that that most he desires. And for passion and
affection, it is apparent, that Ab ipsa very contemplatione (...) abducunt.
Quintil. inflit. l. 6. c. 3. Ratio id iudicari vult quod aequum est* iraid
aequu^ videri vult quod iudicauit. Ratio nihil praeter ipsum de quo agitur,
spectat: ira vanis and extra causam oberrantibus commovetur. Saepe infesta
patrono reum damnat: and si ingeritur oculis veritas, amat and tuetur errorem:
coargui no^ vult; and in male coeptis honestior illi pertinacia, quam
poenitentia (aut palnodia) videtur. Sen. de ira, l. 1. c. 15.
they do not only not help or further ought, but hinder much the discovery
either of truth or of right. But Mr. B. it seems, liked not to be tied to
either of those Laws: for he begins his Book with a long Proeme, and his
Proeme with much passion. Which course since he has taken, and there is a
necessity of examining what he here says, I must entreat thee to blame him
(who has given the occasion) and not me, if thou be kept longer than is fit,
from that which thou hastn^st unto, and that should have been our principal
aim in this work.

SOme years are past since Mr. G. took occasion, I. B.
from casting of Lots to find out for whose sake a dangerous storm was, to
justify playing with Dice, Cards, etc. and to confute me by Name in open
Pulpit.

It has been ever deemed that Pri^ipus omen inesse (...). (...). Eurip. Aeol.
Rarus principi^est exi^us bonus mal^. Principi^ qu^ sunt incho^a ^alo, vix est
^t bon^ per^gantur exi^. Leo ad M^ur. Ep. apud Gr^. cause. 1. q. 1. Vbi tame^
Gl^a paulo seve^ius, Vix ^. n^quam. Malum principium ^alus finis sequitur.
Petr. ^ns r^g. i^r. ^iv. Hinc Cic. ad Attic. l. 10. ep. 20. Male p^suimus
initia; sic caetera sequentur.
Beginnings T. G.
are ominous: and such matter as men meet with at the first entrance of a
work, they are wont commonly to look for and expect in the process. If this
work of Mr. B. should by this rule be judged of, it would receive no small
prejudice; sithence it begins at the first entrance with a flat untruth, to
wit, that I confuted him by name in open Pulpit.

True it is, that handling the first of Iona. 1. ^.
Jonas, I took occasion, by the Lot there cast, to entreat at large of the Use
of Lots in general, the rather for sundry doubts and scruples that by diverse
had been moved unto me concerning the Use of them: And that among other things
I defended the Use of a Lot generally used in disport, either for combination
of the sporters only, or for prosecution and determination of the sport; and
consequently did justify the Lot used in Cards and Dice etc. rather than the
Games themselves simply, or any otherwise, considered. For my maine question
concerning lusorious Lots is, whether the light Use of a Lot be a thing utterly
unlawful, as Mr. B. and some others avouch it to be; and so whether that make
such games among others to be unwarrantable, not whether in other respects they
be unwarrantable or no.

But that by name in open Pulpit I confuted Mr. B. or that in propounding of
any Argument in this Argument by me refuted, I did in Pulpit once name any
Author thereof, is a thing altogether untrue; concerning which I have cleared
my self by solemn protestation to Mr. B. himself, as shall Postscript to
his Preface.
after by his own confession in part also appear: And many also that heard me
and took notes of what was delivered, can yet testify as much.

I hearing thereof by many sent him this message; I. B.
If it would please him to send the substance of the Confutation (for I dare
not rely upon report) I would either reply or change mine opinion with thanks
to God for him; though for the present I thought he failed in Judgment,
Discretion, and Charity.

By whom Mr. B. heard this I know not. If T. G.
they told him ought that was untrue, the fault was not mine but Exodus 23. 1.
Levit. 19. 16. Falson' an vero laudent, culpent, quem velint, Non
floccifaciunt; dum illud quod lubeat sciant. Plaut. Trinum. 1. 2.
theirs; peradventure Atque egomet me adeo cum illis una ibidem traho, Qui
illorum verbis falsis acceptor fui. Ibid. Multum enim derogatio praevalet,
quando deroganti fides habetur. Foelix 2. ad Athan. c. 10. Detrabere an
detrabentem libenter audire, utrum sit damnabillus non facile dixerim. Bern. de
consid. lib. 3. Pari reatu de^rabentes and audientes detinentur. Idem medit.
cap. 42. Similiter culpabilis est is qui detra^it, and qui detrabentem audit.
Idem mod. viv. c. 33. Itaque sci^e Hier. ad Nep^t. Cave ne aut ling^ aut aures
prurientes habeas, i. ne aut ipse alijs detra^as, aut detrabentes audias. Nemo
invito (...) (...)* Dis^at detractor, d^te videt non libenter audire, non
facile detra^ere.
his also, in being ouer-credulous in that which the party, whom he made use of
between himself and me, could have informed him to be otherwise. And I cannot
but wonder by the way, that Mr. B. who here tells his Reader that he dares
not rely upon reports, yet has not doubted upon bare report, (if any such
were) especially having since the same been bettet informed, to auow
peremptorily in print, that I confuted him by Name in open Pulpit. (...)
These things sure do not agree well together. If he durst not rely upon
report then, how dare he now so far forth rely upon it, as to auerre that in
print, which he could not have but by report? unless his judgment be altered
since concerning that point.

But hearing indeed, it seems, that among other Arguments answer was given to
those also contained in his Dialogue; He showed himself, as I was informed,
therewith to be much offended, and sent me word, that if I would let him have
in writing what I had delivered, it should be answered. Whereupon I sent him so
much of it as concerned his Dialogue extracted out of the rest. Which he
promised to consider of, and return answer unto.

Yea, but in this business, Mr. G. in Mr. B. his opinion, has failed much
many ways. If he had then either told me so meeting me, as he did many times,
or had sent me such word, I might then have given him some satisfaction
therein. But let us now at length hear, and others determine, wherein.

1. In Judgment: Because that Doctrine was I. B.
not drawn from his Text; Except this be a judicious deduction.

Gentiles cast Lots in a most serious matter: Therefore Christians may use
Lotterie in Dicing, Carding, etc.

I perceive if Mr. B. might have the framing T. G.
of Mr. G^s. Arguments, there would be very judicious deductions in them
indeed. But if without any such iniudicious deduction, the Question of the Use
of Lots in general might well by occasion of that Text be discussed, then is
Mr. B. his deduction nothing judicious, from thence taxing Mr. G. as failing in
Judgment, for taking occasion thereby to discuss that Question. But herein
Mr. B. deals with me as he does with Peter Martyr in his Dialogue; where,
because Petr. Martyr in Iud. cap. 14.
Peter Martyr relates in his discourse entreating of Dice-play, how (...)
Plat. de repub. l. 10. and apud Plut. de tranquil. and consol. ad Apollon. Sed
and Socrates apud Stob. c. 123. (...).
Plato compares the Life of Man thereunto, he denies, yea and seriously
consuteth this Consequence, implying the same to be Peter Martyrs;

Plato compares man's life to Table-play,
Therefore Table-play is lawful.
I will not here stand upon the Ordinary plea, that it is Magnos bonestus
error est sequi duces. Quintil. instit. l. 1.
n^ great disgrace for a man (a mean man, as my self especially) to go
astray with great Guides, before he be informed (as my self never was till
now) of their error. Nor will I say, as one sometime did (it was no warrantable
saying) Malo ego cu^ Platone errare, quam cum istis vera sentire. Cic. Tascul.
l. 1. Verum hoc est Platonem Deum sacere: prout ipse alibi de eodem; Deus ille
noster Plato. Cic. ad Attic. l. 4. ep. 15. Melius sanctiusque Aristot. ethic.
l. 1. c. 6. (...) Vnde and illud eiusdem sertur; Amicus Plato: sed magis amica
veritas. Sed and Plin. ep. 8. l. 5. Honestissimum maiorum vestigia sequi, si
mo^o recto itmere processerint.
I will choose rather to err with such, than to go the right way with any
other: as if it were safe, as some Cum Pastor ordinarius and a^quis ^lius qui
praedicat non voca^us contraria docent, debet omnino populus Pastorem suum
potius sequi quam illum alterum qui non est Pastor, etiam si forte contingeret,
vt Pastor erraret. Bellarm. de Cleric. l. 1. c. 8. Quasi cum Cic. pro Balb^
diceret, Vti^us bonesti^sque illo duce errare, quam hoc magistr^ erudi^i.
Papists auow, to err at all with any. But yet, considering the ordinary
practice of some Peter Martyr, Dr. Whitakers, Mr. Perkins, and others. An ego
verear ne me non satis deceat, quod illos decuit? Plin. ep. 3. l. 5.
principal Divines of our times, and such as Mr. B. himself (I am sure)
esteems for judicious; as also treading in the track of The now Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury; and the late L. Bishop of London.
two Reverend Prelates (besides others) in this very particular, who take
occasion upon the same Text (though not so largely as I do) to consider of
Lots in more general manner than concerns the particular Lot in the Text
mentioned, and to speak the B. King on Ion. lect. 9.
one of them somewhat of the Lusorie Lot also now questioned; I shall crave
leave of Mr. B. to incline to their Judgments herein rather than his, till he
bring better Reasons for his Opinion than as yet he has brought. Nor will Mr.
B. ever be able to prove that every by- point handled by occasion of a Text,
must of necessity be necessarily deduced ever from the words of the Text.
Howsoever it be, it mattereth not much, since it neither mendeth Mr. B. his
cause, nor yet marreth mine in the Point between us controuerted.

2. In Discretion. Because that Doctrine (though I. B.
occasioned by his Text, yet) so insisted upon, incourageth Gamesters in their
sinful course, and builds up those Abuses, which the Laws of our Land would
pull down.

The Charge, you see, rises, From a gross T. G.
failing in Judgment to a fouler faulting in Discretion, if all that Mr. B.
here auerreth, be true. But whether my discourse does, either encourage
Gamesters unto any sinful course; (unless to use any Lot in Game be a sinful
course, which Mr. B. must not yet take for granted) or build up such Abuses as
our Laws would pull down; I appeal to the Book it self; let Mr. B. either
show so much out of it, or else his Calumniatur, qui quod defert, non probat.
Reg. Iur.
Charge here is but a mere Calumny.

But of this more hereafter.

3. In Charity: Because he confuteth me by I. B.
Name (as I was certified) not having had any conference with me either by
speech, or by writing, though I be his Neighbor Minister.

The heauiest Charge comes last. A breach T. G.
of Charity at least. To fail in Judgment or Discretion, may argue some
weakness of brain; to fail in Charity argues Ideo imperitiam confiteri
solemus, ut malitiae suspicionem vitemus. Hieron. adv. error. Joan. Hierosol.
much more, an evil mind. But let Mr. Bs. words here and elsewhere be well
weighed, and peradventure they will give overmuch ground of suspicion of some
want of that in him, that he charge me here to have failed in. Mr. G. says
he, failed in Charity, because he confuteth me by Name, as I was certified,
having had no conference with me by speech or writing, though I be his
neighbor Minister. Not to insist much on by-matters; that Mr. B. is my
neighbor Minister, is more than ever I heard before: that he is A divisis ad
conjuncta nulla est consecutio. Aristot. soph. elench. l. 2. c. 3.
my neighbor and a Minister, it may well be; yet it is more than I knew, when
I dealt in this point; nor do I yet know, where his place of abode is, save
that himself of late has told me, that I go often by his door; and so he may
be termed my neighbor, yet in no very strict sense, as any other Inhabitant in
the Borough of Southwarke may. But to let that pass, if Mr. B. his meaning be
that I confuted him by name in the Pulpit, as he charged me at first, and which
I utterly deny; how will it stand with Charity or Conscience upon a bare
report, which he says elsewhere he dares not rely on, and that after better
information acknowledged to have been given him, yet still so often, and so
peremptorily to charge me therewith, and with breach of Charity therein? If
his meaning be that I have since that confuted, and do (the Vox audita perit:
litera scripta manet.
letter of my Book still abiding) by name confute him, not in the Pulpit, but
in print, because he says in the present tense, he confuteth me by name, I
deny it not, nor do I hold it any breach of Charity so to do. His Book is
abroad under his Name, as well as mine is under mine: Nor is it any more a
breach of Charity for me by Name so to confute him in the one, than it was in
him by Name to control and oppose Peter Martyr in the other. But neither could
this be any ground for Mr. B. then to judge me guilty of uncharitableness,
when as yet it was not; nor could any certify him then of it, unless they
knew more of my mind then, than I my self did; nor was it done before I had
dealt with Mr. B. by writing, as himself in the next passage freely
acknowledges. Mr. Bs. words therefore hang but vnhandsomly together, when he
says, he thought I failed in Charity, because I confute him by Name, as he
was certified, etc. His mind and his pen, or both, and the known truth, it
may be feared, Illic mihi aliud dictabat animus, aliud scribebat calamus. Erasm
epist. ad Ludov. Viv. lib. 19.
had some struggling together, when he wrote thus.

Well; Mr. G. sent me his Answer to my Dialogue. I. B.
I acknowledge it with hearty thanks. But why have I not replied in so many
years? I answer: Sat cito, si sat been. To speak freely; I think I should
never have replied, in hope that the Question would have died, had not Mr. G.
confuted my Dialogue in Print. But now, the rather, being provoked by many
learned Ministers and other. who tell me, that seeing of all those whom Mr. G.
confuteth, viz. Peter Martyr, Zwinglius, Cartwright, Danaeus, Perkins, Fenner,
etc. I only live, I ought to reply, lest my silence should give way to impious
iniquity; I am ready to perform my promise in replying. Which indeed I could
not have done so conveniently before, because the answer, which Mr. G. sent me,
had not the positive grounds of his Opinion, which the printed book has.

True it is, I was not dainty to deliver Mr. B. T. G.
an Answer to the whole Substance of his Dialogue, but upon promise returned me
first from Mr. B. that in defense of his own Arguments he would reply
thereupon. Which himself also, after long delay, being urged either to do or
tredeliuer it, did by word of mouth to my self again oblige himself either
to do or to yield the truth; for so his words both times were. But after a
year or twoes stay longer, when nothing would be returned, and I was by diverse
informed, how I was in meetings often traduced and backbited, mine intentions
scanned, my positions taxed, some as senseless, some as impious, diverse
assertions fastened on me, that I never delivered, diverse of those - nihil est,
Quin male narrando possit depravarier. T^r. Phorm. 4. 4.
depraved that were delivered, and that Mr. B. himself among others was not
sparing herein: I condescended at length to the importunity of those (yet
having had the whole work viewed and reviewed first by diverse, as well
religious as judicious Divines, and having by writing dealt with diverse others
of contrary Judgment,) that had pressed me to the printing of it.

Now why Mr. B. did not all that while reply upon mine Answer, which he was so
instant to have, he renders two Reasons; in my mind very weak ones.

1. He hoped, it would have died. And how was that likely, when his Challenge
had revived it; and that bruited abroad, a Reply was expected. But his former
Dialogue belike was enough to dash all that either had been or could be said
without further Reply.

2. The writing I sent him, had not my positive grounds. As if his own
Arguments, had they been effectual, could not without them have been
sufficiently defended.

Why now at length he does it, he has two Grounds likewise, but those
suggested to him from others, as the former were from himself.

1. Because he only lives of all those whom Mr. G. refuteth. Where in the
Catalogue of those whom he says I refute, he reckons some, as Zwinglius,
whom I refute not at all, as not knowing certainly what they held, some that
himself refuteth as well as I do, and that allow Cards and Tables as not
simply unlawful, as Peter Martyr, Danaeus, and Perkins; that so both I might
seem utterly to dissent from them concerning the lawfulnes of those Games,
whereas Mr. G. maintains no more concerning Cards and Tables, than Peter
Martyr, Danaeus, and Perkins do.
I maintain no more concerning the lawfulness of them in themselves than they
do, (though in our grounds, I confess, we differ) and that himself might
seem, as the last man alive amongst them, to stand up in the defense of them,
when as indeed he opposes and impugneth them, and these Games, by them not
utterly disallowed.

2. Lest by his silence he should give way to impious iniquity. Here is again
terrible imputations. They were before in the privative; Want of Judgment,
want of Discretion, want of Charity; in the manner of my dealing. They come
now in the positive: Impious Iniquity; Not Iniquity alone, but Impiety and
Iniquity, the breach of both Tables, combined in one: where, think we, but in
the matter of my discourse? Surely, if such impious Iniquity be maintained by
me in this Argument, I beshrew Mr. B. for sparing his pen, when he might by
discovery of it in his reply have prevented the printing of it: And little
cause I have to thank those my friends before spoken of, that having had many
the view of it before it came forth, would not any of them do me the favor to
advertise me thereof. But (...). Plato apud Plut. de adul. and de util. ex
inim. Amantium coeca sunt judicia. Hieron. ad Joan. Hierosol. (...). Greg. Naz.
ep. 13. and 27. and erat. de Eccl. Naz. Fallit affectus. Plin. ep. 44. l. 4.
affection peradventure might ouersway judgment in them. And (...). Plut. de
util. inim. (...). Ibid.
an Adversary many times is sharper-sighted then a Friend. Mean while
remember, I pray thee, good Reader, that there is Si accusasse sufficient, quis
innocens erit? Iulianus Delphidio apud Ammianum hist. l. 18.
nothing easier than to charge and accuse: all the skill is, which Mr. B. must
look to, to make good.

Before I proceed, I protest before God, that I I. B.
esteem Mr. G. as a learned, painful, and faithful Minister, and a right
honest man; and therefore pray thee (Christian Reader) that whatsoever I write
may be considered as concerning the Question between us, and not in any wise
applied to the least prejudice of so reverend a Brother, or to any of his
excellent parts.

If Mr. Bs. purpose were to deal only T. G.
with the Question in controversy, why runs he out into (...). Aristot.
rhet. l. 1. c. 1.
such by-matters, as make nothing at all thereunto? Why does he labor so much
to cast such aspersions, to procure (...). Arist. ib.
prejudice, as well upon my manner of my dealing, as on the matter that I deal
in? Or what is this but as if one should cast filth and dirt openly in a man's
face, and yet bear the standers by in hand, that he did it not to disgrace
him? But proceed we.

So excellent that I wonder what moved him to I. B.
publish his Opinion in print; and the more because of many passages in his
Book.

Me thinks I hear some of those here, that T. G.
Videas praemitti alta suspiria, sicque quadam cum gravitate and tarditate
moesto vultu, demissis supercilijs, and voce plangentiegredi maledictionem, and
quidem tanto plausibiliore^, quanto creditur ab his qui audiunt, cord invito
and condolentis affectu proferri. Doleo, inquit, vehementer de eo, quia diligo
illum satis. Grande damnum: nam-alias quidem in pluribus valet: caeteru^ in hac
part excusari non potest. Bern. in Cant. 24.
Bernard speaks of, who when they desire most to disgrace a man, begin first
to tell of his good parts, and how much it grieueth them that one otherwise so
well qualified, should be so far ouer-seene. But to let that pass.

Mr. B. here wondreth what should move me to put mine opinion (not relating
what it is) in print. As if some new opinion were now broached by me that
either had never been heard of, or never published before. Whereas he cannot
be ignorant, that both the Opinion held by me concerning the lawfulness of a
lusorious Lot in general, is, and has ever been (for ought that can be
showed to the contrary) more generally received than that that he holds, and
has been in print maintained by others before me; yea concerning Cards and
Tables, (which I deal with principally, in regard of the Lot in them,
defending them only as not in that regard unlawful) that they were in print
defended by Peter Martyr, at least; if not Danaeus too.
some of those that himself mentions, before I was borne, or he either.

I might wonder rather that Mr. B. should think either himself or any other
now adays so privileged, that they might take liberty to themselves to
publish new conceits in Print, contrary to what is and has been generally
received, and yet think much that any other in Print should oppose them.

But many passages in my Book show that I ought not so to have done.

First, He takes knowledge of many enormious I. B.
Crimes, which accompany Dice, Cards, etc. p. 193. and in the quotations.

Secondly, He gives this Rule, That that, which is no necessary duty, but a
thing indifferent only otherwise, may not be done, where is strong presumption
upon good ground, that it shall spiritually endanger a man's self, or others,
by giving occasion of sin unto the one or the other, p. 107, 108, 109.

If many and grievous sins attend Dice, Cards, etc. If those games be too too
commonly abused, as he confesses, p. 194. and if an indifferent thing may not
be done which gives occasion of sin: I wonder why Mr. G. writes in defense
of Dice, etc. And the more, because he grants, that where the use and abuse
of a thing are so enwrapped and entangled together, that they cannot easily be
severed the one from the other, then the use of the thing it self (if it be
unnecessary otherwise) would be wholly abandoned, p. 262, 263.

Here is the sum of Mr. Bs. Argument. T. G.
Mr. G. takes notice that many enormious Crimes often (for so I say only)
accompany Cards and Dice: and they are by many too commonly abused: and he
grants further, that things indifferent may not be done when they give
occasion of evil: and that where the use of a thing and the abuse of it are so
entangled together, that they cannot easily be severed, the thing being
unnecessary, would wholly be abandoned. Therefore Mr. G. ought not to have
delivered his Opinion, that a Lot used in game is not simply unlawful; and
that it is not the Lot either in these games or in any other (for it is used in
many besides these) but such abuses attending them, when they are not, or
cannot well be severed from them, that makes them evil or unlawful. For this
is my maine opinion given of them. Or rather, if you will have the truth of it;
Therefore Mr. G. ought not to have contradicted M. B. his opinion, that no Lot
in game is lawful.

He might have added, what Tu id quod boni est, excerpis, dicis quod mali est.
Ter. Phorm. 4. 4.
I add, that those evils attend other Games wherein no Lot is, as well as
those wherein it is: And that it is not the Lot therefore from whence they
arise: and that the use and the abuse may easily be severed by those that be
well affected, as well in these Games as in any other. And I might add, that
Martyr, Danaus, yea and Istiusmodi ludi no^ ita prorsus damnarentur a nobis, si
in eorum usu, quod licet, locum haberet. Calvin. epist. 374.
Calvin himself, though they saw all that he says I say, yet durst not pass
such a sentence on them as Mr. B. has done. But what force is in the
Consequence, let any indifferent man judge.

Thirdly, He shows in many pages, how severely I. B.
Tables, but especially Dice, be condemned by Laws Civil, Canonical, and
Municipall, that is, our English Statutes, as he shows at large, Lib. 8.. 5.
8. He wishes the Laws were yet more severe, and put in better execution, p.
206. He says, that our common dicers may be marshalled among the flock of the
Devils followers, p. 217. He affirms most rifelings and Lotteries to be
little better than unlawful Games, p. 120. And he teaches that by these Games
we must not give offense to the Laws under which we live, p. 251. Now I wonder
that so good a man is not afraid to offend our Law by allowing forbidden Games,
even Dice, as well as Cards etc. which consist not only of Lotterie. T. G.


To all this, that is indeed nothing but a deal of dust and smoke raised to
dasle men's eyes, that they may not discern what the point in Controversy is,
I have already in my Discourse of Lots Of Lots, chap. 8. sect. 8.
answered at large. And it is a frivolous course for Mr. B. to produce it here,
passing dry-foot by the Answer that is thereunto there given.

Thither therefore I might justly send Mr. B. for an answer. But I answer here
again in few words.

1. Our Laws do not simply or generally condemn or forbid Cards or Dice, but
to some only, used in some manner, and at some times.

2. It is not in regard of any such superstitious conceit of the unlawfulness
of a Lot in them, as Mr. B. maintains, that either ours or any other Laws
condemn or inhibite them.

3. It is a gross falsehood that I offend our Laws by allowing any Games that
are thereby forbidden, so far forth as the Law forbids them. Mine own words
by Mr. B. himself produced clear me thereof: And it is too palpable a
Calumny to charge me therewith. If a man should defend the lawfulness in
themselves of bowling, coiting and logeting against some fantastical spirit
that should question the same, (as Nihil tam absurdum est, quod non ab aliquo
etiam Philosophorum dictum sit. Postremo nemo aegrotus quicquam somniat Tam
infandum, quod non aliquis dicat Philosophus. Varro Eumenid. Anaxagoras nivem
esse nigram dixit. Xenophanes Lunam habitari, eamque terram esse multarum
urbium and montium. Cic. Lucull. Terram moveri, coelum consistere, Philolaus,
Cleanthes, alij. Laert. Philol. Plut. Number. Cic. Lucul. Sen. not. quaest. l. 7.
c. 2. Iam Haeretici quoru^ illi Patriarchae, ut site Tertull. pr^siript. quae
portenta dogmatu^ protulerunt? Nec nuptias contra^ere, ^ec corpus vestire
Ad^mitae; n^c vinu^ gustare, Severiani and Encratitae; nec carnibus vesci,
Saturniani, and Ebionitae; nec panem frangere, aut olus scindere Manichaei; nec
judicia exercere Tertullianistae; nec gladio uti, bellare, jurare, magistratum
gerere, porcina, sangu^e, suffocato vesci Anabaptistae; nec nisi precibus.
duntaxat vacare Mesaliani, andc. licitum cense. bant. V. dendi Epiphan. Aug.
Theodor. Danae. de Haeres. Iudaeuli vero quam in hoc genere foecundi? nec quo
spina^ e pede evellat, nummu^ve lapsum attollat, cora^ imagine incurvare se
licitum; nec potandi causasimulacro labia admovere, cujus per os aqua profluat;
nec ornamenti causa humana^ effigiem, Solisve aut Lunae imagine^ sculpta^
habere; nec mulieri et^icae obstreticari; nec per sabbatum super herbam
ambulare, nec pomu^ assare, nec manus lavare, nec lucernam extinguere, nec
supellectilem incendio subtra^ere, etc. Vide Pr^cept. Mos. negat.
there is nothing almost so absurd but some or other have held) would any man,
think we, be either so malicious or so senseless, as to tax him for the same
as offending our Laws, because in the same Laws these are also prohibited,
though there be no Lot in them, even as strictly as those other are? Or were he
a iustifier therefore of the abuses accompanying the same, that should defend
them as in themselves not unlawful?

4. I will not answer Mr. B. here as the Philosopher did one, that telling idle
stories, was still asking, (...)
Is it not a wonder? (...). Aristot. apud Plut. de garrul.
It is a wonder, quoth he, rather that any man can endure to hear thee thus
trifle. But I wonder that Mr. B. since he deemeth it so fearful a thing to be
faulty herein, is not afraid himself to offend our Laws, I might say, by
fastening upon them or the makers of them such superstitious conceits concerning
the use of a Lot, as I verily think Mr. B. himself cannot imagine, ever
entered into their brains; as supposing that these Laws were framed upon such
Grounds as his Book is built upon: but I say rather, by condemning that that
they allow and approve of, and that not in the meaner sort, but in those of
best fashion, that should be examples unto others, and I might add, at such
times, when, if at one time more than other, they ought to be most religious of
any. Mr. B. therefore if he do well remember himself, may turn his
wonderment here from me to himself.

Lastly, though I grant that common Dicers may well be ranked among the Devils
followers, yet follows it not that all use of a Die is therefore to be
condemned; no more than it will follow that because Tauerne-haunters may well
go in the same rank with such, therefore all resort to any Tavern on any
occasion whatsoever is to be utterly disallowed.

Here I have occasion to think, that I may have I. B.
some more comfort in mine opinion, than Mr. G. can have in his. For he names
famous, learned and godly men concurring with me in Opinion. ^ut in the
multitude of his quotations, I find none approving Dice in play. And whereas
some learned Divines, in some sort, allow Games consisting of Lot and wit, but
altogether condemn Dice, Mr. G. defends mine Opinion, disapprouing a mixed,
as well as a mere Lot, because, as he says, a true Lot is in either, p. 126.
and he deemeth them to be amiss, who allow Lots in Game, and yet add for a
Caution, that religiousnesse be used in the action, in regard that holy things
must be done in holy manner.

1. How any man may have sound comfort T. G.
in any error, be it what it will, is more than I am aware of: since that every
error is unsound and contrary to truth: nor can I see therefore how that should
minister any sound or true comfort, that has no soundness nor truth it self.
Some Hin^ Plin. ep. 5. l. 3. Ab illis, quibus notum est, quos quantosque
autores sequar, facile impetrari posse confido, ut errare me cum illis ferant.
excuse there may be for it, but small comfort in it, when a man together with
some great ones goes out of the way. Mr. B. therefore must first be assured of
the truth of what he holds, before he can from his company have any true
comfort of it. The rather since that by his own confession, Mr. B. dedicat.
epist to Dialog.
he ought not to teach a^ untruth, though it were to Gods glory: and what
comfort can he have of doing that, that ought not by him to be done?

2. The Reason produced by him (supposing all he says) is a very weak one,
and such as I doubt not but he himself would have waiued, had he been of the
first that had questioned some things yet in controversy with us.

3. Many famous, learned and godly concurring with Mr. B. I name not, because I
know not many; howbeit indeed all I know, I name. And for those that concur
with me in the justification of a Lot used in Game; I made no special or
particular relation of them, not because none such were, for there are diverse,
but because I was not so much to deal with them that concurred, as with those
that either did indeed, or might seem to oppose. Of which number I was
religious not to miss or omit any one that I could light upon, whom I found
ought in to that effect.

4. Albeit it be not much material what humane Authorities are on either side:
since that neither the Iam. 2. 1. Nec personarum, sed rerum pondere vnumquodque
iudicandu^ est. Hieron. ad Pamm. and Ocean.
Faith of Christ, nor the Truth of God are to be held with respect of persons:
Yet since that Mr. B. would seem herein at least to rely somewhat thereupon,
and would make what I maintain odious, or suspicious at least, by the
nakedness of it, and the want of famous, learned and godly concurring in it,
such as he glories here to have concurring with him: let me a little, good
Reader, entreat thy patience, which Mr. B. enforces me, I might well say, to
abuse, I must needs say, to detain with impertinent discourse all this while
much against mine own will, while, to remove this imputation, I run out a
little further in relating the Opinions of others on either side, and in
clearing the state of the Question in Controversy, which Mr. B. to procure the
more distaste to his opponents, (as the manner is of those that maintain a
weak cause, (...). Greg. Naz. de pace 3.
willing rather to fasten upon any by-matter, that may breed some jealousy of
the adverse party, than to keep close to the point it self) propounds
still in hypothesi, in one particular that he knows to be much abused, when
the Question indeed is a great deal more general.

The Question therefore is not between Mr. B. and me, whether Dice-play, which
so often he has up, that he might traduce me as a maintainer of it, as it is
ouer-frequently used or abused rather, is allowable or no; but whether any Lot
at all in the largest sense taken, used in game, or to speak as himself does
in the very Title of his Book, whether any Game at all consisting in chance,
be allowable. So that Mr. B. if he please, may put the Question as well of
Even and Od, or of Best by trust, or of Heads and Points, or of Cross and
Pile, as of Dice; and of Shuffling of Arrows blindfold or behind a man's
back, or of Casting Bowls together out of some one man's lap or arms to
decide or sort who shall side, as of Cards and Tables, which come here into
disquisition only, in regard that a Lot either is, or is deemed to be in them.
And I marvel why Mr. B. as he peremptorily condemns Cards and Tables, and
requires an utter necessary abolition of them, does not withal also very
seriously and severely enioine all Parents to restrain and utterly inhibit
their Children from playing at Cockall, and Cross and Pile, and Even and Od,
and Heads and Points, considering that these are Lotteries likewise or Games
consisting of chance as well as those are; and there is impious iniquity
therefore (to use Mr. Bs. tragical terms) by his Grounds, as well in the one
as in the other. But it would peradventure have been somewhat too ridiculous
if he should so have done.

But to leave that, in their judgment concerning such Games, there is the more
seeming difference among Divines and others, because See my book of Lots. chapter
6. sect. 3. p. 126.
they do not generally agree about the Definition of a Lot, in regard whereof
also it is ofttimes uncertain whether they do allow a Lot in Game or no,
taken in that large extent of signification that Mr. B. and I understand it.

Whereas therefore the Games controuerted are of two sorts, some depending
wholly upon Casualty, and some but in part only; Fennor of recreat. cap. 4.
Bamford Dialog.
some hold a Lot in both, and therefore utterly condemn either; Danae. de ludo
aleae. Babington on Decalog. Perkins Cases of Conscience. lib. 3. cap. 4.
some hold a Lot in the former, but not in the latter, and therefore allow
those, but disallow these, some Jacob. Rex (...). lib. 3.
hold a Lot in neither, and therefore allow either; B. King in Ion. lect. 9.
some hold a Lot in both, and yet allow either. Now in the general Conclusion
thus laid down, it is true that Mr. B. goes with the first, and I with the
last; but in application of the Judgments of the middle sort to the Games in
question, I concur in part with the former, wholly and fully with the latter,
whereas M. B. dissenteth wholly and fully from both.

There concur therefore with me in allowance of the Games of both sorts,
First. Our most high and mighty Sovereign himself Jacob. Rex vbi sup.
King James, for his singular learning and judgment admired as well abroad as
at home, and whose voice therefore may well in a far greater controversy bear
weight. Secondly, the right Reverend the late B. King on Ion.
Lord Bishop of London: yea and thirdly Calvin. ep. 374.
M. Calvin himself, who would not he says, utterly condemn Cards and Dice,
were it not for the ordinary abuse of them.

In allowance of the latter there concur again with me, Babingt. on Command
8.
Bishop Babington, P. Martyr. on Judge. 14.
Peter Martyr, Danaeus de ludo aleae. c. 6.
Danaeus, Perk. Cases of Conscience, l. 3. c. 4. S. 3. q. 2.
Perkins. All whom, as well the latter as the former, yea the latter more
specially, Mr. B. opposes: Mr. Fenner only, Mr. Br. teacher, (for so Mr. B.
answer to Argum. 5. and defense of Arg. 4.
himself acknowledges him) for ought I know, (nor do I name any other,
howsoever M. B. say I name famous, learned and godly men, concurring with him
in opinion) therein clearly or directly passing sentence on his side.

Nor helps it Mr. B. that I grant, willing ingenuously to embrace and
acknowledge Vndecunque esfulserit Lux neuliquam spernenda veritatis est.
whatsoever light of truth I can from any side discern to discover it self,
that the grounds that some of them have laid being duly considered, fight as
well against the one sort of Games, which yet they defend, as against the
other, which they disallow. For their Judgment is to be framed by what they
conceived and apprehended, and do themselves directly declare and deliver unto
us, not by what may be by us deduced, though never so necessarily it follow
(being more than they saw or were aware of,) from any other position or
conclusion of theirs.

Schoolmen or other such writers of former times I name not now, though I
might many, and have done some obiter in my Chap. 3. sect. 1, 2.
Book; because Mr. B. would peradventure except against them. As for the
Ancients indeed little is to be found of this Controversy in them; because the
exception taken against them for the dependence upon casualtie is in truth but
a new conceit, never heard of till of late. And for Divines among us, I doubt
not but a far greater number of our Reverend Brethren in the Ministry abiding
here about the City, to go no further abroad, yea even of those that Mr. B.
himself cannot but esteem reverently of, do dissent from Mr. B. than
concur in Judgment with him, in the condemning of all Lotterie whatsoever
used in disport; or, because some of them may understand Lotterie otherwise
than he and I do, in condemning all light and lusorious actions that either
merely or mixtly depend upon Casualty.

Fourthly, He grants that Prayer specially applied I. B.
to the Lot may be conceived, where the matter is more weighty, and the event
of some consequence, p. 91. And yet he holds, that the less weighty the
matter is, wherein a Lot is used, the lawfuller the Lot is, p. 111. The reason
why I wonder at this passage, shall be given in my Reply.

Mr. B. should have done well then to have T. G.
forborne to trouble both himself and us with telling us of this his
wonderment, till he meant to give us a reason of it. For I suppose hardly any
man living beside himself can guess what the, And yet, here should intimate,
till he further explain himself.

The last passage now to be observed as matter I. B.
of my wondering, is this. Notwithstanding, he confidently affirms that we may
not do ought without warrant, p. 301. sufficiently confirms the same;
because such an act is not done of Faith, and therefore not free from sin,
Romans 14. 23. but is a mere presumption, and tempting of God, page 313. and
quot. a. and b. and earnestly reproves one kind of Lotterie (why not all
against which the same reason is of like validity?) because not found revealed
in any word of God, but brought in either by Satan, or by some of his
Instruments, who are addicted to vanity, p. 315. and 316. and yet he
avouches, That it is a sufficient warrant for the use of Lots; in that the
oppugners, being learned, can say nothing against them, but what has been, or
may be sufficiently answered, page 235. May I not wonder that so judicious a
Scholar does not observe this discrepance? Lottery is unlawful, if not
warranted by the word; which position supposes the word to be perfect, as is
the Author thereof; and secondly Lotterie is lawful, if learned men can say
nothing out of the word against it. Which position supposes two things, viz.
that the word is like the Laws of Men, that is, imperfect, as be the Authors
thereof: and, that learned men cannot so fail in diligence of reading,
clearenesse of understanding, and firmness of memory, but that, if there were
in the word any thing aginst Lotterie, they could not but see it.

1. I fear there will not want those that will T. G.
Iudex bonus esse nemo potest, qui suspicione certa non movetur. Ci^. in Verr.
5.
strongly suspect that some speeches of Mr. Bs. here proceed rather from
spleen and gall against Mr. G. than from love to any truth supposed to be
opposed by him; and that with much better color, than Mr. B. can deduce that
which he here charge me with from any words of mine here alleged. For what
one title of all that Mr. B. alleges here out of my Book, intimates any
such thing as is here by Mr. B. thence deduced, to wit, that the word of God is
imperfect. As if that which there is nothing in Gods word against it, were not
warranted by the word: or the word must needs be imperfect if this be held
sufficient warrant for an action, that there is nothing in Gods word against
it. For thence must this heinous Charge be inferred, if from any part of my
Position at all. Which Position, or whatsoever else Mr. B. pleases to style
it, (for it is propounded by me only, as matter of consideration, not as a
peremptory position,) he should have done well to have related all out in mine
own words, which are these; It may be thought a sufficient warrant for the use
of th^se Lots, in that the oppugners of them being m^n so learned, and so well
read in Gods word, can say nothing against them, but what either has been or
may be sufficiently answered by others. Which words are there spoken, not as
presupposing that learned men cannot fail^ in reading, understanding, and
remembrance, but as very probably presuming that men learned and well read in
the word, bending their minds and studies that way, might and should at length
find out such a special institution and consecration of Lotterie in general
to be a divine sentence and an holy Oracle, that might not lightly therefore be
dealt with, if it were any where to be found. And that the contrary issue of
their diligent search and industrious opposition producing nothing but what had
been or might easily be answered, might seem sufficient to produce such a
moral certainty as in ci^ill Actions the Casuists do ordinarily require. But
I refer my self and Mr. Bs. dealing herein to the judgment of any
impartial par^ie upon due view of the place it self.

2. Howbeit to stay Mr. B^* wonderment somewhat; that he may not make me an
Owl sitting alone (...) (...) by my self: at least to set him up another to
wonder at as well as my sel^; (one that it se^ (...) he would not, for else he
could not but see, when he found him sitting together in the same bush with
me. Mr. Bradshaw (a man well known to M. B. while he lived, and one that it
would be no disparagement to Mr. B. I suppose, if I should say he were as
judicious a man as himself,) in his Answer to Johnson the Separatist, uses
these words, W. Bradshaw unreasonableness of the Separation, Reas. 3. ans. 1.
This is a sufficient justification of our Ministry, that such malicious
Aouersaries thereof, who would seem so expert in the Scripture, are no better
able by Scripture to prove their unchristian accusation. Here is Quod ille
pronunciat, ego dubitot quod ille definit, ego sciscitor. Hiero^. apolog. pro
lib. adv. Iovin.
a more peremptory assertion than mine is by much, and that in a matter, I
wisse, of much more weight. It is sufficient, says he; it may be thought so,
say I: that men that would seem so expert in the Scripture, says he; that men
so well read in Gods word, say I. Now I will request Mr. B. to look a while
off me, and turning his speech to him tell him* that he wondreth that Mr. Br.
though he do confidently auow (as he need not doubt but he would have done)
that we may not do ought without warrant; yet does withal avouch, that this
is sufficient justification of our Ministry, that men so expert in Scripture
cannot make good ought against it: and that so judicious a Scholar does not
observe this discrepance; and how hereby Gods law is made, like humane laws,
imperfect. And let him imagine but what Mr. Br. would in all likelihood have
answered him, or Mr. Johnson, if he should in that manner have replied upon
him. Mean while he need not wonder, that I see not this discrepance, when one
far more judicious than my self could not see it, either in my work, (for he
had the viewing of it ere it came out, and was a chief instigator of me to the
setting of it out,) or in his own.

2. What by the way he alleges out of my book by me there produced against
Diuinatorie Lots, though mangled in citation, as the former, after his manner,
that therefore they are to be condemned, because Of Lots, chap. 11. sect. 7.
they are not found revealed in any word of God, nor were ever delivered by any
Prophet of God, nor are grounded on any principles of reason and nature, or
were learned by any course of natural and ordinary observation; but were
brought in either directly by Satan, or by some lims and instruments of Satan,
etc. persons addicted wholly to vanity and to ungodly curiosity. And hereupon
asks, Why, if this reason be good against one kind of Lotterie, it should
not be of like validity against all. I make no doubt but the consequence is
firm and good. It remains for him to prove all kind of Lotterie to be such,
and he shall have my suffrage for the condemning of all. Mean while I desire a
little more fair dealing at Mr. Bs. hands in allegation of mine assertions.

Well: it may be seen shortly, how Mr. Gs. diligence, I. B.
understanding and memory have served him in defending lusorious Lots.

It is very likely, that they have all often times T. G.
failed me. (...). Greg. Naz. de pac. 1. (...). Idem de plag. grand.
There is no man but they may; my self much more the meanest of so many.

In the mean while sufficiency of his answering I. B.
is but upon the Trial, and not yet adjudged.

And of Mr. Bs. reply the like. T. G.


All these passages well reuiewed by Mr. G. I I. B.
should think he cannot wonder that a man of 64 years complete (and therefore
his wits may fail) does wonder, that so godly, wise and learned a man, the
faculties of whose mind are at the best, did not say to himself before he
preached, much more before he penned this lusorious Doctrine, Judge. 6. 31, 3^.
Let Baal plead for himself; and, These gamesters shall without any
encouragement from me, Esai. 5. 18.
draw on their iniquity with their cords of vanity; and the rather, because
he acknowledges that account is to be given unto God of gaming, p. 261. If of
the act, much more of justifying it. From which account good Lord deliver me.
For I fear that in justifying lusorious Lots, I should put false spectacles on
a gamesters nose, whereby the bridge seems broader than it is, and so he
falls in without fear; to use Mr. Gs. similitude, p. 264.

Surely either Mr. G. is a wonderful strange T. G.
man, or else Mr. B. is very prone to wonder at things that are not very
wonderful. For here is nothing with him but wondering, and wonder upon wonder.
He tells his Reader again and again that he does wonder: he demands of
him whether he may not wonder: he would not have me, nay he thinks, I cannot
wonder, that he does thus wonder. Some Heathen wisemen have held it (...). Zeno
apud Laert. Nil admirari prope res est una, Numici, Solaque quae possit facere
and servare beatum. Horat. epist. 6.
a point of the highest wisdom for a man to wonder at nothing. I am not of
their minds. Yet as another says, that V^rumque vitium est, and omnibus and
nulli credere; sed alterum honestius, alterum tutius. Sen. epist. 3. (...).
Hesiod.
it is as well reproueable in a man for him Prove. 14. 15. inde (...) fatuus
dicitur. Sirac. 19. 4. (...). Epicharm.
to trust every one, as Butleri Contabr. epigraphe, Be faithful to all, but
trust no man living.
not to trust any: so I hold it an unwise part in any man, as well Vt pavere,
sic Mirari cuncta infantile, insanum nihil.
to wonder at every thing, as to wonder at nothing; as well to wonder where
just cause of such wonderment is not, as not to wonder where it is. Now all
that has by Mr. B. been said being well considered, I leave it to others to
judge what just cause of so much wonderment he has produced hitherto out of my
writings.

2. But let us hear what further matter Mr. B. has here found, for this his
wondering humor to work upon: for the former passages have already been
examined. That a man of 64. years complete should see more than one some
fourteen or fifteen years younger than himself, as Mr. B. persuades
himself that he does, it is no wonder. (...). Plut. paedag. (...). Eurip.
Phoeniss. (...). Idem Beller^ph. - non omnia grandi^r aetas. Quae fugiamus
habet: seris venit usus ab annis. Ovid. met. l. 6. (...). Sophocl. Oedip.
Knowledge gathered by experience and continuance of study, is wont to grow
together with years in Senectus eoru^ qui adolescentiam suam honestis artibus
instruxerunt, aetate fit doctior, usu tritior, processis temporis sapientior.
Hieron. ad Nepot. Talis Solen, qui se quotidie aliquid addiscentem senem fieri
gloriabatur. Cic. senect. (...). Solon.
those that be industrious, as I believe Mr. B. to be: It is not that
therefore, I presume, that Mr. B. so much wondreth at. But that which he
wondreth at, and I must not wonder that he does wonder at, is this, that so
godly, wise, and learned a man, etc. (I would entreat Mr. B. Genus inimicoru^
pessimum est laudantium. Tacit. Agric. Callidum nocendi artificium accusatoriam
dir^ate^ laudum titulis peragere. Mamert. panegyr.
no more thus to commend me: I like not his manner of commendation. I observe
it to be ever but a foil to what here follows, to be but a shooing horn
still, the more smoothly to draw on some disgraceful aspersion or other, and
to make my supposed failing therein the fouler; as before, so here:) that such
an one, forsooth, should plead for Baal, and give encouragement to gamesters:
for that is apparently implied. Which whether I be guilty of, I appeal to my
Book, and to all that will vouchsafe the reading of it. Must he needs be held
to plead for Baal, that should maintain that the trees growing in Baals grove,
which Judge. 6. 28.
Gedeon cut down, were natural trees indeed as others are, and not enchanted
Quales Heliadas fabulantur in arbores versas exclamasse, -nostrum laceratur in
arbore corpus. Ovid. met. l. 2.
Fairies in the likeness of trees, against some fantastique that were possessed
with some such senseless conceit: or that should have defended the lawfulness
of using the wood of them either for sewell or fence, contrary to the In quo
genere adeo superstitiosi Iudaeuli, ut si arbor prope Idolum consita sit, nefas
ducant sub umbra ejus considere, vel etiam per umbram ejus transire, nisi alia
nulla via patu^rit, in quo casu cursu incitatissimo transire praecipiunt.
Praecept. Mosaic. affirm. 45. Commodum nullum ab idolis, aut eorum supellectili
percipiendum. Ibid.
fancy of some superstitious Jews, notwithstanding that superstitiously they
had before been abused, being consecrated unto Baal? Or do they plead for
Baal, Paget against Ainsworth, and others.
that maintain against the Separatists, that our Churches are not now
Idol-Temples, being rid of those abominations, that before they were defiled
with? What encouragement I give Gamesters, Mr. B. himself has in part before
showed, and my Book it self may further show.

3. Account if I should not look to give to God for whatsoever I teach, it
were strange indeed, when I teach that Tam otij quam negotij reddendam
ratione^: tam silentij quam sermonis.
account is to be given even of our lightest employments. But let Mr. B.
remember also, that account must be given of Psalm. 50. 20, 21.
wrongful charging and Matthew. 7. 1.
groundless censuring of our brethren; and that an heavy one too, if Iam. 3. 1.
S. James be believed.

4. As he fears, which I hope not, that I have failed one way; so let him
take heed lest he fail the other way in the same place spoken of: Remembering
that as well it is a sin Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Prove. 30. 6. (...). Greg.
Naz. de eutax.
to add to Gods word, as to detract from it, and Apoc. 22. 18, 19. Vae tam
adjicientibus quam detra^entibus destinatu^. Tertull. contr. Hermog.
as heavy a judgment denounced against the one as the other: And that, as one
says well, though I remember not well who, M. Edgerton, if I mistake not.
We must not ^ick Gods measure an inch to some, because others will thereupon
take an ell more than they should.

But Mr. G. believes that he has written the I. B.
truth, (Preface to the Reader) and is confident that truth is to be known,
especially concerning matters of common practice, p. 263. and gives four
reasons by which he was moved to defend lusorious Lots, p. 264.

The first is to draw men from superstition, in restraining themselves, when
God does not restrain them. This beggeth the Question, as, I hope, will
appear in the Reply.

These words are not mine. Neither are they T. G.
found in the place quoted; nor would I have spoken in that manner. Yet that I
there imply a superstitious conceit in the contrary Opinion, it is true.
Neither is it to be taxed as a begging of the Question, being not produced
there as any proof of the point in controversy, but as my Judgment of them,
whereupon I was induced the rather to deal with them. As for the thing it
self, let it appear in the Reply; and it will come yet time enough.

A second Motive is, because Arguments against I. B.
lusorious Lots have made many stagger in the necessary Use of serious Civil
Lots. It may be so, some failing in their Judgment. But it may be also, that
many more will be made to stagger by reading Mr. Gs. exceptions against
Arguments for, and Cautions in those serious Civil Lots, cap. 5. and by his
Maxim, The less weighty the matter is, wherein a Lot is used, the lawfuller
the Lot is, p. 111.

1. My second motive Mr. B. here omitteth, T. G.
and so also do I therefore. This that he says is part of the third; part, I
say; because I say more than so, and yet no more than I can make good neither,
that those Arguments, the chief of them, that are brought against the one
kind, will, if they be sound, necessarily overthrow also the other.

2. What mine Exceptions may chance to do, is a matter merely contingent; and
(...). Isocr. ad Demon. De futuris contingentibus non est determinata veritas.
Aristot. de interpret. c. 10.
there is of it therefore no certainty. But of the other that they have made
many stagger, I am very certain; nor see I which way Mr. B. keeping to his
own grounds will ever be able to settle them. If my Exceptions be such, as is
here implied, it had been a good work to have removed them, for their sakes,
that might chance else to stumble at them.

3. That Maxim, as Mr. B. terms it, was once before nibbled at. But the time
of the trial of it, belike, is not as yet. What staggering it should cause in
the use of a Lot, unless to those that wilfully put themselves upon hazard of
apparent inconvenience, I cannot as yet conceive.

A third Motive is to take away much heartburning; I. B.
Nay rather this justifying lusorious Lots, will not only cause more
heart-burning; but encourage also Gamesters to ouer-crow such as are
scrupulous. For, if many well-affected have been constrained, in regard of
scruple in this kind to strain themselves to some inconveniences by refusal
of those games, when by those, whom they had dependence upon or familiarity
withal, they have been urged occasionally thereunto: (which to prevent
hereafter is a fourth cause of his writing,) How will these supporters, and
familiars insult upon the scrupulous, now they have so learned a patron of
their gaming? Some have strained themselves to some inconveniences for not
pledging drunken Healths, being drinke-offerings to Bacchus. To prevent which
hereafter should Mr. G. do well unto edification to preach and write in
justification of these Healths?

1. Mr. B. snappeth still at many things; but T. G.
deals not entirely with any. One short shred he snatcheth out of my fourth
Motive, or as he styles it, the third; and another somewhat longer out of the
second, which he here calls the fourth; letting the rest go; for what
reasons himself best knows. But if the inconveniences there mentioned, many
more than Mr. B. here relates, may (as it is no question but that they may, if
the truth be found and cleared to be on this side) be thereby remedied, it is
an effect of some consequence, and such as may well recompense the travel
therein taken.

2. But it will rather prove clean contrary, if Mr. B. may be believed. For it
will encourage Gamesters to ouer-crow such as are scrupulous; (and how can it
do so, if those scrupulous ones shall have received satisfaction, and so shall
have deposed their scruple?) having gotten so learned a patron of their gaming?
A pretty nip; of the same stamp with some other before: as if others more than
one or two, whose learning I doubt not but Mr. B. deemeth deservedly mine to
come far short of, had not before me in Print defended the use of a Lot in
disport.

3. For drunken healths, if Mr. B. can show that a lusorie Lot and they are of
the like nature, he says somewhat: till that, his instance may stand by for a
stale. But suppose that in detestation of these drunken healths, Mr. B. should
publish a Book, endeavoring therein by diverse Arguments to prove that it is
utterly unlawful for one friend to drink to, or to pledge, another at Table,
and much more to drink at Table to, or to pledge (as we say) any that are then
absent; and many weak ones should thereupon make scruple of such common
courtesies; and both they and the profession of piety should thereby be exposed
to derision, and just imputation of superstition, I think it would not be
deemed labor amiss bestowed (for those weak ones sake at least) for some
learned man to take pains to confute such a conceit. And this instance, if Mr.
B. please to apply to the present controversy, I suppose that it will prove
somewhat more pertinent than that he produces; it will in part at least clear
the meaning of one of my motives.

The Sum of his Causes (as he expresses himself I. B.
in his Preface to the Reader) is, To set at liberty the entangled Consciences
of Godly-disposed persons. Indeed; If any Consciences, simply for playing with
Lots, should seek his satisfaction in private, then if Mr. G. quieted him by
his grounds (supposed true) it were not amiss. But is every Doctrine, though
true, to be insisted upon both by Preaching and Printing, and that affirming
matter in Question, and of no necessary use?

Here is the Sum indeed, it seems, of T. G.
that that Mr. B. would have. He must have liberty, (by what rule I know not)
to preach and print (for Epistle dedicatorie before his Dialogue.
what he has printed, he says himself that he had preached) what he will;
but his doctrine must not be contradicted either in Pulpit or by Press. He may
ensnare and entangle Christian Consciences in public; but Mr. G. must not
quiet them again but in private. Especially so long as his doctrine runs in
the Negative, Coloss. 2. 21.
Touch not, taste not, handle not: (it is a Text not unfitly M. Yates Model of
Divinity, edit. 2. cap. 16. quaest. 1. error. 4.
applied to the present purpose, by one sometime of another judgment, but upon
better consideration now concurring in justification of the lusorie Lot:) as if
Romans 14. 14, 17. 1 Cor. 6. 12. and 7. 1, 2, 9, 28, 36, 39. and 10. 23, 25.
the Apostles had never affirmatively preached Christian liberty, or Gal. 2. 4,
5. and 5. 1, 10. Col. 2. 20, 21.
opposed publicly the courses of those that sought to limit and restrain it,
and that in things Romans 14. 2, 6. 1 Cor. 10. 27, 28.
not absolutely necessary neither, but such as might well have been forborne.

That is therefore to little purpose, that Mr. B. adds;

I say, Affirming, remembering the holy wisdom I. B.
of the Apostles and Elders, who decreed touching Act. 15. 28, 29.
offensive things (yet some of them lawful, if conveniently used) only
negatiuely; and deemeth it not necessary to decree affirmatively things that
were then, and might be in use for a time.

For neither is it equal that some one particular T. G.
act should for all circumstances be a general rule to all others: the
practice of the Apostles themselves, and by name of See the places above cited.
S. Paul being at other times in points of the very same kind to the contrary
that Mr. B. here urges: See Calvin. institut. lib. 3. cap. 19. sect. 10, 15,
16.
Neither is there the same reason of Dogmaticall Divinity, by grounds of faith
informing the Conscience concerning the true Nature of the things themselves,
and of Ecclesiastical Discipline by Canons and Constitutions restraining not
Christian Liberty* but the outward Use of it for Order sake, and the benefit
of our Brethren.

It is as if one should thus Reason. 1 Cor. 9. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 11. 8, 9.
The Apostle took no stipend of the Church of Corinth: therefore no Minister
of the Gospel may take stipend of his people. Or, Act. 18. 3. and 20. 34. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.
S. Paul wrought with his hands for his living: Therefore all Ministers of the
Gospel ought so also to do. For such is Mr. Bs. Argument, or else it is none
at all; The Apostles and Elders determined negatiuely only of some things
offensive: therefore no man may presume to deal in the affirmative of such.

Many (I fear, too many) learned Divines approve I. B.
Usury in their Judgment, though condemned by Law. Yet none that I know ever
insisted upon the justification thereof by Preaching and Printing.

Whether Many Divines among us be of that T. G.
mind or no, is more than I know. Nor list I to take notice what has been
either preached or published of that Argument by any. This I am sure of, that
Those very Laws allow Cards and Tables.
our Law, though it condemns Usury, it allows Lotterie; and therefore the
instance is not even in that regard as it ought, and is intended here to be.

Again, Was there ever any so troubled with I. B.
playing with Lots? I doubt it. But without doubt thousands will now more
boldly use Lusorious Lots, without regard of the Cautions, in these licentious
times. As Usurers regard not the Cautions which Divines set down. For it is
enough to them that some godly Divines affirm Usury to be lawful. T. G.


1. What Mr. B. means by so troubled with Lots, I know not: But that many are
by means of the Doctrine by Mr. B. and others maintained, superstitiously
conceited of them, I am sure; and that diverse so conceited have thereupon
sometime strained to sin against conscience, as themselves have confessed, to
their disquiet afterward, and sometime have been constrained to undergo no
small inconvenience for the avoiding of the like again.

2. But thousands now, says Mr. B. (as if the use of such Lots had never been
defended, or were never heard of till now) will now more boldly use Lusorious
Lots without regard of the Cautions. Mr. B. speaks very peremptorily; and yet
I take him for no Prophet; and his prediction therefore yet may fail. But if
any be emboldned by my Book upon better information to use a Lusorie Lot in
due manner, where it is otherwise not unlawful, I have no cause to be sorry
for it. If any be emboldned to abuse it, not regarding the Cautions, it will be
their own fault, not mine, who deliver nothing that tends to the emboldning
of them thereunto. Not to add, that the Cautions concern not a Lot used in
sport as it is a Lot, but Game rather and Recreation in general: which neither
Mr. B. nor any other sound Divine disalloweth, Aug. de Music. l. 2. citante
Martyr. Petr. Mart. in Iud. 14. Thom. Aquin sum* part. 2 2ae q. 168. Perkins
Cases of Cons^. l. 3. c. 4. q. 3. Fennor of recreat. etc.
many by writing defend, and yet do they not thereby give encouragement to any
to use Game or Recreation in undue manner: nor are they held guilty therefore
of the sin of those that regarding not the Cautions by them annexed to the
Doctrine of it, use it otherwise than they ought.

Oh that Mr. G. had considered what he writes, I. B.
p. 107. before cited; and what he writes, p. 103. and 104. viz. Where
inconveniences, that shall necessarily, or in good probability appear to
accompany the thing questioned, or ensue upon the doing thereof, shall be
such, and so great as the Conueniences, which stand on the other side, shall
not be able to counteruaile; there that action is worthily disallowed as
inconvenient, and a Lot consequently unlawful: what he writes in his
Spiritual Watch, p. 27. viz. The rifer any evil is in those places, or ages
we live in, the more careful should we be to shun and avoid such a sin. No
doubt he would have taken heed how by writing he make way to the sin of, or
by Lusorious Lots.

1. I am much beholden to Mr. B. for his T. G.
good wishes. The Considerations that he wishes I had taken into thought, are
indeed good and needful; but unless he can assume, and make good his
Assumption, that the penning and publishing of my Discourse is such and so
inconuentent as is therein specified, he has little reason to persuade
himself, that it must needs doubtlesle have prevailed with me to the staying
and suppressing of my Book. Which yet had it appeared in probability and
likelihood to have been, I should not have failed to be as chary of the
publishing of it, as Mr. B. himself would have had me to be.

2. Nor do I doubt, but as I writ, that Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. (...). Plut. de
laud. sui.
evils the rifer they are, the more careful we should be to shun and avoid
them. But that by defending of the lawfulness of a Lusorious Lot in it self,
I make way to sin in the use, or rather in the abuse of it, I deny; and my
denial stands good, until the point it self be disproued. I do no more
make way to the one by defending the other: than some of the Ancient Epiphan.
de haeres. and August. de morib. Manich. l. 2. c. 16.
Fathers made way to the abuse of Wine either by Drunkenness or otherwise,
when they defended against the Vinum fell principis tenebraru^ dicebant.
Manichees, Tatiani, Encratitae, and others, that Wine was Gods good Creature,
and men might lawfully drink of it. Or than so many of our Calvin. Martyr.
Bucer. Aretius. Bucan. Piscat. Perkins, etc.
late writers, as defend the lawfulness of an Oath lawfully used, against the
Anabaptists, that utterly condemn all use of it, do thereby make way for the
justification of that ordinary vain swearing, that is Quis estoro, praeter
paucos, qui non ad hoc semper Christi nomen in ore habeat ut pejeret? In id
penitus deducta est res, vt Christi nomen jam non sacramentum esse videatur sed
sermo. Pluresque invenias qui saepius perjurent, quam qui omnino non jurent.
Salvian. de provid. l. 4. c. 10.
as rife, yea far rifer, than any abuse of Dice or Lot-play either is or can be.

Many Divines and intelligent men, though of I. B.
Opinion that lusorious mixed Lots may be used lawfully, yet wish that Mr. G.
had never published his Book. For a running Horse, say they, needs no
spurring.

And many Divines and intelligent men pressed T. G.
the publishing of it, and that more of them, and with more importunity many
of them than is fit for me here to relate: I may truly add, that some even of
contrary judgment advised it.

Nor do I spur any running Horse in my Book: but endeavor only to ungirt
some, that Mr. B. and some others had girt in more than was meet, or than they
had any good warrant so to girt in out of Gods word: and to ease such as might
thereby be not girt only, but galled too.

For my part, I wish, that Mr. G. had been affected I. B.
in writing, as he professes himself to be in the use of lusorious Lots, p.
266.

Nor can I blame Mr. B. (though his wishes T. G.
be unequal) that he wishes so often that I had not by writing contradicted the
subject matter of his Dialogisticall Discourse; which yet he himself by a
peremptory Challenge incited me first unto; and by his after-demeanure (in a
manner) enforced me further to publish.

But me thinks, if Mr. B. were so desirous to be informed if he err herein, as
My desire is either informatio^, if I err, etc. But whether I err or no;
which yet I would gladly understand; for I ought not to teach an untruth though
to Gods glory. M. B. epist. dedicat. before Dialog.
elsewhere he professes, and to have 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Try all things, etc. In
the Frontispice.
the Truth tried and cleared, as he would seem elsewhere also to intimate;
yea, or if he were not loath to have his opinion herein scanned or discussed, or
were not somewhat suspicious of it that it would not endure light, he should
not be so unwilling to have it dealt with by others, he should not take it so
evil as he does, that he is contradicted in it; nor would he cast so much
impertinent bymatter here in the way, that may rather hinder than further the
pursuit of the truth with that Christian affection that in such cases ought to
be held; but proceed rather directly to the making good of his own Arguments,
as in my writing given him, I came to the Answer of them directly. If he would
gladly understand from others whether he be in an error, why excepteth he so
much against me for doing no more than himself says he would gladly have
done? If he mislike that it is by writing and publicly done, he may well blame
himself for either; nor see I with what equity he can require to be refuted
only in private, when his errors are in Print abroad. But let us hear him yet
once further, and so an end with his Preface.

Well, whatsoever Mr. G. writes dogmatically, I. B.
he wishes thee, good Reader, to imitate him in his practice, to wit, that
albeit in judgment thou art rightly informed of the truth concerning the
lawfulness of these Games in themselves; yet in godly discretion thou would
rather abandon them, considering the too too common and ordinary abuse of
them; and that many, it may be, among whom thou live, may remain unresolved
and unsatisfied touching the lawfulness of them, p. 267.

I desire the same, and therewith a suspending thy judgment until thou have
well considered my Dialogue, Mr. Gs. Answers, and my Reply, together with mine
Answer to his positive grounds.

Here I promise (with Mr. G. p. 128.) to raze what I have reared, if my Reply
and Answers be proved insufficient, and so Act. 20. 32.
commend thee to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build
further. Only, 2 Timothy 2. 7.
consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

I wish indeed, as Mr. B. says; but without T. G.
prejudice to any that use those games no otherwise than they ought: as 1 Cor.
7. 7, 8, 9, 27, 28.
the Apostle wished others in another kind as himself; yet withal
acknowledging the liberty that Gods word and Spirit had given in that point,
and not censuring others that therein did not as he did.

For the rest; I require of thee, good Reader, the same for this my Reioinder,
that Mr. B. does for his Reply; and of Mr. B. the performance only of what here
he promises: And so requesting Gods grace for us all, that both in this and in
all other points in these queasie times controuersed, we may without all
partiality and by-respects bend our selves to the discovery of the Truth, and
without pertinacitie, and endeavor by silly shifts to elude it, yield our
selves to it where it is discovered unto us, not considering N^n quis dicat,
attendendum; sed quid dicatur. Ne verum fiat quod v^lgo dicitur, Idem duo cum
faciunt, non est idem. Ter. Ad^lph. 5. 3. Et i^tandum Areopag^tas, (...).
Lucian. de sectis.
by whom it is either delivered or discovered, but by what force and strength
of Argument we are convinced of it; I proceed in the next place, after one rub
more removed, from this tedious, needless and impertinent Preface, to the
maine body of Mr. Bs. Book.

ANSWER TO Mr. Bs. POSTSCRIPT.
After the PREFACE is this Postscript added.

TO THE READER. I. B.

THAT I may do Mr. G. no wrong, I am to let thee know, that the 14. of March
1622. Still. Ang. Mr. G. denied naming me, when he confuted mine Arguments in
Pulpit: yet confessing that he named me in Pulpit with others diversely
dissenting from him in Judgment touching Lusorious Lots, when he entered into
the Question of playing with Lots.

And that thou may, good Reader, understand T. G.
the full truth; Be pleased, I pray thee, to spend yet a little more idle time
with us, while I relate, as briefly as I well may, as well upon what occasion,
as what it was, that I spoke to Mr. B. at that time that here he mentions.
Being informed that it was given out by some of Mr. Bs. acquaintance; that
(upon the offering of this his Discourse to be licenced for the Press, and
complaint made by him of supposed wrong that I had done him in confuting him in
open Pulpit by Name) it was by that Reverend Doctor that licenced my Book,
acknowledged that I had indeed done Mr. B. wrong, and that I should therefore
give him satisfaction in private, but that Mr. B. would not therewith be
satisfied, but would have it done in public, since the wrong was such; and
that the same Reverend Doctor should say* that if my Treatise of Lots were
again to be licenced, he would not have licenced it: (all which was utterly
untrue) and supposing that this could come from none but Mr. B. himself, I
desired meeting him near Paul's Church, to have a few words with him. Which
granted, I related unto him, what I had heard, and named the party said to have
made such report; demanded of him whether either any such report came from him,
or the things reported themselves were true. Mr B. denying both to be the
Author of the report, and the truth of the things reported; for that I there
rested. But I further told him, that I understood that he had offered a
Discourse for the Press against part of my Book, which I wished with all mine
heart might come forth; Ex mutuo conflictu, velut ignis e silice, veritas
elicitur and emicat.
the truth, I hoped, would thereby the better be cleared, and I should
willingly be informed of ought that I erred in; to which purpose I told him,
that I had also dealt earnestly as well with Dr Westfield, (who I know well,
will testify as much) when it was tendered to him some three years ago; as
also since with Dr Featly, the party before mentioned, (which Mr. B. also
acknowledged to have understood from him) that they would be pleased at my
request to allow it for the Press. Which why they refused to do, is needless
here to relate. I told him further, that I was informed of two things in it;
the one, that I was accused therein to have confuted him in the Pulpit by name;
the other, (which much more nearly touched me) that I was charged to maintain
in that my Treatise some Assertions that were blasphemous. The former he
affirmed that he had heard by many. I told him, those many (if there were such)
were very much to blame: And withal by solemn protestation, as in Gods
presence, denied that I had by name in Pulpit refuted either him or any other
that I dealt with in this Argument. How I named him or his Book rather, and so
him with it, I told him: to wit, that having propounded the Question concerning
the light use of a Lot, I recited those Authors that had written of this
Subject, viz. B. King upon Jonas, B. Babington on the Decalogue, Peter Martyr
on Judges, Danaeus of Lot-play, Perkins Cases of Conscience, Fennor of lawful
Recreations, Easty history of the Gospel, Bamford Dialogue of Games
consisting in Chance: whereof some were of one mind, some of another; and if I
should dissent in decision of the Question from any of them, I desired it might
be without offense, adding that (...). Aristot. ethic. lib. 1. cap. 6. Pijque
ac prudentis cujusque illud est, (...). Lucian. asino.
promise that Mr. B. has before related. After which having delivered mine
own Judgment, and propounded and prosecuted the Reasons that I had for it; I
then answered the Obiecto^s on the other side, reduced to some heads, and
according to those heads handling them, taking sometime also some part of one
and the same Objection from one, and some part of it from another, who had
somewhat further pursued it; but not naming (as those may testify that have my
notes yet in their hands) any one of those whom then I dealt with. Upon
relation of this, or the effect of it, with such protestation, Mr. B. affirmed
that he was therein satisfied, and believed it to be so as I said. And now
judge, I pray thee, what (I say not Charity or Conscience, but) candor and
ingenuitie at least Mr. B. has showed, in charging me peremptorily, and that
more than once (after this my protestation and his own acknowledgment of the
truth) publicly in Print with confuting him by Name in open Pulpit, and breach
of Charity in so doing. If Mr. B. were so chary of doing Mr. G. wrong, that to
prevent, or at least, avoid the same, he added this Postscript, Nae tu,
inquit ille, homo imprudens es, qui culpam maluisti deprecari, cum posses
praecavere. Nam tu quod caver^ possis, stultum est admittere. Ter. Eunuch. 4.
6. Seraque nimis and praepostera oration, quae peractum castigat, cui occurri
potuerat. Plin. ep. 6. l. 6.
why does he wilfully wrong him in that very point, wherein he would seem
here to salve his credit? Or what is this but Facere est facilius quam sanare
vulnera. Quintil. institut. l. 5. c. 13. Hinc Medius ille (...). Plut. de
adulat. Cum vulnus sanatum est, manet cicatrix. Sen. de ira, l. 1. c. 16.
first to wound a man, and then clap on a fig-leafe that may in part cover
rather than cure the gash that he has given?

For the other Accusation, I told Mr. B. that if, as Hierome said, Nolo in
suspicione haereseos quenquam esse patientem. Hieron. adv. error. Joan. Hieros.
in case of Heresy, then of blasphemy much more, a Christian man ought not to
be, I say not with him, patient, but at least silent, having any good ground
and opportunity to clear himself therein. I signified therefore unto him,
that if he would do but as much for me, as I had before done for him, (and I
supposed in way of requital I might have required it) to deliver me his
Discourse or a Copy of it, I would undertake within short time either to
return it with due answer, or to make public acknowledgment of mine error, if
I were thereby convinced thereof. Or if he would none of that, (as he would in
no wise hear of it) that he would yet inform me what those blasphemous
assertions were that in my Book I had broached, and show me (which I as yet
saw not) wherein they were such. That which in Charity I held him bound unto;
Exodus 23. 4. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. Nedum fratrem ipsum errantem despicias. Tertull. ad
Marc. l. 4. Quid enim tam malignum, quam nolle prodesse, cum possis. Ibid. l. 1.
seeing me to wander so foully out of the way, to lend me his hand and help,
especially craving the same so instantly, for the bringing of me back again.
But other answer to this request of mine from Mr. B. I could have none, but
that he had put that term of blasphemy now out of his Book. I replied again
hereunto: that that was but a silly satisfaction, having charged his Brother
and fellow-Minister with blasphemy to more than a few, to say that he had now
put that word out of his Book. I might in his own words have told him, had I
then been acquainted with them; that I held he failed in Charity, in that not
having had any conference with me either by speech or by writing, though I be
(as he says) his neighbor Minister; he offered to accuse me of Blasphemy by
Name publicly in Print. But I required him, as he would answer one day for the
neglect of such a duty, to show me mine error, that I might not continue in so
foul and dangerous an offense; or to refer it to any one or more of our
Reverend Brethren of the Ministry about the City, such as himself should make
choice of, whether that which I required of him were equal and reasonable, and
whether he in Charity might refuse it. But Surdo cecini, ut Ter. heaut. 2. 1.
vel vanis auribus, ut Live. hist. l. 40.
I sung to a deaf man. I could get from Mr. B. no other answer but this, that
He would be judged by none but by the whole Church of God. And so we parted.
Now, since Mr. B. will so have it, Let the whole Church of God judge, or so
many at least, to whose hands this Discourse shall come, on whose side the
breach of Charity (if any be) has been. And this is more by much than I
would ever have troubled my Reader withal, had it not been for Mr. Bs.
Postscript.

THE SECOND PART. Mr. BALMFORDS Answer to Mr GATAKERS Arguments for the
lawfulness of a Lusorious Lot. Together with Mr. Gs. Reply in defense of his
own Arguments, which are word for word also here related.
THE former grounds laid concerning T. G. of Lots, Cap. 4. Sect. 4.
the Nature of Lots in general, the Reasons that induce me to allow Lots of
this kind as not evil in themselves, among others are these.

This Tenent seems more fearful than beseems I. B. Answer.
a learned man, who after the turning over a wonderful number of books to
compile his Historical and Theological Treatise of the Nature and Use of
Lots, sets down his Judgment: Allowing lusorious Lots only as not evil in
themselves; whereas he affirms them to be lawful in themselves, p. 266. So
that if these games be used with due observation of all his cautions, why is he
fearful to allow them as good in themselves? How then may a scrupulous man,
who remembers not only his wicked ways, but his deeds Ezekiel. 36. 11.
also that are not good, build upon such quagmirie grounds?

Again; Allowing these games only as not evil in themselves, does not
manifest that Love of God, which (I doubt not) is in Mr. Gs. heart. For whereas
God is glorified by good works, and these games Matthew. 5. 16.
be too too common, and accompanied with many crying sins, whereby God is
every where and daily much dishonored, the Love of God would have John 3. 21.
constrained him, if doing truth, to have brought these games to the light,
that thereby it might be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God.

Lastly, By this Tenent he shows not due Charity to his Neighbor. For now
it is enough for Gamesters to plead; A very learned man holds our Gaming to
be not evil in it self. Therefore they will not seek further to know whether
it be good in it self, forgetting that it is written; The Matthew. 3. 10.
Axe is put to the root of the trees, therefore every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Is not then hereby
his neighbors spiritual danger occasioned?

1. I might demand here, why Mr. B. deals T. G. Reply.
only with my Tenent, but takes no notice at all of the Of Lots, chap. 2.
Grounds fore-laid; contrary to In his Preface.
his own assertion, and my course with him, who deal with and discuss as
well his Ground^ as his Arguments. But that I let pass.

2. Requesting him (...). Ulysses Homericus. Neque cu^m ij sumus, quos
vituperare nec inimici quide^ possint, nisi ut simul laudent. Plin. ep. 12. l.
3.
to forbear Honorifica contumelia. Hieron. ad Pamm. and Ocean.
his titles, which I neither desire nor deserve, of learned, and very learned,
so often both here and elsewhere inculcated Quomodo luctantes antagonistas
altius attollunt, quo vehementius illidant. Cypr. epist. 2. lib. 2. Vti contra
Plut. de adulat. (...).
to no very good purpose, as before I have showed: and passing by his gird of
turning over such a wonderful number of Books; (for Mr. B. is not, it seems,
out of his wondering vain yet) I would feign know of him why he calls my
conclusion, a more fearful tenent than beseems a learned man. For if by
fearful he mean hideous and horrible, as he may well, if it be as he
afterward charge it to be, contrary to the Love both of God and Man, that
must first be showed of him; and how soundly he has showed it, shall in the
discussion of his charge appear. If by fearful he mean timorous, as may
seem the rather by the trembling that hereafter he cha^geth me with, (...)
Arian. Epict. lib. 2. c. 21.
I confess my self indeed to be naturally of a timorous disposition. And yet
I suppose it no timiditie, but (...). Plin. epist. 24. lib. 4. Ex prouidentia
timor, ex audacia temeritas provenit. Donat. ad Eunuch. 4. 6. Ego Plinio accedo
ep. 17. l. 5. Nescio quo p^cto magis in stud^js homines timor, quam fiducia
decet.
discretion rather for a man to speak (...) Zeno apud Laert. and Euslath. ad
Odyss. (...).
warily. Nor is Haud insulsum est illud Martini Dumiens. de mor. c. 1. Lauda
parce, vitupera percius. Aeque enim repr^l easibilis est nimia laudatio, and
immoderata vituperatio.
he necessarily fearful that does not by and by cry out as Mr. B. does of
impious iniquity, when ought is allowed that he disliketh: or that does not by
and by commend every thing as exceeding good and godly that he justifies and
allows as lawful. But to speak moderately belike is a fault and
fearfulness with Mr. B. which I was not aware of before.

3. Examine we the ground of this prolix and fearful Accusation, and we shall
find it to be but as they say of the sheering of Swine, much clamor and little
wool, Verbis veget, rebus flaccet. Apul. apolog.
many words indeed, but little matter of any worth. The maine matter of the
Charge is this, Mr. G. allows Lusorious Lots only as not evil in
themselves. Where the word, only, is Mr. Bs. insertion; which if he added for
this end, as it seems he did, to make my words bear this sense, not evil
only, yet not lawful, and warrantable neither, I disclaim it. Otherwise I
confess I conceive my Conclusion in those terms to distinguish the Lusorious
Lot it self from any abuse that may otherwise accompany the Game wherein it
is used, and so make it evil in that respect. But take the Tenent as it is,
Lusorious Lots in themselves not evil. To omit the Distinction so common in
the Schools, Per se, and per accidens.
of it self, and by accident; and the Phrase so frequent among Divines and
Writers of the best note, of things in themselves not evil, wicked, or
unwarrantable. Pictoria ars ex se mala non est. Rhena^. in Tertul. ad Hermog.
The Art of Painting, says Rhenanus, is not evil of it self. Iuramentum per
se non pugnat cum lege Dei morali. Chemnit. harmon. c. 51.
To swear, says Chemnitius, is not of it self against the Moral Law. Per se
vitiosum aut da^mabile non est, necessitatibus suis prospicere. Calvin. harmo^.
Euang. in Matthew. 24. 38.
It is not of it self vicious or condemnable, says Calvin, for a man to
provide for himself. Of some Ceremonies used in our Churches, says Beza, Quum
non sint ex earum rerum genere, quae per se impiae sunt, non videri tanti
momenti, ut propterea deserendum ministerium. Beza. epist. 12.
they are not things impious of themselves, nor such as a man should leave his
Ministry for: and of other of them, Per se non sunt idololatrica. Ibid.
They are not of themselves idolatrous. And Bucanus, Res mediae quae in sese
nec bonae, nec malae sunt. Bucan. loc. commun. 33.. 13.
Things indifferent are such as are neither good nor evil of themselves, etc.
To pass by, I say, an infinite number of such speeches, that in learned
writers occur every where. For to what end should I waste time and loose
labor, in In sylvam quid lignaferam? quidve in mare lymphas?
bringing wood to the wood, and casting water into the sea? Does not the
Apostle himself deliver his tenants sometime in like manner as I do? 1 Cor.
7. 28.
If thou take a wife, thou sinnest not: and, if a virgin marry, she sins
not. And, Ibid. 7. 36.
Let him do as he will, he sins not; let them be married. And now let Mr.
B. tell not Mr. G. but S. Paul, that such a tenent seems to him more timorous
than beseems so worthy an Apostle, etc. setting down his judgment whether
folk may marry or no, to say, they sin not in so doing. I might add a
judicious Divines Comment on those words of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 23.
All things are lawful; Morton in 1 Cor. 10.
that is, they may be taken without sin. As also that Mr. Perkins in this
very point concerning the use of mixed Games, such as Tables and Cards are,
passing his censure of them, says, that they are Perkins Cases of Conscience,
lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 3. quaest. 2.
not simply to be condemned. But of this enough.

4. Yea but Mr. G. affirms them elsewhere to be lawful in themselves. And
why is he fearful now to allow them as good in themselves? Though such words
of mine be not found in the place pointed to: yet I fear not to own them, and
it is like enough that elsewhere I may use them. Nor did I ever understand
till now, that these two were not equivalent, not to be evil, and to be
lawful. Is there any medium in moral actions between lawful and unlawful?
Or any difference between unlawful and evil? If not, then every thing that
is not evil is not unlawful; and every thing consequently that is not evil,
is lawful. Yea I add further, that every thing that is not evil, is in some
sense, and that a good sense too, good. The word, good, therefore in common
acception is taken two ways; sometime more strictly for some such (...).
Matthew. 5. 45.
virtuous act, as deserves Gloriosa. Senaep. 83. Honesta, and pulchritudine
specieque eximia laudabilia. Cic. de ^in. l. 2.
a special note of commendation and praise; and in this sense there is some
medium between good and bad. For some actions there be, as for a man Psalm. 49.
18. Quid magnifici est, se amare, sibi parcere, sibi acquirere? Sen. de benef.
l. 4. c. 14.
to make much of himself, to drink when he is a dry, Lament. 4. 3. Tit. 2. 4.
Meus mihi, suus cuique charus est. Plaut. Capt. 2. 3. (...). Plut. de sen.
polit.
to love his own, Matthew. 5. 45, 46. Si quid (...) erga benefec^, aut consul^
fid (...), Non (...) laudem, ^lpa caruisse arbitr^r. Plaut. ^rinum. 5. 2. Hinc
(...). ep. 11. l. 3. Non ideo ^men eximiam gloriam meruisse me, ut ille
praedicat, cred^; sed tantum effugisse flagitiu^.
to befriend his friend, to Hinc Mitio Tere^t. Adelph. 4. 3. Ego in hacre nihil
repe^io, quamobrem lauder tantopere: Meum officium faci^: quod peccatum a nobis
ortum est, corrig^.
make amends for what he has done amiss, etc. which though they be allowable,
yet are not greatly commendable; Neglecta quaedam offens^m contrahunt, ^uae
^pleta gloriam non merentur: and damnant praevaricatorem, nec glorificant
autorem. Bern. de praecept. and d^ens.
neither deserve they much praise and commendation when they are done, nor
without much sin many times may they be omitted. Sometime the word is taken
in a greater latitude of sense, for any action that is warrantable and
allowable whatsoever, and so there is no medium at all between good and bad,
every particular moral action being either warrantable or unwarrantable, as
Chap. 5. sect. 5.
in my Lots I have showed at large. And in this sense I say, that Contra quam
Tertull. ad ^xor. l. 1. Non id^o quid bonum, quia malum non est.
not evil, and good are all one: as with the Apostle, not to sin, and to do
well are all one. 1 Cor. 7. 36.
If he marry her, he sins not; and afterward, Ibid. 38.
He that marries her does well. Where let Mr. B. again demand of the Apostle
(I dare not) why he was so fearful to say, that he that married did well, at
the first, especially observing the Caution that he there gives, In Domino.
Ibid. 39.
in the Lord: And let him take heed, lest while he rejects these, as
quagmirie grounds, he plunge many weak Christians into deep quagmires indeed,
wherein no firm footing can be found, to fix and rest their perplexed minds
and consciences on.

5. This considered, all that follows is but Ecquandone vidisti flammam
slipula exortam, claro crepitu, largo fulgore, cito incremento? Sedenim materia
levi, caduco incendio, nullis reliquijs? Hem tibi illa accusatio, iurgijs
inita, verbis aucta, argumentis defecta, nullis post sententia^ lata^ reliquijs
calumniae permansura. Apul. in apol.
a mere flash, that vanishes so soon as it is fired, of it self. Nor will
Mr. B. ever be able to prove, or to persuade any man, I believe, not sworn to
stand to his sentence, beside himself, that those Ezekiel. 36. 31.
deeds not good in the Prophet were any other than Iunius refert ad Cap. 6. 9.
evil works, such as the The like phrase is Psalm. 36. 4. where Piscator, in
actionibus malis: and Iunius, viam ut quamque videt pessimam pergit in ea. So
often in the Proverbs, To eat over much honey is not good, Chap. 25. 27. To
respect persons in judgment is not good, Chap. 24. 23. False weights are no
good thing, Chap. 20. 23. De quibus and similibus vise Drus. observe. l. 1. c.
22. and H. Steph. ad Corinth. de dialect.
Psalmist says, wicked men addict themselves unto: for who is bound to repent
of ought that is not evil? Or that in Matthew. 3. 10.
John the Baptists speech, the opposition is between fruit good, and fruit not
evil; and not rather (as all Divines that ever I read, understand it) between
Matthew. 7. 17, 18, 19. and 12. 33. Esai. 5. 4, 7.
good fruit, and evil fruit, or Luke 13. 7. Ezekiel. 15. 2, 3. Sicut steriles
arbores excidi solent. Calvin. harmon.
no fruit; it being evil also, as Malum est non fecisse bonum. (...).
Chrysoft. in Matthew. ho^. and tom. 9. apanthism. 6. sive sermon. de virt. and vit.
Chrysostom well observes, not to do well.

6. For the crying sins that Mr. B. says accompany these Games. Do crying
sins accompany every lusorie Lot, the shuffling of arrows, for the siding
of shooters, or the drawing of pawnes for the leading at Chesse, etc? For the
Question is of any Lot at all used in disport; not of Cards or Dice alone. Or
do those crying sins arise from the Lot it self used in them? or not
accompany other Games, as bowls, and nine pins, etc. wherein no Lot is? Or
must all Lots be necessarily banished from all Game, because some Lot-games are
with many attended with such sins? But Mr. B. has no mind at all to keep
to the Question, or to come directly to that that he should deal with.

I. B. But here, perhaps, it may be said, The first Reason proving that a Lot
may be matter of recreation does give me a check. Is it a check? Then I will
try if I cannot avoid the Mate.


T. G. Mr. Bs. mirth here I let pass, that we may come to the purpose: and
set down my first Argument as it is in my Book.


The first Argument.
FIrst, that which may be ordinarily used in other T. G. of Lots, Cap. 4. Sect.
4. Argument. 1.
civil affairs, be they more weighty or of less weight, that may also be used
for matter of recreation and delight. But a Lot may be ordinarily used in other
civil affairs, as, by the express Prove. 18. 18.
authority of Gods spirit speaking by Solomon, for the ending of contentions,
and matters in suit or strife, be they weightier or of less weight: For the
words in the text are indefinite, neither is there ought to restrain the
ordinary use of them in that kind either there or elsewhere. The word used
there, though in its original propriety it signify (...)* sive -(...) a (...)
vel (...) iudicare.
Lawsuits; yet in the ordinary Prove. 6. 14. 19. and 10. 12. and 15. 18. and
16. 28. and 17. 14. and 18. 19. and 19. 13. and 21. 9. 19. and 22. 10. and 23.
29. and 25. 24. and 26. 20, 21. and 27. 15. and 28. 25. and 29. 22.
use of it, it extends it self to contentions of all kinds. And the
practice of Gods people recorded in Scripture shows that even mean matters
have been decided and determined usually by Lot: as in matter of Tithe, though
it were not much material, which Lamb the Leuite had, so that he had one of
ten, two of twenty, etc. yet was it decided Levit. 27. 32. and Iun. in annot.
by Lot. It was a matter of no great weight what gate of the Temple such or
such Levites should wait at; I say not, that it was a mean matter to be a
Porter in Gods house, (though Psalm. 84. 10. (...) ad limen residere. Leo Iud.
Limen freque^tare. Iun. objectus Vulg. ad locu^ communem and ignobilem rejici.
Calvin. be a doore-keeper. Angl. constant. Serum esse perpetuus, postiaffixus,
ut Exodus 21. 6. i. vilissima condition ibi agere, (...) quam alibi libere
agentem commorari. Inde enim (...) liber^as. Leyfield.
it seem to be mentioned as one of the meanest places of employment there;)
but whether company should wait at this gate, and whether at that other gate,
(as who should stand at the North door of the Church, and who at the South, to
receive peoples benevolence, upon occasion of some collection) was no matter of
great moment, and yet was that also decided 1 Paral. 26. 13, 14, etc.
by Lot. Neither was it greatly material which of the Priests offered Incense,
or which dressed the Lamps, etc. so it were done by some one of them: yet that
also went Luke 1. 9.
by Lot. Since that Lots therefore may lawfully be used in other ordinary
affairs, Gods word indefinitely warranting it, the same elsewhere not
restraining it, and the practice of the godly, carrying it even to mean
matters (for Parum itaque caute Martyr ad 1 Samuel c. 10. sortibus designabantur
Sacerdo^a.
the offices themselves were not put by them to Lot, but the distribution of
particular duties or stations among those of the same office) I see not what
should banish them out of our disports, more than out of other our (though
serious, yet) civil affairs.

The Argument collected with all faithfulness I. B. Answer.
(as the rest, and his answers be) is this.

That which may be ordinarily used in other civil affairs, be they more or
less weighty, may also be used for matter of recreation and delight. But a Lot
may be ordinarily used in other Civil affairs. Therefore I see not what
should banish it out of our disports, more than of other (though serious, yet)
civil affairs.

How faithfully Mr. B. has related mine Argument, T. G. Reply.
any eye that compares this his relation and it, may soon see. I say, A Lot
may be used ordinarily in other civil affairs, be they weighty or of less
weight, as my Proposition required that I should, and Mr. B. dealing as Matthew.
4. 6.
the Devil did with Scripture, when he tempted our Savior, clippeth away
those last words (for what purpose shall after appear) and relates thus mine
Assumption, But a Lot may be ordinarily used in other Civil affairs. If this
be all faithfulness, I know not what faithfulness is. Here is but a bad
beginning again, I am sure; and Grauius enim sub pietatis professione
peccatur. Salv. de provid. l. 4. c. 8.
the worse, because the contrary is so solemnly and so seriously professed. But
let us hear his Answer.

I. B. Is not this a fearful conclusion like the Tenent?


T. G. How timorous the Tenent is, has before been discussed. And if the
Conclusion here be no more timorous, it mattereth not much.


I. B. Why does not Mr. G. conclude positiuely thus? Therefore a Lot may be
used for matter of recreation and delight.


T. G. It is enough if the premises necessarily infer the Conclusion. Which,
what had it mattered, if it had wholly been omitted? as Matthew. 22. 32.
it is sometime with our Savior himself in his disputes. But it is (...).
Plut. de adulat.
the part of a bad pleader, as the Heathen man well observes, to leave the
maine matter, and trifle thus about terms.


I. B. He, forsooth, sees not. Can a blind man go stoutly on his way? But
(blessed be God) Mr. G. sees well, though not in this point. Bernardus non
vidit omnia.


T. G. A little over flowing of the gall, I fear, troubled Mr. B. when he was
about this employment. But what I see not, I hope, Namque homo, qui erranti
comiter ostendit viam, Quasi lumen de suo lumine accendit, facit: Nihilo ut
minus ipsi luceat, cum illi accenderit. Enn^us. Cic. offic l. 1.
he will show me, that sees better than I do in this business.


I. B. For if God had opened his eyes, he might have seen plainly, what
should banish a Lot out of disports more than out of other Civil affairs; to
wit, because God allows a Lot to be used in them, but not in these: and it is
presumption of set purpose to employ God but as it may stand with his pleasure.


T. G. 1. I marvel then why many others sharper sighted than Mr. G. and whose
eyes I doubt not but that God has opened as well as Mr. Bs, do not see it.

2. That God has allowed the one and not the other, will not for begging be
thus had. But what answer is there in all this to mine Argument? unless the
denying of the Conclusion be a legal kind of Answer.


I. B. Hereof more hereafter. In mean while, in further answer to this
Argument, I deny the Proposition thereof. For an Oath may be ordinarily used
in other Civil matters, yet not for matter of recreation. Whereof also more
hereafter.


Here Mr. B. shows why he curtailed and T. G.
cut off part of mine Assumption before, as Plutarch. in These^.
Procrustes did those that were too long for his bed; It was too long to serve
his turn, and that being cut off, he thought no more was said of a Lot in it,
than might well be said of an Oath. Now therefore for further Answer (having
given none at all before) either he denies, not my Proposition, but an other
of his own forging correspondent to the Assumption that before he had framed;
or else he brings an instance nothing at all to the purpose. My Proposition
is this as himself relates it, That which may be ordinarily used in other
Civil affairs, be they more or less weighty, may also be used for matter of
recreation and delight. This thus conceived Mr. B. denies, and that he may
seem to have some show of reason for this his denial, he adds, that an Oath
may be ordinarily used in other Civil matters, yet not for recreation. To let
pass a large liberty given here for Oaths, which if it had in such terms
slipped Mr. Gs. pen, he should soon have heard of it with a witness, as a
patron of, and a pleader for ordinary swearers; as if those places Matthew. 5.
34.
of our Savior and Iam. 5. 12.
S. James well known, did not precisely condemn Sit sermo vester, Matt. 5.
37. i. sermo familiaris and quotidianus, Piscat. sermo co^munis* Chemnit.
ordinary swearing. To let that pass, hoping that Mr. B. meant not amiss,
howsoever his words seem to sound. Unless he put in, be those civil affairs
weighty or less weighty, wherein he says an oath may be used, he says
nothing at all that concerns my Proposition: If he do, he directly crosses
Quod recte sic expressit Chemnit. harmon. c. 51. Pharisaeorum traditio erat, in
quibusvi^ casibus, in familiari sermon, and in co^munibus negotijs, recte and
sin^ peccato posse nomen Dei ad Iuramentum assumi. Contra Christus in
qu^tidianis and communibus colloquijs, negotijs and commercijs, etc. vult
omnino non esse nomen Dei ad juramentum assumendum: utpote quod ^am
sacro-sanctum nobis esse debeat, ut illud non nisi in regra^issima in
testimonium adhibeamus. Nam in re levine magnu^ qu. them virum in testem vocare
auderemus.
the doctrine of our Savior; and his own assertious elsewhere. Neither do I
believe that Mr. B. can give instance of any one particular that may be used
ordinarily in Civil affairs, be they more or less weighty, that may not be
used also in disport. If he or any other can produce any, I will relinquish
this Argument.


The second Argument.
SEcondly, if we consider aright the nature T. G. of Lots, Chap. 4. Sect. 5.
Argum. 2.
of a Lot, and the great uncertainty of it, we shall find it fittest for such
matters as are of least moment, and Sors est incertissima qua res gra^es
quaelibe^ no possunt (...). Baro ^on. c. 1. Non li^et uti in causis jud^ialibus
au^ (...), vel in obeu^is nego^* js (...)* ^el bellicis. Ibid. Ne^ imme ito
notatus a (...) Senato^ Romans quod (...) pridie (...) d^cta^ post^die
repud^asset. Suel. Tiber. c. 35.
not fit to be used in any weighty affair. In regard whereof, as those that
make use of it in serious matters, are wont, with all the Caution they can, so
to dispose of things beforehand, that it may not be material which way the
Lot light, or that as little, as may be, be left unto it: so where it may be
material and of some consequence whether it go the one way or the other, (I
say not now what the iniquity of others may enforce a man unto; a less
inconvenience is allowable for the avoiding of a greater;) there (...). Plato
de leg. lib. 6. Vise and quae supra c. 5. 5, 6. (...). Secr. apud. Xenoph.
(...).
will no wise man willingly put such a matter of weight to the uncertain
hazard of a Lot. That therefore that best sorteth with the nature of a Lot, may
a Lot most lawfully be used unto: but the lightest matters best sort with the
nature of a Lot: and therefore about things of that nature may a Lot most
lawfully be used.

Now I proceed to the second reason, which is set I. B. Answer.
down in two shapes.

The former is this:

That which best sorteth with the nature of a Lot, may a Lot most lawfully be
used unto. But the lightest matters best sort with the nature of a Lot.
Therefore about things of that nature may a Lot most lawfully be used.

The proposition he proves thus. Great is the uncertainty of a Lot. Therefore
not fit to be used in any weighty affair.

The former Argument was propounded unfaithfully; T. G. Reply.
this both unfaithfully and negligently. Unfaithfully, because diverse
enforcements of some branches are omitted, as by comparing mine and his may
appear: Negligently, because the proof of the Assumption is here said to be
the proof of the Proposition. Otherwise I acknowledge it indeed to contain
for the maine substance the matter of my principal Argument.

Mr. Bs. answer follows.

I. B. A Lot is taken sometimes for the instrument of purpose disposed unto
Casualtie, as [The Lot is cast Prou. 16. 33. 1 Samuel 14. 41.
into the Lap.] and sometime for the event, as [Giue a perfect Lot.] Which
howsoever it be casual in relation to the former, yet falls out certainly
this or that, by Gods whole disposing the former. Prove. 16. 33.

I therefore deny both the Proposition and Assumption, persuaded that Mr. G.
would never have set down this supposed reason, if a Lot in the former
acception had not drawn his religious eye from God as the only disposer
thereof to be a Lot in the latter acception.


T. G. Mr. B. here both distinguishes and denies. For his distinction. It is
true, that a Lot is taken sometime figuratively not for the casual event
applied to the deciding of some doubt, that which is properly a Lot, but for
the creature therein used. But what is this at all to mine Argument, that
deals nothing at all with a Lot in this latter sense.

For his denial he is very large in it, and I doubt, he scarce remembered well
what he denied. He denies both Proposition and Assumption.

The Proposition is this, as himself also propounds it, That which best
sorteth with the nature of a Lot, may a Lot most lawfully be used unto* Will
any man that has common sense, beside Mr. B. deny this Proposition, or
require a proof of it? If any do, I will for my part deal no more further
with such an one, than Contra principia negantem non est ulterius disputandum.
with one that denies principles.

The Assumption is this, The lightest matters best sort with the nature of a
Lot.

This Mr. B. denies too, and by denying it therefore, it seems his denial
is grounded upon his former distinction; which yet he seems to apply not to
the Proposition it self denied, but to the antecedent of the proof, to wit,
that a Lot is a matter of great uncertainty. To which he answers, that a Lot
in relation to the Creature used in it is casual; in relation to Gods whole
disposing the creature, Prou. 16. 33. (which place will come to be examined
hereafter in his due place) is certain. If his meaning be this, that it is
uncertain in regard of the Creature either using it or used in it, but
certain in regard of God in his providence disposing it, who either doubts
of the one, or denies the other? or what is said more of a Lot herein than is
true See my Book of Lots, Chap. 2. Sect. 7.
of any contingent Act, whether casual or other? But if his meaning be that
God does certainly ever dispose every Lot according to the nature of the thing
that is by it questioned; as that the better part in a division unequally made,
shall go with him that has the better right the office in an election, with
him that is fittest for it: or again, so that in the same case it shall ever
fall out the same still certainly, as if in dividing of commodities bought in
common, when for the parting of them the Lot has been cast once, and the one
party shall remain unsatisfied, suspecting or pretending that some fraud was
used in it, that upon the second or the third casting too, it shall still
certainly go the same way; If this I say, be his meaning, (as the one of these
two it must needs be, or else it is nothing to the purpose) experience it self
will soon confute him; and as to him therefore that denies the fire to be
hot, I will wish him only to thrust his finger into the flame, so to him that
shall deny a Lot to be of uncertain event, I will wish him only to make
trial of it.


I. B. So that I marvel much, that he finds a Lot to be not fit to be used
in any weighty affair. For why? Dividing the Land of promise, Number. 26. 55. by
Lot: discovering Achan, Josh. 14. Choosing a King, 1 Samuel 10. 20. 81. and of an
Apostle, Act. 1. 26. were they not weighty affairs? Nay rather the premises
considered, a Lot may more lawfully be used about weighty affairs.


T. G. Leaving and passing wholly by the inforcements before spoken of brought
for the strengthening of mine Antecedent, which he should rather have dealt
withal; nor denying the Consequence, which (...). Plato. Qui tacet, consentire
videtur. Bonif. 8. in 6. de Reg. Iur. c. 43.
he gives therefore as granted; Mr. B. here contrary to all rules of dispute
denies the Consequent, or in plainer terms, the Conclusion of mine Enthymem
or imperfect Syllogism: And by another Enthymem grounded on four instances,
endeavors to prove the direct contrary to it. His Argument is this:

The division of the land of promise, the discovery of Achan, the choosing of a
King, and an Apostle, all done by Lot, were weighty affairs.

Therefore a Lot may more lawfully be used about weighty affairs, than about
affairs of less weight.

For the Antecedent, I might well question one branch of it concerning the
division of the Land of Promise by Lot, of which also I have spoken Of Lots,
Chap. 4. Sect. 10. page 67, 68.
elsewhere at large, and to avoid prolixitie refer thither my Reader. Only
thus much for the present. Whether that Lot were ordinary and now imitable or
no, may be questioned. If it were done with respect to a former prophecy, and
with expectation that the seats of the several Tribes should by virtue of the
Lot fall out answerably thereunto, it was extraordinary, and not imitable now
of any without the like special ground. If it were done only to determine
which share each Tribe should have of the Land as equally as could be divided;
though the business it self, to wit, the dividing of the Land was weighty,
yet that which the Lot was to do in this business was it self of no great
weight; for it was not much material which part this or that Tribe had, when
little difference was between part and part; yea the less difference there
was, the less inequality there could be; the less inequality there could
be, the less weighty it was how the Lot went; again, the less danger of
inequality, the lawfuller the Lot, and consequently the less weighty the
event, the lawfuller still the Lot. So that this instance either is of the same
stamp with the other three, and must receive then the same answer with them;
or if it be of another kind, yet it confirms not the consequent, because
neither was that of much weight that the Lot was to do therein, nor will it
follow, A Lot was used once (yea say more than once) in a weighty affair;
therefore a Lot may more lawfully be used about weighty affairs, than it may
about those that are of less weight.

This premised for that branch of the Antecedent; I deny now Mr. Bs. not
Consequent, but Consequence. And that for two causes: 1. Because though it were
granted that the instances were to purpose, yet the Consequent will not
necessarily flow from thence; In such three cases and upon such occasions a Lot
was used in weighty affairs: therefore a Lot may more lawfully, etc. as
before. All that will follow; all granted that Mr. B. himself requires; is
but this, Therefore in weighty affairs sometimes a Lot is not unlawful; or
(for I had almost forgotten my self) the use of a Lot is lawful.

2. Because the instances are nothing to purpose, being of such Lots as were
extraordinary, and are not now imitable, as may appear by Mr. Bs. own grants
in the very next words to these. The Question is about the lawful use of a
Lot, that is, how and wherein we may lawfully use Lots, and whether in such
Lots as we may now lawfully use, the less weighty the matter be, the lawfuller
the Lot is. Now to disprove mine Affirmative herein, or to prove the contrary
thereunto, Mr. B. produces three Instances of Lots used in such cases, as none
lawfully now may use them in; in some whereof indeed, had not the Lot by an
extraordinary providence bin certainly directed, the event was in hazard to
have been of foul and fearful consequence, either some innocent condemned,
or some unfit person designed to a place of the highest moment. That these
examples are such, I have showed evidently Of Lots, chap. 10. sect. 3. and 5.
elsewhere, which Mr. B. ought to have taken notice of. Nor will any wise man,
I trow, be so absurd or senseless, as to imagine, that to find out a thief or
a murderer, or the like, a Lot may now be used, or that in choice of a King,
where the place is elective, a Lot may be cast upon the body of the State
without exception of any, as in Saul's case it was, for the settling of the
succession, lest it should fall out as it did Joseph. capt. l. 4. c. 12.
with the Jews, when they cast Lots for an High Priest, the Lot lighting upon
(...).
a most silly ignorant Ass. So that to reason on this wise is all one, the
very self-same, with this, Our Savior John 9. 6, 11.
Christ opened ones eyes with clay, matter fitter to put out than to open a
man's eyes. Therefore such matter as will rather put out than open a man's eye is
fitter to be used in the like case than any other. Or, A Lot was sometime used
by Gods special appointment in some weighty affairs wherein we may not now
lawfully use it: Therefore a Lot may more lawfully be used of us in weighty
affairs, than it may be in those that be of less weight.

But will you hear Mr. B. controlling himself, and overthrowing what he here
builds? Read me but his next words.


I. B. But indeed, whether the subject matter be more or less weighty, a Lot
may be used about it, provided it be with Gods allowance. For want whereof both
Diuinatorie and Lusorious Lots be equally unlawful.


T. G. 1. Had Mr. B. before put in as much as here he does, whether the subject
matter be more or less weighty, he had neither wronged mine Argument, and he
might easily have discovered much difference in this very point between the
use of a Lot, and the use of an Oath.

2. Are all Diuinatorie Lots unlawful? then are all those three examples
before alleged of Lots unto us at least wholly unlawful. For they were all
Diuinatorie, aiming at the discovery of that which no wit or skill of man was
able by any means to reach to: and by Mr. Bs. own ground and grant therefore
not now allowable. As for lusorie Lots, sub iudice lis est; it is the Question,
which Mr. B. too often beggeth.


Or more particularly for the present business: T. G. of Lots, ubi supra.
A matter of mere indifferency, that is, such as a man may lawfully either
do or not do, and it is not material whether he do or omit, such may a man
lawfully put either to the will of another, or to the hazard of the uncertain
motion of any creature whether he shall do it or not do it. But the using of
a Lot in game (or the using of it in any business, be it serious or lusorious,
qualified and cautioned as before) is but the putting of a matter of mere
indifferency to the hazard of an uncertain event, to wit, who shall join or
stand out, who shall lead or follow, who shall overcome or yield to the other
side, etc. which are matters merely indifferent, such as may without sin be
either done or forborne, either done the one way or the other. The use
therefore of a Lot in such cases, and the putting of such matters to the hazard
of a Lot, is not evil simply in it self.

The other shape of his Reason, more particularly I. B. Answer.
as he says, for the present business is this.

A matter of mere indifferency, that is, such as a man may lawfully do or
not do, and it is not material whether he do or omit, such may a man
lawfully put to the hazard of the uncertain motion of the Creature, whether he
shall do it or not do it. But the using of a Lot in Game is but the putting
of a matter of mere indifferency to the hazard of an uncertain event.
Therefore the putting of such matters to the hazard of a Lot is not evil
simply in it self.

T. G. Mr. B. cannot (it seems) for his life relate T. G. Reply.
any Argument of mine as he ought. For

1. Here in the Assumption he leaves out that that ought not to have been
omitted, to wit, of a Lot qualified and cautioned as before, without which mine
Assumption were indeed very false.

2. He mangleth my Conclusion, leaving out the very principal part of it, to
wit, Therefore the use of a Lot in such cases, etc. that he might find some
matter of exception against it.

But his exceptions to it follow.


I. B. What a trembling Argument is this?


T. G. I see, a man must be very peremptory that deals with Mr. B. or else
he shall be nothing worth. But I shall desire him to pardon me, if I be not so
peremptory, as he and some other are.

But wherein, think we, does this trembling and timorousness discover it
self?


I. B. In the Proposition he speaks of a Lot in the former acception. In the
Assumption, of a Lot in the latter acception. Indeed a man may be bolder with
the Creature, so it be without relation to God, than with the Creator himself.


T. G. What trembling argued this, if I did so? as indeed I do not. And Mr.
Bs. eyesight, it seems, failed him when he made this exception. For how can
I in the Proposition take a Lot either in this or that acception, when there is
no word at all of a Lot in it? as even Mr. B. himself relates it. In the
Assumption I speak of a Lot as it is ordinarily taken, and as himself out of
Lyra in effect defines it, for Mr. B. Dialog.
a variable event (or a casual rather) applied unto the deciding of some
doubt, which that it has any special relation to the Creator, more than any
other ordinary civil Actions have, is denied.


I. B. In the Proposition he affirms lawfulnes: but concludes only, as not
evil simply in themselves.


T. G. These (...). Occidit miseros crambe repetita legentes. Iuven. sat. 7.
twice sod Coleworts we had more than once served in before: nor deserve they
any answer.


I. B. Indeed the Conclusion is to follow the worse part. But in this Argument
the Assumption is particular, and the Conclusion is general.


T. G. The Assumption is, But the using of a Lot in game, or in any other
business serious or lusorious, qualified and cautioned as before, is, etc. And
the Conclusion, The use therefore of a Lot in such cases is, etc. And where
were Mr. Bs. wits (think we) then, when he writ this?


I. B. What? Is Mr. G. afraid to put (The using of a Lot in game) into the
Conclusion?


T. G. Mr. G. is not afraid to put it in; for he does it in effect. But Mr. B.
(who with all faithfulness, if you will believe him, relates Mr. Gs.
Arguments) cutteth it out himself in the relating of it, and then asks Mr.
G. why he puts it not in. If this be not childish, I know not what is. It is
like the Papists dealing with us, that clip the tongue of antiquity, and then
ask us why we do not or dare not allege it.


I. B. Is not the Minor to be the Subject, and the Mayor to be the Pradicate of
the Conclusion? I will not question the figure of this pretended Argument, if
Sub, prae, prima, will serve the turn. And though I find it in no mood, yet
will I answer the two fore-peeces thereof.


T. G. That part of the Minor and Mayor is to be so, I grant; and that I
suppose Mr. B. meant. And that it is so in mine Argument would have easily
appeared, if Mr. B. had related the Conclusion aright.

The Argument thus stands.

To put a matter of mere indifferency to be done or not done to the hazard of
the uncertain motion of any creature whether it shall be done or left undone,
is lawful.

But the using of a Lot in any business, be it serious or lusorious, so
qualified and cautioned as before, is no other than the putting of a matter of
such mere indifferency to the hazard of the creatures uncertain motion.

Therefore the use of a Lot in such cases, be the business serious or
lusorious, is not evil of it self, or, if Mr. B. will admit no other terms,
is lawful.

Thus is the Argument it self cleared against Mr. Bs. exceptions; let us hear
his further Answer to the two fore-peeces of it.


I. B. The former is not true, except Mr. G. understand a matter of mere
indifferency controuerted. For though such a matter may be the Subject matter
of a Controversy, yet a matter controuerted is the only subject matter of a
Lot; otherwise it is no Lot, as Mr. G. truly writes even in this case, p. 167.
If Mr. G. so understand, then there it some necessity of ending the
Controversy put to the determination of a Lot. And consequently it is not then
merely in the will of a man whether he shall do it, or not do it.


T. G. That I say there is no Lot, where no Controversy is, is untrue. I say
only, Where no question or Controversy is. For a question may be where a
Controversy is not. Since that a Controversy is properly Controversia, quando
de re quapiam controvertitur, vel lis aliqua instituitur.
a Question between two parties contending; and a Question therefore more
large than it. But unless some such controversy be about the matter of
indifferency to be done or not done, my former fore-peece, says Mr. B. it not
true. If it be then, belike it is. What Mr. B. would say, I know not. What he
does say is this: To put a matter of indifferency so to the hazard of an
uncertain event, in a matter of controversy is lawful. But, To put it to
hazard so out of matter of controversy, it is not lawful. The reason he
gives why it is lawful in the former, is because there is some necessity
then of ending the controversy put to the determination of a Lot, and
consequently it is not then merely in the will of man whether he shall do it,
or not do it. Where 1. Mr. B. is too busy with a Lot, when it is not at all
in the Proposition. 2. He presumes that wheresoever any Controversy is, there
cannot be but by Lot a determining of it. Which is so untrue, as that the
contrary rather is most true, that nothing may be decided by Lot, but that that
may by other means also be decided. 3. He misinterpreteth my words when I say
of a thing that may be done, as if they were meant of putting or not putting
the matter in question to the hazardous event, whereas my words are plain of
the doing or not doing the thing it self, which for the doing or not doing is
referred to that hazard. But if in any case it be lawful, that no way hurts
me.

The reason he renders why it is unlawful in the latter is, because such a
matter unless it be controuerted, cannot be the subject matter of a Lot; which
we have nothing yet to do withal. And the words therefore, as they are
untrue, nor do I any where so say, so they are altogether impertinent to the
present Proposition. Here is Mr. Bs. Argument: There can be no Lot where no
Controversy is. Therefore to put the question concerning a matter of
indifferency to the hazard of some casual event whether it shall be done or
not done, unless some controversy be about it, is unlawful. Both the
Antecedent is untrue; and the Consequence unsound. He might better have said,
Where no Controversy is, no Lot can be: therefore (supposing that to be true)
it is not possible for any man to put such a question to a Lot or to such a
casual event, as there is no Controversy of. For it is frivolous for one to
say, it is not lawful for a man to do that, which by his own grounds and
grants is impossible.


I. B. In the other piece I observe, that Mr. G. speaking of a Lot in the
second acception, supposes it to be uncertain. Which is begging the question,
for the reason given to his former shaped Argument.


T. G. I beg not any question; but dispute from the very definition of a Lot,
to wit, a casual, or as Dialog, ex Lyrano.
Mr. B. himself speaks, a various event, used for the deciding of some
doubt. The using, say I, of a Lot in game or otherwise where the thing
questioned is such as may be done or left undone, is the putting of a matter of
mere indifferency to the hazard of an uncertain event. Nor can any man that
denies not that definition, deny the truth of this proposition following
necessarily from it.


I. B. Neither is it true that if in game, a controversy (truly so termed) be
decided by a Lot, a matter then of mere indifferency is put to hazard.


T. G. Whether a controversy in game be by Lot ever decided, though there be
often, is not by me here questioned, nor does the strength of mine Argument
depend thereupon. But that a matter of indifferency is put to the hazard of a
Lot in every Lot so qualified, as I had before required, must needs be, when Of
Lots, chap. 5. sect. 4.
one of the Cautions there required is that the matter put to the hazard and
decision of a Lot be a thing indifferent. Yet it is against common sense to say
that the matters put to the hazard of a Lot in Game usually, (as who shall be
on this side and who on that, who shall have the precedencie at Tables or
Chesse, who shall have these and who those cards to make his Game with, and the
like) are not things merely indifferent. If they be such, and there be
controversy there-about, then by Mr. Bs. own grants, they may be put to the
hazard of a various event, that is in short, to a Lot, as himself defines it.
That they are such no man of reasonable understanding will deny; nor that
controversy may be about them in Game. It is lawful therefore by Mr. Bs.
grounds to use a Lot in Game about them.


I. B. But more hereof in my third Reply. In mean while consider, whether this
second shape be more particularly for the present business, so as to conclude
the Question than the former.


T. G. Indeed as Mr. B. had dismembered my Conclusion it was not: otherwise it
is.


I. B. And note, that in both these Shapes, only lightness and indifferency
of matters put to Lotterie are pressed as causes most justifying a Lot, yea so,
as that in the confirmation of his former shaped Arguments Proposition, be
positiuely affirms, that we shall find a Lot not fit to be used in a weighty
affair. If so, then weightinesse and necessity of matters controuerted make
Lotterie less lawful, if not altogether unlawful. But of that also more in
that Reply.


T. G. Albeit it be sufficient to carry my Cause, that the lightness of the
matters questioned be no plea sufficient against the use of a Lot; neither is
it at all pressed here in the latter shape, as he terms it: yet true it is
that I affirm the lightest matters to sort best with the nature of it, and
that it is not fit to be used in any weighty affair; to wit, where it is a
matter of weight and much consequence whether it fall this or that way. Which
neither say I alone, as my margin may there show; nor do I nakedly affirm
it, but add something to strengthen it: And Mr. B. though he have often again
and again carp^d at it, yet neither offreth he to refute it, nor takes notice
of the backing of it, but posteth it off still to a further place. Yea I
affirm now further, what Mr. B. in part hereupon infers, to wit, that the
weightinesse of the business, in regard of the event, makes Lotterie the
less lawful, nor to be condescended unto without very great necessity, and
to be used with far much more care and caution than were otherwise needful in
it. And I say therefore the less lawful in such case, because there must
needs be a fault either in the party so using it, or in those that urge the use
of it, when in such case it is condescended unto. The reason is evident. For if
the matter to be decided by Lot be weighty in regard of the event of it, then
must it needs be of great moment which way the Lot falls. If it be of great
moment which way the Lot falls, then as it may prove well if it fall the one
way, so it must needs produce much inconvenience if it fall out the other way,
and the more inconvenience, the weightier the thing is in regard of the event.
If it must needs then produce such inconvenience if it do fall that way, then
to put it to the hazard of falling that way, is to put the matter upon hazard
of such inconvenience. But to put the matter upon the hazard of a Lot, is to
put it upon hazard of falling that way, since that the Lot may fall out either
way, for ought they know that make use of it, or else it is no Lot; and
therefore to put such weighty matter to the decision of a Lot, is to put it
upon hazard of much inconvenience. Which to do (as some say of an Oath in some
cases) Aut malum est, aut a malo. Matthew. 5. 37. Non ait, qui amplus facit,
malus est; vel siquid sit amplius malum est: sed quod amplius est a malo est.
sed quaere cujus; and si non a malo jurantis, a malo est non credentis. i. a
malo est, quando sine justa causa offertur, illius ultro qui offert: a malo est
and quando exigitur, sed illius qui exigit. Aug. de verb. Ap. 28. A malo vel
proprio vel alieno. Ianse^. concord. Euang. c. 40. Ex bominum vitijs oritur,
quia simplicitatem non colunt. Calvin. harmon. Euang.
it either is evil, or it is of evil; it is evil in the party himself that
voluntarily does it, it is from evil in others, when a man is urged thereunto.
But for the further confirmation hereof, I refer the Reader to Of Lots, Chap.
5. Sect. 6.
that place, where I handle the Caution of Conuenience.

For matter of Indifferency, I wonder that Mr. B. dare except against it: And
I auow here confidently, without trembling and fearfulness, (which Mr. B. so
often lays in my dish) that nothing but what is indifferent may lawfully be put
unto the decision of a Lot. And I would know of Mr. B. whether he dare defend
that any either necessary duty, or act evil in it self, may lawfully be put
to the decision of a Lot, whether it shall be done or no. If he dare not
justify the putting of either to the decision of a Lot, he must needs grant
that indifferency (which here he sticks so much at) is a necessary
affection of such things as may lawfully be put thereunto. But of this at large
Of Lots, Chap. 5. Sect. 5.
in my first Caution; which Mr. B. ought to have taken notice of, and to have
answered if he could.

For Necessity, it is true, nor do I deny it, but that it may make some
Lotteries lawful to some, that for them otherwise to condescend unto were
utterly unlawful. As necessity to prevent a greater mischief, may make a man
yield to give his purse to a thief, Act. 27. 18, 19, 38. -Solet decidere jactu
Navita cum ventis; imitatus Castora, qui se Eunuchum ipse sacit, cupiens
evadere damno. Iuvenal. sat. 12.
or to cast his wares into the sea, which otherwise he ought not to do: So
necessity to prevent a far greater inconvenience may enforce a man to put the
losing of that to the hazard of a Lot which he has very good right to, and but
for the avoiding of such grievous inconvenience he might not lawfully depart
with, or put the loss of it to the hazard of a Lot. Nor is the Lot therefore
the more unlawful unto him either in regard of the Necessity, or of the
Inconvenience that thereupon may accrue, being yielded to to redeem a greater.
And yet well may the Lot it self in some sense be said truly, to be in regard
thereof the more unlawful, than if no such either necessity enforced, or
inconvenience accompanied it, because the use of it is not wholly free from
iniquity on some side. And this, I hope, will suffice, for the present, to
stay the minds of any impartial from entertaining a prejudice concerning my
Judgment delivered in this point; (which Mr. B. is so often snatching at, as if
it were a most senseless conceit, when indeed nothing is more evident, if it be
well weighed) until the time come that Mr. B. will vouch safe to deal indeed
with it, as Sed, Non semper feriet, quodcunque. minabitur arc^d Hor. art. poet.
An, Threatened persons we say, live long.
he tells us still and has told us often that he will.


The third Argument.
THirdly, if the use of Lots in game be of it self T. G. of Lots, Chap. 4.
Sect. 6. Argum. 3.
evil, then must it needs be a sin either against Piety in the first Table,
or against Charity in the second. For every moral evil must needs be a
(...). 1 Joan. 3. 4. (...). Romans 4. 15.
breach of Gods Law, the whole sum and substance whereof being comprised in
those Deuteronomy. 10. ^ december verba: sieve december edicta. Sic enim Est. 3. 15 and 4. 3.
and 8. 14. etc. (...)
ten Edicts of those Exodus 31. 18. Deuteronomy. 9. 10 and 10. 1.
two Tables, every breach thereof must of necessity be brought within compass
of the one of those twain, and so consequently convinced to be a branch either
of Impiety against the one, or of Iniquity against the other.

But the Use of Lots in game is not in it self, or of it self a sin either
against Piety, or against Charity.

To spend time and words in proving that the use of a Lot in game as it is a
Lot, is not against charity, as that it is no breach of charity for men to
draw Cuts or cast Arrows, who shall bowl or shoot first, were both
superfluous and ridiculous; superfluous, because it were to prove what no man
denies; ridiculous, because it were to confute what no wise man will anow. And
yet to charge a lusorious Lot with Impiety, has as little ground as the other.

For the manifesting hereof let thus much be considered, that all Impiety may
be referred to these Ezekiel. 22. 4. 26.
two heads, either the profaning of hallowed things, or the hallowing of
things profane: since it cannot be imagined how any Impiety should be
committed but either by denying holy things their due respect, or by giving the
same where it is not due. But lusorious Lots are not of themselves guilty in
either of these kinds. In the latter kind even their greatest adversaries
will clear them, there being no color to charge them with the hallowing of
ought that is not otherwise holy. And in the former kind they may be cleared
also by the grounds of Gods Law, to wit, from the profaning of ought that is
holy. For the thing used in them is a Lot: and nothing can be profaned by them
but what is used in them: (by Lots, I mean simply as they are Lots, for to
make Lots of holy things, as of parcels of Scripture, or of the Elements
consecrate in the Sacrament, etc. is not any thing concerning the nature of a
Lot, but an abuse cleaving to it in some particular men's practice of it, and
such as is to be severed therefore in this our discourse from it.) But a Lot is
no holy thing, either of it self and in it own nature, or by virtue of any
divine institution. For of these two sorts are all holy things whatsoever,
either they are holy of themselves and in their own nature, as Josh. 24. 19.
Esai. 6. 3. Psalm. 99. 5. 9.
God himself, and Psalm. 111. 9. and 99. 3.
his titles and attributes are, or else they come to be such, whereas in their
own nature they are not, by means of some special divine institution
sanctifying and seuering them to some holy use, as Number. 4. 5. 15. and 7. 89.
Levit. 16. 2.
the Arc, Exodus 29. 42, 43, 44. and 30. 25, 26, 29.
the Tabernacle, Psalm. 5. 7. and 11. 4. and 65. 4. and 68. 5.
the Temple, Genesis 2. 3. Exodus 20. 8, 11. and 31. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
the seventh day of the world before Christ, and Apoc. 1. 10. Act. 20. 7. 1
Cor. 16. 2.
the first day of the week since Christ. Now in neither of these respects can
a Lot be said to be holy, not of it self, or in it own nature, for it is
nothing else but any casual event applied to the determining or deciding of
some doubt: Where the matter of it, a mere casualtie, as it is a casualtie
having no holiness at all in it of it self (for Quod convenit tali, quatenus
tale, convenit omni tali.
then should all casualties in like manner be such) can much less gain or
procure any holiness to it self by any man's application of it to any end
whatsoever, much less by the applying of it to a profane or common end, be it
more or less weighty.

Neither is a Lot holy by any divine institution; since every such institution
must have warrant from some word; and there cannot be produced any word of
institution, whereby Lots are specially sanctified and set apart to such uses
as may bring them within the compass of things holy and sacred. If any
particular Lots have at some time been so used, that can no more impart
holiness to all Lots in general, than the religious use of John 2. 26, 31.
Ephesians. 5. 26.
water in Baptism, yea in the Matthew. 3. 16. Luke 3. 21.
Baptism of our Savior, and the sacred use of Matthew. 26. 26, 27, 28, 29. 1
Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
bread and wine in the Lords Supper can Vise Casaub. ad Baren. annal. ann. 31.
number. 19. contra Chrysostom. homil. de bapt. Chr. and Jacob. de Vitriac. c. 54.
make all water, or all bread and wine in general to be holy, and so
consequently debar men of the ordinary and common use of those creatures
either for the necessity of nature or for lawful delight.

Those therefore are amiss that allow Lots in game, and yet add for a
Caution, that great reverence and religiousnesse be used in the action; in
regard that Sancta sancte.
Holy things must be done in holy manner. For if Lots in general, even civil
as well as sacred, be holy things, they may in no case with no Caution be made
matter of sport and pastime, or of gamesome recreation; nor can the light use
of them be so corrected and qualified, but that it will-haue deadly poison even
in the heart and pith of it, not adhering or cleaving unto the bark or outside
of it only. But civil Lots are not such; and therefore the lusorious use of
them is not the profaning of any holy thing. And if neither the unhallowing of
any thing hallowed, nor the hallowing of any thing unhallowed, then can it not
be brought within compass of impiety or sin against the first Table* And if
it be cleared from all sin against the first Table, and be not charged by any
with any sin against the second Table; it must needs rest discharged of all
sin in general, and consequently be justified as agreeable to Gods word.

I proceed to his third Reason, p. 131. Which is this: I. B. Answer.


If the use of Lots in game be of it self evil, then must it needs be a sin
either against Piety in the first Table, or against Charity in the second.

But the use of Lots in game is not of it self a sin against either Piety or
Charity.

Therefore it must be justified as agreeable to Gods word.

The Assumption is proved thus:

No man auoweth the use of a Lot in Game (as it is a Lot) to be against
Charity: and a lusorious Lot is not the profaning of any thing hallowed by
any divine Institution, from the word, to any holy use. Therefore not against
Piety. Indeed if Lots be holy, they may in no case be made matter of sport.

I could wish that Mr. B. had dealt in this business T. G. Reply.
as fairly with me, as I have done with him: that he would have given me leave
at least Vt meis verbis sensum meum loquatur. Hieron. advers. error. Joan.
Hieros.
to tell my tale in mine own words. The best is, mine own Text before related
will help both to show what mine Arguments are, and how maimedly by Mr. B.
they are ever propounded. But to the point.

I. B. Here I observe one of the faults which I found in the latter shape of
the second Reason, to wit, The Conclusion contains more than the premises.
For the Conclusion says, A Lot in game is agreeable to Gods word, and then it
must be good of it self, which is more than not evil of it self. For that is
good of it self, for doing whereof there is either precept or permission in
Gods word, p. 137.


T. G. And, good Reader, be pleased to look back to what was before answered
to this frivolous exception. For I am even weary of these cole-worts served in
so often. And take along with thee, I pray thee, also Mr. Bs. sauce that he
sets on with them, (if thou find any more savor than I can in it) to
give them the better relish.


I. B. But to the Assumption and proof thereof I answer; That the use of a Lot
in Game is of it self a sin against Piety. For it profaneth a Lot hallowed
by divine institution from the word: as shall be manifested hereafter.


T. G. Well, till that hereafter come then, mine Argument stands good.


I. B. Yet here I think fit briefly to show two things. One is, That an Oath
is hallowed to make an holy use of the testifying presence of God. So a Lot is
hallowed to make an holy use of the determining presence of God. If Mr. G.
deny a Lot to be holy, except it have a more remote holy use: I say, He may as
well deny an Oath to be holy for that cause. More of this point in my second
Reply.


T. G. What Mr. B. means by all this I do not well understand: save that he
beggeth the Question pitifully, and applies nothing of all this at all to mine
Argument, or any part of it. Yet a word or two to it.

1. The Question is, utrum sit, and Mr. B. tells us here quorsum sit. The
Question is, whether Lots be hallowed or no: and Mr. B. tells us to what end
they be hallowed; (...). Aristot. metaphys. l. 2. c. 3. (...).
presupposing that, that being in question is to be proved.

2. He tells us that an Oath is hallowed: Quomodo sanctificetur quod per se
sanctum est? Hieron. ad Sun. and Fret. Sanctificatur enim quod ex non sancto
sanctum fit.
What needs it? It is (...). Cyril. Hieros. catech. mystag. Site itaque Aug.
de spir. and lit. c. 26. Aliter dicimus, Deus sanctificat sanctos suos, and,
Sanctificetur nomen tuum, nam illud ideo, quia ille sacit ips^ esse sanctos,
qui (...) erant sancti: hoc autem ideo, ut quod semper apud se sanctum est,
sanctum etiam ab hominibus habeatur.
holy of it own nature and in it self: as the very definition of it it self
will show. And a man may as well say, that prayer is hallowed to make an holy
use of the inuocating of the name of God, as that an Oath is hallowed to make
an holy use of the testifying presence of God; or rather of calling in the
testifying presence of God; if we regard the true nature of an Oath. But so is
not a Lot: they are nothing therefore alike.


I. B. The other is, That use of a Lot is against Piety, which is (I say not
[Not forbidden] but) [Not warranted] by the word. For it is without faith:
therefore a sin, yea impiety. So disputes Mr. G. against a diuinatorie Lot,
page 313. and so do I against a lusorious Lot.


T. G. Here we return to our old cole-worts again, which, I see, will still
be thrust upon us, and we must not refuse, unless we will seem to say nothing
to that that Mr. B. says to little purpose so often.

1. Here is the distinction revived again between not forbidden and
warranted. As if that were not warranted, that is not forbidden. Let Mr. B.
remember what he set us on, when he served in the same before in effect: Contra
quam Tertull. qui nulla ratione firma nixus negat, Bonum esse quicquid licet:
Et licita esse asserit, quae non sant bona: exhort. ad castit. Et, Bonum,
inquit, permitti non expectat. Ibid. Sed and idem ad Vxorem lib. 1. Quod
permittitur, non est bonum.
That is good for the doing whereof there is either precept or permission.
Hence I reason, Whatsoever is good is warranted; whatsoever is permitted is
good: whatsoever is not forbidden is permitted: whatsoever therefore is not
forbidden, is warranted. But observe what consequents will follow upon this
conceit of Mr. Bs. to wit, that Some things that are not evil, (for nothing is
evil, that is not forbidden) yet are not warrantable by Gods word: Some things
that are against no part of Gods Law; (for if they be against any part of it,
they are thereby forbidden) yet are sins; for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin; and whatsoever is not warranted, is not of faith. Here are strange
Positions, and new Divinity; and such it may be, as Mr. B. scarce dreamed of
when he delivered this: and yet (...). Aristot. l. 1. c. 2. and 3. Vno dato
absurdo caetera scquuntur.
follow they necessarily upon the same.

2. Mr. B. passing by, as his manner is, the proof of mine Assumption before
denied by him, disputes against the Conclusion, or the Proposition denied. But
let us hear his Argument:

That use of a Lot is against Piety, that is not warranted by the word. But the
use of a Lot in Game is not warranted by the word: Therefore it is against
piety.

The Assumption which he should prove especially, he proves not at all.

The Proposition, which indeed is unsound also, he proves sorily thus:

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, yea impiety. Whatsoever* is not warranted
by the word, is not of faith: Whatsoever therefore is not warranted by the
word, is against Piety. The Proposition taken in strict sense, as we dispute
here of Piety and Charity, the one comprehending the sum of the first Table
distinct from the second, and the other of the second Table distinct from the
first, is not true. Many things are done without faith, that is, without
warrant from the word, which yet are not offenses properly and directly against
the first Table. But the whole Syllogism granted nothing hurts me.

3. How I dispute against a Diuinatorie Lot, I have before showed. Let Mr. B.
prove his Assumption above of the one, as I have done of the other, and I will
yield him the lawfulness of them alike.


I. B. If then a lawful Lot be holy, it is, says Mr. G. in no case to be made
matter of sport.


T. G. What means this then here? can any man tell? Or how is this inferred
upon ought that went before? Or what if Mr. G. say so? What does that avail
Mr. B. unless he can prove it so to be? Hypothesis nihil ponit in esse.
A supposition, we say, gives no being to ought. Let Mr. B. assume, and make
good his Assumption; and all will soon be at an end.


I. B. Nay, I may make yet more advantage. For I may say; That maintaining the
use thereof in Gaming, as it is a Lot, by practice, much more by writing, is
against Charity, as well as against Piety. For so a weak brother is offended,
and consequently Christ sinned against, 1 Cor. 8. 11, 1^.
that brother being occasioned, by error of judgment, to stumble. I have this
reasoning from Mr. G. himself, p. 255.


T. G. Mr. B. I see, is half weary of his work, that gives still but a short
snatch at it, and then In via lassus quaerit diverticula. Hieron. ad Laeta^.
starting aside from it, Quod canis in Aegypto, bibit, and sugit: de Antonio
dictum Macrob. saturn. l. 2. c. 2. In illis siquidem regionibus constat canes
raptu Crocodilorum exterritos currere and bibere. Macrob.
as the Egyptian Dogs use to do, drinking in Nilus, runs out into
by-matters that nothing concern it.

The Question is, whether a Lot used in game, as it is a Lot, be against
Charity or no. Mr. B. proves it is, because some weak ones are thereby
scandalized, as if the use of every Lot in Game, whether in private, or in
presence of others, strong or weak, must needs of necessity ever scandalize
one or another; or as if the scandal, when such were either taken or given,
did not arise either from the inconsiderate act of the one, or the erroneous
conceit, caused it may be by Mr. B. of the other, or from both, and not from
the Nature of the Lot so used it self. By Mr. Bs. rule, to eat flesh as it is
flesh (to speak as he speaks) or to eat it upon such a day as it is such a
day, shall be against Charity, and of it self evil, because some, and not a
few, are at some time scandalized thereat.

But I have sinned against Charity by writing my Book. Mr. B. of all other
should not charge me therewith; for who sees not, that in this Cause he will
be deemed as In lite judex quisque corruptus sua est.
a party? He writes against the use of a Lot in Game, and thereby seeks to
possess men's minds with a superstitious conceit of it, which if another seek
to remove and ease men's minds of, he condemns them of breach of Charity,
sinning the mean while therein, though (I persuade my self) ignorantly, both
against Piety and Charity, and ministering thereby the cause of the scandal
himself. Yea, observe, I pray you, Mr. Bs. dealing in this business. He
seems in his Epistle Dedicatorie to be Whether I err or no; which yet I
would gladly understand. Epist. dedic. to Dialog.
doubtful whether he err or no, and affirms that he would be glad to
understand it, if he do. And yet no sooner is any man's mouth open to debate
the matter with him, but he cries out by and by, that they sin against
Charity, in offering to justify a lusorie Lot.

If it be indeed a breach of Charity to discover a gross error, and to
endeavor to remove a scandal, by satisfying the minds, and better informing
the judgments of those that are therefore scandalized because misinformed, I
then confess my self guilty herein. If not, let the blame lie on the heads of
those that at first caused the scandal, and of those that will Si de veritate
scandalum sumitur, utilius scandalum nasci permittitur, quam veritas
relinquatur. Aug. de lib. arb. Et Beda in decretal. de reg. Iur. c. 3.
causlesly take scandal at those that seek to remove it.


The fourth Argument.
A Fourth Argument may be taken from the benefit T. G. of Lots, Chap. 4. Sect.
7. Argum. 4.
of Christian liberty, by virtue whereof every Christian man has Libertatis
Christianae pars tertia, ut nulla rerum externarum per se indifferentium
religione coram Deo teneamur, quin ^as nunc usu^ (...), nunc omittere
indifferenter liceat: hujus cognitio si aberit, ^lla (...) js nestris quies,
nullus superstitionum futurus est ^inis: ^o de^um (...), ut super (...)
transversam incedere nefas ducatur. Calvin. instit. lib. 3. cap. 19 7.
a free use of all Gods good creatures to employ them unto such purposes as by
any Ipsa (...) (...) dotes satis demonstrant, quorsum and quatenus (...) (...).
Ibid. cap. 10. 2.
natural power they are enabled unto, within the bounds above mentioned. But
in these ordinary, civil and diuisorie Lots, be they serious or lu^orious,
the creatu^e is used to no other end or use, but what it has a natural power
unto, and Sortibus uti li^et in rebus potestati nostrae subditis. Krakevitz in
Ion. c. 1.
such as by the mutual consent and agreement of those that use it, it may be
enabled to effect. For it is in the natural power of the creature used to move
or to be moved diversely, and uncertainly in regard of those that make use of
it: and it is further in the power of it by their mutual agreement to
determine such matters as are ordinarily wont to be determined thereby. Which
therefore Sors non est mala nisi ex admixta irreligiositate, aut injustitia,
aut imprudentia. Cajet. sum. vit.
so long as the use of it is kept otherwise free from superstition and impiety,
or from injustice and dishonestie, ought no more to be exiled from a Christian
man's recreations, than any other creature or ordinance whatsoever that has any
natural power to delight and give contentment in that kind.

Now then with some comfort I proceed to the I. B. Answer.
fourth Argument, as Mr. G. calls it, p. 134.

By virtue of Christian liberty, every Christian man has a free use of all
Gods good creatures, to employ them unto such purposes as by any natural power
they are enabled unto.

But in lusorious Lots the creature is used to no other end or use, but what it
has a natural power unto, and such as by the mutual consent and agreement of
those that use it, it may be enabled to effect.

Therefore it is no more to be exiled from a Christian man's recreation, than
any other creature that has any power to delight.

With this Argument Mr. B. deals just as with T. G. Reply.
the first. He leaves out (that he may by that means find matter to work
upon) those words in the Proposition, within the bounds aboue-mentioned, that
is, so that the same be not either against Piety, or Charity, (which had been
in the former Argument insisted on;) or more particularly, as by way of further
explication I add after (which Mr. B. also omitteth) so that the same be kept
free from superstition and impiety, (in regard of the first Table) and from
injustice and dishonestie (in regard of the second.) So that the maine ground
of the Argument is this, that Genesis 1. 28, 29. and 9. 2, 3. Psalm. 8. 6, 7.
Man being by God made Lord of the inferior creatures; and that 1 Cor. 3. 21,
22, 23.
his right and interest in them being restored again to each Christian by his
interest in Christ, Hebr. 1. 2. Apoc. 21. 7.
the heir of all things, 1 Cor. 10. 23, 25, 26.
he has free liberty to use any of Gods good creatures to such ends and
purposes as by nature they are enabled unto, the same being within compass of
the bounds beforementioned.

True it is that Calvin from whom I take this Proposition, delivers it Ipsae
naturales rerum dotes satis demonstrant, quorsum and quatenus frui liceat.
Calvin. institut. l. 3. c. 10.. 2.
more indefinitely, and somewhat after that manner as Mr. B. here propounds:
as the Apostle also does the like in some places, where he says; 1 Cor. 6. 12.
and 10. 23. Vbi universales particulae non sunt in infinitu^ extendendae, quasi
liceat surari, scortari, etc. sed ad materiam subjectam restringendae. Chemnit.
harmon. Euang. c. 51. Omnis omniu^ creaturaru^ usus lege Dei non prohibitus
licite and sine peccato haberi potest. Morton. in 1 Cor. 6.
All things are lawful: and, Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure: and, Romans 14. 14.
I know, and am assured that nothing of it self is unclean, etc. But his
meaning ( Scriptum potius sequi, quam voluntatem scriptoris, calumnianus est.
Cic. pro Caecin.
which ought to be regarded) is apparent to be the same with that that I say;
and being so conceived, it is sound and true, and of good use for direction in
the warrantable use of the Creature. Neither do I suppose that Mr. B. will be
able to give any other good reason, why he may lawfully use starch for the
stifning of his band, or a flint and a steel to strike fire withal, or a spit
to roast his meat with, or cord to girt his bed with, or feathers to lie on, or
arrows to shoot with, etc. save this, that these Creatures have a natural
power thereunto; and God has vouchsafed us the use of his Creatures for such
purposes as by nature they are enabled unto, so that the same be conditioned as
was before said. But let us consider what Mr. B. obiecteth against this.

I. B. So general and eager is the pursuit after Liberty in this licentious
age, that a godly and charitable Christian, much more being a Minister, ought
to take great heed, that he occasion not any, much less too too many, 1 Pet.
2. 16.
to make liberty a cloak of naughtiness.


T. G. Such a godly, charitable, christian Minister as Mr. B. deciphereth here,
was Mr. Calvin, and one, I doubt not, wary of straining Christian liberty
beyond its due extent: and yet speaks he no otherwise than Mr. G. here does,
or rather not so cautelously as Mr. G. does; as the Margin shows, where his
own words are alleged.


I. B. But Mr. G. speaks of Christian liberty, not of licentiousness. Then
let us consider what he says. For both the premises of this Argument are
flatly to be denied.


T. G. When Mr. B. says, both the premises, his meaning is, not of mine
Argument, but of this Argument, that is, of his own, for the one of them, to
wit the Proposition, at least, as appears by the reason of his denial ann
exed.


I. B. For sundry good creatures have a natural power to impoison. But
Christian liberty gives us not free use thereof to impoison at pleasure.


T. G. Nor do I say, or Mr. Calvin mean that it does. It gives liberty to
use such creatures for impoisoning, where that use is free from such taint as
was formerly mentioned; as for the impoisoning, and (by impoisoning) destroying
of vermin, etc. But how does this instance touch my Proposition at all? As Mr.
B. propounds it peradventure it may. As I conceive it my self, I am sure, it
does not. Neither is my Proposition therefore denied, but an other of Mr. Bs.
own put in the room of it, nor any exception at all here taken to it. Let us
proceed to see what to the Assumption he says.


I. B. Neither is it true that any creature has a natural power to be a Lot,
no more than a stone has a natural power to be carried upward. For as a stone
is carried upward by a power that is without it: so all creatures are moved and
applied to be Lots by a power without them.


T. G. Albeit this be nothing to that that I say, for I say not, that the
creature has a natural power to be a Lot, but that the creature in such a Lot
is used to no other end or use, but what it has a natural power unto. Yet is
it most undoubtedly and undeniably true, that the creature that is used in a
Lot has a natural power to be made matter of a Lot; as a stone has a
natural power to be driven upward: else could not either of them by any Art or
humane power be effected with either, nor without some supernatural work. So
that to the Assumption also rightly understood here is nothing at all said.


I. B. God keep me from teaching that Christian liberty warranteth the
unlawful use of any Creature, whatsoever natural power it has to that use.


T. G. Nor is any such thing here taught, either by me, or Mr. Calvin either,
if his words be rightly understood.


I. B. If any Creature have any power to be a Lot, yet that power is not to be
used unto Lotterie, but in cases (whereof gaming is none) wherein God allows
such use thereof.


T. G. This is but a denial of the Conclusion; and a plain begging of the
point in Question: which is this, whether a Lot in game be (how, but by Gods
word?) allowable.


I. B. To the enforcing of the Conclusion by a supposed confirmation of the
Assumption, I say, it is a begging of the Question. For though a Dog having a
natural power to hunt, be not exiled from recreation: yet ought a Lotcreature
to be, for reasons given, and to be given, or rather defended hereafter.


T. G. What reason has been already given, we have seen; what will be, we
shall further then see, when it is. But mean while I would gladly understand
from Mr. B. (since he has pleased to propound this instance) what reason he
can give why a man may lawfully use an Hound or Spaniel to hunt with, other
than before of the like was rendered. As for the supposed confirmation of the
Assumption, what he understands thereby, I know not, unless he mean the
illustration of the Conclusion: which, by his instance, it seems, he does.
For to that that is brought indeed for the proof of it, here is not a word. So
that, neither is my Proposition touched, nor either the Assumption it self, or
the proof of it dealt with: the Conclusion only is denied; and the
illustration of it propounded as a confirmation of the Assumption, which it
has nothing to do with.


The fifth Argument.
A Fifth Argument may be drawn a concessis.
from the T. G. of Lots, Chap. 4. Sect. 8. Argum. 5.
grounds and grants even of those that oppose in this point; and may be framed
on this wise. Any thing indifferent is lawful matter of recreation: But
Lottery is a thing Videtur sortium usus inter adiaphora constitui. Greg. Tolos.
syntagm. lib. 34. c. 5.
indifferent: Lottery therefore may be made lawful matter of disport. The
Proposition is confirmed by their definition of recreation, to wit, Fennor of
recreat. rules spec.. 1.
Christian recreation is the exercise of some thing indifferent for the
necessary refreshing of body or mind.

The Assumption, namely, that Lottery is a thing in it own nature indifferent,
is thus proved likewise by their definition of things in nature indifferent.
Idem ibid.. 2. rule 1.
Indifferent in nature is that which is left free, so as we are not simply
commanded or forbidden to use it, but as we shall find it in Christian wisdom
beneficial or hurtful unto us. But such is Lotterie, or the use of Lots; not
simply commanded, (for Prove. 18. 18.
that of Solomon before alleged is rather a permission than a precept, or not
so much a commandment as an advice and counsel, commending that to us as a
wise and prudent course, not enioyning or imposing it as a duty necessary to be
done, seeing by other courses beside it such controversies may without sin be
composed as are there mentioned, and that effected often by other means without
a Lot, for which a Lot by Solomon is there allowed*) nor again any where
forbidden or condemned as evil in it self: by the former definition therefore
consequently indifferent, and so lawful matter of Christian recreation and
delight.

I. B. Now then to a fifth Argument a concessis, as Mr. G. I. B. Answer.
terms it, p. 135.

Any thing indifferent is lawful matter of recreation. But Lottery is a thing
indifferent. Lotterie therefore may be made lawful matter of disport.

The Proposition is confirmed by the words of Mr. Fennor. Christian, says he,
recreation is the exercise of some thing indifferent for the necessary
refreshing of body or mind.

The Assumption is also proved by Mr. Fennor.

Indifferent in nature is that which is left free, so as we are not simply
commanded or forbidden to use it. But such is Lotterie, says Mr. G. Not simply
commanded. For Prou. 18. 18. is rather a permission than a precept: or, Not so
much a commandment, as an advice commending that as a prudent course. Nor any
where forbidden as evil in it self.


This is indeed the effect and maine sum of T. G. Reply.
mine Argument, though some inforcements of it be omitted. Let us hear Mr. Bs.
answer.

I. B. Mr. Fennors book, from which these allegations be drawn, and from
whence I learned that Lots may not be used in sport, does prove that lusorious
Lots are forbidden, and therefore not indifferent. What help then has Mr. G.
from Mr. Fennors grants?


T. G. Much every way. For (...). Isidor. Pel. l. 2. ep. 228. (...). Greg. Naz.
de Spiritu Sancto.
no testimony is stronger than that that the adverse party gives against
himself. If the grounds granted by him that holds and labors to prove a
lusorious Lot unlawful, be of sufficient validity to prove them lawful and
allowable, it is a matter of no small moment. Else why does Mr. B. himself in
his Dialogue reason from Peter Martyrs grants against Peter Martyr?


I. B. And his own proofs help him as little.


T. G. I need none, when mine Adversary speaks enough for me.


I. B. For it is granted, that if Lotterie be either commanded or forbidden, it
is not indifferent. To pass by the former: only observing, that Mr. G. does
not absolutely deny it to be commanded, Proverb. 18. 18.


T. G. Though he do not deny absolutely, that it is at all commanded, yet he
does deny, that it is simply and absolutely commanded: For that that we are
advised to do rather than some other thing, that we are not simply enjoined;
which kind of iniunction An indifferent thing in nature, is that which is left
free, so as we are not simply commanded or forbidden to use it, etc. Fennor of
Recreat. rules spec. 1.
Mr. Fennor seuereth from things indifferent. And that which among many other
lawful courses is commended unto us, as behouefull and useful, is not
therefore either simply or absolutely enjoined, yea or at all, where such other
may be had.


I. B. I come to the other. I might here refer the Reader to my Dialogue, and
to my Reply, by which it will appear evidently, that a lusorious Lot is
forbidden, and therefore not indifferent.


T. G. How (...). Cic. ad Attic. l. 4. ep. 8.
evidently this will there appear, shall then appear, when the Reply comes
to be discussed. Mean while Mr. B. here denies only the Conclusion of my
Syllogism. For the second branch of the Assumption, to wit, that a Lot is a
thing simply forbidden, (which he would seem to deny, and should deny and
disprove if he did ought) he neither here opposes, nor in his Dialogue or
Reply, does he either defend, much less make good, but maintains the
contrary rather, that in some cases it is allowable, which it were not, if it
were simply forbidden, and so absolutely evil. The Argument therefore from Mr.
Fennor his Teachers grounds stands good, if his grounds at least be good.


I. B. But to speak a little more (generally) of things not indifferent,
because forbidden; I say, That is forbidden as well which is forbidden by just
consequence, as that which is expressly forbidden: As that is permitted as well
which is permitted by just consequence, as that which is expressly permitted.
Mr. G. affirms the latter, p. 137. and will not (I dare say) deny the
former. Again, The word of God is so perfect, that whatsoever it neither
commands, nor permits expressly or by just consequence, that is verily
forbidden. For all things, especially such as have relation to God, ought to
have some warrant from the word. If Mr. G. put me to prove this, I dare
undertake to prove it demonstratiuely. But I presume he will not. For in the
last mentioned page, he describes that to be indifferent, which is (at least)
permitted by the word. If a thing be not so much as permitted, it cannot be
lawful, and therefore not indifferent. Here I wish he would remember what he
writes, page 95. speaking of this word [Indifferent] as it is opposed to good
or evil, and she wing how some say that to be indifferent, which is neither
good nor evil, he determines the point thus. Nevertheless most true it is,
That no particular moral action, or, No action of the reasonable Creature
proceeding from reason, can possibly be so indifferent, but it must of
necessity be either conformable to the Rules of Gods holy word, or
disconformable thereunto. So that I wonder why Mr. G. should say here, Lotterie
in game is not any where forbidden as evil of it self? That is good of it
self which is either commanded or permitted, p. 137. Therefore that is evil
of it self that is forbidden.


T. G. Mr. B. having no more to say to the substance of mine Argument, falls
to quarrel again with some terms used in it. (...). Plato Phileb. (...).
Idem de leg. l. 6. (...). Idem Gorgia.
A good thing, they say, may do well twice or thrice. But (...). Pindar. Nem.
7.
such frivolous exceptions so frequently inculcated, and so tediously
prosecuted, cannot but tire the patientest Reader that is.

He maruelleth much (falling into his wonted vein of vain wonderment again)
why I should here say, that Lotterie in game is not simply forbidden as evil
of it self. I might well ask where I say it: not that I might not well so
say, but because I no where here say it. But as I said at first, if Mr. B.
might have the framing of my Arguments, they should iudiciously be framed. The
Minor should not be part of the Conclusion, as he speaks elsewhere; but the
whole Conclusion or the effect of it should be part of the Minor, or at least
of the proof of it. I say therefore in mine Assumption, or rather in the
proof of one part of it, not that Lotterie in game is this or that; (it
belongs to my Conclusion to tell what it is) but that Lotterie in general is
not simply forbidden ac evil of it self. And my reason (which I rendered of
the like before) why I speak so, is; because a thing though not evil simply
of it self, yet may be sometime forbidden in regard of some abuse necessarily
then annexed thereunto, or some other evil necessarily ensuing thereupon; and
may therefore though not simply and absolutely, yet in that respect and in such
case be forbidden. That is good of it self, that is commanded or permitted;
and yet by circumstances or manner of doing may be marred. And that is evil of
it self that is simply forbidden, so as by no manner of doing, it can be made
good. But that is not evil of it self, that Esai. 1. 11, 14. Dans legem mea
dixerat, quae vestra nunc dicit. Hieron. in Ezekiel. 5. Quia secundum libidmem
suam, non sec. religionem celebrando, sua j^m, non Dei fecerant. Tertull. ad
Marc. l. 2.
being of it self good is by evil handling of it marred. A man might well
wonder that any mean Christian, much more a grave Minister should wonder to
hear some things said to be forbidden as evil of or in themselves; or not be
able to distinguish between things simply evil of themselves, and things
evil in regard of some consequence only. I might here make use of that
School distinction, some things Prohibita quia mala, mala quia prohibita.
Angel. de Clav. sum. verb. Alea, and alij.
prohibited because simply evil, some things evil only because prohibited.
But of these things more than enough, unless they were more to our purpose
than they are.


I. B. It grieueth my soul to see what a wide door to lusorious Lotterie this
doctrine will make. For now Lot-mongers will chop Logic, and say, What if a
lusorious Lot be forbidden by just consequence, yet they are not forbidden as
evil in themselves, and therefore they are indifferent.


T. G. And it grieueth my soul to see Mr. B. to trifle so seriously or so
sadly rather, and (...). Cum larvis and umbris (...).
to fight thus with fearful shadows and fancies of his own framing. Where
reach I any on this wise to argue? Or what difference enfueth from ought I say
between that which is forbidden expressly, and that which by just consequence
is forbidden? That which is forbidden simply (...). Greg. Naz. de Spiritu
Sancto.
by just consequence, is simply evil; that which respectively, is so evil
only, and not otherwise. But what if no Gamester, but some honest and good
Christian being reproved by Mr. B. for holding two pawnes in his hands, and
bidding his Adversary choose to determine who shall lead, alleging all
Lot-games by just consequence to be condemned in Gods word; should tell him,
that though Lot-games may in some case or in some kind by just consequence be
forbidden, yet they are not forbidden simply or as evil in themselves, and
that they are therefore of themselves indifferent. I know not well, how Mr. B.
will be able to answer him. For to say that whatsoever is by just consequence
out of Gods word in any sort forbidden is simply and of it self evil, were
senseless. Since that nothing can be in any sort evil, otherwise than as it is
forbidden.


The sixth Argument.
Sixthly and lastly, that the use of Lots in Game is T. G. of Lots, Chap. 4.
Sect. 9. and 10. Argum. 6.
not against Gods word, but has sufficient warrant from it, may appear by
this Argument. Where the wisdom of God in his word has not determined the
matter, and the manner, or the other circumstances of a thing lawful in it
self, there they are left to man's discretion and wisdom. Else should we hang
ever in perpetual suspense, having no rule at all to direct us by in them. And
where they are left thus to man's discretion and wisdom, there is warrant
sufficient for any circumstance that man shall make choice of (the Magistrate
publicly to inioyne, or private persons to practice) that shall Quum Scriptura
generales legitimi vsus tradat regulas, secundum illas nobis limitandus est.
Calvin. institut. l. 3. c. 10.. 1.
not be against the general rules of Gods word concerning the same.

For the better conceiving of this point, it is to be considered, that for the
doing of every act, and the doing of it in this or that manner, if natural
reason will not of it self afford sufficient direction, there must be warrant
had out of Gods word: and a man must know that he has warrant thence, because
Romans 14. 23.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. I say, where natural reason does not of
it self afford sufficient direction; for the word is given us in moral
matters to supply the defects of it caused by our first Parents their fall; 1
Cor. 9. 7, 8. and 11. 13, 14. Ad natural Apostolus provocat. Tertull. de virg.
vel. Nec differt Scriptura quid an ratione consistat. Idem cor. mil.
neither does it abridge us of the help and Romans 2. 14, 15. Ipsa natura legis
est instar ignorantibu^ legem. Tertull. ad Marc. l. 5.
use of it for direction in such actions, but add a further and fuller help
thereunto.

First then for the act it self in general; that is of it self good and
lawful, and allowable by Gods Law, for the doing whereof there is either
precept or permission in Gods word, and that either direct and express, or
collected by just consequence: Deuteronomy. 5. 29, 32, 33. and 12. 32. Quod
praecipitur, imperatur: quod imperatur, necesse est fieri. Tertull. ad uxor. l
2. Vbi praeceptum, necessitas est servientis. Ibid.
if a precept, it is necessary and must be done; Deuteronomy. 12. 15, 20, 21, 22.
if permission only, it is indifferent and may be done or not done, as shall
seem good to the party whom it concerns.

Secondly, for the subject matter, the manner of it, and other such
circumstances, where they are by Gods word determined, there such only are
lawful as the word of God has enjoined.

Where they are not determined, there all such are lawful as the same word
Concessum videtur quod non prohibetur. Accurs. ad Cod. Just. l. 10. t. 1. l. 4.
does not forbid. In the former that rule holds, Matthew. 12. 30. Omnia sunt
prohibita, qu^ non reperiuatur concessa. Gloss. ad Dig. l. 47. t. 23. l. 3.
He that is not with me, is against me: in the latter that other, Luke 9. 50.
Omnia per legem sunt permissa, quae non inveniuntur prohibita. Gloss. ad D. l.
4. t. 6. l. 28.
He that is not against me, is with me. Thus for sacrifice and the place of it,
before it was determined, Deuteronomy. 12. 8, 9. Genesis 8. 20. and 12. 7. and 13. 18.
and 20. 25. and 26. 25. and 33. 20. Exodus 17. 15. and 24. 4.
it was lawful in any place, because no certain place was designed: but after
it was once determined, Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6, 11, 13, 14.
it was lawful in no place but that alone, that God had expressly thereunto
assigned. So for the Passover and other offerings, and the time and season of
either, the ordinary sacrifices (I mean the voluntary or free will offerings)
Lev. 1. 2, 3. and 2. 1. Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6, 26, 27.
might be offered at any time, because for them was no time determined: but
Exodus 12. 6. Number. 9. 13.
the Passover might be celebrated only at one time, because the time of it
was determined.

This would the rather be observed for the readier answering of some frivolous
objections made by some Separatists; What warrant, say they, have you to use
this or that form of prayer, or to pray upon a book? I answer; It is warrant
sufficient that Luke 18. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 1. 8.
we are enjoined to use prayer, and Matthew. 6. 9, 12. Act. 8. 22. 1 Ioh. 1. 9.
such kind of prayer, confession of sin, and supplication for pardon, etc. no
set form thereof determined; therefore any fit form warrantable: this form
that we use, not unfit otherwise; this form therefore allowable. And let a man
demand of one of them when he prays, what warrant he has to use that form
that he then uses, he can answer no otherwise; or if in effect otherwise, he
shall answer otherwise than well. So for a book; the means of help are not
determined; and this one among others; this therefore not unwarrantable. And if
one of them should be asked, how he proves it warrantable to use a printed
book to read on in the Church; he shall not be able to make other answer than
as before: for neither precept nor practice can be found in the word for the
use of a thing that was not known in those times wherein the word of God was
written.

But to apply this to the present. First, Eccles. 3. 4. Zech. 3. 10. and 8. 5.
Recreation in general is granted by all to have good warrant from Gods word,
as a thing both allowed by permission, and enjoined by precept, if not directly
and expressly, yet at least by just consequence: and therefore I will not stand
upon the proof of it.

Secondly, for the matter and manner of it, or the things wherewith we may
recreate our selves, Certum est in divinis literis nullam de ludis aut regula^
aut formam praescribi: quamvis in eis multa ludorum genera leguntur. Martyr in
Iud. c. 14.
there is nothing determined; any means therefore of recreation that are not
against the general Rules of Romans 13. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 40.
comeliness and decency, of 1 Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23. Romans 14. 21.
conueniencie and expediencie, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Coloss. 3. 17.
of religion and piety, and the like, are by the word of God allowed, and have
from thence sufficient warrant. For example; If question be whether Boules or
Chesse be lawful or no: what can there be said in justification o^ them more
than this, that recreation in general is by Gods word allowed; the matter of
it in particular not determined: these games not prohibited; therefore lawful
and allowable. Now the very same may be said of Lots and Lotterie. Game in
general is allowed: no particular matter or manner of it prescribed: any
therefore lawful that is not against the general rules of Gods word: this of
Lotterie such; and therefore allowable.

If any shall say, that the particular matter or manner of recreation is
determined, Affirmanti incumbit probatio. Paulus in Dig. lib. 22. tit. 3. leg.
2. Et Vlpian. ibid. leg. 22.
he must show where. Or if any shall say, that this particular by Lots is
against the general rules of Gods word otherwise, he must show which and how.
Otherwise there is no civil action almost that shall be justifiable, as
Hebraeis and Asiaticis omnibus ignotum and invsitatum id genus vestitus, decent
phrases illae lumbos acc^gendi, Exo. 12. 10. and pedes contegendi, Iud. 3. 24.
sed nec Romany in usu, quod Casaub. notat ad Suet. Iul.
going in doublet and hose, Et haec illis olim, and plaerisque Orientalibus
adhuc invsitata.
wearing band and cuffs, In zona siquidem olim gesta^utur pecumi^* Man* 10. 9.
Man. 6. 8.
carrying a man's purse in his pocket, A^ubitus priscus conviv^tium and (...)
gest. (...)* 26* 20* (...) Marc* 14. 18. (...). Luke 22. 14. (...)* Joan. 13.
23. (...).
sitting on a stool at the Table, crossing the water in a Boat when one may
go about by the Bridge, Olim v^tum. Levit* 11. 7* Deuteronomy. 14. 8. de qu^ Plut.
symp. l 4. q. 5. a Troskistis nostris renovatum.
eating of Porke, Et hoc olim prohibitum* Lev. 7. 26* and 17. 10. fed and ab
Arianis nostratibus ^uper re^catum*
bloudings or ought strangled, and the like, if it shall be deemed enough to
make an action unwarrantable, either because there is no particular precept or
precedent for it in Scripture, or because it is questioned or condemned by some
without any reason or sufficient cause rendered why it should be questioned and
condemned in that sort.

And so I conclude and leave this sixth and last reason, taken from the common
grounds of other ordinary recreations not questioned; which must all with this
either stand or fall; the selfe-fame grounds supporting either; that this
particular is not prohibited* nor is against the general rules of Gods word
otherwise; which as in the former; so in this case must stand good, till the
contrary can be proved.

Now to come to Mr. Gs. last Reason, which like I. B. Answer.
an Orator he amplifieth, to leave a deep impression behind. But let it be
well considered, as in it self, so whether it prove that the use of Lots in
Game is not against Gods word, but has sufficient warrant from it, as he
pretends in his introduction, p. 136.

What Rhetorical amplifications Mr. B. finds in T. G. Reply.
this Argument, those may well wonder, that know what Rhetorical
Amplifications are. But be it Logical or Rhetorical, hear, I pray you, not
it, but one that Mr. B. has put into the room of it.

I. B. It is this. Where the wisdom of God has not determined the subject
Matter, the Manner, and other Circumstances of a thing lawful in it self,
there all such are lawful as the word does not forbid; and as no Circumstance
that a man shall make choice of, shall be against the general Rules of the
word concerning the same.

But a Lot is a thing lawful in it self, and the Subject matter, manner, and
other Circumstances thereof are not determined by Gods word, nor against the
general rules.

Therefore a Lot in Game is not prohibited, nor is against the general rules
of Gods word otherwise.


T. G. He that should thus reason, were worthy either Ista siquidem, Non sani
esse hominis non sanus juret Orestes: ut Pers. sat. 3.
to be sent to Bedlem, or Vt curatoris egens a Praetore da^i. Hor. epist. 11.
to be begged in the Court of Wards. Quem recitas, meus est, ^ Fidentine,
lib^llus: Sed male dum rocitas, incipit isse ^us. Martial.
Nor is mine this, nor is this mine, unless I be out of my right wits. How
they differ (not to be ouer-tedious) may appear by my words, where having more
largely discoursed of and discussed the several parts of it, I thus briefly
recollect it: Game in general is allowed: no particular matter or manner of it
prescribed: any therefore lawful that is not against the general rules of
Gods word: this of Lotterie such; and therefore allowable. Where prefix Mr. Bs.
proposition, only so knit as it may hang a little more handsomely together,
turning, and as, into, so as, (which so framed I own) and you have two entire
Syllogismes, and the maine sum of mine Argument.


I. B. The Proposition he confirms:

First, touching a thing lawful in it self, by showing that Act to be lawful
in it self, which in Gods word is either commanded or permitted expressly, or
by just consequence.


T. G. This is an explication indeed of one term used in it: no confirmation
of the Proposition, nor so propounded.


I. B. Secondly, touching the manner, etc. by proving the rest of the
Proposition, which he endeavors to perform,

1. By the authority of Calvin.

2. By Luke 9. 50. 3. By a gloss. 4. By showing that the circumstance of time
for free will offerings being not determined, they might have been offered at
any time; and Sacrifices: might have been in any place before a certain place
was determined.


T. G. Mr. B. here makes me much more plentiful in proofs than I am: as
shall appear further in his Answer, and mine thereunto.


I. B. Thirdly, touching the doing of every Act, and the doing of it in this or
that manner, by showing, that if natural reason will not of it self afford
sufficient direction, then must warrant be had out of Gods word, because, Romans
14. ^3.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Which word is given us in moral matters to
supply the defect of it caused by our first Parents their fall. Neither does
the word abridge us of the help and use of natural reason for direction in
such actions.


T. G. This is indeed all alleged for the clearing of my Proposition* not for
the proof of any part.


I. B. The Assumption is thus proved. Recreation in general is warranted from
the word as permitted and enjoined, if not expressly yet by just consequence.
For the matter or manner, or the things wherewith we may recreate our selves,
there is nothing determined. Therefore any means that are not against the
general Rules of Comeliness, and decency, Romans 13. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 40. of
conueniencie and expediency, 1 Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23. Romans 14 21. of religion
and piety, 1 Cor. 16. 31. Coloss. 3. 17. and the like, are by the word of God
allowed.


T. G. This proof and the Assumption by Mr. B. before assigned me (to wit, But
a Lot is a thing lawful in it self, and the subject matter, manner, and other
Circumstances thereof are not determined by Gods word, nor against the general
Rules) hang together, as we say, like (...). Plut.
harp and harrow. He would make the world believe, that Mr. G. is a strange
man, that brings that to prove this.

But his Answer ensues.


I. B. I might, as did Alexander, loose Gordi^ns knot with one chop, and say,
The use of Lots in Game is forbidden in the word, referring my self to what I
have and shall write. But for better satisfaction, I will answer more
particularly, not doubting but that the Proverb may now prove true, viz. Prove.
10. 19.
In many words there cannot want iniquity.


T. G. Why does Mr. B. use so many words then ere he come to the matter? But
the Iniquity he means is on my part: let us see it. For here, it seems, is
the rank poison, the blasphemy that Mr. B. observed in my Book.


I. B. First, I observe fearful shifting, and then unsound arguing. The
former thus appears: He supposes the thing must be lawful in it self, and
disputes only about the subject matter, etc.


T. G. True, I presume Recreation to be lawful in general. Dare Mr. B. or any
man deny it? And yet I presume it not without proof neither. But you must
remember that Mr. B. here sighteth not with me or mine Argument, but f with a
man of straw of g Quomodo apud Romanos contra palum in terram desixum, tanquam
contra adversarium cum crate and clava, si^ tiro ^es dimicabant, ut quasi
praesentem adversarium, sic p^lum omni impetu, omni bellandi art tentarent.
Veget. de re mil^t. l. 1. c. 11. and l. 2. c. 23.
his own making. In his Assumption this is presumed of Lotterie: whereas I
presume it of recreation, not of it.


I. B. Again in the introduction he says; The use of Lots in game is not
against Gods word, but has sufficient warrant from it, which may imply this
position, That is against the word, which has not sufficient warrant from it.
But in the Proposition of the maine Argument his ground is, Such things are
lawful, which the word dot^ not forbid. Four of his confirmations, and his
Assumption are to that effect, or rather defect, and his Conclusion is
answerable. Is not this a fearful shifting course of reasoning?


T. G. This then, it seems, is one point of that fearful shifting that Mr.
B. charge me with. Concerning which enough has already been said; for this
is no new exception. And though the words be not thus generally propounded in
my Proposition, as Mr. B. himself propounds it: Yet there is no
contradiction between these two: since that Omnia licent, i. omnis omnium
creaturarum and rerum usus lege D^i non prohibitu^, licite and si^e peccato
h^beri p^test. Mor^on in 1 Cor. 6 12. quarumvis creaturaru^ and rerum usus lege
mor^li non prohibitus l^e, ^. sieve peccato (...) po^. s^. I Would in 1 Cor. 10. 23.
Whatsoever is not forbidden in Gods word, is by the same word warranted. What
proofs he dreameth of shall hereafter appear.


I. B. Touching the Proposition of his maine Argument, I marvel why Mr. G.
auouching such subject matter etc. to be lawful as are not forbidden, limiteth
this Assertion with these words (of a thing lawful in it self.) As if such a
thing may warrant our retchlesnesse in and about the subject matter etc. As if
God does not, according to the old saying, love Aduerbs. An Oath is a thing
lawful in it self. Are not we therefore to make conscience, that the subject
matter etc. be agreeable to the word of GOD? T. G.



I. B. Why I insert those words into mine Assertion, may easily appear to any
that will not wilfully shut his eyes: because my dispute is concerning
Recreation, a thing granted to be such, and the Question only about the
subject matter of it. And so far are my words from implying any such matter, as
Mr. B. here thence would infer, that I say in express terms, that As well
for the doing of every act, as for the doing of it in this or that manner there
must be warrant had out of Gods word Ista itaque sunt pali vulnera, ut Iuvenal.
sat. 6.
.

But I marvel much more at this ground, Such things are lawful as the word
does not forbid. I set it down thus, because the confirmations tend to make
this good, and so conclude. All things not prohibited are permitted: and
therefore the subject matter etc. of a thing lawful in it self. I marvel, I
say, because Mr. G. confirms a thing or act it self to be lawful in it
self, if it be in the word, either commanded, or permitted expressly, or by
just consequence. Which I acknowledge to be so clear a truth, that (me thinks)
Mr. G. cannot, but in proportion of reason, if he believe the word to be Psalm.
19. 7.
perfect 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
unto every good work, hold all things to be unlawful, which are not lawful
one of these two ways; and the rather because he peremptorily affirms, p.
95. All particular moral actions, be they never so indifferent, to be either
conformable or disconformable to Gods word; and, by particular actions he
means Actions clothed with circumstances, page 94. O that Mr. G. would hold
to this doctrine! Then should he thereby provoke all who make conscience of
their ways, and John 3. 21.
do truth (that is, do good works sincerely) to come to the light, that their
deeds might be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God. On the
contrary, if he bring not disciples, Isai. 8. 20.
to the Law and Testimony, by doctrine according to the word; but writh from
it, by teaching that to be lawful, which is not forbidden; as therein this
light fails, so thereby he shall make men careless to seek for their
warrant, and wilful Number. 15. 39.
to seek after their own heart and eyes, after which they go a whoring.


T. G. Here is a long and sore accusation; which might all well without any one
word more be answered, only by pointing the finger to what formerly was said.
But because Mr. B. so much presses me, I will entreat the Readers patience for
a little further discussion of what is here objected. All I say here is this,
that Where the circumstances of Actions in themselves lawful are not
determined in the word, all such are lawful as are not in the same word
forbidden, or as are not against the general rules of the said word of God
otherwise. And is it not strange that this Assertion should to Mr. B. seem so
strange? Or is this any writhing from the rule of Gods word? Yea but I cross
my self elsewhere in it. For I say elsewhere that such things are lawful as
are in Gods word either commanded or permitted either expressly or by just
consequence. I say so indeed: and what contradiction is there between these
two? For is not that by just consequence permitted, that is not prohibited?
Yea, (since we are come to these precise terms) that is, neither expressly nor
by just consequence prohibited? For I am sure Mr. B. will not deny that to be
prohibited, as well that is by just consequence prohibited, as that is
prohibited in express terms. Either Mr. B. then must give us some medium
between permission and non prohibition, or else these two positions will have
very friendly agreement. Yea but Mr. G. himself may seem to assign some when
he says, that in circumstances determined, there is no permission, though no
prohibition be of any other. I answer in a word, that the very stinting of an
action to those circumstances is a virtuall prohibition of all other not
expressed, albeit no exclusive particle in the iniunction be adjoined. For
example, when God bid Abraham Genesis 22. 2.
take Isaak and sacrifice him on an hill that he should show him: it was as
effectual a prohibition of sacrificing him in any other place but on an hill,
and on any other hill but that hill, as if God had said expressly (as he does of
the Jews sacrificing, Deuteronomy. 12. 13, 14.
in the place that I assign and not elsewhere) upon that hill, and upon no
other: And the reason is apparent; because that commandment could not be
fulfilled if any branch of it, whereof the precise place was one, were broken.
This is that then that I say, that where the circumstances of actions are
stinted, there those only that are enjoined in special are lawful: where
they are not, any are permitted, that are conformable to the general rules of
direction given in Gods word. Against which in this whole heap of words Mr. B.
brings nothing, but an other of mine own assertions, which no whit crosses
it, his well wishes only ( Somnia enim sunt haec Democriti optantis, non
docentis. Cic. Lucull.
which might well have been spared) set apart.


I. B. Well, let us examine his confirmations.

First Mr. Caluins testimony in English is this. [When the Scripture
delivers general rules of a lawful use, the use is to be limited according
to them.] From hence Mr. G. concludes that a man has a sufficient warrant for
any circumstance he shall make choice of, that is not against those rules. Mr.
Calvin speaks of an Use, and of an Use do we dispute. Mr. G. concludes a
circumstance. Mr. Calvin says, according. Mr. G. concludes, not against. Is
this sound arguing? T. G.



It is true that I quote a sentence of Mr. Caluins in the margin, as
concurring with me in one clause against which it is quoted. And I might ask
why Mr. B. did not take notice of him a little before as well as he here does.
But that I frame any Argument at all out of him, much less ground that I
deliver upon his or any other man's authority, is untrue. As for the
differences between him and me herein by Mr. B. here imagined, they are very
silly and frivolous. For first of all, does not the use of a thing consist in
the circumstances of it, as in the manner of using, and the like? Or what does
Calvin mean by the limiting of the use by those general rules, but the
assigning of it such circumstances as those rules give allowance of. Calvin.
institut. l. 3. c. 10.. 1.
Many, says he, take for granted, which yet I yield them not, that the our
liberty is by no qualification to be restrained, but that it is to be left to
every man's conscience, to usurp so much of it as to himself seems lawful.
I confess indeed that Nec debere nec posse conscientias statis praecisisque
legum formulis hic alligari.
men's consciences neither can nor ought to be tied herein to certain precise
forms of laws: but since that the Scripture delivers general Rules of the
lawful use of them, according to those is it to be limited of us. Where Mr.
Calvin says plainly, that for the use of Necessaria praesentis vitae
adminicula.
the outward necessaries of this life, (whereof recreation is one) there can no
special precise rules be given out of Gods word, but it is sufficient for them
that we be directed in the use of them by such general directions as the same
word does afford; which is all that I say. Yea he extends this Calvin. ibid.
cap. 19.. 7.
afterward to the very matter of our meat, drink and apparel, where he
falls upon the same point again.

Yea but Calvin says, according, and Mr. G. not against. Mr. B. is very
curious, that can Quaeris and in scirpo (soliti quod dicere) nodum. Ennius apud
Fest. Qui inimicus est, etiam in scirpo nodu^ quaerit. Hieron. ad error. Joan.
Hieros.
find a knot in a bulrush. If those general rules be not violated, are they
not observed? if there be nothing done against them, how are they violated? if
nothing then be done against them, they are undoubtedly observed. It is all one
therefore in effect to be according to them, and not against them; and Mr. Bs.
exception consequently idle.


I. B. Is the second confirmation from Luke 9. 50. much better? The words set
down by Mr. G. be these, [Hee that is not against me is with me.] This place
(forsooth) is a Rule holding in the Subject Matter, etc. determined. As these
words, [He that is not with me, is against me, Matthew. 12. 30.] is a rule in
the subiect-matter, etc. determined. Both a like in conceit. And why may not
Mr. Gs. conceit be the same touching things or actions? But let us see whether
the conceit be not a be misted fantasy. In the former place Christ's words
are occasioned by his Disciples their forbidding one who cast out Devils in
Christ's Name. Forbid him not, says Christ, for, He that is not against me is
with me. In the latter place Christ spoke those words upon occasion of the
Pharisees their opposition. So that consider the two sentences with their
occasions together, this indeed is the sum. All men are either with or
against Christ, for there be no Neutrals. So that those two sentences are like
these. He that is not a goat is a sheep; and he that is not a sheep is a
goat. But Mr. Gs. argument is this: All men who are not against Christ are with
him. Therefore circumstances not determined, nor forbidden, are lawful. Is this
sound arguing?


T. G. And where, I pray you, does Mr. G. argue on this manner? But Mr. B.
(...). Plut de Isid and Osirid. Nam quod elim Vitius Crispus, Ego ve^o ista non
dico. Quintil. instit. l. 5. c. 13.
frames me Arguments at his pleasure: And then pleases himself in finding
faults in them; as if their defects concerned me, and not rather himself, who
either must father them, or I know none else that will. For his exposition of
those places, to let pass what exception might well be taken thereunto,
because it is not to the purpose. It is untrue, that I produce them for
confirmation of ought that I had before delivered. I imply only that the
distinction I delivered (which may be extended also to things or actions, as
well as their circumstances; but my dispute now was of these) might in those
two Rules or Sentences be not unfitly conceived. And the truth is, I had a
notion in my head then of somewhat to that purpose, that in a learned Lord of
Saint Albans his considerations.
Noble-mans writings I had sometime read; which yet because I was not very
certain of, nor had I the Book by me then, I forbear then to cite. The
speeches are alleged as by him, so by me, not in way of Confirmation, but by
way of Illustration and Allusion; as if I should have said, That rule which in
another case our Savior gives, holds well here. A course not unusual, in
the writings of the learned and most religious. I allege them but as Romans
10. 18.
the Apostle does those Psalm. 19. 4.
words of the Psalmist; Their sound is gone through all the earth, and their
words unto the worlds ends. Concerning which, I dare not say as Jerome does
ouer-boldly on another occasion, that Aliter in suis locis, aliter in tuis
epistolis sonant. Videmus exempla captiva: servi erant tibi ad victoriam, quae
suis in voluminibus non dimicant. Hieron. apolog. pro libr. contr. Iovin.
the Texts alleged by the Apostle sound one way in their own places, and
another way in his allegations of them: because they are spoken of the (...),
uti loquitur Basil. Sell.
dumb creatures publishing Gods glory in the one place, of the Apostles
preaching Christ's Gospel in the other. They agree well and make good harmony,
since that the Apostle only alleges them by way of allusion, for illustration
of the matter that there he deals in, not by way of illation or inference,
for the confirmation of ought there delivered, or the concluding of ought from
thence. The like do I here. And Mr. B. may as well frame an Argument thus out
of the Apostles words, The Psalmist says, that the heavens preach Gods glory
to all the earth: therefore the Apostles have preached to the whole world: as
extract such an Argument as he does here out of my words.


I. B. The third Confirmation is from a gloss. Here I remember an old saying,
[A cursed gloss corrupts the Text.] Now let us see whether Mr. G. have any
blessing by this gloss. The words whereof in English be these, [All things
are permitted by Law, which are not found prohibited.] Note that it speaks of
things. Therefore it makes as well for Actions, as for Circumstances. Is this
Divinity? But what Law? If the civil Law, what is that to the point? Except
Mr. G. can prove the Civil Law to be a perfect Rule to us; and whatsoever it
permits to be allowed of God. Howsoever (I say) this course of fetching
proofs from any other Law than Gods Law is fitter for a Papist, who holds
unwritten verities (so called) to be a supplement to the Scriptures, thereby to
authorize Traditions of men, then for one Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
that fears God to walk in his ways. Is then this glossing sound arguing?


T. G. Or rather is all this any more than Mera vitiligatio, uti Cato olim.
Plin. praesat.
mere cauilling? To let Mr. Bs. grave notes upon this Gloss, and his serious
inferences upon the allegation of it pass, wherein he makes himself (...);
uti Aristoph. and Lucian. Jove Trag.
most ridiculous. All this ado is, because in the margin of my Book (which a
Scholar may make use of) I allege out of the Glossers of the Civil Law,
certain Rules that in their Law concur some with the one branch, some with
the other of the distinction I there use. It is but as if one handling some
point of Divinity about lawful and unlawful silence should say, In some
cases that Rule of the Canon Law holds* Qui tacet consentire videtur. Bonif.
in 6. de reg. jur. c. 43.
Silence is deemed as consent: in other cases that other Rule, Is qui tacet,
non satetur: sed nec utique negare videtur. Ibid. c. 44.
Silence is held no denial, and yet no consent neither: or determining how far
forth the desire goes for the deed, should say, In this case, that of the
Civil Law holds, Affectus tantum punitur sicut effectus. Cod. ad leg. Corn.
de Sicarijs.
The Affection is punished, though it take not effect: in that case it holds
not, but that other rather, Affectus non punitur, nisi sequatur effectus.
Digest. de Poenis.
The affection is not held faulty, if no effect follow. Which (forsooth) in Mr.
Bs. conceit must needs therefore be one ground of the truth maintained, or else
all is nothing worth. But he wanted better matter, it seems, to work upon.


I. B. Has the fourth Confirmation more validity in it than the rest? The
former three proofs speak not directly of Circumstances according to the
Proposition; (so does Mr. G. dispute ad idem) here he does.


T. G. How should I dispute ad idem, where I dispute not at all? And yet are
those ad idem, for that whereunto they are alleged. But Mr. B. now comes De
semita in viam. Plaut. Cas 3. 5.
out of the Margin into the Text again, wherein himself says I do dispute
to the purpose.


I. B. Here then I enquire. If the circumstances of Time and Place, be at the
pleasure of him that uses a thing lawful in it self, does it follow
thereupon, that the subject matter and manner be so too? If God allow any thing
to be done, of necessity there must be a time and place, when and where it
may be done. Even when and where there is just occasion of the Act. It is to be
observed, that as here, so in the Proposition it self Mr. G. slideth from the
subject matter, and manner, to circumstances only. Is not this fainting?


T. G. Or rather is not this fopperie? Mr. G. slideth from the subject matter
and manner to circumstances only, because he says in his Proposition, the
matter and the manner, or the other circumstances, meaning indeed the subject
matter, as Mr. B. also expounds me. For to omit that my words do not
necessarily make them both Circumstances, though I join that word with them;
Are not the subject matter and manner circumstances, that is, things about and
without the essence and substance of those things that they have reference
unto, as well as either Time or Place? If not, our Logicians are much amiss,
Materia in quae subjectum proprie dicitur adjuncta in se recipiens. Materia
circa quam proprie Objectum dicitur.i. subjectum adjuncta occupans. Dounam. in
Ram. Dial. l. 1. c. 6. Locus est subjectum rei locatae. Ram. Dial. l. 1. c. 10.
that refer the Place and the Subject matter both to one and the same Head.
For as for the manner, if it be not a circumstance, I know not what is.

But if it be true of these, says Mr. B. that they are at the pleasure of him
that uses a thing lawful in it self, does it follow thereupon that the other
are? Yea doubtless does it; what reason can either Mr. B. or any other show
why it should not, where they are left alike free; and the one is no more
stinted than the other. But who says, that time and place are left (either
wholly or generally) to the pleasure of him that uses a thing lawful in it
self? This is another of Mr. Bs. spirits or ghosts that he raises, to show
his skill in coniuring them down again.

Yea but Mr. B. can show you some difference between the one and the other.
For, If God allow a thing to be done, there must be time and place when and
where it may be done. And must there not be Subiect-matter and manner too? Or
must not a man have warrant as well for the one as for the other? Yes, says
Mr. B. for I hope he will not deny that. Well what warrant then? It may be
done when, and where there is just occasion of that act: and what is that, but
at any time and in any place where there is just occasion thereof offered? So
that Mr. B. denies not, but affirms the truth of that that I say concerning
some Circumstances; only he denies therefore that it follows concerning
some other, which he says are no Circumstances. Which whether they be or no,
it is not a pin matter, since that warrant from the word is required for the
one as well and as much as for the other.

But I leave this his frivolous (...), 1 Cor. 9. 26. Hodie multi soli adversus
aerem pugnis, armis, brach^js exercent se. Drus. proverb. 1. 3. 4.
beating the air: having only observed, how Mr. B. that was so diligent to
hook in out of the Margin whatsoever he thought he might with any the least
show of color, (though without any just occasion) be snarling at: yet passes
by all in the Text it self that I press, concerning the infinite
perplexities, yea and impossibility, which by instances I show, of making
particular actions good, or justifying of them against those that may question
them, that must needs ensue upon the denial hereof. Which I desire by the
impartial and judicious to be well weighed. What I bring not for confirmation,
that he says I do, and takes occasion thereby to deal with, and rather than
he will let it pass, he will step aside into the Margin to fetch it into the
Text: what I bring for confirmation, that he slippeth by, and lets alone, as
if he saw it not, though it lie full in his way, and he need not go far for
it, or as if at least, which I suppose rather, he had no list to see it.


I. B. Let us now proceed to that, which Mr. G. writes touching both the doing
of every Act, and the doing of it in this and that manner. Neither of which
needs warrant from the word, if natural reason of it self afford sufficient
direction. Good Lord! What fearful shifting from the word is here? But why
does he join the doing it self of an Act with the manner thereof? I Will tell
you: even to make a way to his Assumption. For if he stick close to that which
he teaches in immediate words, to wit, that an act it self is lawful in it
self, if in the word it be either commanded or permitted expressly or by just
consequence, he foreseeth, that it will be answered to the forepart of his
Assumption, that every Lot is not lawful in it self. Therefore he would
trouble the Readers head with a supposed direction therein of natural reason,
and that sufficient. I say supposed; for he shows no direction therein of
natural reason either sufficient or insufficient.


T. G. Mr. B. here begins to bless himself; as if indeed some evil Spirit
had appeared. This belike was the blasphemous matter that he met with in my
Book. But he must not think with such scar-bugs to carry it away. He has
not t babes and children only to deal with. His judicious (...). Xenoph.
Hellen. l. 4. (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. sermon. 43. Persona pueris deformis metum
facit. Sen. de constant. sap. c. 4. (...). Sed quae puelli formidant, rident
viri.
Readers will not be scared with such outcries, from scanning and discussing
the things questioned; howsoever some simple, or some partial ones may.

Before he comes to exagitate the blasphemous Assertion, to cast some dust in
his Readers eyes, and breed some prejudice of the adverse party: Verum caveat,
ne dum aliud studet notare culpae, ipse notetur calumniae. Hieron. adv. error.
Joan. Hieros.
he makes Mr. G. no better than a Iugler, who foreseeing the weakness of
some thing in the Assumption or second part of his Argument, labors with
other by-matter to trouble the Readers head beforehand, that the same may not
be discerned. And this was the cause, (as Mr. B. peremptorily tells you,
having discovered the mist that I cast before my Readers eyes, and knowing my
mind herein much better than I did or do my self) why I joined the doing it
self of an Act with the manner thereof; and why I tell him of a supposed
direction of natural reason. He had need of a long clew, that treads the
maze of this wild and intricate discourse. But that it may appear in a word
to the Reader, how sincerely Mr. B. herein demeaneth himself: What is it in
mine Assumption, that I made all this do about, for fear my Reader should
discover the unsoundness of it? Forsooth that A Lot is lawful in it self.
Which Proposition (though none of mine, and yet I deny it not neither) M. B.
to oppose tells us (in such language as I think no learned man beside
himself would use) that Every Lot is not lawful in it self. But let that
position be found in any part of mine Assumption, not as Mr. B. frames it, but
as it is in my Book, and I will freely confess the whole accusation, that to
this very end I did it whatsoever it was that Mr. B. here says I did; for I
understand not well what it is. If no such thing be in it, with what Conscience
can Mr. B. say so peremptorily, that I did I know not what to keep my Reader
from discerning that, or the default of that in it, that indeed is not there at
all? And thus having cleared my self from such finister intention, as Mr. B.
here charge me with, and I not only had not, but could not have: let us
proceed now to the point it self.


I. B. But let us with fear and trembling consider Mr. Gs. most strange
position, to wit, [Neither the doing of any act, nor the manner of doing
needs warrant from the word, if natural Reason of it self afford sufficient
direction.] Let us consider it, I say, together with his reason. For, says he,
the word is given us, in moral matters to supply the defect of natural
reason caused by our first parents their fall. Is it our best way then to seek
sufficient direction in moral matters from natural reason, before we consult
with God in his word? For the said direction is two times urged thus. I say,
where natural reason does not of it self afford sufficient direction. And
need not a man know, that he has warrant from Gods word, if in his persuasion
he have sufficient direction from natural reason? Does the Maxim of Gods
Spirit, quoted here by Mr. G. to wit, [What is not of faith is sin,]
intimate, that Romans 14. 23.
whatsoever is done by sufficient direction from natural reason is of faith?
Became natural reason only defective, and not corrupted also by our first
Parents Romans 8. 7.
their fall? O God have mercy upon us! For I see that the wisdom of the flesh
is enmity against thee: for it is not subject to thy Law, neither indeed can
be. But why do I vex my soul with this fearful doctrine, seeing Mr. Gs.
heart faints in the prosecution thereof? For at last he comes to say:
Neither does the word abridge us of the help and use of natural Reason for
direction in such actions. Here is some more authority (to wit, Of not
abridging us of the help, etc.) given to the word. For it does imply, that the
word might abridge us, etc. Therefore our most warrantable way is to be well
informed, when and how far the word does give us leave to use the direction of
natural reason in moral matters. If this be so, then the former strange
doctrine is contradicted, and I need not make any answer to the Scriptures
quoted in the Margent.


T. G. The strange and fearful Position, as Mr. B. conceiueth it, is this:
Neither the doing of any Act, nor the manner of doing needs warrant from the
word, if natural Reason of it self afford sufficient direction. Its this, as
I deliver it my self; For the doing of every act, and the doing of it in this
or that manner, if natural reason will not of it self afford sufficient
direction, there must be warrant had out of Gods word.

If the difference between these two be demanded; I answer:

First, Mr. Bs. Proposition may seem to imply, that in any Act whatsoever
sufficient direction may by natural Reason be afforded, (which I say not:) in
mine only, that in some kind and some cases there may. In the former manner
(it seems) Mr. B. pleased to propound it, to procure the greater prejudice to
that that I hold.

Again, (wherein the most material difference consists) it is one thing for
an action to have warrant from Gods word, (which I deny not but that every
action ought to have) and another thing to have that warrant taken immediately
out of it; as shall afterward appear. So that neither does Mr. B. here
faithfully relate what I say, nor do I affirm what he here relareth.

Yet for the point, as Mr. B. here propounds it, saving what he would seem
to imply in it, and burden me and my cause with the envy of; the Proposition
it self contains such an undeniable truth, as there is no man, I suppose,
endued with common sense, but will acknowledge it. For if Natural Reason of it
self afford sufficient direction, there need no further warrant from ought
else; since that it were not sufficient yet, if it needed ought else. And it
was even so with Adam in his original estate. If any truth undeniable then be
fearful and strange then this position peradventure may be such; but not else.

But for the point as I propound it; (for with that now I deal not) that for
the doing of every act, and the doing of it thus or thus, if natural reason
will not of it self afford sufficient direction, there must be warrant had out
of Gods word. If the question be demanded, why I speak in this manner, I
answer, because many things in this kind are so clear and evident even to
natural reason, that there can no doubt be made of them, or that they may
unanswerably and necessarily be thereby concluded; for which therefore a man
need not further warrant out of the word; not that the warrant of Gods word is
in any wise needless; but that a man may thereby be well assured, that it has
warrant in Gods word. For what is the word of God for moral things, but the
perfection of true Reason, and a Sum or Body of that Law of Nature at first
imprinted in man's soul? So that either it must be held that there are some
things in the Law of God not agreeable to Reason; or else it must needs follow,
that Gratia non destruit naturam, sed eam perficit. Nam subordinata no^
pugnant. Nec est contra naturam, sed supra naturam* Etenim Deus est author omnis
boni in natura, five sit secundum naturam, sive supra natural. Deus autem sibi
ipsi contrarius non est. Proinde nullus fidei articulus est contra rationem.
Adeoque quod est Philosophice verum, etiam verum est Theologice, and contra:
quia verum vero consonat. Alsted. system. Theolog. l. 1. c. ^.
whatsoever is agreeable to the rules and grounds of true Reason, is agreeable
likewise to the Law of God: since that true Reason cannot possibly cross it
self, nor swerue or disagree in ought from it self. To say therefore that for
the doing of every Act, and the doing of it thus or thus, if natural Reason
will not of it self afford sufficient direction, there must be warrant had out
of Gods word: it is all one as to say, In proving of points in controversy
between the Papists and us by Authorities, if a man be not very sure that his
memory fail him not, he must have recourse to his Books. Which when a man
says, his meaning is not that he may allege ought that is not in the Books
whence he alleges it, but that if the allegations be so fresh and so firm in
his memory, that he is well assured thereof, he need not make further search
into his Books for it. Or to come nearer home, to say, In moral things, as
well for every thing that a man does, as for the manner of doing it, if the
word of God elsewhere afford not sufficient direction, there must be warrant
had out of the Decalogue. Which speech should not argue that any action may be
done of us, that we have no ground for in Gods Law: but that if we can find
ground for it in any other part of Gods word, we may thereby be sure that it
has undoubted ground there. To the Reason that I adioyne taken from the end of
the word, given in moral matters to supply the defect of natural Reason, etc.
Mr. B. answers nothing at all; but asks only, if it be our best way to
seek sufficient direction from natural Reason, before we consult with God in
his word. No. Who says it? But yet sometimes natural Reason affords grounds
more readily without seeking, than the word does. And it is a certain truth,
that Mr. Hooker of Eccles. Polity, lib. 2. sect. 8.
a Reverend Divine has, that In every action of common life (yea in many of
them, say I, whereof no doubt or question is made by any) to find out some
sentence clearly and infallibly setting before our eyes what we ought to do,
seem we in Scripture never so expert, would trouble us more than we are aware.

To reflect upon our former instance concerning the Decalogue, who doubts but
that all a man's actions ought to be grounded upon it, since that they are all
lawful or unlawful so far forth as they are either consonant unto or
dissonant from that that is therein contained. Yet how many actions are there,
the lawfulness whereof may be demonstrated much more readily from some other,
either proofs of Scripture, or grounds in Nature, than from any Branch of it?
Yea in resolution of doubts, how often do the Read Mr. Perkins his Cases of
Conscience, his Treatise of Callings, etc.
best and religiousest Divines resolve Cases of Conscience concerning Civil
actions, by grounds of Reason, without allegation of any Scripture?

Yea but, says Mr. B. need not a man know that he has warrant from Gods word,
if in his persuasion he have sufficient direction from natural Reason? How
does this follow from ought that I say? If it do not, as it does not, I might
well return it to Mr. B. and request him to return an answer to it himself.
But I answer: If he be sure he has, he may thereby know it, and need not
therefore in that regard to seek further for it, save for the further
strengthening of his faith, if some doubt should arise of it. If he be falsely
persuaded of it, the case is all one, concerning direct warrant from the word.
For be he falsely persuaded of sufficient direction either from natural Reason,
or the written word, Conscientia siquidem (...) non excusat.
he has just cause to look further, though he be not aware of it.

But does that Maxim, What is not of faith is (...), intimate, that whatsoever
is done by sufficient direction from natural Reason is of Faith? Here is a new
quare, that I am not bound to answer. Nor do I, as Mr. B. would intimate,
deduce any such thing from thence. Yet I say, that whatsoever is so done (...)
of faith: because whatsoever is so done, as before was showed, has sufficient
warrant from the word.

Yea but natural Reason is not defective only, but corrupted also. What then?
Is it so utterly defaced that there is nothing left of it, that a man can have
any certainty at all of? (...). Epic^et. Arian. dissert. l. 2. c. 20. Oculos by
nobis effodiunt. Si Protagorae credimus, nihil in natura rerum est nisi dubium.
Si Nausiphani, hoc unum certum est nihil esse certi. Non facile dix erim, utrum
magis irascar illis, qui nos nihil scire voluerunt; an illis qui ne hoc quidem
nobis reliquerunt, nihil scire, Sen. epist. 88.
No Sect of Philosophers was ever held more absurd, than those that held that
men had no certain knowledge of any thing. For moral grounds it seems Mr.
B. holds the same with them: at least without holding so, that that he
holds here cannot be vpheld. For if natural reason be so corrupted by the
fall of our first Parents, that nothing can certainly be from thence concluded
concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of ought, then it is certain that
there is no certain knowledge of ought in that kind; and nothing is certain
therein, but that all things are utterly and universally uncertain. That
Hooker eccles. polit. lib. 2. sect. 8.
reverend Divine before mentioned, has not amiss observed, what infinite
perplexities, doubts, and scrupulosities will arise in men's minds, and what
stops and rubs will be cast into the course of men's lives, with the weaker and
simpler sort especially, concerning their ordinary and civil affairs, if
this light be suppressed, and men should ever be constrained, though it burnt
never so clearly, yet not to proceed by it in ought, till they had solemn
access still unto the written word, and fetched light from some particular
sentence in it, for the further confirmation of them therein. But I add
further; since that the most of men's particular actions, which they must have
ground for being infinite, are not expressly and precisely in the written word
specified, and must therefore have their warrant by consequences deducted from
it, in which deduction, sometime So Mat. 22. 32. Galat. 3. 15, 17. 1 Cor. 9. 9,
10. Romans 4. 3, 4. and 3. 10, 19, 20. Hebr. 8. 13.
a natural principle is joined with a testimony of Scripture for the
concluding of the thing questioned, and though So Gal. 3. 11, 12. Heb. 1. 4, 7,
8, 13, 14.
two places of Scripture be produced for it, which being in a Syllogisticall
form joined together, may truly and infallibly conclude the point questioned,
yet it is Vise Keckerman. praecogn. Logic. tract. 1. and in system. Logic. lib.
2. and 3. passim.
natural Reason that must judge of the force and strength of the Argument;
take we all certainty of judicature from natural Reason in such cases, and we
shall have no certainty left of the lawfulness of ought, that is not in
express terms comprised in Scripture. I might well add, that by this Mr. Bs.
manner of reasoning, an utter uncertainty might be concluded even of all things
contained in Scripture; at least to those that do not exactly understand the
Originals: For if this Inference be sound, Natural Reason is in part defective
and corrupted: and therefore it cannot certainly inform us of ought: This must
also of necessity be allowed for a good Consequence; All Translations of
Scripture are in part defective and corrupt: therefore nothing can certainly be
learned out of them. Yea, Every man's skill in the Originals is in part
defective and corrupt; and therefore no man can certainly gather ought thence.
Let Mr. B. therefore, who professes to have his soul so much vexed with the
fearful doctrine that I here deliver, take heed lest by that that he here
maintains, he vex the soul and perplex the conscience of many a scrupulous
Christian, and ensnarle them thereby in such inextricable difficulties, as he
shall never be able with all the skill he has to unwind them out of again.

But he finds me at last fainting and contradicting my self: and therefore
all is now almost well again. And wherein? Forsooth, because I affirm that
the word does not abridge us of the help and use of natural Reason for
direction in such Actions. And how does this contradict (for I thought it had
confirmed) that which before I had delivered? Mr. B. will make it clear unto
you.

For first when I affirm that the word does not abridge us, I do imply that
it might abridge us, of such help. Is not this think you a strange Inference?
As if when we say against Act. 17. 18.
the Stoics, that Affectus gratia moderatur, non aufert. Stultique erant
Stoici, qui in eo toti erant, ut affectus omnes perimerent. Pet. Martyr in 2.
Sam. 13. Facessat ergo inhumana illa philosophia, quae obtinere non potest,
nisi hominem sensibus omnibus sp^liatum in stipitem redegerit. Calvin. instit.
l. 3. c. 10. Quis (...) illa^ ubi nullus animu^ tangit affectus, stuporem
immanem, qui nullo prorsus erigatur and excitetur, nullo flectatur atque
inclinetur affectu, non omnibus vi^ijs judicet esse pejorem? Aug. de civil. l.
14. c. 9.
Grace does not strip men of humane affections; nor make them stocks and
stones; we do thereby imply, that Grace might strip them of it, and make mere
blocks of them: As much to say, as that it might work against it self, and
the word work against that end for which it was given. But this is too too
senseless.

Secondly, therefore our most warrantable way must then be to be well informed,
when and how far the word gives us leave to use it. How follows this upon
ought that I say, unless this be a good consequence, Gods word does not
abridge us; Therefore it is the best way to be well informed, when and how far
it does. But to omit, that to say, that It is the warrantablest course to be
well informed when and how far forth Gods word in matters concerning the Law of
Nature, (for the Romans 2. 14, 15.
Moral Law is no other) gives us liberty to make use of true reason: Is as
much as to say, that it is the warrantablest way to be well informed how far
forth Gods word warranteth us to use Logic in scanning of moral matters, or
how far forth it gives us leave to be reasonable creatures. Let Mr. B. have
what he would: what follows hereupon? Why? If that be so then is my strange
doctrine thereby contradicted. Which way, think we? Mark the Consequence;
(though the Antecedent also follow not upon ought that I say:) It is the best
way for us to know how the word gives liberty to use this direction. Therefore
there is no use of it for direction at all in this kind. Nay rather, therefore
there is some use even in this kind of it; or else to what end is it to labor
to be informed, when and how far forth, of that that is not at all. Whether
does this contradict now M. B. or me? Judge, Reader.

But that which best is, Mr. B. hereby takes occasion to ouer-slip whatsoever
my margin here affords for the confirmation of mine opinion in this Point.
How fitly, you shall see, if you observe how it follows. Mr. G. says, The
word abbridgeth us not of direction hereby: therefore it may abridge: and
therefore it is best to be informed how it abridgeth: and therefore Mr. Gs.
doctrine is contradicted: and therefore I need answer none of his Arguments.
Here are strange Ergoes. But where one has no list to do a thing, a small
matter will serve to withold him. Mr. B. that was a little before so* curious
in this Argument to pull in by head and ears every marginall note, though
containing no matter of proof, and drawn out of the Civil Code; is easily
induced here to let pass the marginall quotations, where they contain matter
of confirmation, though extracted out of holy writ. But yet by his leave, thou
shall have them; and judge when thou have them, whether Mr. B. had need to have
answered them or no.

First then, for the Point it self that I here hold; it is neither new nor
strange. It is all one, says Tertull. de coron. milit.
Tertullian, whether a point be proved by Scripture or by Reason: thereby
implying that what was allowable by the one, was warrantable also by the other.

Secondly, for the proof of it, we have it both from the practice and the
doctrine of the Apostle Paul. First for his practice; Idem de virg. veland.
The Apostle, says Tertullian, appealeth unto Nature. 1 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
Does not Nature, says he, teach you? speaking of some comely and uncomely
habits: as (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 26.
by Nature both the comeliness, and consequently the warrantablenesse of the
one being justified; and the uncomeliness, and consequently also the
vnwarrantablenesse of the other by the same also sufficiently detected. And
again, pleading to the Corinthians for the maintenance of the Ministry, 1
Cor. 9. 7, 8.
he uses reasons drawn from the light of natural reason in the first place;
which yet it seems Mr. B. would control him for, if any other should now do.

Again, Nature it self, says Tertull. adv. Marc. l. b. 5.
Tertullian, is in stead of the Law to those that are ignorant of it. Romans 2.
14, 15.
When the Gentiles, says the Apostle, which have not the Law, yet do by
Nature the things contained in the Law, they having not the Law are a Law to
themselves. Which show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their
Consciences also bearing witness, and their cogitations (...) alternati^. Vet.
Inter sese. Quomodo Virg. Illi inter sese multa vi brachia tollunt. P. scat.
interchangeably excusing and accusing. And surely, if the Law of Nature
written in man's heart be the very same so far forth as it is yet undefaced,
with the Law of God revealed in the word: Then whatsoever by just consequence
of Reason may be deduced from the grounds yet in Nature remaining of the one,
may be certainly known to be agreeable also unto the other.

And thus we have at length got out of this intricate Labyrinth which Mr. B.
has drawn or rather withdrawn us into. If the Point were so perilous, as he
here pretends, and it vexed his soul in such manner as he here professes,
it had been a charitable work, I deem, both to me and himself, to have let
me seen it before this, especially so instantly requiring the same, and so to
have freed his soul sooner from this grievous vexation. But for the Point it
self; Ador^ Scripturae plenitudinem. Tertull. adv. Hermoge^.
I adore, with Tertullian, the plenitude of Gods word, as much as Mr. B. or any
other man does. I acknowledge it with Chrysostom, and Augustine, to be (...).
Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. hom. 13.
a most perfect and absolute Rule, In his quae aperte posita sunt in Scriptura
inveniuntur illa omnia, quae co^tinent fidem moresque vivendi. Aug. de doctr.
Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
containing in it all things necessary unto faith and good life. I should
grieve at the heart to have uttered the least tittle that should tend to the
derogation either of it, or ought in it. If Reprehe^ures enim non audio; sequor
magistros. Hieron. apolog. prolib. in Iovin.
I may be showed that I have so done in ought, I will readily recant it.
Concerning this Point in particular, (besides those that viewed the whole
work, and advertised me what they wished to have altered, which was not much,
nor material) I had conference with Mr. W. Bradshaw.
one not unknown to Mr. B. whom I have before named in this Book, as
judicious and as precise in his judgment as the most; who not only concurred
with me in it, making no doubt at all of it; but withal told how he was often
troubled to satisfy some in their Cases propounded unto him, though he gave
them never so good reason for his resolution, because they would not therewith
be satisfied, unless he could produce some place of Scripture for every
particular. But let the wise and learned judge: and if I may from them be
informed that I have herein erred, I will say as he did, Errare possum,
Haereticus esse nolo.
Err I may, but an Heretic I will not be; I will not be obstinate in mine
error; I will retract it: which I may well, without the least prejudice to the
maine matter in Question, which it nothing concerns, and will stand therefore
well enough without it. But Ad pensum redeamus. Cic. de Orat. l. 3.
return we to our task.


I. B. So then I proceed to the Assumption of the maine Argument. In the former
part whereof it is to be denied (as was said before) that every Lot is a thing
lawful in it self. For as a Diuinatorie by him, Cap. 11. so a lusorious Lot
by me and others is denied to be a thing lawful in it self.


T. G. To pass by the strange manner of speech, that Every Lot is a thing
lawful in it self: which I suppose none but Mr. B. will use. That a Lot is a
thing of it self indifferent, and consequently lawful in it self, was before
showed. But I have nothing here to say to it: for in mine Assumption there is
no mention of it. Mr. B. must answer, if he will, for his own Argument.


I. B. More clearly to answer the other part. It is to be observed, that in
this large Argument, it cannot be gathered what Mr. G. means by Subject
Matter. So the mind of the Reader may be troubled with words, which Acts 15. 24.
ought not to be. But by that which he writes, p. 230. I understand, he
means the matter whereabout the Lottery is employed. If so, I affirm that
the subject matter of a Lot is determined by God, namely, A controversy to be
ended thereby: and therefore I also affirm, lusorious business (to use Mr.
Gs. own word, p. 130.) to be a subject matter of a Lot, no less against the
general Rules of the Word, than was the finding out of Jonas in Mr. Gs.
judgment, p. 278. If then a lusorious Lot be not a thing lawful in it self,
and if Lusorious business be a subject matter of a Lot, that is against the
general Rules, then how can the manner and other circumstances, though neither
determined, nor forbidden, be sufficient warrant for the use of a lusorious Lot.


T. G. Not to say, how fitly the place of Scripture in the Margin is here
applied. For the simple Reader, if a man should stand to explain every School
term, that, in such discourses and disputes as this, we are enforced often to
use, it would be a very tedious task both to Writer and Reader. Nor does Mr.
B. himself observe that Rule that he would tie others to: For does he not often
speak of mayor, minor, proposition, assumption, mood and figure; Sub, prae,
prima, etc. never informing his Reader what thereby is meant. But is it
possible that so learned a man as Mr. B. should not understand what so familiar
and ordinary a Logical term as the Subject Matter is, means? But it is yet
more strange that Mr. B. should not understand what himself says. For this
Assumption he speaks of, is not mine but his own: nor do I here speak any
one word of the Subject Matter of Lottery: it is himself only that does it.
Which Subject Matter whether it be, as he says, determined to be such as he
here says, shall in his due place appear. No more for the present, but that
this Assumption I own not, and therefore need take no care for it, whether it
fall or stand, so far forth as it comes here in question.


I. B. Let us try the force of the Assumptions confirmation. It is true, that
Recreation in general, indefinitely understood, is warranted by Gods Word. But
I believe Mr. G. will not affirm all recreations taken up by men to be so
warranted. Yes, (says Mr. G.) we may recreate our selves with anything, that
is not against the general rules; because touching things wherewith we may
recreate, there is nothing determined.


T. G. That which indeed was mine Assumption, Mr. B. has now at length by good
hap light upon. But knowing not well how to bring it otherwise in, he makes it
the Confirmation of mine Assumption, that is the confirmation of it self. Or
rather, according to Mr. Bs. analysis and resolution of mine Argument, (which
was not yet so hard to be brought into form) the confirmation not of mine, but
of his own Assumption: and so the Argument should thus stand;

Recreation in general is warranted, and (...) particular manner of it
prescribed, etc. Therefore a Let is a thing lawful in it self, and the
subject matter and manner etc. are not determined by Gods word, nor against the
general Rules. You need not marvel why Mr. B. de^ieth not this Consequence*
albeit it be most senseless. For if he should, he knows not any that would
undertake to defend it, but turn it home to him the true fether indeed of it.

But as he deals with me for mine Arguments; so he does the like with his
own inferences. He does not believe, he says, that I will defend all
recreations taken up by men to be warrantable. And yet as controlling himself
herein, he says, Yes. What is that but as much as, he does? Now how proves
he this gross Calumny? Thus forsooth. Mr. G. says, we may recreate our
selves with any thing that is not against the general Rules. And does he that
says so, defend that All recreations taken up by men are allowable? This is
(...). Plato de rep. l. 8. and Eusebius. adv. Hierocl. Vel caeco appareat. Live*
hist. l. 31.
so palpable, that a man though stark blind, yet might feel it with fingers.


I. B. Of this ^uasion, [Not against] I need not speak at this instant.


T. G. No: we have had more then enough of it already too often.


I. B. But touching things not determined, so much incule^ted. I ask whether
things must be determined particularly, or by name, or else, if not so
forbidden, they are lawful. If so, why does Mr. G. (speaking of diverse
particulars) as of a Key and a Book, of a pair of sheeres, and a sieue, and
such like, so earnestly ask, Are they any where found revealed in the Word of
God? Where he is of another mind then here, arguing thus: Not found there
commanded or permitted; therefore unlawful. If it be said, not so found there,
to find out a thief. I then say, Neither are Lots so found there for
recreation.


T. G. What I mean by determined, may easily appear by the instances given of
Exodus 12. 6.
the Passover tied to a certain time, and the Deuteronomy. 12. 8, 9.
sacrifices restrained to some one certain place; to wit, stinted to some one
or more particular matter, manner, time, place, etc. as on the other side, by
not determined, such as are left free without such special restraint, as the
free will offerings, vows, etc.

For the Objection here brought, we had it once before; and there it was
answered. Neither does Mr. B. cite my words there used sincerely, but as he is
wont: And the place it self, had he not clipped the tongue of it, would without
further help have afforded him an answer: to wit, that such Lots diuinatorie
must have some special institution, because that is required of them, which by
no natural power that either is in them, or man can add to them, they are
able to effect. Let Mr. B. prove as much by the sporting Lot; and there an end.


I. B. But if by not determined, he meant, Things wherewith we may recreate,
are not determined in the Word, either expressly, or by just consequence, then,
whosoever says so, if he be wise, will add [so far as I do remember and
know.] For who can remember all the sentences of holy Scriptures, and know all
just Consequences, that may be made from them? If he thus add, then his
Negation is of no validity; but he himself is too bold in denying, upon
presumption, that another remembers and knows no more than he.


T. G. Here Mr. B. thinks he has got me on the hip. And either he will
condemn me of great presumption and want of much wisdom, or else overthrow
the maine strength of mine Argument. That concerning recreation therefore there
are no special rules prescribed in Scripture, whereby it is stinted to this or
that particular matter, and is therefore (as from Calvin before was well and
truly affirmed) to be directed by the generals; it that which I affirm, and
Peter Martyr with me; as by my Margin (which Mr. B. had no list, it seems,
to take notice of) may appear.

Yea but no man without presumption, says Mr. B. may so affirm, unless he
put in this exception, so far as I know or I remember* Besides that Peter
Martyr then was too presumptuous in this very particular: Our Divines that
deal with the Papists are very b Per Scripturam sanctu^ convinci non potest
Petrum suisse Romanum Episcopum, aut unquam Romae suisse. Mars^l. Pasav.
defens. pac. part. 2. c. 16.
far ouer-seene; with whom these assertions are so frequent and usual, Quinque
spuria illa Sacramenta cu^ omnibus suis ritibus and ceremonijs, sine verbo Dei
addita. Confess. Scotic. Verbo Dei destitui. Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 3.
That (...) (...) ^ Sacrament, there is no Scripture for it; That Pen^nce, or
Orders, or extreme Unction, is a Sacrament, cannot out of Gods word be proved*
(...) (...) Peter was ever at Rome, or was Bishop there, or that he had a
superiority of power and authority above the rest of the Apostles; or that
the Pope succeeds him either in his seat or in such right, cannot be made
good out of Gods word. And again, No place of Scripture can be showed, where
Christ or his Apostles has bound us to it. White way to Church, digress. 33.
Non est Dei verbo praescriptura. Calvin. inst^t. lib. 3. c. 4.. 8. Non habet
Scripturae testimonium. Ex Scriptura probari non potest. Chem^it. exam. Conc.
Trid. part. 2.
for a man to repair to the Sacrament vnshriuen; to eat flesh in Lent, etc.
are not against any word of God. Yea this is a general plea with them against
most of the Popish superstitions, The most and greatest points of their
religion, even well nigh all wherein they dissent from us, have no foundation
in the Scriptures. White ibid. sect. 5. nur^. 8.
that there is no ground for them in Gods word. Whereas if they had consulted
with Mr. B. beforehand, they should have been better advised, and have added
always this exception; So far as I know or remember: and so given their
Adversaries just cause to have laughed at them for their labor* Where observe
we withal, what advantage Mr. B. here gives to the Adversary, when he shall
be pressed with ought in this kind. For tell we one of them, that for a man to
refuse Shrift is not against ought in Gods word: After advice had with Mr. B.
he may soon shape you an answer, that you are very presumptuous so to say:
for can you, or any man else, remember all the sentences in Scripture, or know
all just consequences that may be made from them? Which if it be a sound and
sufficient answer, surely for many points of Popery, as some of their new
Sacraments, etc. we must lay our hands upon our mouths, and let them alone
with them, for ought that I see. As if the Scripture were so vaste and diffused
a piece of work, that a man could not, without he had such an infinite memory
and an universal understanding, tell what were of some particular subjects
delivered in each part of it. Yea what a miserable perplexity does Mr. B. by
this means plung Christian meny Consciences into, the more scrupulous sort
especially, when for particular civil actions of ordinary use, their
scrupulous hearts causlesly moving doubt of them, having searched to and fro in
Gods Book, though they can find nothing at all that may control them in the
use of them, yet they shall still be perplexed, because Mr. B. has here
informed them, that there may yet be somewhat in Gods word against them,
neither can they, do they what they can, have any assurance of the contrary,
unless they had such memories and understandings as Mr. B. here speaks of? I
cannot here pass by a passage of Mr. Caluins concerning such scruples; Calvin.
instit. l. 3. c. 19.. 7.
These and the like, says he, se^me frivolous trifles: but there is more in
them than men are commonly aware of. For when men's Consciences are once in this
manner ens^red, they enter into a long and an intricase Labyr^th, from whence
it is no easy mut^er to get out again. Si dubitare ^eperit, an lino uti
liceat, nec de cannabe (...) securus erit, (...) and de stupis incidet
dubitatio.
If a man shall begin to doubt, whether he may use flax, or linne^ made
thereof, in his sheets, shirts, handkerchefs, towels, table-napkins, etc. he
will not long ofter have the like scruple of hemp; and after that of towe too.
And he will begin to think whether he may not dine and sup without any
Table-cloth or napkins* at all* and so consequently whether he may use them or
no, when he may well enough be without. Yea Denique coveniet, ut super
transversam, quod dicitur, festucam incedere nefas ducat.
at length, says he, you shall have a man come to that pass, that he will
think it a sin ((...) (...) say) to stride over a straw. Such height of
superstition men grow unto* when way is given to such frin^lous scruples, which
yet Mr. B. here ministers much matter unto. For suppose we one of these
scrupulous Christians, yea or any other, should repair to Mr. B. and move this
as a doubt to him, whether it be lawful for him to wear band and cuffs either
of cambricke or holland, and Mr. B. having affirmed that it is, he should
demand of him, what warrant out of Gods word he could furnish him with for it.
Answer him this way, that Apparel in general is enjoined, and for the matter
of it there is no special direction of restraint given in the word, and
therefore liberty left for any that is not against the general Rules in the
word, of decency, modesty, frugalitie, etc. resolving him of such as doubt or
question may be moved of: and it is not unlikely but you may give him good
satisfaction therein. Whereas go Mr. Bs. way and tell him, that though
apparel it self be allowed, yet whether the matter of it be determined or no,
neither he nor any man can say, unless he had all the Bible, and whatsoever is
contained in it, or may be deduced from it, in his head: I suppose you will be
so far from giving him any good satisfaction, that you will leave him more
perplexed than you found him at first. I propound somewhat of this kind in
pursuit of mine Argument, which Mr. B. misdoubting he might run a ground there,
slily saileth by, and not so much as once takes notice of. Either he medleth
with the Conclusion, and passes by the premises: Or he frames me such matter
of confirmation as he pleases, and lets pass that that I propound. I
demand then, rubbing up Mr. Bs. memory a little, as before in my Book, what
other proof can be brought for the justifying of Bowls or Chesse-play, than
such as is here propounded, which it behooved him to have answered if he knew
any better, considering that the instance was of much more moment for the
clearing and confirming of this branch of mine Assumption, than many things
that it has pleased him to be pidling withal.

For the thing it self: First, it is well known, that for many Heads, or
Common places, what is found in the word may soon be laid all together, as for
games, for markets, for mariage-feasts, for Lots, and the like: by
consideration whereof a man may often be informed what is in Gods word either for
or against them. Secondly, such things as require a special Institution, (and
of this kind must a Lot be, if it be a divine Oracle, and an immediate
judgment and sentence of God, as Mr. B. pretends that it is) the matter is
much more obuious. Special Institutions in the word are as stars of the
chief magnitude, so eminent and conspicuous, that they cannot easily lie hid,
nor need overmuch search, and a man may boldly say therefore of such and such
things, that there is no special institution of them in the word. Thirdly, for
moral matters, we may draw to a nearer scantling than the body of the whole
Bible; Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
the Sum of all is comprised in the Decalogue, and whatsoever a man is sure
to be against none of those Exodus 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
ten Words, or to come yet to a narrower compass, against neither Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
Levit. 19. 18. Luke 10. 27, 28.
Piety, nor Charity, the Sum of the Exodus 24. 12. and 31. 18.
two Tables, he may surely know not to be against Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40.
Mark. 10. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
any part of Gods word, and consequently to have nothing in Gods word against
it, though he have not such a vaste capacity of understanding or memory, as
Mr. B. here requires. But consider the whilst what an (...).
utter uncertainty and irresolution in this kind Mr. B. drives us hereunto:
For by his grounds a man may not safely say, that There is nothing against
wearing of an Hat in Gods word; unless he know all consequences that may be
deduced from this Sentence of Scripture, Genesis 1. 1.
In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth. For if he must needs know so much
of all, that may safely say so of ought, then of that in particular, that being
one of those all.


I. B. At last let us religiously consider the general Rules so often spoken of,
and we shall find, that Mr. G. should have done well not to have pleased
Libertines by pleading Not against, but to have given the word due honor by
saying with Mr. Calvin. [The use of things is to be limited according to the
general rules.] For these rules require Decency, Expediency, and Piety, and
therefore they are not obeyed by the use of things not indecent, not
inexpedient, and not impious. For it is to be noted, that in 1 Cor. 6. 12. and
10. 23. Paul says not, All things are lawful, but some things are
inexpedient; but in both places thus; All things are lawful, but all are not
expedient.


T. G. Of this distinction we heard before, and answer thereunto was there
given. Yet lest I seem to pass by so grave and serious observations with
silence,

First, if those rules require more than not indecent, not inexpedient, etc.
then whatsoever is not more than so, is against those rules, and is no more by
Mr. G. allowed than by Mr. B. himself, for ought that Mr. G. here says: which
Mr. B. also might soon see, if he knew what he would have. And therefore his,
It is to be noted, might very well have been spared, for any hurt it does Mr.
Gs. cause, if that be all that it prove.

Again, though this might suffice to keep Mr. Bs. exception from fastening on
ought that I say: Yet let us see of what weight his annotation here is. The
Apostle says not, Some things are inexpedient, but, all things are not
expedient. Why? what difference is there in the Apostles meaning here between
these two? Hear we the exposition of Th. Morton. e Coll. Christi Cantabrig.
as acute and judicious a writer as the most of those that these times of ours
have afforded us, though one that lived in much obscurity; In 1 Cor. 6. 12.
on the former place of the Apostle he thus paraphraseth his words, If we
Christians ought to be so careful in cherishing and improuing piety, Vt vel a
licito rerum usu pietati officiente abstinendum putemus.
that we deem our selves restrained even from the lawful use of things that
hurt or hinder piety, how much ought we to abstain from things of their own
nature and every way unlawful. In 1 Cor. 10. 23.
On the other place yet more plainly: But all things are not expedient: i. at
quarundam rerum usus interdu^ incommodus and noxius est.
that is, but the use of some things is sometimes incommodious and harmfull to
a Christian man, in that that concerns the defense and iner ease of his faith
and piety, and the furtherance of his eternal safety. For it is not to be
expected from earthly things, of which the Apostle principally here speaks,
such as are meat and drink, that they should directly further our salvation:
it is enough if they be not an impediment thereunto. And again afterward: Quod
non aedificat. i. quod fratris fidei, pietati, and saluti impedimento est.
That does not edify; that is, is an hinderance to our brothers faith, piety,
and safety. As for decency and indecencie; piety and impiety, in actions
capable of either, Mr. B. may as soon (...). Insec^bilia secare.
divide the point of a Spanish neeale, as assign any medium between the one
and the other. Mean while Mr. B. has set a new snare here to entangle and
snarle scrupulous Consciences in. For though no indecency can be discovered in
some kind of attire, yet if they Et Magis audiendu^ quam auscultandum censeo:
Vti de Ariolis Pacuv. Chryse. apud Cic. de divin. l. 1. de Pharmacopolis Cato
in Coelium apud Gell. noct. Attic. l. 1. c. 15.
hear Mr. B. they shall hang, upon this new conceit of his, still in suspense,
whether it may be auowed to be decent or no. I might add, that with much
difficulty and no little ado they must have it proved to them by some
sentence of Scripture, (which I would feign hear Mr. B. perform) for no
reason will serve else, that it is so.


I. B. Let us consider these rules yet somewhat more nearly to the point.
Touching the first: The words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 40. be these. [Let all
things be done honestly, and by order.] In which is no intimation that all
things are in themselves lawful to be done, which are done honestly and by
order: but a charge, that all things, be they in themselves never so lawful,
be done honestly and by order. Those drink offerings to Bacchus, commonly
called Healths, per antiphrasin, are solemnized sometimes with standing,
sometimes with kneeling, always with putting off hats, and some speech more or
less: are they acceptable to God, because they are thus orderly carried? If
not, then be Lots and the users of them in gaming never so orderly disposed,
yet are they not therefore justified.


T. G. Mr. Bs. task is to instance if he mean to do ought, against what
general Rule of Gods word a lusorious Lot is; for that is the issue that we
now are at. But in stead thereof Mr. B. tells us that that no man denies,
that if it be in it self unlawful, it is not the more justifiable, because it
is not against this first rule of order. And what is this to the purpose? I
(...). Plut. (...). vel quod Rufino Hieron. Manu^ posceris, and pedem porrigis.
Vel Academico Domino si serviret, facturum quod se Epictetus profitetur, (...).
Arian. dissert. l. 2. c. 20.
ask for a pickaxe, and Mr. B. reaches me a spade. This is mine Argument,
Game in general being allowed, and no particular matter or manner of it
prescribed, any is lawful that is not against the general rules of Gods word:
But Lottery is such, to wit, not against any general Rule of Gods word:
therefore Lottery is lawful. That it is of it self lawful is the Conclusion;
that it is not against any general rule of Gods word is the Assumption. Mr. B.
denies the Conclusion; says it is unlawful; and that it cannot be made
lawful, though it be not against some one such Rule. What manner of answering
call we this, wherein nothing is denied or answered to, but that that indeed
ought never to be denied?


I. B. Touching the second Rule. It is true, That all things must be expedient,
that is, edify, 1 Cor. 10. 23. Therefore they sin who stumble or offend a
brother, that is, occasion him to fall or be made weak, Romans 14 13, 21. But
lusorious Lots occasion thousands to fall into sin, and to be weak in
goodness. Therefore they do not edify, and therefore are not expedient.


T. G. Here Mr. B. speaks somewhat to the purpose indeed, if his Answer could
be made good. For he says, that a lusorious Lot is against this second Rule.
But how proves he it? Because lusorious Lots occasion thousands to fall into
sin, and grow weak in goodness. What does every Lot used in game do so?
Make that good and take all. Let Mr. B. prove, that every Lot used in game, as
for example sake, every shuffling of arrows, or choice of pawnes hid in the
hand to decide leading, or every game that children play at, even and odd,
heads and points, etc. does occasion thousands, or some one at least or other
to fall into sin, or grow weak in goodness, and I will yield all lusorious
Lots to be unlawful. If he cannot, he must no more condemn all lusorious
Lots, because where they are abused they produce such effects, then all use of
boules for disport in general, because bouling abused does altogether as much.


I. B. Concerning the third Rule, Let all things be done to Gods glory, 1 Cor.
10. 31. Is this to Gods glory, to use his Name in any other case, than wherein
God is well pleased his Name should be used, and then to take that Name in
vain? Is tempting of God any glory to God? But playing with a Lot is to use
Gods name in another case, than wherein God is well pleased his Name should be
used; and then also to take that Name in vain: and it is a grievous tempting
of God, as shall be proved. Therefore playing with a Lot is not to Gods glory,
and by consequence not agreeable to religion and piety.


T. G. This is, to use Mr. Bs. term, the kill-cow indeed. But all that here a
sporting Lot is charged with, is yet to be proved. It shall be, Mr. B. says.
In good time; but till then Nihil dicitur fuisse factum, quamdiu aliquid
agendu^ superest. Reg. Iur.
nothing is done. Nor is it true that Mr. B. says in the next words, unless
what shall be done, be done already.


I. B. Though it be sufficiently proved that lusorious Lots are directly
against two of the general Rules; and not warranted by the third: So that Mr.
G. has not bettered his cause by appealing to them.


T. G. How sufficiently M. B. has proved this, whatsoever he will do; I have
showed: (...). Aristoph. thesmoph^r.
Nor is my cause yet any thing hereby impeached, until more be brought against
it, than as yet is.


I. B. Yet it is to be observed, that all the Rules require Things and Actions
to be according to them. But Mr. G. by only speaking of them, would justify
circumstances, and means of playing with Lots, if (forsooth) they be not
against them.


T. G. Of that frivolous exception, and distinction of according to them, and
not against them, enough already has been said.

For the rest here objected, that by only speaking of them, I would justify
circumstances and means of playing with Lots, if they be not against them,
albeit neither I, nor any man else, I believe, besides Mr. B. himself,
understands well what it means: yet to clear my self from such aspersion,
as it may seem to cast on me; I will briefly relate the sum of mine Argument
reduced into due form. Thus then it stands:

Any means or manner of recreation that is not against the general Rules of
Gods word, these and the like, is allowable. Lottery is such a means of
recreation as is not against any of the general rules of Gods word, these or
the like. Lottery therefore is a means of recreation allowable. The
Proposition I thus proved:

Where a thing is allowed, and the means, manner, and other circumstances are
not in particular determined; there is any means or manner of it allowed that
is not against those generals. But such is recreation: for it is allowed in
general, nor are the means, and manner, and other circumstances of it
determined in particular. Any means or manner of it therefore is allowed that
is not against the general rules of Gods word. In explication of the first
Proposition, I relate those Rules: For confirmation of the Assumption, ^
require to be nominated, against what general rule Lottery used in game does
offend. Now let Mr. B. show which way herein I offend.


I. B. Thus having evidently showed the Reasons inducing (not drawing) Mr. G.
to allow lusorious Lots, to be ^oth fearful; as these euasiue speeches, [Not
evil in themselues] [Not prohibited] [Not determined] and [Not against the
general Rules] do import; and otherwise unsound; I will (with Gods help I
hope) reply upon Mr. Gs. answers to mine Arguments against playing with Lots
contained in my Dialogue.


T. G. How well Mr. B. has quit himself in this his opposition, there will no
doubt, I see, be made, if he may be his own Judge. But if his Dextra sinistram
meliorem and gladio scutum habere dicebantur, qui sua melius defenderent, quam
aliena impugnarent.
left hand steed him no better than his right, nor his shield do him more
pleasure than his sword has, I doubt much whether his Reader will receive from
him any good satisfaction, howsoever he may therein please and sooth up
himself. As there is seldom Author laudat opus. Ovid. de Pont. l. 3. el. 9.
Quidni? Scruta quidem ut vendat s^rutarius laudat. Lucill. apud Gell. l. 3. c.
13. Sed and suum cuique pulchrum. Cic. Tusc. l. 5. (...). Aristot. ethic. l. 9.
c. 7.
any workman but likes well of his own work.


THE THIRD PART. Mr. BALMFORDS Arguments against Games consisting in or
depending upon Chance, taken out of his Dialogue. Together with Mr. GATAKERS
Answer to them in his Book of the Nature and Use of LOTS. As also Mr. Bs.
Reply in defense of them: and Mr. Gs. Reioinder thereunto.
The first Argument.
Whatsoever directly, or of it self, or I. B. Dialog. Arg. 1.
in a special manner tends to the advancing of Gods name is to be used
religiously Mala. 1. 6, 7.
, and not to be used in sport; as we may not pray or swear in sport: Exodus 20.
7. Esai. 29. 13. Ierem. 4. 2.
But the use of Lots directly, or of it self and in special manner tends to
the advancing of the name of God in attributing to his special Providence in
the whole and immediate disposing of the Lot, and expecting the event Prove. 16.
33. Act. 1. 24, 26.
.

Therefore the use of Lots is not to be in sports.

I answer: The Assumption is not true if it be understood T. G. Answer. Of
Lots, chap. 7. Sect. 5.
universally: it concludes nothing to the Question if it be taken particularly.

The proof annexed to it scarce carries good sense: the Printer, it may be,
is in fault. But if the meaning of the Author be, as I conceive it, (for I must
in part go by guess) that the disposition of every Lot is wholly attributed
to, and the event wholly expected from the special and immediate Providence of
God; I deny it, neither do the places produced prove it. The Prove. 16. 33.
former of them, concerning ordinary Lots, or Lots in general, was examined
and answered sufficiently before.

The Act. 1. 24, 26.
latter is an example of an extraordinary Lot, wherein there was indeed an
immediate and special providence. But Vise Hieron. sup.. 4. Sic and Greg. in
Ezech. homil. 4. Aliud est quod de doctrinae usu atque disciplinae dicimus,
aliud quod de miraculo scimus.
extraordinary examples make no general rules. Neither is it a good course of
arguing, to reason from the special, or a singular, to the general and
universal; much less from one extraordinary act or event, to all ordinary
courses of the same kind. Herein is the difference between the one and the
other, between the extraordinary Lot, wherein there is an immediate hand of
God for special purpose, and the ordinary Lot, wherein there is not; that the
one could not but fall certainly, were it never so often cast, as in the Lots
used for the discovery of Josh. 7. 16, 17, 18.
Achan and Ion. 1. 7.
Jonas, and in the election of 1 Samuel 10. 20, 21.
Saul and Act. 1. 23, 24, 25, 26.
Matthias, and the like: whereas the other cast often in the same case, as for
partition of goods and chatels descending by inheritance upon, or bought in
common by diverse, would not constantly and certainly fall out still the same.

The Assumption understood generally is true: and I. B. Reply.
the places quoted make good the proof thereof, as shall be made manifest.

This is said; but should be done. But Mr. B. T. G. Reioinder.
having said, it shall be, presently slincketh away from it: nor does ever
after do what here he undertakes, unless it be by saying that it is manifest
to all that will see, that it is so as he says.

I. B. First therefore let us consider the supposed distinction between
ordinary and extraordinary Lots. Mr. G. speaks of a distinction, but
shows not wherein (touching the Lots themselves) it does consist. Indeed
touching themselves (as they be Lots) there is no difference. For in an
ordinary, as well as an extraordinary Lot, the things are by man of purpose
intentionally disposed unto a variable event, and they are wholly disposed by
God unto this or unto that event, which the vser of a Lot expects. If so,
then it follows, that the use of all Lots (as they be Lots) whether ordinary
or extraordinary, directly or of it self, and in special manner, tends to
the advancing of the name of God. How? The use of Lots attributes to Gods
special providence in the whole and immediate disposing of the Lot, and in
expecting the event. Does this scarce carry good sense?


T. G. Against the proof of the proof of Mr. Bs. assumption, from Act. 1. 24,
26. I object two things:

1. That it is but one particular example, and therefore cannot prove a
general. To which exception Mr. B. here answers not a word; and the
exception therefore stands good still; and is enough to infringe the
validity of all proof drawn here from that place. 2. That it is of an
extraordinary Lot: and from extraordinary actions, much more from some one of
them to conclude of all ordinary, is an unreasonable kind of reasoning. And
indeed it is as if a man should thus reason; There was a special hand of God
in Pharaohs Genesis 41. 19, 25.
dream: There is the like therefore in all dreams whatsoever. Or, Exodus 3. 2.
The Bush was holy that God appeared to Moses in; And therefore every common
Hawthorne is holy. So, The Lot whereby Matthias was elected, was by Gods
special providence immediately disposed: Therefore the like is in every Lot.


Now Mr. B. that he might seem to say somewhat to this at least; Says that I
deliver a distinction of Lots ordinary and extraordinary, but show not
wherein touching the Lots themselves it consists. He that reads Of Lots,
Chap. 4. Sect. 1. and chap. 10. sect. 1.
my Book may soon see where I define either, what difference I assign
between them: and Mr. B. himself in part also hereafter acknowledges it.

Yea but says he so far forth as they are Lots, there is no difference
between them. No reason there should; for the same general nature of a Lot is
common to both: as the same nature of a dream is common to all dreams: the
same nature of a bush is common to all bushes. Nor did Pharaohs dream, as it
was a dream, differ from other dreams: nor that holy bush, as it was a bush,
differ from any other bush.

But what is the common nature of a Lot? Hear Mr. B. himself, and he will
tell you truly and fully elsewhere, that Balmford. Dialog.
it is the variable event of some sensible thing applied to the determining of
some doubtful matter. But because that will not here serve his turn, he
changes his note now, and makes this the general nature of a Lot common to
all Lots, (begging withal pitifully that that is in controversy) that things
be by man of purpose intentionally disposed unto a variable event, and wholly
disposed by God unto this or that event, which the vser of a Lot expects.
That which is so far from being the common nature of a Lot, that neither the
one branch, nor the other is common to all Lots, much less both jointly
together. For neither is it true, that in every Lot things are by man disposed
to a variable event: as where a controversy is put to be decided by the track
and turning of some beast that has passed before: nor are the things by man
disposed in Lot, by God ever wholly and immediately disposed, as in the proof
of his Assumption is affirmed, and here only repeated; and much less are they
ever disposed to such event, as by the users of the Lot is expected, but rather
clean contrary sometime, as in Ester 3. 7, 13.
Hamans example. But if it be so in all Lots, says Mr. B. then mine Assumption
is true. That is as much as to say, if you grant me what I affirm in the
proof of mine Assumption, though I barely repeat it only, and do not at all
prove it; then mine Assumption stands firm; to wit, that a Lot does directly
or of it self and in special manner tend to the advancing of the name of God,
in attributing to his special providence in the whole and immediate disposing
of the Lot, and in expecting the event. Which by the way he demands, whether
it scarce carry good sense or no: because I said it scarce did, being withal
willing to salve the matter by supposing that the Printer might be in fault.
But I see now, Mr. B. will take it upon himself; and I must show reason for
what I said. What others therefore may deem of it I know not. But I supposed
the word, to attribute, to be a verb transitiue, requiring somewhat therefore
to be expressed that should be attributed, as well as some thing or person to
which or whom it should be attributed; which in Mr. Bs. words does not appear.
It were senseless for any man to say, that he does in his words and deeds
attribute to God, not expressing ought that he does therein attribute unto him.
But let us hear Mr. B. further.


I. B. Is there then no difference between an ordinary, and extraordinary Lot?
The only difference is the Subject matter whereabout the Lot is employed. The
subject matter of an ordinary Lot, is by Gods allowance, a controversy to be
ended. The subject matter of an extraordinary Lot, is any other matter,
whereabout a Lot is employed by Gods special direction: otherwise it is
unlawful, as be lusorious and diuinatory Lots.


T. G. I might well Supervacua enim refutare, nullius artis est. Quintil.
instit. l. 5. c. 13.
let all this wild discourse pass; since it is nothing at all to the purpose,
neither to the justifying of his Assumption, nor of the proof of it; yet since
he says it, we will see what he says. That there is difference between an
ordinary and extraordinary Lot, in regard of the subject matter, is most true,
but no such difference as Mr. B. here assigns. Of Lots, chap. 4. sect. 1. and
chap. 10. sect. 1.
What it is I show where I handle the nature of either. But that the subject
matter of an ordinary Lot is ever some controversy, is not true, as I have
formerly showed: nor if it were so, did it hinder, but that the Lot used in
sport might be an ordinary Lot, since that a controversy is thereby also often
times ended. And again, that no controversy, but some other matter is the
subject matter of an extraordinary Lot, is also as untrue: since that a
controversy also may and often is the subject matter of it also. Not to add,
that lusorious Lots are without all reason here ranked among extraordinary
Lots, no reason rendered why they should be so termed. So that here is much
unsound matter packt together to no purpose.


I. B. In regard of which difference only Mr. Gs. Logic holds good as thus.
From the use of a Lot about another matter than ending a Controversy, and that
by Gods special direction, it follows not, that it is lawful to use a Lot
about any other matter, than ending a Controversy, as gaming, without Gods
special direction.


T. G. In stead of making good his own Logic, Mr. B. tells us what will
hold good in Mr. Gs. Logic. What he means by my Logic, I neither know nor
inquire. When I make such an Argument as Mr. B. here frames, then let him
answer it and not before. For this is but to set up men of straw, and then
having run a course or two at them, to ride away in triumph, as if he had
done some great matter, and laid Mr. G. or I know not whom in the dust. But
mean while Mr. B. forgets to show us the validity of his own Logic; to
wit, how an Argument will follow, from one singular example of an
extraordinary Lot (by himself confessed to be such) used therein by Gods
special direction, to the ordinary use of Lots in general.


I. B. But Mr. G. makes another difference, to wit, an immediate and special
providence in an extraordinary Lot, which is not in an ordinary Lot. He does
so: and therefore in his Logic, he cunningly joins a supposed extraordinary
Event to a supposed extraordinary Act, and declineth the proof of an
extraordinary Act, which rather he should have done, because mine Argument
stands upon the use of Lots.


T. G. Nay by Mr. Bs. leave, Mr. G. does not so. He says only that there is
great difference between an extraordinary Lot wherein an immediate divine
providence is, and an ordinary one, wherein the same is not. Not presuming
that there is necessarily such an immediate divine providence in every
extraordinary Lot, but that such there was in that extraordinary Lot by Mr.
B. alleged, as also there is ever in all such of that kind as are done by
Gods special direction. I spare to speak much of the idle distinction here
between an extraordinary Lot, which by Mr. Bs. own grant this was, and an
extraordinary Act, which he would here imply that it was not, when he
requires proof of it. If the event were extraordinary, it is enough for my
purpose, because Mr. Bs. Argument is in express terms concerning the event,
wherein somewhat, but I know not what, (for he mentions nothing) is said to
be attributed unto Gods special providence; which if it be therefore more than
ordinary in such a Lot, there is no reasoning from it to any where it is not
so, much less to all whatsoever in general. That this Act it self, or
occasion and manner of vising it, was extraordinary, though neither I stand
bound here to prove it, and the reason is senseless whereupon Mr. B. here
requires it, yet I have proved evidently Of Lots, chap. 10. sect. 3.
where I entreat particularly of it. But M. B. must remember that here it is
his part to prove: it is mine only to answer, deny, or distinguish; and his
to take away mine answers, if he will make his Arguments good.


I. B. Neither does he soundly prove an immediate and special providence, or
extraordinary event to be in an extraordinary, and not in an ordinary Lot.


T. G. Neither do I affirm it generally of the former, but of all such of
that kind as are used by Gods special direction, in which Mr. B. himself
here acknowledges it: and of the latter what I say, I have Of Lots, chap. 2.
sect. 5. and chap. 7. sect. 4.
in diverse places proved. Here I speak only by way of distinction between
the one and the other, which let Mr. B. if he can disprove*


I. B. For as it is a tempting of God to cast (...) ^ry Lot the first time
without Gods special direction, p. 313. so it is a tempting, yea, a agr^er
tempting of God, when be ^ath given his judgment already by the (...) of the
Lot, to cast the Lot again without hi^ special ^rection. How then c^ Mr. G.
so confidently affir^, that an extraordinary Lot could not but fall certainly*
were it never so often cast?


T. G. Whether it be a tempting of God or no, upon my occasion what*soeuer to
cast a Lot more then on^ i^ such a business as God has given special*
direction (...) use it in, is not the Question* th^gh I suppose it be more then
Mr. B. will be able ever to make good that it is. And whether upon so doing,
because it were a tempting of him, God ^ould refuse to give answer or no, might
also be questioned. He was content Judge. 6. 37, 39, 40.
by a Sign to answer Gid^ the second time, though he had given assurance
sufficient before, and as much as he at first required. He answered the seaman
in Jonas 1. ^. Of Lots, chap. 10. sect. 5.
the Lot that lighted upon (...), though it were in them a mere tempting of
God, by Mr. Bs. own grant, having no special direction from God for the doing
of it. Nor dare any man say, but that if it had been by them for their (...)
satisfaction cast often, as Ari^ Montan. in Io^. 1.
some think it was, it would have lighted upon Jonas still. But all that I say
is this, that in (...) (...) Lot, wherein there i^ (...) ^diate hand of God for
special purpose (good ground supposed for the reiteration of it) the event
were it never so often cast, would be ever the same. For God certainly would
never give a sentence contrary to himself. And of the certain steedinesse of
such a Lot, we see a pregnant proof in Josh 7. 16, 17, 18.
Achans case, where the Lot sour several times cast, kept on his due course,
till it came to seize on that particular person that was aimed at. And the like
may be presumed certainly of every such Lot so reiterated. If God refuse
further to answer, there is no such immediate hand of God for special end in
it: if there be, and he do answer, he will be ever like himself, there
shall be no, Est, and non. 2 Cor. 1. 18, 19, 20.
it is, and it is not, with him.


I. B. Indeed, the certain event of an extraordinory Lot may in faith be
expected, because of Gods special direction. And why not so in an ordinary
Lot? Seeing God advises us page 135. to use Lots for the ending of
Controversies, Prou. 18. 18. and assures us that the whole disposing of them
is of him, Prou. 16. 33.


T. G. I might answer in a word: Let Mr. B. make trial. But I refer my self
to Answer to Mr. Fennors reason 4. chap* 7.. 10. p. 158, 159.
the instances given by me elsewhere, of diverse in several places casting Lots
upon the same persons for the self same places, and to what hereof has been
here before said. Only I add that no such special assurance is given us by
God for the one, as in such cases was for the other. Nor does any such thing
follow thence, because God has advised us rather thereby to end controversies
than to give way to courses more inconvenient, that therefore God will by a
special hand of his guide the Lot thus or thus, to wit, to favor him that
has the better right in this, as to sever the innocent from the nocent in
that. How far forth Prove. 16. 33.
the place produced proves any such thing, comes hereafter to be discussed.


I. B. But Mr. G. has answered this place before. Let us then consider what he
has answered.


T. G. For the sentence of Solomon, there want not T. G. Answer. Of Lots, chap.
7. sect. 3.
good Authors that expound it of De singularibus, mirabilibus, divinis, quas
disterminant a politicis. Chytrae. in Iud. c. 1. 10. Winkelman profess.
Marpurg. and Barthold. Krakevitz in Ion. c. 1. and Pe^cer. de divinat.
singular extraordinary; and miraculous Lots only: such, to use the words of
one of our Eastie hist. Gosp.
Adversaries, as are used immediately to find out Gods will: whereas these that
we now dispute of are no such; Authors pra^ominati.
neither is it now lawful to use any Lot at all to that end.

But the words seem to be more general, and are word for word thus in the
original, Prove. 16. 33. (...) Sicut Number. 26. 55. (...) terram tamen (quod
attinet) sort dividetur. Et Nehem. 9. 32. - (...) (...).)
The Lot, it is cast into the lap; (...) (...).
but every judgment or disposition of it (for there is no article there
answering our English The) is of God. As he says elsewhere, (...). (...). 26.
Many seek the Rulers face or favor; (...)
but each man's judgment is from God. And, Prove. 21. 31.
The Horse is prepared for the day of fight: (...) sicut Psalm. 3. 9. (...) Et
Ion. 2. 9. (...)
but salvation is of God, or belongs to God, i^ Gods. Which words so read
(...) providentia, etiamsi (...) providentia in alijs (...), (...) ^munis
providentia c^sum. Bellarm. de* cleric. l. 1. c. 5.
import only thus much, that there is a providence of God in all things, even
in the least, in the most casual things, and among the rest by name in a Lot:
And so is there no more said of Lots there, than is spoken elsewhere not of
Lots alone or things casual only; but of all men's thoughts and purposes, and
words and works, and counsels and courses; as we have Chap. 2.. 3.
formerly shown; and as beside the Authors there alleged, some of those that
urge this place for the proof of this point, confess elsewhere against
themselves, when they say, that Balmford. dialog. Et Zanch. de sort. D^um omnia
regere, igitur sorts etiam.
The disposing of the Chance is secret, that it may be Chance indeed and wholly
of God, who directs Prove. 16. 1, 3, 9, 3^. Balmf. ibid.
all things.

Yea take the words as they are usually read, The Lot is cast into the lap, but
Genev. translat.
the whole disposition, or The Kings Edit.
the whole disposing thereof, is of the Lord; It may as truly be said with good
warrant from diverse I^sal. 33. 10, 11, 13, 14, to 20. and 37. 6, 7, 9, 12, to
16. and 127. 1, 2. Prove. 10. 22. and 19. 21. and 20. 24. and 21. 30, 31. Esai.
26. 12. and 34. 15, 16. Ierem. 10. 23. Matthew. 6. 26, 30. and ^0. 29, 30.
other places of Scripture beside supra.
those by the Adverse party produced, that the whole issue or event and
disposing of all things great and weighty, or less and lighter, is of the
Lord: which yet excludes not the means, that God works by or with, in the
most of them, nor implies an immediate providence universally in them: but is
therefore so said, and may truly be said, to show, that it is wholly in Gods
hands to dispose of the event and issue of all things, and to cross or give
way to them, as he shall see good. So that a man may as well, and upon as good
ground out of the places concerning all other men's speeches and actions
alleged by themselves, (together with those other, which are some of them yet
more general and of larger extent) exclude all things else whatsoever from
game, as they may Lots, in regard of ought that concerning them can be picked
out of this place.


I. B. Before he says, p. 144. Good Authors expound this I. B. Reply.
place of singular extraordinary and miraculous Lots only.


T. G. And if Mr. G. had stuck to this, I suppose Mr. B. T. G. Reioind.
would not easily have been able to refute it, and so his Argument had stuck
fast. But I refuse to take advantage of ought that in mine own judgment I
deem unsound. For it is Disputa^is ^ is Christianae scopus no^ victoria, sed
verita^. (...). Greg. N^z. epist. 15.
not victory, but truth only that I stand for.


I. B. But, says he, the words seem to be more general, and are, word for
word, thus in the Original, [The Lot is cast into the lap: but every judgment
or disposing of it, is of God.] Does not confuting them, who hold only
extraordinary Lots to be meant in this place; and translating the Text [Euery
iudgement] and expounding it [or disposing it] show plainly that this place
proves mine Assumption to be universally true?


T. G. I perceive a man must not be ouer-liberall with Mr. B. for i^ a man give
him an inch, he will too soon take an ell. He might well think me very
silly, freely to grant him all this, and yet deny his Assumption, i^ this were
so plain a Confirmation of it.

That I confute them is not true: I show only my dissent from them. I leave it
to Mr. B. if he can, to confute them.

That I so translate and expound the Text, is true: but very sorry assistance
arises to Mr Bs. Assumption from thence.


I. B. So that I marvel that he denies this place to prove mine Assumption,
because it concerns Lots in general.


T. G. And marvel well he might, did I reason on that manner. But he wants
matter, it seems, to marvel at, that he frames such to himself. In eadem
urna and aurum est and vipera. Si aurum ex urna sustuleris; quia illic and
viper^ est, non ideo mihi urna auru^ dat, quia vipera^ habet; sed aurum dat,
cum and vipera^ habeat. Sen epist. 87.
It is one thing to say, It proves not Mr. Bs. Assumption, though it concern
Lots in general: and another to say, It proves not Mr. Bs. Assumption,
because it concerns Lots in general. That is all that can be gathered out of
ought that I affirm. But Mr. B. his earnest desire belike to have his
Assumption confirmed, suggested this to him.


I. B. For if it do so, then it proves that ordinary as well as extraordinary
Lots, tend to the advancing of the Name of God.


T. G. It seems that Mr. B. has forgotten his own Assumption. If he have, I
will make bold to put him in mind of it. It is this, The use of Lots directly,
or of it self, and in special manner tends to the advancing of Gods Name,
in attributing to his special providence in the whole and immediate disposing
of them, etc. Here is a great deal more than barely tending to the advancing
of Gods Name, which all things that are disposed by him (and Esai. 26. 12. Dan.
4. 35. Math. 10. 29, 30.
what is not disposed by him?) in some degree or other do. A man might marvel
therefore rather why Mr. B. should not so much, but at all marvel at Mr. Gs.
denial, that this place so understood, does prove Mr. Bs. Assumption; yea, he
might marvel, that Mr. B. should not see that it did not, if he remembered what
his Assumption was.


I. B. Again, p. 145. Mr. G. taking the words, as they are usually read in the
Geneua Translation, and the Kings Edition, to wit, [The Lot is cast into the
lap, but the whole disposition, or disposing thereof, is of the Lord] grants
that the whole event is of God.


T. G. 1. What I yield of my liberality, Mr. B. is one thing: What you must
make good, if you will maintain your own cause, is another thing. That is the
translation, say I, (...).
word for word. Which unless therefore he can either disprove, or prove his
Assumption out of it, his Argument is undone, and his cause with it, having
indeed no color of ground beside that place much wrung and wronged to support
and uphold it.

2. I take not the words so, but supposing them so to be taken, I say, that no
more is therein said of Lots, than may be said of all things that are done in
the world, though by means the most of them, that the whole issue and event of
them is of God, because he not only has an hand in them, but it is in his
power either to afford or to deny such issue unto them. And what has Mr. Bs.
cause gained hereby more than was granted it before? Or how is his Assumption
hereby confirmed, when no more is yielded to be said therein of Lots, than may
be said of a game at boules?


I. B. A grant, though true, yet turning the Reader aside from seeing the whole
truth. For the Text is, [The whole disposing of the Lot cast into the lap.]


T. G. And do not I speak of Lots in general? Or do I exclude any such as be
cast into the lap? Or is it material, whether they be cast into lap, or Into a
bonnet, Litleton Tenures, l. 3. c. 1.
hat, or In galeam. Homer. Iliad. n^.
helmet, or (...). de quo Aenigma apud Athe^. dipnos. l. 10. Vide Casaub. ibid.
c. 18.
lot-box, or In bydriam, five si^ula^. Plant. Casin.
water-pot, or into none of all these, as in cross and pile, or not cast at
all, as in best-betrust? That Mr. G. should so slily seek to conceal that,
and by leger-demaine seek to turn his Readers eye aside from it. But, says
Mr. B.


I. B. If then the Lot cast into the Lap, that is, of purpose disposed by man
unto a variable event, be wholly disposed by God, so as the event be that which
pleases him, then God does not mediately dispose the Lot to this or that
event: if not mediately, then immediately, because the whole disposition is of
him.


T. G. And what if the Lots then be not cast into the lap, or be not by man
disposed at all? If that alter the case, as may seem here implied, then that
will not be true of every Lot, nor of many a Lot, that Mr. B. here says.

But if Mr. Bs. meaning be (for I would feign understand him) that there is an
opposition between man's Act and Gods Act in the Text. So is there in those
words, Prove. 16. 1.
The preparations of the heart are in man: but the answer of the tongue i^ of
the Lord. Which yet prove not an immediate work of God therefore to be in
every answer that a man gives, or in every word that he utters.

But unless Mr. B. can find some stranger matter in those words, cast into the
lap, more than here he discovers, or any man (I believe) sees beside
himself, he says no more than he said that I granted before, to wit, that the
whole disposing of the Lot is of God, so as the event is what he pleases.
Which does not necessarily infer an immediate act of God in it: No more than,
if a man should say, as he truly may say, that Psalm. 18. 29, 39. and 44. 3. 6,
7. and 60. 11, 12. (...). In Dei arbitrio posita est victoria. Lactant. Contra
qua^ Sen. Herc. fur. 1. Omnis in far est salus.
the whole disposition of war and battle (which Sicut urbium expugnati^, ita
sorti^ temperatio a Domino est. Hebrae^rum nonnulli, test Mercero in Prove. 16.
33.
the Rabbines, some of them, compare here with a Lot, and so make this verse*
cohere with the next before it) is of God the Lord of Hoasts, so that the issue
and event of it is such as he pleases; it would follow thereupon, that he
denied Prove. 21. 30, 31. 2 Samuel 10. 12.
arms to be of any use in war, or affirmed all victory to come immediately,
and without means from God.


I. B. Does not this then make good mine Assumption?


T. G. No indeed; not a whit: Unless the asking of the Question do ought in
it.


I. B. But for all this Mr. G. will not have it so. For as he translateth this
place, he says* It imports thus much, [That there i^ a Providence in all
things, even the least, and most casual.] And this he would confirm by these
my words, viz. [The disposing of the Chance i^ secret, that it might be Chance
indeed, and wholly of God, who disposes all things.] Do these words justify
Mr. Gs. interpretation of this place? Yes: for they say plainly, God directs
all things; and they say withal, The (...) of the Chance (that is, of the
things purposely ^isposed by a man unto a variable event) unto a certain
event, is secret, that it may be Chance indeed, that (...), an event not by the
will of man, but wholly of God. ^o that my words imply this Argument. God
directs ^ll things: therefore much more, in our discerning a Lot, the whole
disposing whereof is of him. This is far from saying that thi^ place imports
only, That there is a providence in all things.


T. G. Mr. B^. words I have faithfully related; and they ^ustifie as much as I
allege them for, to wit, a con^ession, that God directs and disposes as
well all ^ther things as Lots. What Mr. B. may please to fish further out of
his own words, I am well content he do: what the words themselves of
themselves import, any man may soon see.


I. B. Neither does Mr. Gs. translation infer this imported interpretation.


T. G. What it will necessarily infer, is not material; what it will well
bear, is for me enough. It is sufficient, that no more can be inferred out of
it: and that is all that I auerre. But Mr. B. (you shall see) will show that
there may.


I. B. For this discretion [But] does so oppose every judgment, or disposing
of it (as he expounds Judgment) to a Lot cast into the lap, as that every
disposing, is all one with the whole disposing.


T. G. The discretiue (for so I suppose his meaning is) but, does no otherwise
oppose here than in the place before cited; but Prove. 16. 1.
the answer of the tongue is of the Lord: nor does it any more prove, that
every disposing is all one with the whole disposing, (though I refuse not that
also in such sense as I have showed) than that every man's judgment is all one
with the whole judgment of every man; in that speech also of Solomon, Prove.
29. 16.
Many seek to the Rulers face, but every man's judgment is of God.


I. B. This place so troubles Mr. G. that from it he would have no more
gathered, than that the whole event (as of all things, so) of a Lot, is of the
Lord. Yet so, as working by means in the most of them, and not implying
immediate providence universally in them.


T. G. Rather this place so troubles Mr. B. being indeed the only maine
bulwark of his cause, that like a man in a maze he runs backward and
forward, from Mr. Gs. to the Geneua translation, and then back to Mr. Gs.
again, as not enduring the trial of, or trial by either.

It is true, I auerre it, nor does Mr. B. himself here deny, but that the
whole event of all things is of the Lord: nor have the words of the Text in the
ordinary Translations any one word more of a Lot, and no necessary implication
therefore of any immediate providence in them, which Mr. B. would pick out of
them.


I. B. I need not examine the means or immediate providence of all the
instances quoted in the margent. For here it is impliedly granted, (for he
says not, all, but, the most of them) that in some things God works not by
means, and that there is an immediate providence particularly; for he denies
such a providence only, as being universally.


T. G. Mr. B. it seems, little passes what he say, though never so little
to the purpose, so he may seem to say something. The instances some of them
are by Mr. B. himself, though contrary to his own purpose, alleged. Mine
Argument stands thus:

Nothing is said by Solomon in this place of Lots, but what may with good
warrant from Gods word be truly said of all other humane actions, in the most
whereof yet God works not immediately, but by means. There is nothing
therefore said of a Lot in this place, that may prove any immediate providence
of God therein. Now what is it to the purpose whether there be an immediate
providence of God in some of them or no. This phrase that may be truly used,
where none such is, proves it not. The impropriety of speech here used I pass
by, because it is nothing to the purpose. But till either the Antecedent here
be disproued, or the Consequence (which I suppose no man will once question)
infringed, Mr. B. remains clean put beside his maine bulwark.


I. B. Howsoever it be in other things, I think it is manifest to all, that
will see, that God without means, and therefore immediately, does dispose the
Lot cast into the lap unto this, or that event, what pleases him, whereas man
disposes the things only unto a variable event. As at cards a man shufleth
them of purpose to dispose them unto a variable event. But by the immediate
providence of God, they are so shufled as that this or that event follows.


T. G. Here Mr. B. lets go his hold of that Text, and without any direct
Answer at all given to mine Argument against his deduction, now upon his bare
word only tells us, that it is so here, howsoever it be elsewhere, and we
are all wilfully blind if we see it not to be so as he says. Let him pardon
me; (...). Theocr. idyll. 7. Sed non ego credulus illi. Virgil. ^clog. 9.
I believe him not. He must first show better Cards for it than he has done
yet, or else few wise men and well advised, I suppose, will believe that either
all Lots in general, or the shufling of the Cards so and so, are effected
without means. Any man, I think that has his eyes in his head, may soon see
it to be otherwise.


I. B. Therefore (with Mr. Gs. favor) any reasonable man may judge it not
senseless to say (which he doubts of. p. 147.) that in Childrens plays at
even and odd, or at Heads and Points, there is an immediate providence, in
inclining the will of the Child, and guiding his conjecture.


T. G. And with Mr. Bs. good favor, I believe any judicious Reader will smile
to hear Mr. B. here affirm it. But I would gladly know of Mr. B. why he
skippeth thus from place to place in his Answer, and does not go through with
my discourse and Argument about this very particular, but balke or stride over
all that lies between that he last dealt with, and this that comes in the
very end of it. But especially I would have him tell what he can answer to
that instance of a Lot propounded next immediately before this, wherein two
appeal to the Cards as they lie left by those that last used them without
further shuffling, who (suppose it) left the Cards (though unknown to the
appealants) in some certain manner sorted as to themselves then best seemed;
whether the event fall out by an immediate providence therein or no. Or, which
I now add, when two shall determine to shape their course by the tracke of a
beast gone before them, which being driven to the market by its owner, takes
this rather than that way, because the market that way lies, whether this be
also by an immediate providence or no.


I. B. Thus we see this place does confirm mine Assumption, and the proof
annexed, Mr. Gs. interpretation notwithstanding.


T. G. But no man, I am sure, unless he borrow Mr. Bs. spectacles, will be
able ever to see it.


I. B. But he gives two reasons against an immediate providence in ordinary
Lots.


T. G. Though I needed not to give any: Affirmanti incumbit probatio. Negans
probare no^ tenetur. Reiswich. reg. Iur.
he that says it, should prove it: yet I give indeed not two only; but more
than two, if Mr. B. had pleased to take notice of them in the very same place
where I give these.


I. B. The former is this. That which agrees to a thing as it is such, agrees
necessarily to all things that are such. Therefore if there be an immediate
providence in a Lot, as it is casual, then there is an immediate providence in
all things that are casual. But the latter is not true: ergo not the former,
p. 143. Why not the latter, if these Positions be true? That which seems
Chance to us, is a certain word of God (says Bernard, Sermo quidam.
but Mr. G. translateth it, is as a word of God) acquainting us with his will,
p. 17. and, In casual events there is nothing guiding them but Gods
providence, p. 22.


T. G. But for ouer-burdening this Book, I would insert here mine own
Argument at large: but so much as Mr. B. relates shall suffice. He denies
(it seems) here the Assumption; and so auerreth that which all evidence of
daily experience does abundantly confute; and which some of those therefore
that have heretofore made this the maine ground of their opinion in this point
now do relinquish; that there is a special and immediate providence of God in
every thing that falls out casually, as in every meeting of any by the way
unsought for (though his business lying this way and mine that way at that
time are the means of our meeting) the stumbling at a stone, or stepping in
some unclean thing, while a man looks up or aside at some sight in a
shop-window, and the like infinite accidents that daily occur. For mine own
part the Assertion to me seems so senseless, that I will no more spend time
to dispute it with him that shall offer to defend it, than with one that shall
affirm all the Rivers in the world to run with salt water.

Yea but there be some sayings in mine own Book that auerre it. Let us hear
them.

Why first Bernard says, Bern. de diverse. sermon. 26.
That which seems Chance to us, is a certain word of God acquainting us with
his will.

First for the Translation, then for the Exposition, and the end for which it
is alleged. The words of Bernard are Sermo quidam, that is, word for word,
some kind of word, or to avoid ambiguitie, a word in some sort. For I hope Mr.
B. when he translateth it, a certain word, does not take certain in that
sense that he did, who expounding the words of the Gospel, Luke 16. 19.
There was a certain rich man, observes thence, that though the Rich man
there mentioned, were otherwise an evil man, yet he was sure and certain of
his word. But Mr. G. translateth it, as a word. And who knows not that quidam
and quoddam are usually notes of diminution and qualification? I wish Mr. B.
had committed no greater fault in relating my words both here and elsewhere,
than I have committed in translating Bernard in that manner.

For the exposition of it how it is to be understood, because I show Of Lots,
Chap. 2. Sect. 3.
there at large whence by Mr. B. it is cited, I do thither refer my Reader.
Only I add thereunto, upon further view of the place, that it is evidently
apparent by the whole sequel of the Sermon, (the maine scope whereof is to
persuade men to rest satisfied with Gods will and pleasure in all accidents and
occurrents, as loss of friends by decease, and the like) that Bernards
Dictorum siquidem intelligentia ex dicendi causis sumenda est Hilar. de trinit.
Et Joan. Savisber. ep. 254. Dictum determinatur secundum suam causam. Reg. Iur.
meaning is, that when ought falls out, whether by casualtie (which he
mentions, because that might most be stuck at) or otherwise, Gods will was
thereby manifested that so it should be, and therefore that we were to submit
to Gods will in it. But no more will it hence follow, that there is an
immediate providence of God in all casual things, more than in any other sort
of events. Gods decreeing will in every event is revealed by his work. And
every event, be it casual, or not casual, is a word of God revealing his
pleasure unto us, and acquainting us with his will.

For the latter allegation Mr. B. most shamefully abuses me, or himself, and
his Reader rather, clipping off just so much of the sentence spoken by me; as
to make it speak directly contrary to that that it does. He brings me in
affirming, that In casual events there is nothing guiding them but Gods
providence. Whereas my words are these, Of Lots, chap. 2. sect. 4.
If in casual events we consider ought beside the creature and the uncertain
motion thereof, (uncertain, I say, to us, because not determinable by us,
though determined ordinarily by some natural cause or other) there is nothing
guiding them but Gods providence. I remember one that in the Schools gave this
Position to be disputed of, Virtus est vitium; and being required to show some
Author for it, produced Horace, where he says, Horat. epist. 1.
Virtus est vitium fugere. And I could relate the like trick that a Popish
Priest sometime showed me in some things that passed in writing between him
and me. And such shifting may well be seem such as they are. But I would wish
Mr. B. to be better advised than to deal thus, if he regard his own credit.
Which I wonder he would thus hazard the calling in question, unless he thought
that no body would take the pains to search the places quoted by him: where
how that that I say, fitteth his turn, may soon be seen, or rather how
directly it contradicts it.


I. B. But suppose there is not an immediate providence in all things that be
casual, what is that to the purpose? For all things casual are not such with
a Lot, wherein things are of purpose disposed by man unto an uncertain event:
which things so disposed by man, are wholly disposed by God unto a certain
event, this or that; so it is not in all other things that be casual.
Therefore all other casual things and Lots are not such.


T. G. Mr. B. before denied mine Assumption. Now he denies either the
Conclusion, or nothing. Though it be so, says he, in other casual things, yet
in a Lot it is not so; for they are wholly disposed by God, that is, in Mr. Bs.
understanding, there is an immediate providence of God in them, which is the
contradictorie of my Conclusion.

What he talks to no purpose in the world, of Lots not being such, is very
frivolous. For either he understands not what I say, or what himself would.
I ground my Proposition, upon a generally received Axiom thus;

Quod convenit tali quatenus tale, convenit omni tali.
That which agrees to a thing as it is such or such, agrees necessarily to
all things that are such; Therefore whatsoever agrees to a Lot as it is a
Casualty, must necessarily agree to every Casualtie. Mr. B. denies neither
Antecedent nor Consequence: but tells us, that all casual things are not
such with a Lot. To what, think we, does this Answer? Every Casualty as it is
a Casualty is such with each Casualty. For the same reason and common nature of
Casualtie is in each; though each of them have something over and beside
distinct either from other. And what agrees therefore to any Casualty as it is
a Casualty, must needs agree unto all.


I. B. Neither is it said, an immediate providence is in a Lot, as it is
casual, but as the Lot being made casual is wholly disposed by God to this or
that event.


T. G. Mr. B. has here given so sore a cut to his own cause, as Afferat ipse
licet sacras Epidamius berbas, Nulla sanabit hoc tibi vulnus open. uti Ovid.
fere Pontil. 1.
he will never be able to cure again with all the skill that he has. For what
has been the maine ground, yea the only ground in effect whereupon these
Games have been by his Master herein, himself, and those that concur with
them condemned, but this, because they depend upon Casualty either in whole or
in part? Ask Mr. B. himself why these Games are unlawful; the very The
unlawfulness of games consisting in Chance.
Title of his Book tells you, because they consist in Chance. In his Epistle
dedicatory he repeateth the same again. In the entrance into his Dialogue,
Dice are therefore unlawful, because they depend upon Chance. And after, Dice
wholly evil, because they depend wholly upon Chance; Cards and Tables somewhat
evil because they depend somewhat upon Chance: And are therefore Lots, for
from thence they have the denomination of a Lot, which in Latin is called
Sors, that is, Chance or hazard; and therefore unlawful. And again, Whether
you call Cards and Tables Lots or no, you play with chance or use Lottery, and
by so doing make God an vmpire in play, which must needs be a sin: because you
take the name of God in vain and tempt the Almighty by a game some putting of
things to hazard, and making play of Lotterie. Again what do those words
imply, the disposing of chance is secret that it may be chance indeed, and
wholly of God: but that therefore it is wholly (that is in Mr. Bs. meaning
immediately) of God, because it is Chance, which else it were not. Go^ we a
little higher from Mr. B. to his Teacher (as himself terms him) herein Mr.
F. Fennor of Recreat. rule spec. 4.
The Nature of a Lot, says he, lies wholly in this, that although the thing
be of us, yet the disposition is wholly of God, that is, he uses not our
means of cunning, practice, strength, etc. but takes it wholly to himself.
And therefore Dice, dealing of Cards, etc. where the matter is laid on hazard
(as they call it) or rather Gods providence, without using any cunning of ours
to dispose, is upon the same reason of a Lot unlawful. Yea hence he infers
that to say, Idem ibid.
what luck is this! how crooked! is in plain terms (so he speaks) as much
as to say, what a God, or a crooked providence of God is this! as presuming
that luck, chance, or hazard, (for all is one in effect) is nothing else but
Gods providence. Now what does all this tend unto but this: That therefore
these games are unlawful because they depend upon Casualty, which makes them
to be Lots: and that therefore it is unlawful to use any game depending upon
Casualty; because in that regard there is an immediate providence of God in it?
Whereas Mr. B. therein crossing all this, and ouerturning his own grounds,
here tells us, that It is not said an immediate providence is in a Lot, as it
is casual. But how then? forsooth as being casual it is wholly disposed by
God to this or that event. That is as much as to say, An immediate providence
of God is not in a Lot, as it is casual, (though that be the ground whereupon
we have formerly affirmed it to be) but as there is an immediate providence of
God in it; (idem per idem) for that is, to be wholly disposed by God; as Mr. B.
still means. Thus you see how Mr. B. has now mended the matter, and made
good his own grounds. But he will have somewhat out of my words yet, before he
have done with them.


I. B. So that from Mr. Gs. axiom this Argument may be framed. An immediate
providence in an extraordinary Lot is acknowledged by Mr. G. as it is a Lot
(say I) wholly disposed by God: Therefore an immediate providence is in an
ordinary Lot, (as it is a Lot) wholly disposed by God. For there is no
difference between these sorts of Lots (as they be Lots) and so disposed. For
Mr. G. has showed that Prou. 16. 33. speaks as well of one sort of Lots, as
of another.


T. G. How this that follows comes in with a, So that, I know not. Yet let
us see what it is. Mr. G. he says, has showed, (I grant it indeed, but I show
it not; it is he that should show it, or he will never be able to convince
those that say otherwise) that Prou. 16. 33 speaks of Lots in general as
well ordinary as extraordinary. Be it so, what of that? But I acknowledge also
an immediate providence in an extraordinary Lot; and that is therein as it is a
Lot; says Mr. B. and therefore by Mr. Gs. Axiom, it must be so in an
ordinary one also. For this I suppose it is that he would say. But he must
first show where I acknowledge an immediate providence to be in every
extraordinary Lot, which I deny to be in many thousands of them: and then prove
it to be in such a Lot as it is a Lot; which to affirm and not prove, is to
require that in effect without proof to be granted, which all the controversy
is about, and which he must not think will be yielded upon his bare, I say.


I. B. The other Argument is this, which is the Kill kow. If in every Lot there
be necessarily an immediate work and providence of God, then it is in the
natural power of man to make God work immediately at his pleasure.

But to say that it is in man's power naturally to set God on working
immediately at his pleasure, is absurd. There is not therefore an immediate
work and providence of God necessarily in every Lot. Mr. G. like an Orator
seems desirous to draw his Adversary into hatred by these words,
[Necessarily, Natural power, Set God on working, At pleasure, To say, and
Absurd] Verba dum sint, surdo canit. But hoping better, I answering his Logic
deny the Assumption. For it is as much in man's natural power to set God on
working immediately in an ordinary, as in an extraordinary Lot. For both God
and man do respectively as much in the one Lot as in the other.


T. G. It is Mr. Bs. guise not mine to seek to draw his Adversaries into
hatred, by traducing them as Pleaders for Dice play and such abuses as attend
thereon, where it is used otherwise than it ought, because they deny every
lusorious Lot to be unlawful, or diceplay simply evil in regard of the Lot
used in it. I reason but here from what Mr. B. himself grants, as shall
hereafter appear.

But Mr. B. denies the Assumption, which is this, To say that it is in man's
power naturally to set God on working immediately at his pleasure, is absurd.
And dare Mr. B. then deny this Assumption? He might as well say, It is in man's
power naturally to set God on working of miracles at his pleasure; as say, It
is in his power naturally to set God on working immediately at his pleasure.
For is not every immediate work of God, or every work wrought without means,
miraculous? Some miracles have been wrought by means: but nothing is wrought
wholly without means, that is not miraculous. Well, I will not say, that it is
blasphemous to ^erre this: but yet I believe it comes nearer blasphemy than
any thing in my Book does.

Yea but Mr. B. has some good reason for the denial of mine Assumption. For,
It is as much in man's power naturally to set God on working immediately in an
ordinary as in an extraordinary Lot. Very true, Quod ille olim, tam doctrina
quam moribus: cum neutra ex part idoneum ad gradum offerret.
as much in the one as in the other. That is in very truth in neither. If there
be in an extraordinary Lot of Gods special appointment, (for in no other is
there any certainty of it) an immediate providence, neither is that there by
any power of man naturally procured, nor is God set a work therein at man's
pleasure, but he works therein upon his own pleasure, and man only by his
appointment. This Mr. B. himself saw well, and adds therefore,


I. B. But an extraordinary Lot is by the special direction of God. True; So
is an ordinary Lot by Gods special advice to end a controversy.


T. G. It follows not from the one to the other. And the reason is apparent.
Because in the extraordinary Lot the event required, be it, to find out a
malefactor, as in Josh. 7. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Achans case, or to discover who the man is that God has fore-appointed to
such an office, as in 1 Samuel 10. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Saul's case, cannot certainly be effected without such an immediate
providence; whereas in the ordinary Lot, nothing is to be determined, but may
well and certainly be decided without it. But if it be so, as Mr. B. says,
that therefore in an ordinary Lot there is an immediate providence; and
therefore a setting of God on working immediately so often as such a Lot is used,
because an ordinary Lot is by Gods special advice to end a Controversy: How
is that true both in his Dialogue, and in the very next words implied by him,
that in a lusorious Lot God is thus set on working? For if God have given no
allowance for lusorious Lots, how is he in them set so on working, who does not
so work, but where Lots are used by his own allowance? Or how sin they in
setting God on working there, where he does not work? Mr. B. therefore here
hangs fast in the briers.


I. B. If then every Lot be a setting of our glorious God on working, there
ought to be prayer, if not by words, yet in heart in the use as well of
ordinary as extraordinary Lots. If so, then Lots are not to be used in
sports.


T. G. If every Lot be, says Mr. B. contrary to what before he implied, that
unless it be done by Gods assignement, it is not. If it be so indeed, the rest
will follow. But that is it that is to be proved. And for Conclusion of this
Argument, let it be observed, that Mr. B. cannot make this good, whereupon the
whole strength of this his principal Argument depends, and for the proof
whereof he alleges, Pro. 16. 33. to wit, that there is an immediate providence
of God in every Lot whatsoever, unless this absurd Position be also granted
him, that

It is naturally in every man's ( nay in every child's) power, to set God on
working immediately at pleasure: And that little children as often as they cast
for cross and pile, cause God therein to work a miraculous work. That which
the rather I require to be observed and remembered, because the whole pith of
the next Argument, yea of all the rest in a manner, depends upon this point.


The second Argument.
WE are not to tempt the Almighty by a vain desire I. B. Dialog. Arg. 2.
of manifestation of his power and special providence.

But by using Lots in sport we do so: therefore we may not use Lots in sport.

T. G. The Assumption they seem to prove on this T. G. Of Lots, chap. 7. Sect.
6.
wise.

Dan. de lud. al. c. 9. rat. 1.
To call God to sit in judgment where there is no necessity so to do, or for
the determining of trifles, is to tempt, nay to mock God:

But by the use of Lots in sport, God is called to sit Tanquam rei gerend^
extraordinarius modeator and arbiter. Dan. ibid.
in judgment where there is no necessity, for the determining of trifles.

By the use of Lots in sport therefore we tempt and dishonor God.

The Proposition is confirmed a simili, Eastie history of Gosp. Reas. 5.
by the King and Council, by whose government though we all live, yet were it
a dishonor to them to be called upon by children to determine their sports.


I. B. The Assumption is proved a pari, by comparing I. B. Dialog. Ground 3.
together a Lot and an Oath: A Lot in the nature thereof does as necessarily
suppose the providence and determining presence of God, as an Oath in the
nature thereof does suppose the testifying presence of God. Balmf. ibid. and
Zanch^ia miscell. ar. de sort. E^iamsi actu non invoces, tamen re^psa Deum
invocas so^titus.
Yea so, that as in an Oath, so in a Lot, 1 Samuel 14. 41.
Prayer is expressed or to be understood. In which regard also as an Oath, so a
Perkins Cas. of Consc. lib. 3. cap. 4.. 4. q. 2.
Lot is an Res sacra. Dan. lud. al. c. 9. rat. 1. Religi^sa. Iun. in Ion. c. 1.
act of religion, in which we refer unto God the determining of such weighty
things as can no other ways be determined: and therefore Perkins ibid.
in the use of it is ever infolded, and sometime also expressed, both a
confession that God is a sovereign Judge to determine such things, and Act. 1.
24, 25, 26.
a supplication to him that by the Lot, when it is cast, he will be pleased so
to do. A Lot, therefore, as an Oath, is not to be used but Vise sup. cap. 5. 3.
in case of necessity and extremity: and Perkins ibid.
being a solemn act of religion may not be applied to sporting: Eastie hist.
of Gosp. Reas. 6.
We may as well jest with the Word, and Sacraments, and Oaths, as with Lots.


There might be diverse several Arguments framed T. G. Answer.
out of these allegations; but because they build all on one ground, and stand
upon one bottom, I have thought best to put them in this manner together, that
the same common answer might serve them all.

First therefore the using of Lots either in matters ibid. sect. 7.
sage and serious, or of sport and delight is In Iudo taxillatorio iudicium
divinum non requiritur, sed fortunae res co^mittitur. Thom. de sortib. c. 5.
and Lyra in Prove. c. 16.
not of it self any desire of the manifestation of Gods special power and
providence by an immediate disposition, unless men offend against the caution
before given in doing it to this end, to try thereby whether God will vouchsafe
to work immediately and extraordinarily or no; which being not of the nature
of the thing it self, is not necessarily implied in the ordinary use of it.
Neither is there any such calling in of God to decide doubts in game, but
Iudice fortuna cadat alea. Petron. satyr. Fortuna sit optionis iudex, and sort
d^rimatur. Justin. inst^t. l. 2. til. 20.
the matter in question is put to the casual disposition of the Creature; no
more than there was any solemn calling of God in, or calling upon him to
determine the Tithe, in the example before alleged out of Levit. 27. 37.
the Law. And therefore consequently Non est (...) ne Deum tentare vide^ mur.
Martyr in 1 Samuel c. 10.
no such tempting of God, as is here charged, in the use of a Lot, be it used
either in case of necessity or otherwise.

Yea rather if a Lot be such, as here they say, it is not to be used in my
business at all upon any occasion whatsoever. For, It is Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Matthew 47.
not lawful to tempt God Praecepta negativa lig^nt semper and ad semper.
Gerson. reg. mo^al.
in any case whatsoever: But to use Lots in any case whatsoever is to tempt
God: It is not lawful therefore to use Lots in any case whatsoever.

The Assumption is thus proved evidently Ex con^essis.
by the former grounds and grants: Exodus 17. 2. 7. Psalm. 7^. 18, 19, 20.
To require a work of Gods immediate power and providence in this or that
kind, is to stint, and so to tempt God: But to use a Lot in any case, is to
require a work of Gods immediate power and providence: (for every Lot, say
they, is such:) Therefore to use a Lot in any case whatsoever is unlawful.

But this Conclusion is untrue: for Prove. 18. 18.
a Lot in some cases may lawfully be used: the former ground therefore is false.

It is indeed No^ permittit nos Deus voluntate suam per media extraordinaria
investigare. (...) disq. mag. tom. 2. l 4. c. 4. q. 5.. 2.
unlawful and a tempting of God to use a Lot so as they would have it used
only, to wit, requiring and expecting an extraordinary work of God in it, in
any case or upon any occasion whatsoever, without Gods express appointment of
it, though all means should fail otherwise. For to have recourse to
extraordinary means when ordinary fail, is to tempt God by refusing to depend
and wait upon God, as our Savior implies, when Math. 4. 3, 4, 2.
at the Devils motion he refused to (...), etc. sicut (...) 1 Reg. 2. 17. male
vulgo exponunt, Iube, impera, etc.
speak to his Father to have stones turned into bread, lest by so doing he
should tempt God, though it were in case of extremity: that which was Exodus
17. 2, 3. Psalm. 78. 41.
the sin of the Israelites sometime in the Wilderness. No such Lot therefore
at all as they allow of is allowable. And to speak as the truth is, by the
course and force of this their discourse, the only lawful use of a Lot is
disallowed and condemned, and an unlawful and unwarrantable use of it is
allowed in the room of it. Ibid. sect. 8.


Secondly, an Oath and a Lot are not alike: the comparison therefore laid
between them will not hold. For neither is the right of ought in an ordinary
Lot put to the special providence or immediate and extraordinary work of God;
as 2 Cor. 11. 31. Galat. 1. 20. Phil. 1. 8.
the truth of the thing testified is in an oath put to his testimony: neither
is there in every Lot any such solemn invocation of God, as there is in an
Oath ever either 2 Cor. 1. 23.
expressed or implied, by which God is called to witness with us the truth of
that we auow, or the truth of our purpose to perform what we promise: as may
hereby appear.

The definition of each thing contains the whole nature of the thing defined.
Now a Lot may be defined without this: but so cannot an Oath. Yea so Balm.
Dialog.
some of the adverse party define Lottery out of Lyra in Pr. c. 16.
Lyra, To use Lots is by a variable event of some sensible thing to determine
some doubtful or uncertain matter. Which definition of Lottery contains no
such matter as is here supposed to be of the very nature and essence of a Lot,
as it is of the essence of an Oath; which cannot be defined therefore without
it.

Neither do the 1 Samuel 14. 41. Act. 1. 24, 25, 26.
places produced prove it. They prove only that Prayer was sometime used (but
Precatur, sed prorsus absque omni fide. Martyr in Sam. c. 14.
a faithless prayer 1 Samuel 14. 41.
the one of them without word or warrant) before an extraordinary Lot for an
extraordinary power and providence to direct the event of it; Act. 1. 24.
the thing intended being such as the Lot by no natural power, either of the
Creature using it, or used in it, was able to effect: which kind of prayer
has no place, nor is lawful in ordinary or mere diuisory Lots. For example:
Levit. 27. 32.
In assigning and setting out Tithe, it was not lawful, much less necessary,
to pray God so to give a right Lot, that every Lamb or Kid that were indeed in
course of time the tenth, might certainly or constantly so come to hand. But
they prove not that prayer is part of a Lot, or is in the Lot, as it is part of
an Oath, and is included in the Oath, as by the usual Hoc est iurare, Deum
testari. Aug. in Psalm. 109 Deum testem adhibere Cic. Offic. l. 3. Quid est
iurare, nisi nes veritatis Deo reddere. Aug. de verb. Ap. sermon. 28. Iurare est
testem adhibere Deum. Lomb sent. l. 3. d. 29. F. Deum in testem vocare. Thom.
sum. par. 2^. 2ae. q. 89. a. 1. 4. and q. 98. a. 2. implorare testimonium Dei
exhibendum. Ibid. q. 89 a. 1. Iuramentum est Dei attestatio ad veritatem
sermonis nostri consirmandam. Calv. instit. l. 2. c. 8.. 23. Invocatio Dei qua
petimus ut Deus sit testis de animo nostro quod fallere nolimus, and vt vindex
fit si sefellerimus. Melan^h. loc. com. in definit. Iuratio itaque ad
invocatione pertinet. Ibid. de 20 praecept.
definitions of an Oath may appear. In election of offices sacred or civil,
prayer is used or at least ought to be used: yet it follows not therefore
that prayer is a part of the choice, or that therefore the election in the
nature of it does necessarily suppose a special providence and determining
presence of God. Yea prayer may be used both before game and in game, as both
before and at meat, and yet is not therefore of the nature of game, nor
supposes therefore a special providence of God and a determining presence in
it.

Lastly, a Lot is no religious act, nor holy thing of it self, as Chap. 6.. 6.
before has been shown: there is much difference therefore between Lots,
and the word of God, Sacraments, and Oaths. For these things are holy of
themselves and in their own nature, as the very definitions of them will soon
show: and therefore cannot but be holy. Whereas a Lot is not in the nature and
the definition of it holy, and therefore is not always and necessarily sacred.
Yea those things are now holy, as ever, in our ordinary use; whereas no Lot is
holy that we can use now adays; nor indeed was ever any so, save
extraordinarily. But Gods taking of any thing sometime extraordinarily, or from
ordinary use, to apply it to some holy and extraordinary use, does not exempt
the kind in general, but the thing only it self so used in special from
civil or light and ordinary usage; and that also so long only as it is so set
apart: As the use of water in Baptism hinders not but that a man may play
with water, yea and with that very water that may afterward be a Sacrament in
Baptism, or that has so been, but is not now. In like manner, when a Lot
shall be extraordinarily used for a special sign of Gods immediate election
and choice, whosoever shall then contemn or set light by that Lot, he shall
abuse an holy thing and Gods name in so doing; but not whosoever shall use
otherwise any Lot to disport, yea though it were that Lot that had been used
in such a business before; there remaining no more holiness in it after that
use is over, than in Exodus 3. 2, 5.
the bush that burnt but wasted not, when God manifested himself to Moses in
it, after that manifestation was once ended.

To this long Answer I might make a short Reply. I. B. Reply.
For whereas Mr. Gs. maine ground i^ this: There is no immediate providence of
God in an ordinary, as is in an extraordinary Lot, and thereupon he builds
these Answers. Therefore there is no tempting of God by using Lots in sport.
Therefore Prayer expressed, or to be understood, is (not) required in ordinary
Lots: and Therefore an ordinary Lot is not an holy thing in it self. I might
(referring my self to the defense of my former Argument) briefly reply and
say: There is an immediate providence of God in an ordinary Lot: Therefore God
is tempted by using Lots in sport: Therefore Prayer expressed, or to be
understood, is required of them who use an ordinary Lot: and Therefore an
ordinary Lot is an holy thing.

Here that appears that I told you before, that T. G. Reioinder.
unless you grant Mr. B. what he could not in the former Argument make good,
all is gone. For here is nothing that will stand, unless that be made good. So
that by his own acknowledgment nothing needed to be anew answered to this
Argument, if sufficient Answer have been given to the former.

But Mr. G. he says upon such ground denies all this.

1. Mr. G. need lay no ground at all for his denial: It is enough for him
barely to deny some Proposition, which upon his denial Mr. B. is to prove.

2. Mr. G. does not deny all this upon such ground as Mr. B. here pretends,
because there is no immediate providence in any ordinary Lot; which he says
not; no more than that it is in every extraordinary one: for who can hinder God
from working immediately when he will, either in that or in ought else? or who
can enforce him to work in such manner save when he himself will? But because
it cannot be proved that there is so ordinarily in ordinary Lots, nor does the
nature of a Lot require that it should be. Yea because that ordinarily it is
not, as has already been showed.

3. I might demand of Mr. B. how the use of a lusorious Lot can be a tempting
of God, by desiring the manifestation of his special providence in his
immediate disposing, if such an immediate providence of God be generally in all
Lots. For what is it to tempt God, but to stint him to that, or to try him
whether he will do that, or no, which it is uncertain whether he be willing
unto or no? But if in all Lots such an immediate providence of God be, then it
is certain before hand that God will so work in it. And if it be said, that
God is not willing to have lusorious Lots ^ast; yet he is not unwilling, if
this ground be good, when they are cast so to work in them: for who can
enforce him to it, unless he will? A man might reason therefore rather
backward from Mr. Bs. grounds, and say, An immediate providence of God is in
every Lot necessarily: And, Therefore it is no tempting of God to expect that
of it, that cannot but be in it, to wit, a special providence in disposing the
Lot without means.

I. B. But something more in replying, will have more savor in reading.


T. G. Vt enim aliae benae res, ita bonus liber melior est quisque, quo major.
Et M. Tull^j oration optima fertur esse quae maxima. Plin. epist. ^0.
True: if it be not so unsavory as some things before have been. (...).
Callama. h. apud Ath^n. (...) s. l. 3. E^, (...). Diogenian. in Pa^m.
Otherwise the more and the longer, I suppose, the less savor.


I. B. Therefore I first marvel that Mr. G. forgets himself in concluding:
That all Lots be unlawful, if there be an immediate providence in all Lots.
What? Were extraordinary Lots unlawful too? Nay; he understands an exception
of them, because they were commanded by God. So I say, ordinary Lots were
advised by God to end controversies. Therefore using them in that case is no
tempting of God.


I. B. Mr. B. might, if he pleased, easily have seen what my Conclusion
intends, not to determine ought concerning any such Lots as by Gods special
appointment were sometime used with expectation of such a special and
extraordinary providence in them, but of such only as may in these days be
lawfully used, which alone we now deal with. Between which two sorts there is
much difference in the case now questioned. It being no tempting of God to
expect such an extraordinary work of his in the one, because without it that
could not be certainly effected, for which he had enjoined them to be used.
Whereas in the other it is; because neither the business whereunto they are
used, requires it, nor has God himself any where promised it. So that it is
not the want of either command or warrant for the use of them, but the
expecting or requiring that which there is no ground or promise of God for in
the use of them, that makes them guilty in that kind.

That which follows therefore I auow still, and can easily make good; both
that all extraordinary Lots now used are unlawful, and no better than mere
Soreeries; as the attempting by Lot to discover a malefactor would be, which
yet was lawful when Josh. 7. 14, 15.
God enjoined it.

And again that to use any Lots in that manner as Mr. B. prescribes, to wit,
with invocation for and expectation of a special and immediate work of Gods
providence therein, or to put things to Lot upon presumption of such
providence, is to tempt God, he having no where promised any such thing.


I. B. I marvel also, why Mr. G. should so confidently affirm, that by this
course, that is, by maintaining an immediate providence in all Lots, an
unlawful use of a Lot is allowed in the room of the only lawful use.


T. G. The reason is apparent, because such an use is allowed, as is
superstitious, and without warrant. Yea such as Mr. B. himself, I doubt not,
but will condemn, if that position be unsound, to wit, that such an immediate
providence, as Mr. B. pretends, is ordinarily in Lots; which Mr. B. knowing
that Mr. G. denies: why should he marvel that he holds that, that does
necessarily follow upon the denial of it?


I. B. But I refer the discussing hereof to the defense of my third Argument.


T. G. There then we shall deal further with it.


I. B. Again it is to be observed, that he sets down a Comparison between an
Oath and a Lot, which I set not down, whereby the mind of the Reader may be
troubled. For I say not: As the truth of a thing is by an Oath put to Gods
Testimony; so in an Ordinary Lot the right of a thing is put to Gods immediate
providence. This is it that I say: As an Oath in the Nature thereof supposes
the testifying presence of God: so a Lot, in the Nature thereof, supposes the
determining presence of God. My reason is, Ending a Controversy; I say not,
Deciding a right: For before dividing the land of promise by Lot, no Tribe, or
family could challenge more right to one portion than to another. Ending (I
say) a controversy is by a Lot referred to Gods determining, the same by his
whole or immediate disposing the uncertain Lot to a certain event.


T. G. I set down no more as Mr. Bs. but what is his, and he himself in
precise terms has set down before me. Only I show diverse differences, and
those material between an Oath and a Lot, in regard whereof there is no sound
reasoning from the one to the other. And among other things withal show, that
there is no necessity of Gods determining presence in such manner as is here
presumed in a Lot, because there is nothing in an ordinary Lot put upon
Lottery, that requires any such divine determining presence.

But whereas Mr. B. here auerreth that no right of ought is in an ordinary Lot
put to Question, because the use of it is only to end Controversy; the reason
is most frivolous: For are not Controversies most frequent about matter of
Right? and many of them more impossible to be ended by any other course, than
other Controversies ordinarily are? And sure if there be such an immediate
providence and a determining presence of God in them, as by Mr. B. is presumed,
why should not questions of right, where they cannot well be determined
otherwise, be referred to a Lot, as well, if not rather, than any other? Since
also that that place in the Proverbs speaks of Controversies in general,
without distinction or exclusion of any. For to reason, as Mr. B. here from a
particular to a general, There was no question of right (though that also may
be questioned by those that rank that among extraordinary Lots) in the
division of the land of Canaan; Therefore there is none in any: I say no more
but that it is like Mr. Bs. reasoning often elsewhere.


I. B. It is also to be observed that in the 2. Comparison between an Oath and
a Lot, touching Prayer, he says, Neither is there in every Lot any such
solemn invocation. Therefore in some Lot, there is, that is, in an
extraordinary Lot, because of an immediate providence to direct the event of
it. For the same cause (say I) prayer to be expressed, or understood in the use
of an ordinary Lot to.


T. G. You see, if a man grant Mr. B. what he will, he can prove what he list.
We had this before in the brief Answer at first: Why does he trouble his
Reader now with it again? But you see, he cannot go on an inch unless that
be still granted; which will never be made good.


I. B. But, says Mr. G. Prayer is of the essence of an Oath, and not of a Lot.
I have said nothing to the contrary. So that he might have spared his
definition of a Lot.


T. G. But if he say nothing now to it, he answers not mine Argument; that
therefore prayer is not necessarily in every Lot either expressed or implied.
Wherein also because I spoke somewhat short then, it being sufficient to give
the contradictory to Mr. Bs. assertion, I speak further home now and say, that
it is not in any Lot at all; for it is one thing to be used about it, another
thing to be in it. Prayer, and other discourse is used often about or at our
meals, but is not therefore in them.


I. B. But because he takes a Definition, (such as it is) out of my Dialogue,
I will say somewhat thereto. The definition (so called) is from Lyra, viz. To
use Lots is by a variable event of some sensible thing to determine some
doubtful, or uncertain matter. How is this matter to be determined indeed?
Even by Gods whole or immediate disposing the Lot. Has God the principal hand
in the determination? And is not then Prayer to be expressed, or understood in
a Lot, that is, in the managing by the users thereof.

1. If that definition be but a sorry one, why did T. G.
Mr. B. give no better? Or why does he not show wherein it is defective? 2. You
see still, he must have that granted him, which so often he inculcateth, or else
nothing will fadge with him. 3. Has not God an hand, and if an hand, I hope, a
principal, because a ruling and ouer-ruling hand in all things. Must solemn
prayer therefore be necessarily used before every thing, every step that a man
strideth, or every chery that he eats? 4. It is one thing to have prayer used
about a thing; an other thing to have prayer necessarily understood or implied
in it. 5. By this silly reason it may be proved that any serious affair about
which solemn prayer is to be used, is of the same nature with an Oath.



I. B. Now then let us consider the places produced to prove it. The former
(says Mr. G.) was faithless. I say so too. Because that Lot was without any
warrant. This notwithstanding, prayer in this and the other place, does show
that Gods people believing that God does signify his judgment by the whole or
immediate disposition of that Lot, did therefore think themselves bound to
pray.


T. G. What is all this to prove that in a Lot, as in an Oath, prayer is ever
understood or implied. A man might as well reason thus; Our Savior Matthew. 14.
14. Luke 24. 30.
more than once prayed, before he brake bread: Therefore in all breaking of
Bread prayer ever is implied.

I need not add, that in those being extraordinary, there was necessary cause
to crave by prayer some special presence and providence, because Mr. B.
himself in his next words observes it.


I. B. But both their Lots were extraordinary, wherein was an immediate
providence of God. Therefore they might well believe that they should pray.
True: so all Christians may, yea and must believe, they ought to pray in the
using ordinary Lots, because of Gods immediate providence exercised therein.


T. G. True, if they will believe Mr. B. on his word: but not else: for out of
Gods word, I am sure, he cannot make this good, which yet so often he repeateth,
and builds all upon.


I. B. Nay; It was unlawful in setting out Tithe. If so; not because it was an
ordinary Lot, (if a Lot) but because the Lord expressly says, of all that goes
under the rod the tenth shall be holy.


T. G. I no where deny that any Prayer might have been used at that manner of
assignement, but prayer only to such particular purpose. Which yet if it had
been used, did not require ought against the tenths being holy, but that each
tenth might come forth according to the due order of being yeaned.


I. B. The instance of election of Offices is besides the purpose. For it is
not argued thus: Because Gods people prayed when they used a Lot; therefore
there is an immediate providence of God in a Lot. But thus: There is an
immediate providence of God in a Lot: Therefore Gods people prayed when they
used a Lot.


T. G. Then belike it was produced to prove nothing at all that was to be
proved. For the point to be proved was not that Gods people prayed at the use
of a Lot, but that that a Lot does suppose the determining presence, or
immediate providence of God. Which hereby also Mr. B. endeavored to prove. But
now Mr. B. it seems, takes that for a thing granted; which is the point that
he is to prove.

The instance is to the purpose; for it does show that Prayer is not therefore
implied in a Lot, as in an Oath, though it be used thereabout.


I. B. If then there be an immediate providence of God in a Lot, and in regard
thereof prayer is to be expressed or understood in the lawful use of a Lot,
then praying and playing (though they rhyme well together, yet) run not well
together in the lawful use of a Lot. Nay rather it follows from both, That a
Lot is not to be used but in a case of necessity more or less. And therefore
strange (I will not say, absurd) is Mr. Gs. Position p. 111. to wit, The less
weighty the matter is, wherein a Lot is used, the lawfuller the Lot is. Except
it be proved, that the less weighty the matter is, the greater is the
necessity of ending the controversy by a Lot. The said Position is more
strange, because he grants p. 95. That Prayer specially applied to the Lot
may (in some case) be conceived, where the matter is more weighty, as in the
choice of a Magistrate. But concerning this also more shall be said in my next
Reply.


T. G. If a man grant Mr. B. his Ifs still, he can prove any thing: else
nothing. He said but even now that he does not here prove it, and yet presently
upon it, he tells us, If then it be so etc. as if it were here proved to
hand. But unless that be proved, all that follows is just naught. For
naught and naught and naught makes naught; as in Ciphering they use to say.

Yet that praying and playing do not at all run well, I hope Mr. B. will not
affirm. For albeit a man may not play with prayer, yet he may pray, I hope,
before he play; yea and upon just occasion too at his play.

That absurd Position, as Mr. B. here implies it to be, has been
sufficiently canuased already; and has more truth in it, I believe, than Mr.
B. is aware of. If ought further come against it, it shall in his due place be
answered. That here alleged of Prayer used with some Lot, no way crosses it;
nor does Mr. B. show wherein it any way does.


I. B. Lastly, It serves my turn that Mr. G. acknowledges that Gods name,
and an Holy thing is abused, whenever an extraordinary Lot is contemned,
because an immediate providence of God is therein. For the same cause an
ordinary Lot is the Name of God and an Holy thing, and therefore not to be
abused in sport. But Mr. G. has shown before, that a Lot is not in it self
an Holy thing. Indeed; he would have shown in his third Reason, inducing him
to allow lusorious Lots, as not evil in themselves, that a Lot is not holy
either in it self, or by divine institution. Whereunto I have already answered
somewhat. But having learned more (occasionally) by his further dispute, I will
now for some more satisfaction, answer somewhat more. A Lot (says Mr. G. p.
132, and 133.) is not holy either in it self, because a Casualtie has no
holiness in it self: For then all Casualties should be holy: or by divine
institution in the word sanctifying it to some holy Use.

I answer briefly. Is an extraordinary Lot the Name of God, an holy thing in it
self, because of Gods immediate providence therein, and not an ordinary Lot in
respect of the same providence? If it be, Then though all casualties be not
holy in themselves, yet all lawful Lots be holy in themselves. So that as the
Bush that burnt and wasted not, was holy, when God manifested himself to Moses
in it, p. 156. So a Lot is holy, because of Gods special presence therein.
Herein they differ. The Bush was holy but for a time, because God was present
in it but for a time: Where as a Lot is holy from time to time, so often as it is
lawfully used, because of Gods special presence therein from time to time.
Therefore howsoever sport might have been made with the Bush, the presence of
God being removed; yet ought sport never be made with a Lot, because Gods
special presence is ever therein.


T. G. This should have come before. Yet better at last, we say, than never.
But Mirabar, inquit ille, si quid afferres novi. Ter. Phorm. 3. 2.
what new matter has Mr. B. here brought? Does he any more than At enim
taedet iam eadem audire millies: dum eande^ semper cantilenam canis. Ibid.
abuse his Reader by singing over and over his wonted song, that in every
lawful Lot (it must be in every one lawful or unlawful, if it be of the
nature and essence of a Lot) there is an immediate providence: and if so, then
that such and such things follow; that which no man doubts of or denies. I
pass by, that he says, I grant that every extraordinary Lot is Gods Name, and
Gods Name abused in it, when it is contemned; whereas I hold many extraordinary
Lots, as all Diuinatorie ones used now adays, to be rather the Devils Name;
and Gods Name most honored, when they are most, not contemned only, but
detested too.


I. B. Again, I need not prove that an ordinary Lot to end controversies is by
divine institution in the word, seeing Mr. G. grants that God in Prou. 18.
18. advises us to use it to that end.


T. G. What I grant, is to be seen. But by this Argument a man may as well
prove, every peare-plum, or Lectise-leafe, to be holy, because Genesis 1. 29.
by divine institution in the word, all herbs and fruits are for man's use. Mr.
B. himself saw the slightness hereof: and adds therefore to mend the matter:


I. B. But it is not sanctified to an holy use. I have showed otherwise.


T. G. Where? Can you tell?


I. B. But what then? Is not a Lot therefore always holy in it self? as Mr.
G. says in this passage.


T. G. I no where say, that a Lot is not always holy in it self, (nor is any
at all so) but only, that Lots are not always sacred.


I. B. Were all extraordinary Lots sanctified to holy uses?


T. G. Yea: all that were used by Gods special direction, if Mr. B. speak of
such, were sanctified to an holy use, to wit, to be divine Oracles. And what
then?


I. B. Yet Mr. G. deemeth them all holy in themselves, because of immediate
providence in them.


T. G. Rather: therefore he deemeth them sacred, and in that regard holy,
though not holy otherwise of themselves.


I. B. Why may not I for the same cause, think the same of all ordinary Lots?


T. G. Prove the same, and then think the same of them. But this is nothing
but Versat Sisyphus ingens Saxum sudans nitendo; neque proficit hilum. Cic.
Tuscul. l. 1.
the rolling of Sisyphus his stone forward and backward: and taking still for
granted (...).
the maine Question it self.


I. B. And the rather because Mr. G. says, p. 227. Marriage being Gods
ordinance is holy in it self. But (as he acknowledges, p. 1.) a Lot is Gods
ordinance. Therefore from his grant a Lot is holy in it self. If then a Lot is
holy in it self, I conclude with Mr. G. p. 133. It may in no case be made
matter of sport.


T. G. This belike is the new matter that M. B. had of late better learned, and
which he thought good therefore to close up this his wild and diffused
discourse with; (...). Liban in Demosth. Quae excellunt ad perorandum
serventur. Cic. de ^rat. l. ^.
reserving that that he thought would strike all dead to the last. But so sorry
and silly a thing it is, that I wonder a man of his gravity, unless he did it
a little to recreate himself, would produce it. For what man of the meanest
understanding sees not* that there is a mere equivocation in the word holy:
taken in the Proposition in a general sense, as all Gods ordinances,
recreation and meat (which in 1 Timothy 4. 4. Si^ Calvin. in 1 Cor. 7. Coitus viri
and mulieris res pura est, honesta, and sancta; quia Dei institutie.
one of the places of Scripture there by me cited, is conjoined with it) as
well as marriage, are said to be holy: but concluded in the strict sense here
disputed of, as those things only are termed holy, that have special relation
unto God: which of Marriage, I suppose, unless it be, as the Popish sort say, a
Sacrament, Mr. B. will not avouch. What such poor shifts as these are argue, I
had rather others should say than my self.

Let me add but a word, to solue a seeming contradiction; (howsoever I say not
in that place, that Marriage is holy in it self, which yet I well might;) that
it is one thing to say, a thing is holy of it self, not requiring therefore
any further special institution to make it such; and another thing to say,
that it is holy in it self, in way of opposition to man's corrupt and evil
usage of it, that Tit. 1. 15. Hegg. 2. 13.
may pollute and unhallow that that is holy in it self.


The third Argument.
Whatsoever God has sanctified to a proper end, is I. B. Dialog. Arg. 3.
not to be perverted to a worse end Math. 21. 12, 13.
.

But God has sanctified Lots to a proper end; viz. to end controversies Number.
26. 55. Prove. 18. 18.
.

Therefore man is not to pervert them to a worse; viz. to play, and by playing
to get away another man's money, which without controversy is his own.

This Argument thus conceived is faulty two T. G. Answer. Of Lots, chap. 7.
Sect. 13.
ways. For first it goes from the question, which is not whether any Creature
or ordinance of God may be perverted, or peruersly used; but whether the use of
Lots questioned; be a perverting of them or no; whereas in the conclusion it is
taken for granted that it is. Neither again is the question whether men may
use Lots playing for money; (a thing incident to other games as well as these;
which whether it belawfull or no, I shall not need now to diseusse) much less,
whether they may be used in game to that end, to get another man's money from
him, or no; (which is no general use of them, nor has any place at all there,
where either there is no wagering at all, or where the Lot is used only at the
beginning of the game, to decide who shall join, who lead, or the like:) but
whether Lots may in any wise be used in sport.

Secondly, there is more inferred in the conclusion than was in the premises,
and that which follows not from ought in them. For the use of a Lot in play
is ever to decide some question or controversy, though a light one it is like,
yet a question or controversy truly so termed; otherwise it were no Lot.

For the mending of these faults, the Argument may better be conceived on this
manner:

That which God has sanctified to some proper use, is not to be applied to any
other, especially a worse use. But Their proper use is to decide great
controversies. Perkins gold. chain, chap. 20. on precep. 3.
God has sanctified Lots to this proper use, to wit, the deciding of
controversies in matters of weight. A Lot therefore may not be applied to any
other use, much less to a worse. The Proposition is proved by Matthew. 21. 12,
13. ex Esai. 56. 7. and Ier. 7. 11.
an instance of the Temple, set apart for prayer, which the Jews therefore are
reproved for applying to market and merchandise.

The Assumption is confirmed principally by that saying of Solomon, Prove. 18.
18.
The Lot stinteth strife, and makes partition among the mighty. For Number. 26.
55.
the other place is but an instance that a Lot once was by Gods own
appointment so used. It is amplified a simili, The proper end of a Lot, as of
an Oath, is to end a controversy. Balmford dial. ground 2.
by the like use of an Oath: concerning which there is a further speech of the
Apostle brought Fennor of recreat. spec. rule 4. reas. 1.
to prove that Salomons purpose in those words before alleged, is to show the
only lawful use of a Lot, (viz* to end controversies, which otherwise
conveniently cannot, when each Contender without the Lot is too mighty to
yield) thus: Fennor ibid.
As when the Apostle says, Hebr. 6. 16.
An Oath for confirmation among men is an end of all strife, his purpose is not
so much to teach us, that men use an Oath to end controversies; (which every
man knows) but that God has dedicated and made an Oath holy and sure only
for that use of necessary deciding of doubts-of importance among men: so the
like words used of a Lot must be understood in the same sense* not so much to
teach us that a Lot ended such controversies among men, which all know, but
that God has ordained it only for that use.

For the fuller answer to this Argument and the ibid. sect. 14.
proofs of it, diverse distinctions, of some good use, would be observed.

First therefore the word, sanctify, is diversely taken. For to omit all other
acceptions; it is taken sometime in a larger sense; and so to sanctify
signifies to assign a creature to any special or singular use whatsoever,
either sacred or civil: thus are Esai. 13. 3.
the Medians said by God to be sanctified for the subduing and sacking of
Babel: and so are 1 Timothy 4. 4.
meats said to be sanctified by Gods word for man's food; and 1 Cor. 7. 14.
the unbelieving Mate sanctified to the married believer*

Sometime again it is taken in a stricter sense; and so to sanctify
signifies to set apart a Creature beside his ordinary use to some sacred and
spiritual employment: as where it is said* that Genesis 2. 3.
God sanctified the seventh day of the world; and where Exodus 20. ^.
men are commanded to sanctify the same: he by precept inioyning that
employment of it; they by practice employing it according to his precept.

Now in both these kinds may the Lord well be said sometime to sanctify, but
not to appropriate; when by his ordinance he either inioyneth or grants the
use of a Creature so in some kind, as yet he restrains not, nor inhibiteth
the use of it in any other kind. Thus are the fruits of the earth so Genesis 1.
29.
sanctified for man's food, as they are Esai. 38. 21.
not yet restrained from physic: yea thus was the water that Number. 20 10, 11.
miraculously gushed out of the rock so 1 Cor. 10. 4.
sanctified to a spiritual employment, as yet it was not denied unto civil
and profane uses, even Number. ^0. ^, 11.
to the watering of brute beasts: sometime to sanctify and to appropriate,
when God sequestreth and seuereth the Creature so sanctified unto some one
special or proper use from all other uses else whatsoever.

And thus he sanctifies and appropriateth either the whole kind of the
Creature; as Exodus 30. 31, 32, 33.
that curious composition of precious and holy ointment expressly inhibited to
all other uses; or some particular only of that kind; as Exodus 30. 23.
the spices and odours ingredients of that holy ointment; as Exodus 30. 26, 27,
28, 29. and 29. 44.
the Tabernanacle, 1 King. 8. 10, 63, 64. and 9. 3.
the Temple, and the appurtenances of either: and as those Elements of Matthew.
3. 11. Ephesians. 5. 25. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
water, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
bread and Matthew. 26. 27, 28, 29.
wine that in the Sacraments are sanctified to be signs and pledges of
spiritual grace: and that again, either so to continue during the date of
that law, as in the unguent before spoken of; or during the time only of the
special use to those ends, as in the Elements last mentioned.

To apply these distinctions then to the present Argument: If they take the
word sanctify in the stricter sense, the Proposition is true, but the
Assumption is unsound: for Lots are not set apart, or said so to be in either
of the Prove. 18. 18. Number. 26. 55.
places produced, to any holy or spiritual, but to a civil use only.

If in the larger and more general sense, then either they speak of things
sanctified only but not appropriated, or of things both sanctified and
appropriated too, and that either the whole kind in general, or some of the
kind only.

If of things sanctified only, but not appropriated, the Proposition is not
true; For 1 Cor. 11. 23, to 28.
bread and wine are sanctified to be seals of Gods covenant, and yet does not
that hinder Psalm. 104. 15.
the lawful use of them otherwise: so was oil sometime Leuit. 21. 8, 10, 12.
Psalm. 89. 20. and 133. 2.
sanctified to anoint 1 Samuel 10. 1. and 24. 7. and 26. 11. and 16. 13. 2 Samuel
2. 4. and 5. 3. 1 Kin. 1. 39. 2 King. 11, 12. and 23. 30.
Kings and Leuit. 8. 2, 10.
Priests, and yet did not that then restrain Psalm. 104. 15. Eccles. 9. 8.
Matthew. 6. 17. Luke 10. 34.
the civil use of it for food, physic, necessity or lawful delight. Or to
use a more familiar instance and nearer the present purpose, Genesis 1. 29.
the fruits of trees are sanctified to be man's food; yet does not that let but
that children, as of old time they did, may lawfully play and make themselves
pastime as well with Da nuces pueris. Catul. epithal. Sparge, marite, nuces.
Virg. Eclog. ^. Iam tristis ^cibus puer relictis. Martial. l. 5. ep. vlt. Et,
Alex ^rua nuces and non (...) videtur, Saepe tamen pueris abstulit illa nates.
Idem l. 14. epig. 18. Quatuor in nucibus non amplius al^ae tota est, Cum sibi
suppositis additur vna tribus. Ovid. (...). (...). Aug. c. 83.
nuts or (...)* Pollux l. 9. c. 7. In comment. Rabbin. iubetur pater familias
die festo poma, nuces amygdalas, pueris* praebere. Casaub. ad Suet. Aug.
almonds, as with cheri-stones, or with checkstones, and the like.

If of things sanctified and appropriated; as it was in that Exodus 30. 31, 32,
33.
holy ointment inhibited to all other uses; and as it is in the Romans 4. (...).
Exodus (...). 11.
Sacraments sequestered and set apart to certain spiritual purposes only, the
Assumption is unsound.

If of the sanctification and appropriation not of the whole kind, but of some
particulars of the kind, the premises might be granted, and yet nothing
concluded against the use of Lots in general.

If of the whole kind, the Proposition is true, though the proof be not so
pertinent; but the Assumption is not sound.

For the proof of it out of Prou. 18. 18.
Solomon: that place shows only Summa est singularem esse sortis vsum in
componendis litibus. Cartwr. in Prou. c. 18.
how a Lot may well and wisely be used; but neither inioyneth that use of it,
nor restrains it thereunto. It approves only the use as good and
commendable in that kind: But it is one thing for a Lot to be used well and
wisely to that end; and another thing to have that the proper or only end of
it.

But Hebr. 6. 16.
the Apostles speech of an Oath shows that Solomon meant so, when he used the
like speech of a Lot.

It does nothing less. For neither is it true that the Apostles scope was to
show that this is the only end of an oath, to stint strife and controversy,
neither is it so indeed.

His purpose is not to show it: for Hebr. 6. 13, 16, 17, 18.
it is only to show how sacred, firm and inviolable an Oath is among men from
man to man; (which he proves by that which all men know and acknowledge) and
how much more then from God to man, when Jurat vobis per quem iuratis. Cassiod.
Var. l. 8. ep. 3.
he swears to us by whom we swear: like the Argument used by the Apostle
elsewhere, Galat* 3. 15.
A man's covenant or testament once ratified no man annulleth; much less can
any annull or abrogate Gods.

Neither is that the only lawful end of an Oath. For there be other ends of
it; as, to give assurance of the performance of covenants and promises. For
what controversy was there between Jonathan and David to be ended by Oath,
when 1 Samuel 20. 16, 17, 42.
they swear either to other? or what controversy was there between God and
Abraham, or David and God; when Genesis 22. 16, 17. Heb. 6. 13, 14, 17, 18.
God swear to Abraham, and Psalm. 119. 106. and 132. 2, 3.
David to God? or what controversy is there to be ended by those Oaths, that
men usually take at entrance into office both in Church and Common* weal?

The like may be said of that Prou. 18. 18.
other place of Solomon. The scope of the place is not to stint or restrain
the use of a Lot to the ending of strife, much less to the ending of great
quarrels only; or among men of might alone, though Solomon expressly name such:
For he speaks of contentions in general: And why may not a mean inheritance
be divided by Lot among mean men as well as a rich one among mighty men? Or
do not contentions arise among mighty men many times about mean matters? But
the scope of it is rather Vise Lauat. and. Bain^ in Prou. 18.
to persuade all sorts of men to compose their controversies, be they great or
small, rather by such a course so easy and so equal, than to plunge
themselves by eager pursuit of Lawsuits into further inconveniences; and
Cartwr. ibid.
to induce men of mean condition the rather so to do, when even men of might
are content often to submit themselves thereunto.

Not to add, that Lots have been used Josh. 7. 14. Ion. 1. 7. 1 Samuel 14. 42.
Leuit. 16. 8; 9.
often to other ends (for it is but one use among many that is there mentioned)
as both has been in part, and shall further hereafter be showed, and as Vsus
particular is sortis litium diremptio. Valet porro ad veritatem investigandam;
ad concordiam ubi prius culta est alendam, etc. Cartwr. in Prou c. 18.
some of them that in this point oppose us, confess.

I would thank Mr. G. for mending mine Argument, I. B. Reply.
though there be not any great need, if he had not put into his Assumption
these words [In matters of weight] for his own purpose, as shall appear.

What need there was both of mending it, and of T. G.
inserting those words, that it might conclude, and the conclusion might not be
wholly impertinent, by mine Answer may appear.

I. B. But to the matter. In mine understanding and meaning, the proposition
does sufficiently express all that which moves Mr. G. to grant it.


T. G. Yea and somewhat more too; for it beggeth the question in controversy,
and presumes that that is to be proved; which the Conclusion following it must
needs also have done; as in mine Answer I show.


I. B. Well; then let us consider his Opposition made to the Assumption, and
the amplification thereof. Does Mr. G. imply a Lot not to be sanctified,
because (as he says now peremptorily) it is not enjoined? What? Is Recreation
(in general) enjoined by precept, if not directly, yet (at least) by just
consequence? as Mr. G. in his allowance of lusorious Lots says is granted by
all, p. 138. And is not so useful an Ordinance, as is a Lot, to end
controversies, enjoined by precept, either directly or by just consequence?
Does God more carefully provide for recreations, than for peace among his
people? But Mr. G. is not so peremptory in another place, p. 135. where he
says: The use of Lots is not simply commanded. For Prou. 18. 18. is rather a
permission than a precept; and not so much a commandment, as an advice and
counsel. I will come to an issue. If it will please Mr. G. to set down his
just consequence to prove Recreation enjoined by precept, I will undertake to
set down as just a consequence to prove, that a Lot to end a Controversy is
likewise enjoined by precept. In mean while, I cannot be persuaded, that our
God of peace, who commands us to seek peace Psalm. 34. 14.
and follow after it, and has ordained a Lot, wherein he is specially present
by his immediate providence, to end controversies, which otherwise cannot be
ended conveniently, does leave us at liberty in that case, to use or not to use
a Lot.


T. G. 1. Mr. B. is somewhat like those Lawyers of whom Aristotle says, that
(...). Aristot. rhet. l. 1. c. 1.
they would have little to say, if they were held to the matter that they are
to deal in. He takes occasion here to run out into a by-matter, which though
all were granted him is (...). Nihil ad rem ipsam.
not a pin to the purpose. For the question is, whether Lots be not only
sanctified, but appropriated so to the ending of Controversies, that to no
other purpose they may be used, and whether Salomons testimony, Prou. 18. 18.
prove as much. Now grant all that Mr. B. here pleads for, and that I deny
not; That the use of Lots is enjoined in some cases, such as he last
mentions, or, that it is enjoined by just consequence out of the word, is
this sufficient to prove that it is therefore to that use only appropriated,
or that this place of Solomon proves the same? This I deny to follow; and
(besides that reason it self evidently discovers as much) Mr. B. himself
Dialogue.
elsewhere cutteth the very sinews of his own Argument, where having objected
that Bread and Wine are in the Sacrament to holy uses sanctified, and yet we
may recreate our selves therewith; as also that singing of Psalms is
sanctified to the praise of Gods Name, and yet with singing also we may
recreate our selves, he answers that those ends be not proper, though they be
holy. So that all this granted, yet is his Assumption, by his own grant, as
far from being proved as ever it was.

2. He charge me most untruly to deny that the use of a Lot for ending of any
Controversy is no where enjoined in the word, either expressly, or by just
consequence. I say only, that Solomon in that particular place questioned,
neither inioyneth that use of it, nor restrains it thereunto. Which latter
branch it is especially, that Mr. B. must oppose and disprove, if he will from
thence have any proof. But this is like Vide Bellarm. praefat. ad Controvers.
2. and Apolog. Erasmi adv. articulos a monachia Hispanis sibi objectos. Sed and
Aegid. Hunnium in Calv. Iudais. and Paraum in Calv. Orthod. praefat.
the Argument that Bellarmine and some others use to prove Calvin and Erasmus,
Arrians, because they deny some places to be understood of Christ's Deity, out
of which the same is supposed to be confirmed by others. Does a man necessarily
say, Such a thing cannot at all be proved out of Scripture; if he say, that Out
of this or that place it cannot be proved? Scripturae docent non aequalem s^re
gloriae modum in coelis. Calvin. instit. l. 3. c. 25.. 10.
Calvin holds degrees of glory in heaven; and yet denies that Da^. 12. 3. 1
Cor. 15. 41. Vide Calv. comment. in haec loca.
some places affirm it, which are yet alleged commonly for the proof of it.
But whether either this or any other place of Scripture do prove that the use
of Lots is enjoined for the ending of Controversies, is nothing to the purpose,
unless it be proved also that they restrain it wholly thereunto.

3. A man if it were to the purpose, might well make question, whether the use
of Lots to end controversies, be so necessary as recreation is. Since many an
one have lived quietly enough, and done well enough without use of the one,
which no man living can do without the use of the other.

4. Why does Mr. B. offer to join issue hereupon here, where it is nothing to
the purpose, and not rather accept of it before offered him, in the last of my
Arguments, concerning other recreations, as Boules, Chesse, etc. generally
justified, and some other civil actions; but slily slincke by it there, as if
no such matter had at all been once mentioned? And I would gladly yet hear
what proof he would bring out of Gods word for recreation by Boules or Chesse,
or for wearing band and cuffs, ruffs or falls, and the like. Here it needs
not: for I grant all he requires; and doubt not but that in some special
cases, though very few, a Lot is enjoined necessarily, and that by the word the
same may be showed. But Mr. B. is very forward indeed to prove that that is not
denied: but that that is most denied, he still obtrudeth upon us without
proof, to wit, that God is in a Lot present by his immediate providence. For
that comes in also here again. It is as the Cross with the Papists; Crucis
signum in omnibus rebus adhibendum. Ex Pseud^-Dionysio and Martiale Steph.
Durant. de rit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 36. In omni^us sacramentis Crucis signum
adhibetur. Bellarm. de Imag. c. 29. Quod Lucian. de Rhetor. (...).
nothing can be done without it.


I. B. But suppose the use of a Lot be not (thus) enjoined; yet does not Gods
counsel (which me thinks is a commandment, though it be said of a man's
counsel, that it is no commandment) sanctify it to be used to end
controversies? This (I think) will not be denied.


T. G. 1. If it will not, as indeed it is not: why does Mr. B. keep such a
coile about it; as if it were denied, when it is not. But thus Mr. B. as he
says of some, (...). Agatho apud Clem. strom. l. 5. and Athen. dipnos. l. 5.
Observanda trajectio, ne lepos intercidat.
loves to be brief in the maine point, and long (even to tediousness) in
by-matters.

2. Whether difference be or no between Gods counsels and commands, (the
Apostle seeming 1 Cor. 7. 5, 6, 7, 25, 27, 28, 39, 40. De virginibus, inquit,
praeceptum Domini non habe^. Cur? Quia and ipse ut esset virgo, non suit
imperij sed propriae voluntatis. Hieron. ad Eust^ch. de custod. virgin.
Coelibatum ut laudet, nihil audet praescribere; nemini necessitatem vult
imponere; sed suam cuique libertatem relinquere. Coelibatum commendat, liberum
tamen conjugium facit; ut quod nemini negari debeat. Calvin. in 1 Cor. 7.
Coelibatus res est indifferens a Domino in lege nemini vel praecepta vel
prohibita, sed tantum omnibus permissa. In istis vero rebus indifferentibus
imperium quidem peremptorium jubens vel ve^ans, nullum; at consilium earu^
commoditate^ vel incommoditatem ostendens, magnum and usum and locum habet.
Morton. ibid.
to allow some things, which yet he would not advise, and not absolutely to
inioyne some things, which yet he wishes and advises to) I stand not now to
dispute. Sure I am, that he that advises a man rather to divide by Lot, than
to waste himself at Law, does not inioyne him thereby to divide by Lot, but
only to use that course, or some other of like nature, (for it tieth him not
to that particular) whereby a quiet end may be had.

3. But to what end should words be multiplied more about this, when as it is
acknowledged, whether it be a counsel or a command, a permission or
iniunction, it is sufficient to sanctify Lots to that use? So that Mr. B. need
not have strained himself to utter herein an untruth, and then dilate upon it
with so many Rhetorical amplifications, if he had not been disposed (...).
Homer. Iliad. v.
to pick a quarrel without cause.


I. B. But it is denied, That the use of a Lot is restrained to end
controversies, much less great quarrels only; and sundry instances are given
of using Lots to other ends than to end Controversies. But all those Lots were
extraordinary. Therefore whereas in the beginning of this Answer, where he
would find fault with mine Argument, he says, That the use of Lots in play is
ever to determine some question or controversy, though a light one (it is
like) yet a question or controversy truly so termed, otherwise it were no Lot.
If he mean a Lot in general, then (with his favor) he forgets himself,
in saying, Lots by him quoted were not to end controversies. If he speak of a
Lot in play, as being an ordinary Lot, then he fails in judgment, In
denying that the use of ordinary Lots (whereof is the question) is restrained
to end controversies: and the instances which he gives being extraordinary
Lots, are not to the point.


T. G. 1. Let it be observed, that Mr. B. has never a word here to prove that
that is denied. It is denied, as Mr. B. himself here confesses, that that
place, Prou. 18. 18. does restrain the use of Lots wholly to the ending of
Controversies, so that they may not in any other case be used with good
allowance. For this in effect I cite some of those that seem to concur in
opinion with Mr. B. at least in part, Mr. Cartwright by name: Nor is there
ought either in the Text or about it, as I there plead, to enforce any such
thing out of it. Hoc est quod dici solet, (...). Hyperides apud Suidam.
All which Mr. B. sliding by, and not offering by any Argument to make good any
such thing out of the Text; pitcheth at length upon some instances in the very
tail of my discourse, given of Lots wherein no controversy was to be ended.

His exceptions against them are two:

1. That they were all extraordinary Lots; which yet is more than of all he can
make good. For how will he prove it to have been an extraordinary Lot, that
was Let it. 16. 8, 9.
cast upon the escape goat? But suppose there could be no instance given of any
Lot in Scripture used where no controversy were. Would that prove that the
place of Solomon restrains it only to such? Nothing less: Nor do I offer
to hazard my cause thereupon. My maine Answer, which I rely upon is this, that
out of the Text no such restraint can be proved or produced: Not to add, say I
afterward, that Lots have been used often to other ends, etc. as some also that
in this point oppose us, confess. Besides that, it would be observed, that Mr.
B. who has so often offered to argue from extraordinary to ordinary Lots, yet can
by no means here endure to hear of any such arguing. He shall do well to
remember that Rule given in both Laws, Non licet actori, quod reo licitum no^
existit. Bonisac. in 60. de Regul. Iur. c. 32. Non debet actor^ licere, quod
reo non permittitur. Pandect. Reg. Iur. l 42. ex Vlpian. ad Sabin. lib. 26.
What is not lawful to the one party, neither is lawful to the other. Though
indeed neither do I, as may appear, frame any Argument at all out of it. 2.
That by mine own confession, if they be not to end controversies they are no
Lots at all. But he takes my words, as I have showed formerly, a little too
short. For I say not simply, controversy, but, question or controversy, as he
himself here cites me; the former whereof is a term more general than the
latter, and easily salueth the seeming repugnancy.



I. B. Besides the subject matter of an extraordinary Lot, being by Gods
special direction, if it be lawful; there may happily be no present
controversy. Where as the subject matter of an ordinary Lot being something
questioned between man and man, there may be a great controversy. I say, May
be. For if it be well observed, in an ordinary Lot there is not always a
present controversy to be determined: But always some question to be decided
to prevent a controversy. As may appear by Mr. Gs. own words, partly here,
where he says, [That there must be some question or controversy, or else it
is no Lot] but more evidently where he says; that the Lot used by the
Soldiers about Christ his garments, which he truly calls a serious diuisorie
Lot, was to prevent all contention and strife, p. 176. and 177. Such was the
Lot also which was used about the Land of Promise, about which was no present
controversy. For God who would have no controversies, would have such things
removed, which may cause or justly occasion controversies. Therefore m Christ
expounding the Commandment, Thou shall not kill, forbids words of
provocation. About which ordinary Lot, God, who knows how ordinary or common
controversies, and the occasions thereof be, gives direction in Prou. 18. 18.


Oh Quod Passunus olim cuidam, test Plin. ep. 6. l 7. Been, been: sed quo
istud tam been? Been scripsisti, sed nihil ad causam pertin^ns. Hieron. ad
Joan. Hier.
how plentiful Mr. B. can be where no proof needs! But (...). Greg. Naz. in
Christi natal. and in Pasch. ex Homer. Iliad. (...). Idem ad Eunom.
keep the horse, as they say, home to the hedge. That Lots may be used also
for the preventing of controversies; (and that is more than the bare ending of
them: for Non potest videri habere des^sse, qui nunquam habuit. Reg. Iur. Civ.
208.
a thing cannot be ended ere it be begun) Mr. B. has at large showed us.
Though I know not by what Logic he can gather out of my words, that it must
needs ever be either for the one or the other; because I say, it was for the
one of them in the Lot cast upon Christ's coat. But (...); Quid haec ad Bacchum?
what is all this to the purpose? How does all this prove a restraint of
Lottery to the deciding only of some controversy? which it may be Mr. B.
hoped that this long discourse would have put clean out of his Readers head.
That, he told you, was denied; and that, not only is not proved, but no assay
of proof made of it. For Mr. B. in the whole ensuing discourse gives it
clean over, and spending many words about other by-matters leaves his
Argument to shift as well as it can for it self. (...). Aristot. rhet. l. 3.
c. 14.
It is the manner of those, says the Heathen man, that maintain a bad cause,
that they desire to dwell rather on any thing than that that they should deal
in.


I. B. That which is said of an ordinary Lot, may justly be also said of an
Oath, that the use of it is sanctified to end controversies by present
determination, or prevention. For, as it is true that Hebr. 6. 16. implies,
that Gods oath to man is more inviolable, than an Oath from man to man, whereof
only Mr. G. takes knowledge: so it is true, that Hebr. 6. 16. intimates,
That as an Oath, for confirmation, is among men an end of all strife: so Gods
Oath for confirmation of his promise to Abraham, was to put the matter out of
doubt, question, or controversy. Else these words [An end of strife] were to
no purpose. But that they were to the purpose by me understood, appears in
the two next verses, where it is written, That God bound himself by oath, as
to show the stablenesse of his counsel, so that the heirs of promise might
have strong consolation. So that Gods oath to Abraham took away doubting,
questioning, and all strife that might be, not only in Abraham's mind, but
also in the minds of the heirs of promise. Therefore an Oath does not only
and present contronersies, according to Mr. Gs. understanding, but confirming a
promise or covenant, does also end a strife, though there be none present, when
the Oath is given, to wit, by prevention.


T. G. I will notstand (lest I either seem too contentious, or prove
ouer-tedious) to frame such exceptions, as well I might, against diverse
particulars of this discourse, built mainely upon a mere equivocation: Nor to
press anew the Oaths taken usually at entrance into office: Only I demand,
how all this proves, that the Apostles purpose there is to limit the use of an
Oath, and to restrain it wholly to such an end. Which though it were also
granted, as it never can be proved, yet it leaves that place of the Proverbs
still as free as before. But Mr. B. has forgotten, it seems, what he was to
prove out of it.


I. B. Now let us somewhat consider Mr. Gs. purpose in putting into the
Assumption these words, [In matters of weight] Forsooth, by denying the same,
to make way for light matters, and consequently for playing with Lots. Because
(as he says, p. 130.) they best agree with the nature of Lots, that is, with
uncertain hazard.


T. G. (...). Homer. Odyss. (...).
A Witty man, they say, can soon find a fault, where none is. Why I put or
required those words to be put into Mr. Bs. Assumption, I render a reason in
his due place; to wit, because without them the Conclusion could not have gone
current against a lusorie Lot. Now Mr. B. if any man can be so filly and
senseless as to believe him, tells us, that I did it to make way for light
matters, and consequently for playing with Lots. God has sanctified Lots to a
proper end, viz. to end controversies; says Mr. B. in general. I wish him to
put in, lest his Conclusion else against lusorious Lots come short, in weighty
matters. Whether this be to make way for the bringing of them in, or the
shutting of them out, let (...). Philostr. vit^ Apollon.
any judge that has but common sense only. He might as well have said, that
Mr. Perkins put in the word great for the same purpose, when in the place cited
there in my margin, he says, Perkins gold. Chain, chap. 20. on precept. 3.
The proper use of Lots is to decide great controversies. But belike Mr. B. had
no other way to hook that in here, that he is now falling foul on.


I. B. Surely if Mr. G. had acknowledged Gods special presence by his
immediate providence in a Lot, as being a Lot ordained by God to end
controversies, he would not have so written, but deemed weighty matters best
agreeing with the nature of a Lot.


T. G. I believe Mr. B. that if I believed as he does, (for I hope he thinks
as he writes) I should believe otherwise than I do. But these coleworts come
so often in still, that I fear there is the less savor for them in this his
tedious discourse, which yet he promised us should have the more savor in it
for the length of it.

He must prove, he must prove this his immediate providence and imaginary
special presence, before he control others either for not admitting of it, or
not observing what would necessarily ensue upon it.

But why was he offended with me for putting that into his Assumption, that he
himself, as appears here, would have therein maintained?


I. B. It is true, that a matter of less weight in it self, may be the
subject matter of a controversy, as a controuer sie may be among men, as well
mean, as mighty in their estate, as Mr. G. here says, p. 137. For by mighty
men (as in Genesis 6. 4. so) in Prou. 18. 18. are meant men strong in affections,
so as the controversy cannot be well ended without a Lot, whether the subject
matter of the Controversy be of more or less weight in it self, so as there
is a necess^ie that one or both parties be satisfied. For otherwise there may
be a great quarrel about a matter of less weight. Neither do I say, that
only great quarrels are to be ended, or prevented by a Lot, as Mr. G. denies
not, but some may. For (as he says truly, p. 173.) God speaks in Prou. 18.
18. of contentions in general.


T. G. 1. Not to question the exposition of the word mighty here and Genesis 6. 4.
(albeit the word be (...) Genesis 6. 4. (...) Prove. 18. 18.
not the same also in either) which yet I believe Mr. B. is not able to make
good. All granted that is here said, how does it hence appear, that the use of
Lots is in that place of the Proverbs restrained to such quarrels or
controversies, as Mr. B. here speaks of? Or how appears it hence, that for
some sinister end I put in those words?

2. If any Controversies but weighty, may by a Lot be decided; how holds the
comparison between a Lot and an Oath, both by himself, and by those that
herein concur with him, so often used and urged, for the excluding off from
light matters the use equally of either?


I. B. Here then we may enter into further consideration of that which Mr. G.
writes, p. 135. to wit, That by the force of our discourse against playing
with a Lot, the only lawful use is condemned, and an unlawful use is allowed
in the room thereof. What is that only use of a Lot? I can find none other
than the putting of that to a Lot which he calls, (p. 130.) A matter of mere
indifferency, that is, Such as is not material, whether a man do or omit.
Howsoever there may be a lawful use of a Lot about such a matter questioned,
to determine, or prevent a Controversy, yet I wonder that Mr. G. deemeth that
only lawful.


T. G. Mr. B. is like children, that are willing rather to go any whither than
to come home. But it is our task now to follow him; and to tread in his steps.
What I there say therefore, I stand still unto. And I marvel as much at Mr. B.
that he should once imagine that a man may safely put any other matter then is
here specified, to the hazard of a Lot. For may a man put it to the hazard of ^
Lot, Non iussa quidem licite vel admittantur vel omittantur: jussa vere non
sine culpa negligantur, non sine ^rinune contemnantur. Ber. de praecept. and
dispens.
whether he shall either omit some necessary duty, enjoined him of God, or
commit ought that is naught and evil. If he may neither, of those there is
nothing left for a Lot to deal but such things as are indifferent, and may
consequently be either done or omitted.


I. B. Does he not grant p. 91. that Prayer may be conceived in weighty
matters, as in the choice of a Magistrate, which is not a matter of mere
indifferency, that is such as is not material whether it be done or omitted.


T. G. And in the choice of a Magistrate, if there appear a material
difference between party and party, in regard whereof it may be of
consequence whether the one have the office or the other, it is not lawful to
put it to the hazard of a Lot, unless some far greater inconvenience enforce
it. Which when it shall so do; it may be lawful to entreat God so to direct
the Lot, that the mischief may not ensue; but yet there is no assurance (it is
but as prayer for other temporal things) that the Lot shall be so directed.
For whither the choice of a Magistrate be a matter of mere indifferency or no,
is no whit to the purpose. It is not Magistracy it self that is put to the
Lot, in such cases, whether men shall live without it or no, but that presumed
that Magistracy must be maintained, and Magistrates consequently designed,
whether this man or that man shall have the place, which i^ they be both alike
fit for, it is a thing indifferent, and not material at all, whether o^ them
have it.


I. B. Did God specially appoint Lots to be used about only matters of weight?
and must man so far swerue from Gods example as to strive only about matters
of such indifferency, and then to put only such controuerted to the
determination of a Lot?


T. G. Mr. Bs. Rhetoric will not so carry it. What men may strive or not
strive about is not now to be discussed (and yet who dare condemn lusorie
controversies: or what strifes in themselves are more harmless than they
are?) nor what one man's iniquity may enforce another to put to the hazard of a
Lot. But in all controversies be the matter in question of more or less
weight, the more equality things are reduced unto on either side, the less
material it is which way the Lot goes; and the less material it is which
way the Lot goes, the less danger of wrong or inconvenience; and consequently
the lawfuller the Lot. Let Mr. B. lay aside his Rhetorical amplifications, and
answer this Argument.


I. B. So that I doubt not, but that with sound judgment, and a clear
conscience not accusing me of not duly respecting the special providence of
God by his immediate disposing of a Lot, I may affirm, That the more weighty
the subject matter of a controversy is, the more justifiable is the
Controversy: and be that matter of more or less weight, the greater the
necessity of ending a Controversy is, the more justifiable is the use of a
Lot. Is not then playing with a Lot an irreligious abusing of Gods ordinance?


T. G. It is the manner of bad pleaders Probationibus deficientibus fidem suam
interponunt.
when proofs fail them to fall to protesting. And it is reported to be the
guise of your preaching Friars, when they know not how to confute our doctrine,
to assure their hearers upon their salvation that it is herefie^ Mr. B.
methinkes should do otherwise. I say nothing in this point without reason;
which Mr. B. must refute, if he will have me alter my judgment. But if it may
be had with protestations, Mr. B. will not miss of it. Which when he has thus
solemnly made, grounded still upon a false supposall, (which unless you grant
him, all is gone,) he then demands, Is not then playing with a Lot an
irreligious abuse? Why so? what is the reason. Because Mr. B. is persuaded so
as he says. All This Pali aura paleas non triticum ex area dispergit. Aug. de
verb. Dom. 18.
wind will shake but little corn, save with such, if there be any, that have
pinned their faith upon Mr. Bs. sleeue, and must depend upon his persuasions.
It is the property of Veritas docend^ suadet, non suadendo docet. Tertull. adv.
Valent.
truth, says one, not to instruct by persuading, but by instructing to
persuade.


I. B. But, (says Mr. G. glad of any thing to plead for playing with a Lot)
The use of a Lot in play is ever to decide some question or controversy truly
so termed. If so, then he might have called it a serious Lot according to his
doctrine, the lightness of the subject matter controuerted not withstanding.


T. G. Mr. G. is not so glad of any thing to plead for playing with a Lot, as
Mr. B. is (...). Greg. Naz. de pace ^.
glad to lay hold on any thing to be girding at Mr. G. what a silly toy has he
found here to cast in his dish, that if any question or controversy be by a
lusoricus Lot decided, it may be by Mr. Gs. doctrine termed a serious Lot. If
you ask how; you may go seek. But suppose it were so, (as he cannot, I know,
make good,) what then?


I. B. But where about is that controversy? Mr. G. in his written Answer to my
Dialogue before mentioned says; The controversy tends to victory, which
till it be decided, there is a Controversy, though a light one, yet a
Controversy truly so termed. But is that truly or worthily to be called a
victory, which falls out by haphazzard (according to Mr. Gs. esteeming a Lot)
without any desert? But (say I) Is it not a tempting of God to put him by his
immediate providence in disposing the Lot, to humor (I say not, honor) some
of the vainglorious fools with supposed victory, who make a pretended
controversy thereabout, whereas (before they intended so to play with a Lot)
there was none indeed? Is this a controversy truly so termed? I need say no
more.


T. G. No: you have said, though not enough, because (...).
nothing at all to the point, not one tittle to make your Argument good, or to
prove the maine matter denied in it; yet a great deal Quomodo ille, Fortuna
multis dat nimis, nulli satis. Martial.
too much; because so much clean beside the matter. And here nothing but
unsavory stuff, unworthy to be answered.

You tell here of Mr. Gs. writing, which you never returned any answer to. Why
pick you this alone out of it, letting pass many other things in it of more
moment still unanswered?

But what is the fault here I marvel, that has moved Mr. Bs. choler thus
much? I say, forsooth there is in play a controversy, and that it tends to
victory. And is it not so in all games and sports ordinarily? Or does not
(...). Eustath. ad Il. (...). ex Pausan. Lex. Attic. (...). Pollux. l. 9. c. 7.
(...). Ibid. Vicissem velquinquaginta millia Aug. apud Sueton. c. 71. Aliquando
ut vineat, ludit assidue aleam. Ibid. c. 70. Veru^ in rebus apertis argumentari
tam sit stultu^, quam in clarissimu^ Sole^ mortale lumen infer. Quint inst.
l. 5. c. 12
common use of speech confirm as much? matter of desert, I think, is not
usually much respected in play. Yet in those Games that Mr. B. condemns there
is (...). Sophocl. Pala^. (...). Hesych.
use of wit and Art to in managing what the Chance affords. I might add that
there is in Game question, and controversy also, if with Mr. Bs. leave I may
so speak, whether of the two shall lead, and who shall join either with
other, either of which in some cases may well be termed a controversy, though
it tend not directly unto victory, and which by Lot also is and may be lawfully
decided, for ought Mr. B. has hitherto to the contrary discovered.

But what kind of controversy or victory soever it be, that is in Game and
disport, must they needs all be styled vaineglorious fools, that in game
strive, as we say, who shall beat either other. This favors too much of
supercilious (for I will not say superstitious) either Stoicisme or Pharisaisme.

But his reason hereof is worth all: for that is it that is all in all with Mr.
B. which if you once debar him of, (...). Lucian. Gallo.
he is as mute as a Fish, and stands stone still, as Ad incitas redact'.
Plaut. Trin. 2. 4.
one at his wits end. It is a tempting of God, by putting him to dispose the
Lot by his immediate providence, and thereby to humor such vainglorious
fools. This is the (...). Prora and puppis. Cic. epist. sam. l. 16. ep. 24.
head and foot of all, the perpetual burden of Mr. Bs. song, which if you
grant him, he is able to prove all that ever he would: but if it go, (...).
Philostr. in Hero. c.
all is gone with it.


The fourth Argument.
I. B. THat which there is neither precept for, nor practice of in Gods word,
general or special, express or employed, that there is no warrant for in the
Word.

But such is the use of Lots in game: for we read I. B. Dialogue, Ground 1.
not in Scripture that Lots were used but in serious matters only, both by
Jews and Gentiles: Eastie hist. of Gosp. Reas. 2.
neither is there any warrant in the Word for the ludicrous use of them by
precept, or practice, general or special, express or employed.

There is no warrant therefore for lusorie Lots in Gods word: and so
consequently they are unwarrantable.


This is like Ambroses argument against merry T. G. Answ. Of Lots, chap. 7.
Sect. 16.
jests; Ioca videntur dulcia and suavia, cum tamen a Christiana regula sint
aliena: non enim in divinis literis invenitur, quemadmodum ea debeant,
usurpari. Ambros. offic. l. 1. c. 23.
We read nothing of them in Scripture: therefore they are not to be allowed.
Which yet is no good kind of reasoning. The consequence of his Enthymem, and
the Proposition likewise of their Syllogism is unsound.

For first an Argument holds indeed from the negative in matter of Faith, but
not in matter of Fact: as to say, Hebr. 1. 4, 5. Quod non lego, non credo.
(...), etc. Cyrill (...). 4. Sine au oritate Scripturaru^ garrulitas no^ habet
fide. Hiero^ ad Tit. c. 1. Quod de Scripturis autoritate^ non habet, eade^
facilitate co^temnitur qua probatur. Idem in Mat c. 23. Sancta Scriptura
doctrinae nostrae regulam sigit. Aug. de bon. vid. c. 1. In bis quae aperte
posita sunt in Scriptura, inveniuntur omnia illa quae continent fidem moresque
vivendi. Idem de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. Cum hoc (Euangelium) credimus,
nihil desideramus vltra credere: hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod ultra
credere debeamus. Tertull. in praescript.
such a thing is not expressed or revealed in the word, therefore it is no
matter of Faith, nor such as a man is necessarily bound to believe: but not to
say, Scriptura multa dissimulat, multa tacit praeterit, etc. Aug de not. and
great. contr. Pelag. c. 37. and 38. and de mend. ud Consent. c. 10.
such a thing is not mentioned or related in Scripture, therefore it was not
done, or it never was: as for example, Genesis 4. 17.
Cain has but one son mentioned by Moses, therefore he had no more sons or
children but him. Much less may a man reason A facto ad jus: a non fieri ad
non licere.
from matter of Fact to matter of Right, as to say, such or such a thing we
never read in the word to have been done, and therefore it may not be done.
For how many things are there whereof there is no example in Gods word, and yet
the use of them is generally allowed as lawful and good? Many things there are
whereof no precedent of the use of them but in some one kind only, which yet
may be used also unto others. No use of butter recorded in the word but for
food only: may it not therefore be used also for physic? Yea many things
there are of ordinary use, whereof there is no mention at all in Gods word,
which yet all generally allow: as sugar for sweetning, printing of books,
shooting in guns, and the like, which all by this argument are utterly
condemned; or if they be justified, then the grounds of it fail.

Secondly, an Action may have Voluntas Dei dicitur praeceptio, prohibitio,
consilium, permissio. Lomb. sent. l. 1. d. 45. G.
warrant sufficient by permission without precept or practice. For where God
has not limited the use of any Creature or ordinance, there he has left the
use of it free. Where he has not determined the circumstances of any acton,
there what he has not prohibited, that has he permitted, and that is warrant
sufficient for it. Where therefore circumstances are determined, the argument
holds from the negative to make that unwarrantable, that is not either
expressly or by good consequence enjoined. But where they are not determined,
the argument is strong enough from the negative to prove that warrantable that
is not either expressly or by just consequence prohibited.

For this cause in the point of Gods worship the argument holds Ier. 7. 31.
and 19. 5. Coloss. 2. 22, 23.
from the negative for the substance of it, because Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32.
God has determined it. But in civil affairs it will not hold from the
negative to disallow ought; because God has not so determined them. Else what
warrant is there for boules, for tennis, for football, for chesse, etc. which
yet no man disalloweth? Let one example serve for all to show the weakness of
this kind of arguing. There is neither precept, nor practice, ( 1 Samuel 14 31,
10 35.
at least allowed or allowable) of eating blood in Scripture: therefore a man
may not eat a black pudding. In which conclusion I assure my self these
Authors will not accord with the Familists and new Sectaries. And yet may they
say more against the one, than these can any of them against the other. For the
one is found expressly forbidden both in the old and new Testament both Genesis 9.
4.
before the Law, Lev. 7. 26, ^7. and 17. 10, to 15. Deuteronomy. 12. 16, 23, 24, 25.
and 15. 23.
under the Law, and Act. 15 20, 29.
after the Law, (to omit what (...). Clem. constit. apost. l. 6. c. 12. (...).
Canon. Apost. 62. (...). Greg. Naz. de pasch. In Christo omnia revocantur ad
initium, etc. c^borum libertas, and sanguinis solius abstinentia, sicut ab
initio fuit. Tertull. de mon^gam. Sacra Scriptura nobis praecipit, ut
abstineamus a sanguine and suffocato: merito igitur damnamus (...) qui
cuiuscunque animalis sanguinem art aliqua condiunt, and sic comedunt. Qui hoc
secerit, Clericus deponatur, Laicus excommunicetur. Synod. 6. can. 67. Qui
suffecatum aut sanguinem manducarit, biberitve, 40. dies poeniteat. Greg. 3.
pa^itent. c. 29.
sundry of the Ancients have held of it) but the other no where in neither. And
if Galat. 5. 1.
Christian liberty notwithstanding bought with the blood of Christ, give Gods
children a free use of the one, how much more then of the other. If Act. 10.
13, 14, 15. Romans 14. 14. Tit. 1. 15.
it loose them there, where they were bound before; sure it binds them not
there, where they were free before.

Mr. G. in his book shows many instances of Lots I. B. Reply.
used both by Jews and Gentiles, and all in serious matters. Which intimates
to me, that they by the light not only of the word, but of Nature too
discerned, that Lots are to be used only in serious matters. O let us take
heed how we put out so great light.

True: out of the word I relate many instances of T. G. Reioind.
Lots used in serious matters both by Jews and Gentiles: nor do I find any
lusorious Lots mentioned there to have been used by either. Gods word deals
most with serious, not with lusorious affairs. Nor does the Spirit of God
busy it self to tell us what sports and pastimes men did use in those days.
But does it follow therefore that both Jews and Gentiles did by the light both
of Gods word and Nature discern that they might not be used in any other
affairs than such? Nothing less. For what an infinite number of examples are
there, Of Lots, Chap. 6. Sect. 1. and 2.
whereof not a few Mr. B. might have found also in my Book, of Lots used in
sport and recreation, whereof in that regard neither Jew nor Gentile that Mr.
B. can show, ever made scruple? Which does evidently rather infer the contrary
to that that Mr. B. here affirms. But to quit Mr. Bs. close, If a man should
say to Mr. B. We read of many garments in Scriptures used both by Jews and
Gentiles: But we read of none that ever wore band or cuffs; which intimates
to me, that it is by the light both of Gods word and Nature too, discerned that
such are not to be worn: O take heed, Mr. B. how you neglect this light, and
do that that you have no warrant for, in wearing such. I suppose that even Mr.
B. himself would deem him to be ridiculous, that should so argue. I say
nothing more, but leave the application either to Mr. B. himself or any other.
Only I add, that there is Magno contu magnas nugas agere. Iul. Scal de subtle
Et trisles meptias ut Caecilius, eoque magis ridiculas, habere, ut Sen. ep. 113.
nothing more unsavory than to trisle so seriously.

I. B. But let us consider his answer, which is only to the Proposition,
though I have already confuted many principal parts thereof.


T. G. He may do well to show what parts and where. For I know not, for my
part, what he has as yet either confuted or confirmed.

Yet a little, by his leave, to the Assumption; though not his, yet Mr.
Easties, joined here with his; and by him acknowledged: It is this in effect;
There is not any warrant in the word for the ludicrous use of Lots either by
precept or practice, general or special, expressed or implied. Now if we
believe Mr. B. this is a very presumptuous Assertion, and such as no man may
auow, unless he had a memory able to contain every sentence of Scripture,
and an understanding so absolute, as to know every consequent that might be
deduced and drawn from each of them. And therefore Mr. E. or Mr. B. ought to
have said, There is no such warrant, by precept or practice, so far as I know,
or to my best remembrance. And thus might Mr. G. with a knife lent him by Mr.
B. cut a sunder this Nodu^ Gordius, a^ Gordianus: a Gordio Midae patre, ut
Curt. de gest. Alex. lib. 3. non a Gordiano nescio quo.
Gordians knot, to use Mr. Bs. words, and so let the denial of the Proposition
alone. But we will not take all advantages that Mr. Bs. offers may afford.


I. B. In my Dialogue, to show that the Spirit sometime reasons from a matter
of fact to a matter of right negatiuely, I quote these Scriptures, Ioh. 8. 39,
40. 1 Cor. 11. 16. The words of the former are these; Ye go about to kill me,
a man that has told you the truth: This did not Abraham. The Argument is this:
Abraham did not kill any that told him the truth: Therefore ye ought not to
go about to kill me, if ye would be the sons of Abraham. This is Christ's
Logic, wherewith I dare find no fault. Neither does Mr. G. For he says
nothing to it, because the Printer puts for verse. 40. the 48. verse.
wherewith Mr. G. makes pastime. But I will let pass time now to take further
knowledge of it.


T. G. Mr. Bs. Proposition in truth is this: That which there is no example of
in Gods word is not warrantable by it. This to make good, he sets against
his first ground in the margent, a quotation of those two places. The Printer,
it seems, had misprinted the one, and directed me to a wrong place, where
finding nothing that carried any the least semblance of confirmation for the
Point propounded, it may be, I say, that There needs a Delian diver. A Proverb
used by either Crates or Socrates, upon view of an obscure discourse. (...).
Laert. in Heraclit.
opus est Delio natatore, to fetch ought out of those words; or that I am no
One famous for arreading of riddles. Hinc ille apud Terent. Andr. 1. 2. Davus
sum, non Oedipus.
Oedipus to assoile Mr. Bs. riddle, or some such like, (for I have no copy now
by me of that writing, nor had Mr. B. (I will not say, the honesty, but) that
care of his word, that he should have had, to return me either answer, or it
again) and that is all the pastime that Mr. B. here says, I make with it. He
should have done well to have set down my words, whereby it might have
appeared, whether I had used any other terms therein, than might well stand
with due reverence and regard to him. In which kind, whether either in that
writing, or in my Book, after it published, I have been faulty, I appeal to
any that have seen the one, and to all that may, if they will, take a view of
the other.

But for the thing it self, how I should have known what it was that was
intended, unless it were by (...). Euripid. Hippol. Non sum divinus. Martial.
divination; or how should I have answered it, before I knew what was intended,
unless it had been by prophecy, (as he said sometime that Master of Paul's
School in Rich. 3. his time. Tho. More story.
a proclamation was penned) I know not. But Mr. B. deals herein as Bellarmine
is wont, who when he has produced a testimony out of some newfound, and it
may be new-coined Author, that has not been long abroad; and those he deals
with, it is like, never so much as once heard of; Ad haec testimonia neque
respondent adversarij, neque respondere aliquid possunt. Bellar. de Euchar. l.
2. c. 19. etc. 21.
and to this, says he, the Heretics give no answer at all. But now we know
what it is that Mr. B. would have, he shall not be long without an Answer.
Where to omit that Mr. B. speaks, as if our Savior CHRIST had a Logic by
himself, or would either here or elsewhere teach us a new Logic, or another
Logic, than I say not Aristotle the Heathen, but Ramus and other Christian
Logicians have taught: when as indeed he wrongeth our Savior in deducing from
his words that which they will not bear, yea if they should bear, he that is
John 14. 6.
Truth it self, should be contrary to himself. Our Savior, as it is
apparent, reasons on this manner; They that do such wicked works as Abraham
never did, nor would ever have done, (for even this also Mr. B. himself
hereafter acknowledges to be intimated; which if it had here been mentioned,
would have marred all) show themselves to be such as are no children of
Abraham: But you do such wicked works as Abraham never did, nor would ever
have done: for you offer to kill me for telling the truth: which Abraham would
not have done:

Therefore you show your selves thereby to be none of his children. So Piscator
analyzing and explicating the place:

Piscat. in Joan. 8.
The Lord thus conuinceth them from their doings: If ye were Abraham's sons,
you would do Abraham's works; that is, such as he did, to wit, good. But you
do not Abraham's works, that is, such as he did, to wit, good: and I instance
in one, for you seek to slay me that have deserved well of you. Therefore you
are not Abraham's sons. And it is well observed by Calvin, that not all things
simply that Abraham did or did not, but Quid enim praecipue in Abraham laudatur
nisi obedientia fidei? Haec igitur discriminis nota est, quoties ab extrancis
discernere oportet ejus filios. Calvin. in Joan. 8.
those for which he is specially commended, are notes to distinguish the
children of Abraham from others. Now observe but, I beseech you, what absurd,
if not Logic, yet deductions and consequences Mr. B. would fasten upon our
Savior. For if this place help Mr. Bs. cause, or do prove that a man may
reason in the point now controuersed, from matter of fact to matter of right,
this must be the Argument:

That which Abraham did not, no Christian man may do: But Abraham never played
at Cards, or Abraham never used a sporting Lot: Therefore no Christian man may
do either. Or put we some other Assumption to the former Proposition:

But Abraham went not in doublet or hose: or, Abraham wore not bands and cuffs:
or, Abraham never walked London streets, etc. Therefore no Christian man may
warrantably do any of these. Yea to go a little further: if we should
stretch, as Mr. B. does, the words of our Savior, we might thus reason:

They that do not as Abraham did, are none of Abraham's children: But they that
deny not their wives, do not as Genes. 12. 13, 18. and 20. 2, 5.
Abraham did: Therefore they that deny not their wives, are not Abraham's
children. Nor is this to control our Saviors Logic, but to show, what manner
of Logic Mr. B. would either teach our Savior, or make us believe that our
Savior used. In a word, here is the proof of Mr. Bs. Proposition:

Our Savior proves the Jews not to be the children of Abraham, because they
would have killed him, which Abraham did not: Therefore whatsoever there is no
example for in Gods word, is unwarrantable. But let us see whether his next
quotation stand him in any better steed.


I. B. Of the other quotation the words be these: We have no custom, nor the
Churches of God.

The consequent implied is: Therefore women ought not to pray uncovered.
Hereunto Mr. G. answers indeed, but so, that he does not deny that Paul
argues negatiuely from a matter of fact to a matter of right: which is all
that I intended by the quotation; and not, to imagine this Argument, The
Churches of God, and faithful men do not use Lots in gaming. Therefore such
gaming is unlawful.


T. G. Mr. B^. would make his Reader believe here that Mr. B. had laid this for
a ground in his Book, that from matter of fact a man might reason in some case
to matter of right; (which yet would do him as much good for the proof of his
Proposition, if it were granted him, as a little water would in his shoe) and
that for proof thereof Mr. B. having produced this place, Mr. G. in his
writing had granted the same; (for so he would seem to imply, when he says,
Mr. G. does not deny it) whereas indeed all this is but Fictio juris, or giving
of Colors to have matter to work upon. A course usual in legal proceedings.
See Doctor and Student, lib. 2. c. 53.
a fiction, and a mere made matter. For howsoever in mine answer to the entire
Argument, peeced up partly out of Mr. B. and partly out of Mr. Eastie, I speak
of such arguing, yet in Mr. Bs. Dialogue there is no mention at all of it. But
Mr. Bs. Proposition is, or must be, to make up his Conclusion, That which there
is no example of in Gods word, is unlawful. Now how do the Apostles words
prove this? Or what other Argument to further Mr. Bs. cause could be framed out
of them, but such as is above by him mentioned, and I supposed he would have
made? But since he waiueth that, let us see how it will prove that that it
should. 1 Cor. 11. 16.
It is not the custom, says the Apostle, of Christians, to be contentious; as
Chrysostom. Morton.
some expound it; or as Tertullian. Theodoret. Hervaeus qui Anselmi nomine
prostat. Lyran. Hugo Cardin. Heming.
others, It is not a custom among Christians, for women to be vnueiled.
Therefore none ought to be such, to wit, contentious: or none ought to do so,
that is, bring in such new fashions, as are both indecent, and unusual. Will
it now follow hence, that because the Apostle either condemns
contentiousnesse, because Utrumque conjungunt Theophylact. Oecumen. Piscator.
Aretius.
it is not the manner of Christians to be contentious: or women's appearing in
the public congregation vnueiled, because it was contrary to the custom of
the Christian Churches; and (...). Greg. Naz. (...). Faciat quisque, quod in ea
Ecclesia, in quam venit, invenerit: duminodo nihil contra fidem aut mores fiat.
Ipsa quippe mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adjuvat utilitate, novitate
perturbat. Quapropter quae utilis non est, perturbatione infructu^sa
consequenter ^oxia est. Aug. epist. 118. ^. 6.
to break settled order in such things is not allowable: Will i^, I say, follow
hence therefore, that nothing is warrantable, whereof no example is in the
word? If it do not, either let Mr. B. put it out of his Book, or else
forbear at least to urge it.


I. B. So that I need not herein reply upon Mr. G.


T. G. No: but he has need to prove his Proposition, unless he will have us
to take it upon his word.


I. B. I only wonder that he says: The use of Lots in games has been common
in the Churches of God. What? In the public assemblies? as was the fault of
women their heads uncovered in the Church at Corinth?


T. G. To put Mr. B. out of his wonderment; (you see how feign he would be
quarrelling) I mean by the Churches of God, the whole multitude of men
professing the faith of Christ, distinguished into particular Churches or
Congregations, consisting of diverse households and persons: among whom these
lusorious Lots has been frequent and ordinary in all ages, nor has there
been scruple made of them till of very late times. And by Mr. Bs. leave, the
Apostle understands no other Churches, when he says, Tum nos Christi
Apostoli, tum Christiani Deum Patre^ in Christo colentes. Morton.
The Churches of God have no such custom. But this is but (...). Greg. Naz.
monod.
shooting beside the mark.


I. B. But Mr. G. in this answer speaks of things merely natural or civil,
as sweetning with sugar, etc.


T. G. Name all, good Mr. B. There is besides, printing of Books, and shooting
in guns, playing at boules, tennis, chesse, football, etc. against which the
Argument will hold as well as against either Cards or Tables.

And must not warrant be had as well for civil actions as for others? Or is
not recreation, whereof we now dispute, a civil thing? Or must warrant be had
by some example out of the word for Cards and Dice, more than for Chesse, or
else they are in that regard unlawful?

I might here exclaim, as Mr. B. uses to do, yea and that with better ground
than Mr. B. so often does; Oh what a wide gap does Mr. B. open here to
licentiousness, when he implies that for actions merely natural or civil,
there needs no warrant at all be had out of Gods word! It grieueth my soul to
see what will ensue hereupon. For now will ungodly men, when they are reproved
for ought amiss in the course of their life and conversation, and required to
show what warrant they have for it, be ready to say, These are but things
merely either natural or civil: and therefore we need not care whether we
have any warrant out of Gods word for them or no. And either Mr. B. must imply
no less, or else his exception is idle, and of no use.


I. B. I will not endeavor to prove, that in the word there is matter of just
consequence, either general or implied (which is a part of the Proposition) to
allow, as well sweetning with sugar, etc. as Recreation in general: and
therefore they may be lawful, though they be not mentioned in the word.


T. G. Here Mr. B. tells us, that he will not endeavor to prove that which he
need not, because it is not in question: and withal Hoc ipsum evertit quod est
confirmandum; confirmat idipsum quod est diluendum. Quintil. instit. l. 9. c. 2.
in stead of proving what he should prove, he does utterly himself overthrow
it.

That that he says he will not endeavor to prove, is not at all questioned.
For the entire Proposition made up out of Mr. Eastie and him does not say, that
whatsoever thing has no allowance from Gods word is unlawful: but, whatsoever
has not allowance either by precept or practice in Gods word is unlawful. In
neither kind whereof, I suppose, Mr. B. can find ought touching diverse of the
particulars before mentioned, which yet he denies not to be lawful.

That he overthrows directly that that he should prove, is apparent. For
his Proposition is this; Whatsoever there is no example of in Gods word, is
unwarrantable: And yet here he says, that some things may be lawful, though
they be not mentioned in Gods word. What is this but a direct contradiction of
that?


I. B. But suppose Mr. Gs. Axiom holds in them: what is that to Lots,
wherein is the Name of God by his immediate providence, and the use whereof is
limited, to end serious controversies? In regard whereof doubt I not, but an
Argument concerning the use of them may hold from the negative in matter of
fact, as well as in matter of faith, or of the point of Gods worship for the
substance of it. For I presume that as Abraham would not, if he had had
occasion, as he did not, kill a man that told him the truth: so that all that
feared God, and knew the nature and use of a Lot, would not, as they did not,
use a Lot in game.


T. G. If Mr. Gs. Axiom hold in any, your Proposition is infringed. Any one
particular denied, overthrows an affirmative general. Let his Axiom alone
therefore, and prove your Proposition. But that you will never be able to do:
and do wisely therefore to let it alone.

Yea but if you will suppose and take that for granted, which was the ground of
Mr. B. his first Argument, and without which never an one of them can subsist,
then Mr. B. presumes that Abraham would not have played at Cards or Dice, nor
no other godly man: And what then? Why? Then we should have had no example
either of Jew or Gentile recorded in Scripture that had done so. And
consequently, (for that is the Proposition in Question) Nothing is warrantable,
whereof there is no example in the word. Here is a deal of Arena fine calce.
Quod de Senc^ scriptis C. Caligula. Sueton. Caio c. 53.
loose sand without ought to bind it together. The maine matter in Question
still begged, and yet nothing inferred out of it, that is ought to Mr. Bs.
Argument. No due proceeding in ought, only (...). Plut. adv. Stoic. (...) (an
(...)) (...). Hesych.
a wheeling round about with a return to the old principle, of an immediate
providence in every Lot, the ground of the first Argument: For that comes in
still to help at a dead lift, and is as good as the Tragoedians their (...).
Lucian. Philops. vel (...). Idem de sect. (...). Plato Cra^yl. Vt Tragici
poetae, quum explicare argumenti exitu^ non potestis, confugitis ad Deum. Cic.
de not. Deor. l. 1.
God in an Engine, that served to help out still when they were at a stresse.


I. B. Secondly, why may there not be for a thing permitted, some precept in
the word, general or implied? The permission of any thing must be in the word,
either express or by just consequence, and then the thing so permitted is
indifferent. But Mr. G. reconcileth these two Axioms, [Euery Action is
indifferent] and [No Action is indifferent] thus, Every naked and bare Action
simply conceived, is indifferent: But no action clad with his particular
circumstances is indifferent, p. 94. So that he concludes it to be most true,
That no particular moral Action, or no Action of the reasonable Creature,
proceeding from reason, can possibly be so indifferent, but it must of
necessity be either conformable to the rules of Gods holy word, or
disconformable thereunto, p. 95. These things, especially these words (rules of
Gods word) considered, I may say, that howsoever a naked indifferent thing be
by permission, yet a clothed indifferent thing, if lawful, is by precept, or
rule, as well as Mr. G. says, Recreation in general is both by permission and
by precept, if not expressly yet by just consequence p. 138. Does then Mr. G.
make permission a just exception against the Proposition?


T. G. Mr. B. having in stead of proving it overthrown his own Proposition:
now comes to try, if he can yet make good Mr. Easties.

A thing may be warranted, say I, though neither by precept or practice, yet by
permission.

Against this Mr. B. obiecteth, that for a thing permitted some precept may be.
I answer.

1. Unless he say, must be, he says nothing; because he says nothing to the
purpose.

2. If there be a precept for ought, so far forth it is not barely permitted:
for where permission is, Libera res relinquitur. Calvin. in 1 Cor. 7. Huc illud
in Iure Canonico, Quod licet, non praecipitur. Zachar. Ferrer. addit. ad Abbat.
de Cohab. Cler. and mul.
the thing is left free.

Yea but Mr. G. says, that recreation is warrantable both by permission and by
precept. True by precept in some cases, by permission in other: or by precept
in general, by permission in particular, for balls or bowls, and the like.

Yea but again Mr. G. says, (to let the rest pass of Mr. Bs. Scopae
dissolutae. Cic. de orat. perfect.
Besomes here without bands) that every thing indifferent, is lawful, if by
rule, and consequently, if you give Mr. B. leave to expound it as he list, by
precept. Let me mind Mr. B. what before he told us, it is Maledicta glossa
quae corrumpit textum.
a cursed gloss that corrupts the Text. Does every Rule necessarily imply a
precept? Then belike of things Indifferent, that is, (not, of things neither
good nor bad; in which sense my former words cited by Mr. B. iumbling things
here together, nothing to the purpose, are to be understood; but) of things
neither enjoined nor inhibited, no Rules can be given. But let us try (though
it be too palpable) the truth hereof. When the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 39.
A woman is free to marry again if her husband be deceased. Is it not a Rule?
Or is it therefore a precept? when he says, 1 Cor. 10. 27.
If an infidel inuiteth you, you may go if you will: for Ire vel non
ireliberum vobis relinquo. Morton.
that is also implied: and, when you are there, you may eat of all that is set
before you without scruple of conscience. Are not these Rules, and yet no
precepts? If they be, by Mr. Bs. own grant, Mr. Gs. exception against Mr.
Easties proposition stands good, and the proposition consequently is unsound.


T. G. Touching his proof, that permission is a sufficient warrant: I first
would know, what ordinance of God that is, which has not some limited or
appointed use thereof.


I. B. That Gods permission is a sufficient warrant, he that requires to have
it proved may as well require it to be proved, that Gods word is a good
warrant. Idle had the Apostle been if in so weighty affairs being craved his
advice, he should have delivered that that would not warrant those things that
he gave way for, yea and justified them as free from sin. 1 Cor. 7. 28.
If she marry, says he, she sins not. And he that denies it, may as well
Mero meridie si dixerit illi tenebras esse, credet. Petron. satyr.
deny that the Sun is up at high-noone.

His frivolous question therefore is to no purpose in the world: For what if
God has by certain general Rules restrained in some kinds and cases the use
of his ordinances: does it follow therefore that there is nothing in them left
free? God has restrained Recreation by such Rules as by way of Caution are in
my Book of Lots Of Lots Chapter 8.
delivered. Does it follow therefore that it is not free for men to recreate
themselves either with bowls, or with coites, whether they themselves will,
and to make bowls indifferently either of beech or of brasil, and coites
either of tile sherds or of horse-shooes. For, I hope, none of all these may be
done without warrant.


I. B. I am sure and have showed that Gods ordinance touching a Lot has.


T. G. If your own word without further proof may be taken, you have.


I. B. Secondly, I grieve to observe what a gap Mr. G. has by this doctrine
opened to Licentiousness. What! may man disposed to sin, employ any
creature, whose use God has not limited, to what use he will? No: for here is
to be understood that exception which is expressed in the next part of the
reason touching circumstances, viz. [Any use, but that which is prohibited]
Howsoever I could demurre thereupon, especially if an express prohibition be
understood, yet herein I will be silent having enough granted me.


T. G. These be all but -velut aegri somnia, vanae Finguntur species. - Hor.
art.
idle fancies of Mr. Bs. own brain. I open no greater gap to any
licentiousness, than (...). Greg. Naz. de eutax. (...). Eccles. 7. 16. Ibid.
the word of God warranteth: which Mr. Bs. unjust charge must therefore
consequently fall upon, and upon the Apostle himself together with me. I spare
to observe what grievous and inextricable streits Mr. B. would cast Christian
Consciences into by his contrary Assertions; such, I am sure (let him take
heed Matthew. 23. 4.
whom he follows therein) as himself will never endure to be tied to: to
wit, to bring some (I say not warrant, but) precept out of Gods word, for every
particular Act that he does, every sort or part of apparel he wears, every
kind of recreation that at any time he uses, and the like.

Only* I wish that Mr. Bs. ordinary faithfulness may here also be observed.
He says he could demurre upon this position, that I give for the
circumstances of such Actions, in which they are not determined, viz. [ Any
use, but that which is prohibited, is lawfull] especially, if an express
prohibition be understood. When as my words are expressly, not either expressly
or by just consequence prohibited. I would know of Mr. B. what precept, (for
unless precept, no warrant, says Mr. B.) or what permission at least there is
for such dealing in Gods word.

But he has enough granted him by Mr. G. without this. Let us hear how.


I. B. For the use of Lots in game is prohibited by just consequences, as I
have demonstrated.


T. G. If Mr. G. left it indefinite, as Mr. B. in his very next words before
intimated, and expressed not himself, whether he meant prohibited expressly
only, or by just consequence also: how has Mr. B. enough by Mr. G. granted for
the effecting of ought that here he would have? If he did express himself
therein, why was Mr. B. pleased to question what his meaning was?

But how Mr. B. has not proved only, but (...). Ne magna nimium dixeris,
mirande vir. Aristoph. Ranis. Nam, Multa fidem promissa levant, ubi before
^quo Laudat, venales qui vult extrudere merces. Horat. ep. 2. l. 2.
demonstrated, what he here says he has done, I know not; unless Qui per
metempsychosin in Homero, Ennio revixisse ferebatur, ut Tertull. de resurr. and
alij.
Pythagoras be revived again in him, and Notum illud Pythagoreorum, (...),
Ipse dixit: in quo per omnia acquiescebant.
his bare word be as authentical as the best proof that is. Such (...).
Samijs Lacones. Plut. apoph^b.
great words might have been well spared, unless his proofs had been more
pregnant: least it be said of him, as he said sometime of the Athenians, that
they were like old men, that (...). Democrates apud Stob. c. 22.
blew hard, but did little.


I. B. For the better understanding of the second part of the reason (hasting
to an end) I only desire an Answer to this Question. Is any use of a Lot
lawful, where the circumstances of Time, Place, and Persons be not determined?


T. G. Mr. B. weary, it seems, of arguing, comes now to asking. The end of
his Question, he says, is for the better understanding of the second part of
my Reason. Why? admit my reason or some part of it were not worth a button, how
does Mr. B. make good the Proposition, which all this while he should have
proved? But to the Question, I answer as the Spartans sometime in a word: Ad
prolixam Philippi Maced. qua quaedam ab eis deposcebat epistolam, unica vocula
an vocali respo^debant, (...), vel (ut Scal. ad Eusebius. ex Athen. itemque ad
Auson ex Athen. and Gell.) Hinc Auson. epist. 25. Vna suit quondam, qua
respondere Lacones Litera, and irato Regi placuere negantes. Idem and Dionysio
rescripsit Philoxenus: unde Prouerbium, (...). Suidas.
No. And what then? Are there no more circumstances to be observed but these
only? Or are there not general Rules according to which I require the use of
such things to be regulated?


I. B. If Mr. G. except an extraordinary Use, I may as well except the
lusorious use of Lots.


T. G. Can any man living tell what this means? I answer as before; and if
Mr. B. can pick ought our of mine Answer for his advantage, he may.


I. B. I answer to the exemplification of this reason, granting that an
Argument holds from the negative for the substance of Gods worship. I yet
make this Quaere, whether only because God has determined it?


T. G. Whether Mr. B. grant this part of mine Answer or no, yea whether it be
sound or unsound is nothing material, since that the strength of mine Answer
for the disproofe of the Proposition rests wholly upon the other part, to
wit, that from matter of fact not expressed in Scripture, it is no good arguing
to matter of right or wrong; and that a thing may be lawful without either
precept or practice recorded in the word express or implicit: and much less
is it material what become of Mr. Bs. quaeres: which I needed not therefore
stand to answer; nor does ought therefore that follows here, at all touch our
cause.

But let us hear Mr. Bs. quaere. He makes it a Question; Whether the Argument
therefore only holds from the negative for the substance of Gods worship,
because God has determined it? I answer: It is enough for my purpose if it do
hold therefore. Which Mr. B. it seems, does not deny. And in many cases it
holds only therefore: For why we should use water and not Nam and vino
lavare gentibus quibusdam hodieque no^ est insolens. Quo and forsan allusit
Iacobus Genesis 49. 11.
wine in Baptism: why bread, rather than As in the Passover, Exodus 12. 9.
roasted flesh in the Lords Supper, and why bread only and not cheese too, as
Haeretici quidam Artotyritae hinc dicti. Epiphan. haeres. 49. Aug. haeres. 28.
ex Isidor. Great. decr* cause. 24. quaest. 3.
some have used, no reason can be rendered, but Quia tibi sic placitum: uti
Christus ad Patrem, Matthew* 11. 26. Quanquam nolim ex hoc loco argumentum
contexere: prout supra D. B. voluit ad Arg. 6.
because God so pleased to determine the elements in either. It is true indeed
that some sorts of Worship are in themselves Deuteronomy. 12. 31. Talia Ethnicorum
Sacra Taurica, Cabirica; sed and Floralia, Lupercalia, Saturnalia, Bacchanalia,
Aphrodisia, Priapeia, etc.
impious, and are therefore also disallowed. But let us hear the reason why
this Quaere is made.


I. B. For in those places of Jeremy, God does blame his people only for
using a worship [which he commanded not] without any intimation that he
prescribed his own worship.


T. G. Is there not an evident intimation that God had prescribed his own
worship, (unless it be presupposed that he would not at all be worshipped)
when for this very cause he rejects some kind of worship, because he had not
prescribed the same.


I. B. To the same purpose writes Paul to the Colossians against the
Traditions of men, and will worship, not for Mr. Gs. cause, but because in so
worshipping they held not the Head, verse. 19. which is Christ, King of his
Church, teaching and governing the same in all things.


T. G. The Apostle expressly condemns one sort of the superstitious he there
speaks of, because they were mere (...). Col. 2. 22, 23.
will-worships, and humane inventions (wherein let Mr. B. take heed lest he be
found faulty in denying unto Christians the lawful use of Gods creatures upon
conceits merely superstitious, as those false teachers then did) that is, as
Piscator well, Quum Deus istarum author non sit. Piscat.
because God was not the Author of them. Which is in effect for the very same
cause that I auerre.

As for that of Col. 2. 19.
not holding the Head, it is not urged by the Apostle for any such purpose as
Mr. B. here affirms, confounding and blending together those things that are
to be distinguished; but against those that would have brought in the (...).
Coloss. 2. 18.
Adoration of Angels, who in so doing the Apostle says Quod Christum isti
dignitate sua spolient, ut qui un* toti suo corporitum fovendo, tum augendo
sufficiat. Piscat.
relinquished Christ the Head, who is of himself all-sufficient to foster and
propagate his Church, without such sending of his servants to seek assistance
from any other.


I. B. But in Deuteronomy. Mr. Gs. cause is implied. It is true, that there God
forbids his people to inquire how other Nations served their Gods, and
sends them to his word to observe the same, without putting anything to, or
taking ought from the same. Surely I should not gather from hence Mr. Gs.
cause. Because I fear it would* encourage Papists in their superstitious rites
and ceremonies called Circumstances, though indeed parts of the substance of
outward worship. For they are ready to take hold thereof and say, God has
determined nothing touching these supposed Circumstances, and they are not
against the word of God; therefore they are permitted and so warranted.


T. G. Is it not implied, when God says, they should not serve the true God as
the Heathen served their false Gods* but so only as he had himself
prescribed; is it not implied, I say, that God had for the substance of it
determined his own worship?

Or is not this a senseless consequence, Mr. G. holds that God has
determined the substance, but not all particular Circumstances of his service
and worship: Therefore Mr. G. gives encouragement to Papists to add to Gods
worship such things as they call Circumstances, but are indeed parts of the
substance of it. It is as if one should say, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
The Apostle charge all Christians to provide for themselves and theirs:
Therefore he gives worldly men encouragement to be greedy of the world, which
they call providing for them and theirs.


I. B. But I should gather from that and the other places, (I think, directly,
and not auckwardly,) this Conclusion: Because all things in and unto the
service of God ought to be precisely according to Gods will revealed in his
word; therefore whatsoever is not commanded ought not to be. And the rather
(God being jealous) because of the meaning of the fringes upon Exo. 20. 5.
the Israelites their garments, to wit, That you may remember all the
commandments of the Lord, and that Number. 15 39.
ye seek not after your own heart, not after your own eyes, after which you
go a whoring.


T. G. Now we have Mr. Bs. collection, not auckward, as mine, but direct, as
his are wont to be.

Where first I would understand wherein Mr. Bs. cause differs from Mr. Gs.
cause: that is, whether that, whatsoever it be, that is there forbidden, be not
therefore, yea and therefore only there forbidden, because God had determined
his own worship. That which was Mr. Bs. exception against Mr. Gs. cause before.

2. I would be informed whether Mr. B. will affirm that all particular
circumstances of Gods service and worship be precisely determined in the word,
for if that be not his meaning here, what says he more than I say? If it be,
let him return answer to the instances produced to the contrary before. For
the conceit it self is so senseless, that Demonstrare solummodo, destruere
est. Tertull. adv. Valent.
it deserves not further to be refuted; neither do I think that any man
living will concur with Mr. B. therein.

3. For the place out of Numbers produced by him, whereby he would prove that,
(whatsoever it is) that he says, it does no more prove that all things in the
service of God ought to be precisely according to Gods will revealed in his
word, than that all other humane actions as well civil as sacred ought so to
be. For the place speaks of Hinc Iudaeorum commentum, eum qui mandatum de fin
brijs istis observet, tantundem facere atque si legem totam servaret. Primo
enim nodi 5. sunt in unaquaque fimbria. His nodis si fila 8. adnumeraveris, 13.
existent. Iam vocabulu^ Heb. (...) 600 facit: quibus 13. illa adjecta 613.
confiunt: quot nimirum mandatis lex constat universa, etc. Purtorf. synag. Iud.
cap. 4.
Gods commandments in general*

4. How follows it hence that no action or circumstance in Gods service, yea
or in other affairs i^ left free, because all such things ought to be
precisely according to Gods will revealed in his word? I suppose that that
Christian that being invited by a Gentile, when there was no just cause
otherwise to hinder his going, did as well in going to an Infidels table walk
according to the precise rule of Gods word, as he should have done in not
going: and in eating indifferently of each dish, as in forbearing either this
or that when he was there. And I suppose they walk precisely according to the
rule of Gods written word, as well where they begin their solemn service of
God on the Sabbath day at seven of the clock, as where they begin it at eight,
or at nine. Which yet were not, if that circumstance of time were precisely
determined, and nothing at all therein left free.


I. B. To the last I answer, That a Lot is no more a civil affair than is an
Oath, though it (as is an Oath) be used in civil affairs.


T. G. Here is no Question about it whether it be or no: but a Proposition,
which Mr. B. has all this while forgot, to be justified. As for the rancking
of a Lot and an Oath together; and the supposed sacredness of a Lot, enough
already has been said. But why does not Mr. B. answer here, the Question of
Boules and Balls, (for it is very material) and the point concerning a black
pudding?


I. B. And lastly, I affirm again, that God has determined the use of a Lot
to determine Controversies, so as without Gods special appointment (which is
not now to be expected) it cannot be lawfully used to any other purpose:
Therefore an Argument from the Negative will hold by Mr. Gs. rule to disallow
the use of any other Lot, as well lusorious as diuinatorie.


T. G. I will not stand to discuss here how this helps Mr. Bs. arguing, That
is not lawful whereof no example is found in the word, etc.

I observe only how Mr. B. can conclude, by help of my Rule, what he would,
if you grant him withal, what he can not prove. But the Antecedent should in
the former Argument have been made good: which yet Mr. B. there not only has
not done, but has not so much as indeauoured to do. And without proof for
him to Propter nostrum affirmare aut negare nihil ponitur in esse. Beda in
Axiom.
affirm it again and again, is but lost labor both to his Reader and
himself.


I. B. Thus having answered Mr. Gs. reasons inducing him to allow Lusorious
Lots as not evil in themselves: and removed Mr. Gs. answers to mine Arguments,
I may more confidently hold mine opinion, which Mr. Dudley Fennor (of reverend
memory) his godly Treatise of Recreations has taught me, to wit, That Tables
and Cards, as well as Dice, and all other Games consisting in Chance (wherein
there is use of a Lot) are utterly unlawful.


T. G. Thus having within less than three weeks space since this book of Mr.
Bs. came first to mine hands, which he has been Partus plus quam
Elephantinus. Quem etsi december annis uterum gestare vulgus existimet: (unde
Plaut. Stich. 1. 3. Audivi saepe hoc vulgo dici^r, solere Elephantum gravidam
perpetuas decem-esse annos:) Aristoteles tamen biennio tantum. Plin. hist. not.
l. 8. c. 10. Verum Aristoteles juxta alios sesquiannum, juxta alios tri^nnium.
hist. animal. l. 6. c. 27. Adjicere liceat Plinij illud ex praefat. ad Vespas.
Audio, inquit, quosdam, quod semper expectavi, parturire adversus libellos
meos, and subinde abortus facere, jam december annis, quum celerius etiam
Elephanti pariant.
about some I handled this Argument anno 1613. and shortly after the handling
thereof delivered Mr. B. in writing at his request the Answer to his Arguments,
which he undertook then to return Answer unto.
ten years a breeding, run through the same, and showed that it contains
nothing material, or of just exception to ought in my Book, neither confuting
any of mine Arguments produced in the defense of lusorious Lots, nor confirming
and strengthening any of his own against them, I may the more confidently
conclude, the rather holding that, that till now of late, was scarce ever
questioned of any, that Games depending upon casualtie are not in that regard
unlawful, nor is a Lot excluded from being matter of disport by any ground or
warrant forth of Gods word.


AN ADVERTISEMENT to Mr. BALMFORD.
IF Mr. B. shall think good to surreioyne, I would desire some few things of
him (as I suppose) neither unreasonable nor unequal.

One is, that he will deal more faithfully than he has here done, in relating
either mine Arguments or mine Answers both for matter and manner; that is,

1. That he do not in producing them mangle and maime them, cutting that away
that is material. 2. That he alter not my phrase, but give me leave, as I do
him, to utter my mind in mine own terms.
Another is, that he would be pleased (...). Aristoph. eccles.
to keep close to the point: Or if he desire to be dealing (...).
in by-matters, as in most of this he does; that he would handle them apart
from those things that concern the maine (...).
matter in controversy, that the Reader who desires to be therein more fully
informed, may not be constrained to hunt after, what should give him
satisfaction, as if he sought Acum in acere. Iul. Scalig. de subtle. exerc. 216.
a needle in a bottle of hay.

To which purpose I require him to take notice what issue we are at, and as
well what either is denied, or is to be denied, as what also is to be performed
and made good, either in his Answer to mine Arguments, or in the defense of his
own.

For his Answer to mine Arguments.

In the first he denies this Proposition: That which may be used in other
Civil affairs either weighty or less weighty, may be used also in disport. I
reply by way of Induction* and require (...). Aristot. l. 2. c. 2.
an instance to be given of any thing that may be used indifferently in the one
and not in the other: that of an Oath will not serve.

In the second Argument, the former shape, he denies this Proposition, That
which best sorteth with the nature of a Lot, may a Lot most lawfully be used
unto: which for my part shall never be further proved.

In the latter shape (the vain cavil to the form of it omitted) he denies
this Proposition; A matter of mere indifferency, such as a man may lawfully
do or not do, and it is not material whether he do or omit, a man may
lawfully put to the hazard of the uncertain motion of the Creature whether he
shall do or no: yet with a restraint, unless it be a matter controuerted. And
let that, for me, rest too, and others judge of it.

In the third Argument he affirms, The use of a Lot in Game, as it is a Lot,
to be against Piety, because it is not of faith; against Charity, because it
scandali^eth. That is an idle consequence; this evidently untrue of a Lot in
Game simply considered: and he maintains every Lot to be holy by some divine
Iustitution, which I require to be produced.

In the fourth Argument, he denies nothing at all that I say, not conceiving
or understanding mine Argument aright. I affirm any use of the Creature
lawful, that it has a natural power unto, so the same be kept free from
superstition, impiety, injustice, and dishonestie. Which qualification he
suppresseth, and so denies the forepart.

In the fifth Argument, he denies nothing at all, but some Assertions of his
own framing, and the effect of the Conclusion. Lottery, say I, is a thing of
it self indifferent, neither simply commanded nor forbidden: therefore by Mr.
Fennors grounds, lawful to be made matter of disport. Alusorious Lot, says
Mr. B. is forbidden, and therefore not indifferent. Which crosses nothing but
the Conclusion only in mine Argument.

The sixth Argument he miserably peruerteth, and in room of it sets up one
of his own, which he keeps much ado with: Which I would wish him now to
take better notice of, being in the plainest manner that may be laid open to
his eyesight.

For the fuller answer whereunto, (because it is much material to the clearing
of the present point in Controversy) I would desire him only to show by what
Arguments or Argument deduced from Gods word, the use of Boules and Chesse-play
may be justified. Not that I doubt whether it may be done or no; but that I may
understand how Mr. B. will do it: not doubting but his manner of doing it, if
it be sound and such as it should be, will bring much light to this matter.

For the defense of his own Arguments.

In the first he must prove, if he will make it good, that an immediate
providence of God in every Lot, is proved out of Prou. 16. 33. which as yet he
has not done.

And if he will disprove or overthrow mine Arguments against it, he must
affirm such an immediate providence in every Casual Occurrent: as also a
natural power in man to make God work immediately, and consequently
miraculously at pleasure: and answer my reasons produced to the contrary.

In the second he must prove the same, to wit, an immediate divine providence
in every Lot: for that is the ground of this also; and is often repeated, never
proved: and that once proved will effect all.

In the third he must prove that that place, Prou. 18. 18. does so restrain
the use of a Lot to the ending of Controversies in serious matters, that to no
other use it may be applied: to which purpose there is not a word here.

In the last, he must make good, if he will maintain his own Proposition,
that nothing is lawful whereof there is no example in Gods word.

Or if Mr. Easties, that nothing is by permission warrantable; or, Nothing
warrantable but by precept.

These few points if he can make good, all will soon be at an end. And these
would be handled apart, (other by-matters discussed by themselves) that so what
is said to the purpose may the better be seen, and the truth in the Point
controuersed receive the more light, which it cannot so well do, (...). Plut.
eretic. Hinc* Aristot. Topic. l. 6. c. 1. (...), etc.
when it is shuffled up together with so much impertinent matter.

FINIS.
Some things omitted, or misprinted.
Page 6. lin. 24. after a^ow, put in it to be, yea and * meritorious too. and
in the margin against it, * Si^usticus citra articulos credat suo Episcopo
propon^nti aliquod dogma (...), meretur in credendo, licet sit e^rer, etc.
Tol^t* instruct. (...). l. 4. c. 3.. 6. Page 213. l. 11. after well, put in
together. Page 232. lin. 19. in the margin put in ^ Matthew. 5. 21, 22. Page
238. l. 4. put out the point after neither, and put it in after these. l. 5.
after de^, put in, i^. Page 239. l. 8. after d^e, put in wholly, and after
controversies, put an interroga^ine point. Page 240. l. 14. put the like after
reason? Page 257. l. ^ in the margin, for (...)- read (...)- Page 259. l. 1.
for (...) lawful, if by rule, read if lawful, is by rule. Page 260. l. 3.
for justified, read justify. Page 261. l. 9. after on, put in it. Page 263. ^
in the marg. after Gell^) put in ^. Page 270. l. ^ in the marg* for perpetu^,
read perpetuos.


