CHRISTIAN CONSTANCY CROWNED BY CHRIST.

A Funeral Sermon on APOCALYPSE 2.10.

Preached at the burial of M. WILLIAM WINTER, Citizen of LONDON; Together with
the Testimony then given unto Him: By THOMAS GATAKER, B. of D. and Pastor of
ROTHERHITH.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for WILLIAM BLADEN, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. ROBERT OFFLY MASTER of the company of
Habberdashers, and the right Worshipful Sir JOHN GARRET Knight, Mr. Alderman
HAMMERSLY, Mr. Alderman WHITMORE, Mr. Alderman RANTON, and other worthy fathers
and brethren of the said Company, all prosperity in this world, and happiness
in the world to come.
Right Worshipful,
ALbeit the expressions of a gracious heart by lively voice breed deeper
impressions, (God attending his own ordinance of preaching with a more special
blessising) yet writing has in this respect a prerogative, that holy truths
thus conveyed to the world spread further, and continue longer. Those therefore
deserve well of the Church that this way impart those things to public and
future use, by which God wrought on the hearts of the hearers for the present.
In which respect this funeral Sermon preached out of love and honor of the
graces of God in a poor, yet well esteemed Christian (Master WINTER) may gain
acceptan^^, as being not only for matter sound, for handling clear, but for
the times seasonable. For what more necessary in these times, wherein many are
ashamed of the downeright profession of that religion by which they hope to be
saved, than to press constant faithfulness in known truths, unto which all
promises are intailed? Particular points have been much and long urged amongst
us, it is very needful that constant clea^ing to all those blessed truths
likewise be enforced. And from what stronger encouragement can this be, than
from a crown of life here promised to the crown of all graces, Perseverance?
Since the fall, one dangerous disease of the soul, is unsettledness in good
purposes, especially when either discouragements or allureme^ts are offered.
But what will not a soul break through, that has in the eye of it a crown held
out to all that hold out to the end* by him who has both obtained it for us,
and keeps it for us, and us for it? There is a mutual passage of trust
between God and us (for thus graciously he condescendeth to us.) We trust him
with the salvation of our souls, he trusts us with his truth, which if by
grace we be enabled to keep, it will keep us* and raise up our hearts to an
expectation of all good from our faithful and good God, even at that time when
our souls gasp for comfort, at the hour of death. And at the day of
judgment the sentence will pass, not according to greatness of parts and
place, but according to faithfulness, Well done, not learned, wise, rich, but
faithful servant, etc. This Sermon entreating of things thus useful, is
presented by me, as entreated by the widow of the late deceased (Master WINTER)
and some others whom I respect, and to you as chief of that Company whereof he
was a poor member: and this by willing consent of the author, my reverend and
ancient friend of whom I am not willing to take this occasion to speak: his
long, faithful, learned labors in the Church have made him sufficiently
known. He gave her full power of the copy for her use. Which in her behalf,
and at her desire, I offer unto your worships as a testimony of her respect, as
likewise if there be a blessing in your hands in the behalf of the Orphans of
such as have been of your Company, I was not unwilling to take this advantage
of presenting her estate to your merciful considerations, considering she
traineth up a son at the University for the future service of the Church. It
is a special blessing of God where he has given power and a willing mind to
do good, to offer likewise the opportunity of fit objects that bounty be not
misplaced; which here undoubtedly you shall have, and the blessing of the
fatherless and widow shall come upon you. The Lord lead you on in a course of
faithfulness to which we are here encouraged, that in the end you may receive
the crown of life which is here promised.

Graies Inn, Ian. 2. 1623. Yours in all Christian service, R. Sibbs.

CHRISTIAN CONSTANCY crowned by CHRIST.
APOCALYPSE 2.10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life.


IT shall be needless to make stay upon any curious Analysis, either of this
whole Chapter in general, or in particular of that Epistle, whereof my Text is
a parcel. It contains an entire Sentence of it self, and may well therefore
be handled by it self.

They are the words of our Savior to the Angel or Frustra est (...) Origenes,
qui de Spiritibus coelestibus interpretatur (...) Luc. him. 13. and 3^
Pastor of the Church Verse. 8.
of Smyrna: and they divide themselves into two parts, Parts 2.
a precept. a promise.


Precept.
The precept is in those words, Be thou faithful unto death:

Promise.
The promise in those, And I will give thee a crown of life. Part 1.


Branches 2.
There is the work in the one; the reward or wages in the other. 1. Duty.


2. Stint,
In the precept we may observe, Extent.
1. The duty required, fidelity or faithfulness: Be thou faithful: Part 2.
and Branches 2.
2. The stint, or extent of it; Unto death.


1. Giver.
In the promise likewise we may consider, 2. Gift.
1. The giver; Christ: I will give thee. Part 1.
2. The gift; a Crown; and that of life.


Branch 1.
For the first branch, the duty required or enjoined; Duty.
Be faithful. The word faithful, is ambiguous, Fidelity.
and may be taken two ways; and in a twofold sense is it given to the godly.
For as the word (...).
Faith is taken sometime for credulity, Faith twofold. Creduli^ie, Confidence.
and sometime for fidelity; sometime for trust, and sometime for trustiness;
sometime for confidence in another, and sometime for faithfulness to another:
In the former sense it is taken in those phraeses so usual; Act. 24.25.
Faith in Christ, and Act. 3.16.
Faith in his Name: Fidelity. Faithfulness.
In the latter sense it is taken in those words of our Savior, Matthew. 23.23.
You neglect judgment, mercy, and faith, or fidelity; and in those of the
Apostle, Tit. 2.10.
Let servants show all faith (that is, Faithful two ways.

In regard of Belief and Confidence.


faithfulness) to their Masters. So Gods Saints and servants are termed (...).
faithful in a twofold respect: sometime in regard of their faith; that is,
their belief and confidence in Christ: John 20.27.
Be not faithless, but faithful; says our Savior to Thomas: And, 2 Cor.
6.15.
What part has the faithful with the Infidel? In regard of Fidelity and
Faithfulness.
says the Apostle; that is, the believer with the unbelieving. Sometime in
regard of their fidelity and faithfulness unto Christ: Matthew. 24.45.
Who is a wise and a faithful servant? says our Savior. And, 1 Cor. 7.27.
I have received mercy of God, to be faithful; ^aith the Apostle: which of
the former Non quia ^ram, sed ut essem, ne meritum fidei Dei misericordiam
praeveniat. Aug. de great. and lib. arb. c. 6. and 14. and de praedest. sanct.
c. 2. and 3. De fide iustificante intelligens.
some mis-expound. In this latter sense (as I take it) is the word here to be
taken. For so is Antipas (...), contractum ex (...): sicut (...). Lucius,
Lucas. Ar^emidorus, Artemas. Numerius, Numas, etc. vise Var. de ^ing. Lat. l.
7. and Scalig. ad Catul.
a little after termed Verse. 13.
Christ's faithful Martyr: and what is here said of being faithful to death,
is in the next Epistle called, Verse. 26.
the keeping of his works to the end.

So that the Point then of Instruction that we observe hence, Mea^ing. Point I.
is this; that

Fidelity or faithfulness is required of all Christians.

Faith in Christ must be seconded with faithfulness unto Christ. As we must
have Faith in him, so we must keep Faith to him. For Apoc. 14.17.
those that are with him, are (...).
elect, called, and faithful. And as some in this Book are commended in this
kind for their Ver. 19. C. 14.12
patience and faith: so some are said elsewhere, to be condemned, for breaking
their faith, to wit, formerly plighted unto him.

Now that we may the better conceive, Necessity of Fidelity.
and see the necessity hereof: Reason 1.


1. Consider we what terms of relation there are between Christ and us.
Fidelity and loyalty is in more special manner required Prou ^.17 Ho^^. 3.3.
Ier. 3.20.
in the Wife toward the Husband; and in Tit. 2.10.
the Servant and Subject toward his Master, his liege Lord, and his Sovereign.
But Ephesians. 5.23.
Christ is our Husband, our Head, and every Christian soul is his Spouse:
Hosh. 2.19, 20.
I have espoused thee unto me, says he, in mercy and in fidelity. He is 1
Cor. 8.6.
our Lord and Matthew. 23.8.
Master: John 13.13.
You call me Lord and Master; says he, and you say well; for so I am. We ought
therefore to bear all loialtie* to show 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 1 Pet. 4.10.
all fidelity and faithfulness unto him. I might add, that as Christ is
Gods, so 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
we are Christ's. 1 Cor. 3.23.
You are Christ's, says the Apostle, and Christ is Gods. As Christ therefore is
to God, so should we be to Christ. But Heb. 4.2.
Christ was faithful in all things to God his Father: and Vt enim i^se fidelis
est in reddendo, ita fidelem exigi^ de promisso, Chrysostom. nom. de fide, spe,
char.
faithful therefore should we be likewise in all things to him. He was
faithful to God for us: and so should we also be for him.

Reason 2.
2. The faith that must save us, must be (...). 1 Timothy 1.5. 2. Tim. 1.5.
faith unfeigned. But faith severed from fidelity, is no faith, but a mere
fancy. Fides enim ab eo dicitur, quia id fit quod dicitur. Ex Cicer. de repub.
l. 4. offic. l. 1. and ad Tir^n. ep. 10. Nonius de propr. sermon. Aug. de mend.
c. 20. and ad Hieron. ep. 6. Herv. in Romans 7. Haimo ibid. 1. and 5. Ergo ubi
non fit quod dicitur, non est fides. Petr. Ca^t. de ver. abbrev. c. 7.
Faith without faithfulness is a false, a counterfeit faith; like (...). Plut.
de ^^ulat.
Copper coin that has the luster, but not the worth of good Gold. It is
Infidelis quaeda^ fiducia. Bern. de temp. 50.
a faithless faith, says Bernard; and a trust without truth, ( Ierem. 7.8.
You trust in a lie; says Jeremy;) whereby men expect that God should keep
covenants with them, when they have no care to keep the like with him.
Rabsakehs Argument against Ezekiah had been good, if his words of Ezekiah had
been true. Little cause could Ezekiah have Esai 36.7.
to trust in God, had he taken down his high places, and demolished his altars.

Reason 3.
3. When we surcease to keep faith with God, we free him from performance of
his promises to us. For howsoever it be true indeed that the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2.13.
Though we be unfaithful, or, though (...). Vide notas Piscat.
we distrust, rather; yet does God abide faithful; nor can he deny himself.
Romans 3.3.
Man's distrust or incredulity cannot annull his fidelity. And it is a
deuillish position that the Romanists hold, and such as cutteth asunder the
very si^ewes of humane society: that Fidem cum haereticis non esse servandam.
Videantur quae ex Simanch. institu^. catholic. habentur in. Thesib.
Romano-Cathol. a D. Thom* Mort^no editis. and in Alex. Cooks More work for a
Mass Priest, number. 7.
Faith is not to be held with Heretics. For even Etiam infideli recte
servatur fides. Taxatq^e Cic. offi^. l. 3. Atrei illud apud Accium. Neque do
infideli, neque dedi, cuiquam fidem.
with the unfaithful is faith to be held. Howsoever, I say, we may not (...).
Plut. in Lysand. and Aemyl.
play the Creetes with Cretians; that is, lie and dissemble, because others so
do: nor in regard of any man's wickedness or ungodliness otherwise, hold our
selves discharged of such Genesis 21.32. and 26.28, 29. and 31.44, 53.
bonds and covenants as we stand obliged in unto him. Yet where agreements
between parties are founded and grounded on conditions or covenants (for I
stand not now on the precise distinction of Law-tearmes) to be mutually and
enterchangeably performed on either side, Frustra sibi fidem quis postulat ab
eo seruari, cui fidem a se praestitam servare recusat. Bonifac. PP. in 6.
reglur. 75. Frangenti fidem fides frangatur eidem. Fidem frangenti l^citum est
fidem frangere. Petr. Fous reg. Iur. ff. de inoffic. testam. Quanquam hoc
revera non est fidem fallere.
he that in such case breaks first, does thereby free the other party. Nor
is it any unfaithfulness therefore in God, (whose promises of life and
salvation are so conditional) to deny to make his promises good unto those,
Reason 4.
that have no care to keep touch with him. Heb. 8.9.
They kept not covenant with me, and I regarded not them: says the Lord.

4. As there is nothing among men generally more odious, than falsehood in
friendship; infidelity in those that we are in league and amity withal:
Viri f^^deris tui praevaricati sunt. Obad. 7.
Thy confederates, says the Prophet, have dealt treacherously with thee. And,
Ps. 55.12, 13, 14.
It was not a professed enemy, says David, that did me this wrong: for then
could I well have brooked it: but it was thou, my guide, my companion, my
sworn brother; as we say. So there is nothing that God takes to heart more,
or can worse endure, than Esaias 24.5. Ier. 3.20. and 5.23. and 11.10, 11.
disloialtie and breach of covenants in those that be in league with him.
Ierem. 34.17, 18.
Those, says he, that have violated the covenant which they solemnly made
with me, when they Ritus, qualis ille Genes. 15.9, 10, 17.
cut the calfe in twain, and passed between the two sides of it; I proscribe
them to the famine, the sword, and the plague; and their carkases shall lie
rotting above ground unburied. Eccles. 5.5.
Better not to make covenant with God at all, than to make, and not keep.

Use 1. Examination.
From hence then may we learn how to try and examine the sincerity, and the
soundness of our Faith. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Try your selves, says the Apostle, whether you be in the Faith: whether you
be sound or (...).
unsound. (The word would not be translated reprobates, as we commonly use that
term.) Here is a Touchstone to try it by. If our Faith and Confidence in
Christ be accompanied with fidelity and faithfulness unto Christ: if we be
careful as well to observe what he requires of us, as to expect what he
promises. It is (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 2. Fides Deum indiuiduat.
the Nature of Faith, says Chrysostom, to single out God; to make him as
Thomas speaks, John 20.28.
My Lord, and my God: and as to single out God himself, so to apply his
promises in particular to the faithful party: Galat. 2.20.
Who has loved me, says the Apostle, and given himself for me. But we must
know withal, that true Faith is careful as well to apply Gods (...).
precepts, as his (...).
promises. Psalm. 27.8.
When thou say, Seek my face; my soul answers thee again, Thy Face,
Lord, will I seek. Yea, to that end says Chrysostom, does the Apostle make
that particular application of Gods grace and goodness to himself, (...).
Chrysostom. ad Stelech. and in Genesis hom. 34.
to imply thereby his own particular engagement to God for it. And it is no
true Faith that regards not the one as well as the other. Hence it is, that
it is said of some, that (...). Act. 6.7.
they became obedient to the faith: and of the Romans, that Romans 6.17.
they had from the very heart obeyed the form of Doctrine delivered unto them:
or (if you will) (...).
that they were bound unto. Who are commended also more than once for their
(...). Romans 1.5. and 16.26.
obedience of faith, or their faithful obedience. Which faithful obedience is
a sure note of sound faith; nor can it be true faith where such obedience is
wanting. Then may we know our Faith to be sound and sincere, when our faith in
Christ breeds and produces in us a faithfulness unto Christ, a carfulness
to please him, Romans 8.9, 14. Galat. 2.20. and 5.25.
a willingness to obey him, to be guided and ruled by him.

But alas, Use 2. Conviction.
how many will be found, to have no true faith, who yet make profession of
Faith, if they be brought to this Touchstone, if they come to this trial.
Every one is ready to say with him in the Gospel, Mark. 6.24.
I believe, Lord. But, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
All men, says the Apostle, have not faith. No: all have not Faith, that make
profession of Faith. How appears that, may some say? Surely, because as the
same Apostle says elsewhere, Romans 10.17.
All obey not the Gospel: 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
all observe not the rules of it. For how many profess the faith of Christ,
that yet are wholly Ephesians. 4.18. Philip. 3.18, 19. Romans 16.18. Christum l^ngua
si crepat, cum vita neget, non est fides, sed hypocrisis. Cypriani nomine de
dupl. martyr.
estranged from the life of Christ? How many thousands (millions, I might say)
be there, that having given up their names unto Christ, and made solemn vows
and covenants in Baptism with him, never so much as once think on (much less
have any care of performing or making good) those solemn vows and promises
that then they made, the bonds they entered into in their Baptism? And how are
they Christians that keep no faith with Christ? And yet will such be counted
Christians as well as the best: and are ready enough to vaunt of, and presume
on their Christendom, as if Ita quidam omnibus fidem Christianam etiam cum
mala vita tenentibus salutem promitteba^t: test Aug. de Ciuit. l. 21. c. 21.
in regard thereof they were sure to do well. But, to omit that this their
confidence, is like that before touched upon of the Jews, which Ierem. 7.8.
the Prophet tells them, should never stand them in stead: I would gladly
know of some such, what it is that makes him a Christian. My faith,
peradventure thou will say, Use 3. Admonition.
in Christ. Yea, but that Faith, as has been showed, that is not accompanied
with faithfulness, is no true, it is but a false and a counterfeit faith: Nor
can a false and a counterfeit faith make (at the best, and the most) but a
counterfeit Christian; Christiani nomine, non vita, non moribus. Aug. in Psalm.
30.
a Christian in Name, but not in deed.

If therefore we desire Aliud est enim esse quod diceris, aliud dici quod non
^s. Chrysostom. n^m. de sp^, fid. char. Quid autem proderit appellari quod non
es? quid nomen prodest, ubi res non est? Aug. in 1. Joan. 5. (...). Di^n.
Chrys^st. orat. 38.
to be counted what we are called, let us approve the sincerity of our faith
in Christ by our fidelity and faithfulness unto Christ. If we desire to have
benefit by our faith in him, let us be careful to keep our faith with him. If
we look that he should keep covenants with us, let us be sure that we keep
covenant with him. Psalm. 25.10.
All the ways of God are mercy and truth, says the Psalmist, but to whom? to
those that keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. And, Psalm. 103.18.
The mercy of God is for ever and ever, upon those that keep Covenants with
him, and that think upon his Commandments to do them. But it is an unequal
thing for us, to expect that he should keep covenants with us, when we have no
care to keep the like with him. An unreasonable thing were it for Hosh. 2.5,
8, 9.
a Wife to require means of maintenance from her Husband, when she lives
disloially, and keeps with another man: or for a Servant to expect the Wages
couenanted from his Master, when he keeps no covenants at all with his
Master, when he refuses to do his work. Nor have they any reason to expect
Life from Christ, when they die, that have no care to keep Faith with Christ,
Branch 2. Extent.
while they live.

But how long must this faithfulness of ours be continued? Non ad annum, vel
ad tempus, sed in aeternum divino te mancipasti famulatui. Bern. epist. 254.
Not for a day or two; as some formally would seem to observe it, when they
repair to Gods board once a year; no, nor for a year or two only; but, as
in the mutual plighting of Faith in Wedlock it is wont to be said, Romans 7.2.
1 Cor. 7.39.
till death us do part; so long as life lasts, unto death, (...). Clem.
Alex. in protraept.
to the last gasp: as it is afterward expounded, Verse. 25.
until I come; Verse 26.
unto the end.

Christian fidelity must continue to the last. Point 2.


So David, Psalm. 119.112.
I have applied mine heart to fulfill thy statutes always, even to the end.
And, Hebr. 3.6.
His house we are, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of hope to
the end: and, Heb. 3.14.
we are partakers of him, (or, (...), i. (...), ut Cap. 1.9. h. (...). Romans
8.17. socij. consortes. Piscat.
fellow-heires with him) if we keep firm (...), i. (...): quae (...) esse
dicitur, cap. 11.1. Idem. principium autem sive initium fidei, i. quam
profiteri c^pimus, and qua initiati sumus fide.
the confidence begun in us to the end. And look what is there said of our
confidence in, the same is required in our faithfulness unto Christ, in Verse.
26.
the keeping of his works; that must also be to the end. For even one branch
it is also of Psalm. 44.17, 18.
our Faith unto Christ, Necessity of Perseverance
to hold fast our faith in Christ, and the profession of it, against all
oppositions, and all opposites whatsoever.

Now as the necessity before of this fidelity, so the necessity of such
constancy and continuance may appear; Reason 1.
if we shall consider, that

1. Non perseuerare cultus est mutilus. Bern. epist. 24 and 165. and de temp.
56.
Not to persevere is a curtailed sacrifice; a maimed service, and such as God
therefore will not accept of. Leuit. 22.21, 22.
No maimed beast might be presented for sacrifice. That that was offered to God
must have both Psalm. 69.31.
horn and hoof: yet it must not want so much as the tail: for Leuit. 3.9.
the taile-peece by name is in the sacred Rituals disposed of. It being thereby
intimated, say Caudam hostiae offerre praecipimur, ut omne bonum quod
incepimus, etiam perse^eranti sine compleamus. Greg. mor. l. 1. c. 40. Been
immolat, qui sacrificium boni operis ad finem perducit. Idem in Euang. 25.
Caput cum cauda offerri jubetur, quia sine perseuerantia nihil placet. Rad.
Ardens. in 1.40 ^.
some of the Ancients, that no holy course of life is accepted, if it be not
concluded and closed up with a good end.

2. Indicium maximum est malae mentis st^ctuatio. Sen. epist. 120.
Inconstancy and instabilitie is an Argument of unsoundness and insinceritie.
Prou. 17.17.
A friend, says Solomon, loves for ever. And, (...). Aristot. rhet. l. 2. c.
21. and Eudem. l. 7. c. 2. Non est amicus jugiter qui non amat. Amicitia quae
aliquando desmere potuit, nunquam vera fuit. Martin. Dum. de morib. ex Aug. ad
Julian. Com. de poen. d. 2.
He was never a true Friend, says the Heathen man, that ever cease to be a
Friend. Reason 2.
In like manner, those that be true-hearted to God, will keep constantly with
him. Psalm. 78.8, 10, 37, 57.
Nor were they ever sincere and upright with him, that ever leave and give over
their loialtie unto him. Reason 3.


3. Christus perseveravit pro te. Tu ergo pro illo perseveres. Bern. de temp.
56. and de ^on. deser. Ibi tu figas cursus tui metam, ubi Christus posuit suam.
Idem. ep. 254.
Christ perseuered for us* and therefore ought we to persevere for him. Such a
Friend was he to us, as Solomon describes. John 13.1.
Whom he once loved, says the Evangelist, he loved them to the last. He was
not Heb. 12.2.
the Beginner only, but the Finisher of our salvation. He held out to the last
gasp, till Consummatu^ est. John 19.30.
all were consummated, till all were done that was to be done for the full
effecting and the finishing of it.

4. It is a Rule in the Civil Law, Reason 4.
that Factum no^ dicitur, quod non perseverat. Pet. Fon^ Reg. Iur.
it is as nothing that holds not. Yea that, Nihil dicitur fuisse factum,
quamdiu aliquid agendum superest. Ibid. ex Cod. Justin. Incassum bonum agitur,
si ante terminum vitae deseratur. Greg. m^r. l. 2. c. 40. (...). Basil. Cas.
hom. 5.
Nothing is held done, because all that is done is as good as nothing, as not
done, as long as ought remains to be done. Testamentum (...) perfectum
fuerit, nullum est. Gloss. ad Great. de poen. d. 3. ex Cod. Justin.
A will unfinished is no will: a deed, unless it be signed, sealed, and
delivered, is no deed. In a Lease made upon condition of diverse Acts, either
successively to be done, or yearly to be reiterated, if all but one be done,
and that only omitted, or all be observed for many years together, but
default then be once made, Nisi totum soluatur, nihil soluitur. Neque enim
absolutus est debtor, qui multa reddit, sed qui omnia Greg. Mor. l. 22. c. 6.
that one fail, or once failing, is enough to make all the rest of no effect,
and to cause a forfeiture of the whole.

5. Cedunt prima postremis. Tacit. Annal. l. 13. Vltima primis cedunt. Bern. de
pass. Dom. c. 14.
The former part of our life yields unto the latter: Reason 5.
and Vita posterior priori praeiudicat. Hieron. ad Furiam.
the latter part of our life carries it away from the former. Ezech. 18.21, 22.
If the wicked man, says God, return from his wicked courses, all his former
iniquities shall be forgotten, and shall be mentioned no more. And on the other
side, Ibid. 24. Neque enim ex praeteritis, sed ex praesentibus judicantur.
Hieron. in Ezech. c. 26. vides profunda oblivione sepeliri, quae perseuerantia
non insignivit. Bern. de grad. obed.
If the righteous man, says he, give over his good courses; all the righteous
deeds that he has done shall do him no good; but for the evil that then he
does, shall he die. Reason 6.


6 Terminus ad que^ dat appellationem. Non quaeruntur in Christianis initia vel
exord^a, sed finis and perseverantia. Paulus male co^pit, sed been finivit.
Judas bena coepit, sed male finivit. Ex Hieron. Bern. ad sororem. c. 20.
The end of each thing is all in all. Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the end of the just man. And, Psalm. 73.17.
I saw the end of these men. It is that that makes or marreth all. Cu^us finis
bonus est, ipsum quoque bonum est. Bern. in Psalm. 91. ser. 17.
Every thing, we say, is well, that ends well. And indeed, H. Smith on Psalm.
90.12. Tota vita discendum est mori. Sen. de brev. vit. c. 7.
the maine end and aim of our whole life, should be this, to make a good end
of our life; to put a good conclusion to it, 2 Pet. 3.14.
that we may be found then holy and unblameable in peace.

7. Perseverantia sola virtutum coronatur. Bern. epist. 32. and 109. and 129.
and 353. and de (...). 56. and 114.
It is perseverance alone that carries away the Crown. Unless we be
faithful to death, there is Finis, non p^gna, corona^. Id^m. de pass. Dom. c.
14. (...). Themistocles. Plut. apoph.
no Crown of life for us. Reason 7.
Heb. 12.1.
Christianity is compared to a race. 1 Cor. 9.24.
In a race, says the Apostle, all that run, win not. Those only get the
Garland that get first to the Goal. But in this spiritual Race, says
Chrysostom, Non qui primus ven^^^t, sed quicunque pervenerit. Chrysostom. nomine de
fide, spe, char. tom. 4.
not he that comes first, but each one that holds out to the last, is
crowned. Matthew. 24.13. Mark 13.13. Non qui ^^perit, sed qui perseveraverit.
Bern. de grad. (...). Non in hoantibus, sed p^rseverantibus praemium
promittitur. Isidor. de sum. bon. l. 2. c. 7. Nec coepisse, vel facere, sed
profi^ere virtutis est. Hier. Gloss. ad Matt. 10.
He that perseuereth to the end, shall be saved. Galat. 3.4.
He that does not, loses all that he has done. (...). Basil. Caes. hom. 5.
Nec ad bravium victoriae pervenit, qui in magna part sp^ctaculi velociter
currit, si juxta metas veniens, in hoc quod reliquum est, deficit. Greg. mor.
l. 22. c. 6.
Coming but a foot short, may make a man miss the prize, and lose the wager
he ran for. As (...). Basil. Caes. ibid. Nec ad quaelibet des^^nata loca
pergentibus ^nch^^ndo pr^desset longum iter carpere, si non etiam totum
valerent consummare. Greg. ibid.
in iournying also, a man does but lose all his labor, Reason 8.
if he get not to his iournies end.

8. Deus aeter^us: praemia aeterna. Quid levitati and aetern^tati? Aug.
God himself is eternal, from whom we expect our reward: and the reward that
we look for, is it self also everlasting. But what has leuitie and
inconstancy, says Augustine, to do with eternity? Aeternitatis ^maginem
perseverantia prae se fert. Sola est cui aeternitas redditur. Bern. de
consider. l. 5.
Our fidelity must therefore hold out to the last, if we desire to have an
everlasting reward. Yea most equal it is, that we continue to the end, if we
look to enjoy that Gaudium in fine, sed gaudium sine fine. Id^m de diverse. 19.
joy and bliss in the end, that shall be without end.

And, Use 1. Information.
is it so then, that without such perseverance nothing in this kind is
available? How miserable then and deplorable is the stare of those that with
Ephesus, Apoc. 2.4, 5.
forsake their first love; that with the Galatians, Galat. 5.7.
run well a while, but then Frusta velociter currit, qui priusquam ad metas
venerit, deficit. Greg. mor. l. 2. c. 40.
give over; that Galat. 3.3.
begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh; that Luke 9.62. Retro post aratrum
aspicit, qui post exordia boni operis ad mala revertitur quae dorel* quit. Gre.
in Ezech. 1. hom. 6.
put their hand to Gods plough* and then look back again, as Luke 17.32.
Genesis 19.26.
Lots Wife did toward Sodom; that with Demas, Coloss. 4.14. Phil^m. 24.
follow Paul a while; but then 2 Timothy 4.10.
leave him again to embrace the world; that 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
having escaped the defilements of the flesh, and the world, by the
acknowledgement of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, do afterward turn away
from the holy Commandment, and return (...) Prou. 26.11.
like Dogs to their vomit, to their former filth, and (...) ^ambus est, and
poeticum spirat.
like swine after washing to the wallowing again in the mire? They are not
only in as bad ca^e as before, (and yet were Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. and 4.17, 18.
that bad enough) but in worse case now than ever. 2 Pet. 2.20. Matt. 12.45.
Their latter estate, says St Peter, is worse than their first was.

Use 2. Admonition.
And let it admonish us therefore Verse. 25. Chap. 3.11.
to hold fast what we have; Acts 11.23.
to cleave unto God with full purpose of heart; and Hebr. 6.11.
use all diligence, to keep firm our assurance of hope to the end. For as it
were better for us never to have entered into Covenant with God, than to make
Covenants with him, and not to keep them: So Ille plus delinquit, qui
interruptam causam dimittit, quam qui nunquam ad illam perveni^. Bromyard in
oper. trivio ex Authent. collat. 8. de Litig.
it had been better for us never to have made show of observing them, if at
any time after we cease and give over the observation of them again. And
therefore 2 Pet. 3.17.
seeing that we know these things, says S. Peter; since that we see and have
heard what Ing^us praeiculum ad deteriora redeundi. Sen. ep. 72. John 5.14.
Gravius aegrotant, qui cum levati morbo viderentur, in eum de integro incidunt.
C^c. famil. l. 12. ep. 30.
the danger of it is, let us take heed lest we be drawn away by the error of
the wicked; and so fall from our steadfastness and our faithfulness to our
Lord Christ Jesus.

And because, as Gregory says, Quid ista proderit praenosse, si non contingat
evadere? Greg in Euang. 36.
it is to little purpose for us, to be informed how dangerous it is, if we be
not taught how to prevent the danger: It shall not be amiss to add some few
Rules for the furthering of us unto perseverance in those religious courses
that either we are to enter, or are in some measure entered into already.

Rules for Furtherance. Means of Perseverance.

Means 1.


Would thou therefore continue faithful to Christ thy Master, and hold out in
thy Christian course to the end?

1. Enter with resolution. Luke 14.28, 29, 30.
Cast up thine accounts before hand. Et aequissimum ^^era; and ad iniquissimum
te para. Sen. ep. 24.
Forecast the worst, and prepare for it. Luke 14.33.
Unless a man, says our Savior, leave ( Quantum ad affectum, licet non
quantum ad effectum. Ludolf. de Vit. Christ. proposito tenus. Adrian.
qu^dlibet. q. 10.
in resolution at least) all that ever he has, Luke 14.26.
father and mother, and wife, and children, and land, and living, and his own
life too; he can be none of my Disciple. The want of this is that, that makes
many a one turn head and set sail back again, so soon as they see storms
toward, and opposition begin to be made: they never were minded to go
further, than they found the way clear before them. It fares with them as
with those that go to sea upon pleasure, Nondum era^ tempestas, sed ja^
inclinatio maris, (...) subinde crebrio^ fluctus. Cepi guber^natorem rogare,
(...) me in aliquo litor^ exponeret. Senec epist. 53.
who no sooner see a black cloud rise, or find the sea begin to work,
especially Nausea me segni torquebat. Instit itaque gubernatori and illum,
velle nollet, coegi ut l^^tus peteret. Ibid.
if they begin to grow Sea-sick with it, but they are crying by and by to make
back with all haste to the shore; whereas the Merchant or Seaman Cui
propositum (...) navem* in portun^ perducere. Idem e^pist. 85.
that is bound for his Port, will not be driven back with a storm or two,
(he looked before for it) with a little foul weather, or a little
sea-sicknesse, but goes on through fair and foul, Means 2.
till he has made his voyage, till he have gotten to his Port.

2. Labor for sincerity. Endeavor to be that inwardly, that thou make
profession of outwardly. Else there is no hope of continuance. For (...). Greg*
Naz. Nihil fictu^ diuturnum. Amb^ offic. l. 2. c. 22* Caduca sunt quae^ cunque
fucata sun^ Cyprian. ad Donat*
nothing that is counterfeit, will last long. Counterfeit pearls may make a
fair show for some time; but their luster will not last. And this is one maine
cause of the Apostasy of many, they were never but Psalm. 78.37. Hosh. 6.4.
hollow-hearted; they were never sound at the heart. Mattth. 13.20* 21. Nam
quod ra^ dicatum est etiam ardente Sole ares^ cere non potest. So^le nutritur
and vi^rescit, non arescit Aug. in Psalm. 43* and in 1 Joan. ^r. 3.
The seed on the stony ground, therefore withers away when the heat of the
year comes, because it had no root. And therefore 1 Timothy 4.1.
many shall fall away, when 2 Timothy 3.1.
the dangerous days come, that had made a goodly show of profession before;
because they had (when they were at the very best) 2 Timothy 3.5.
an outward show and semblance of godliness only, but inward power of it.
Yea, that is one cause why Read the (...) of Sanders and ^ndleton, in (...)
Acts and Mo^^ments.
many that have seemed very forward men in times of peace, have in times of
persecution fallen clean away, when some others that made no such great show
before, have stuck close to it. There was an outward blase only in the one,
that was therefore by and by blown out: there was an inward spark in the
other, that being blown up by the bellows and blast of opposition, has
broken forth, and blased out to the wonderment of those, that little looked for
such things from such, as had made no greater flourish before.

Means 3.
3. Be careful to 1 Timothy 1.19.
keep a good Conscience. ^ebr. 13.18.
Holding the mystery of faith in a good conscience; says the Apostle; 1 Timothy
3.9. 1. Tim. 1.19.
which some casting away, have made shipwreck of Faith. Perkins of Conscience.
He compares Conscience to a Ship or a Bark; and Faith to Treasure therein
imbarqued; Recte itaque con^ra Papam ratio^natur Nilus ep. ^^ess. (...).
which must needs therefore miscarrie, if the Ship or Bark be castaway. And in
this Bark, Sins against Conscience make foul breaches, which if they be not
speedily repaired, (and that is not easily done neither) may soon undo all.
Better it is to prevent them, than to hazard the making of them good again.
The rather, because when they are grown frequent once, they bring a kind of
retchlesnesse with them. It is with our Conscience, as it is with our apparel.
While it is fresh and fair, new, or new washed, we are very charie what we
lean against, where we sit, or what we touch with it; but when it is once
soiled or sullied, we have no such regard of it, we little pass what we do
with it, we care not now where we cast it. Means 4.


4. Slight no sin; make light of no evil course. For to omit that Nihil leve
quo Deus laeditur. Salvian. de provid. l. 2.
no sin is light or little in it self. Some may seem Matthew. 7.3, 4.
motes, and be so termed in comparison of some other. But there is none but
may well be deemed a beam, being considered in it self. As the earth, though
but Terram hanc cum populis, and urbibus, fluminibus, atque ambitu maris puncti
loco ponimus, ad universa referentes. Sen. ad Marc. c. 20.
a center or a point to the heavens, yet is an huge body of it self, Ier.
31.37. Ambitus terrae totius, quae nobis immensa videtur, ad magnitudinem
universitatis instar brevis obtinet puncti. Ammian. hist. l. 15.
by no art or skill of man exactly measurable. And again, that in every sin,
great or less, there is rank poison; there are Peccatum quodque in se and ex
natura sua mortale esse docet Gersees de vit. spirit. lect. 1. Idemque fatetur
Joan. Fisher Roff. Ep. in re^ut. Luther. ar^ic. 32. V^dentur Vasquez. in Thom.
tom. 1. disput. ^42 number. 7^.
no sins that are in themselves not mortal, as the Popish sort imagine: 1
Cor. 15.55, 56.
a deadly sting there is in every sin; which Pro^. 10.23. and 14.9.
may not therefore be dallied with. Not to stand, I say, upon these things;
even those little sins, as we reckon them, if we give way to them, will
make way soon for greater. The Devil uses them (it is the comparison of
Author Oculi moralis.
an ancient Writer) as Thieves, some little Boy that they put in at a window;
who though he can do no great matter of hurt himself, yet when he is once
in, can open, the doors and let them in, that may both rob the house and kill
all that are in it. Or Idem. ibid.
as Hunt (...) do their little Beagles, which they ply the D^ere withal till
he be heated and blown, and then clap they on their great Buck-hounds that may
pull him down and pluck out his throat. And indeed, in these smaller matters
decay of grace first discovers it self, as Easly on Esaias ^.5.
the decay of a tree, appears first in the washie boughs or the twigs, and
so by little and little goes on further into the bigger arms, and at length
pierces into the maine body. And as we say, that a man's truth and honesty
may be seen as well in a small matter, as in a greater: So Luke 16.10, 11.
even in these trifling things also, as they are commonly esteemed, as well as
in weightier, may a man's unfaithfulness be discovered. He has hardly a
faithful heart unto Christ, that counts any thing a trifle that may tend to
his dishonor; as 1 Timothy 6.1. Tit. 2.10. Romans 2.24.
all sin, in a Christian man especially, more or less does.

5. Be jealous of thine own weakness* trust not too much to thine own
strength. Matthew. 26.33, 34, 35. John 13.37. Praesumps^t nescio quid, quod in
illo nondum erat. Aug. in Psalm. 55. Pos^e se putavit, quod nondum potuit. Ber.
de temp. 88.

Mean 5.


It was Peter's ouer-sight, and we know how Matthew. 26.73, 74.
foully he fell. And his example is left upon record Vt ^uina majorum si^
cautela minorum. Greg. mor. l. 33. c. 15. Scr^p^ae sunt enim ruinae priorum ad
cautel^m poster^erum. Rad. Ardens post Trinit. 9. (...) naque debet reddere,
non s^qu. (...) error ali^nus. C^ssiod. Var. l. 7. ^p. 2.
to make us the more wary. For this is the ruin of not a few; Multos imp^dit
a firmitate praesumptio firmitatis. Aug. de verb. D^m. 13. Infirmior is est,
qui suam non considerat infirmitatem. Greg. registr. l. 6. indict. 15. ep. 4.

Means 6.


that they presume too much of their own might, and so are bold to offer
themselves unto those prouocations and temptations, that prove many times their
utter ruin. They are Stella in Luc. c. 11.
like sick folks, who when they have had a good day or two, think that they
are perfectly well again, and make bold to cast off their sick kerchiefe, or
put on thinner apparel, or venture out into the fresh air, and by such means
fall into relapses, which they hardly, or never (it may be) recover again.

6. Shun evil occasions. Non vitat peccatum, qui non vitat occasiones
peccatorum. Stell. in Luc. 11. and Melanchth. loc. commun. 22. Exponens se
periculo peccati mortalis, peccat mortaliter. Gersonde vit. spirit. lect. 4.
He shunneth not sin as he should, who is not careful to eschew the
occasions of sin, as well as the sin it self. By carelessness in this
kind many fall into relapses. Which St Peter also intimates, when he says of
some that 2 Pet. 2.20.
having escaped the defilements of the world, by the acknowledgement of Christ,
that is, by the profession of Christianity; by being (...). Saepe familiaritas
implicavit. Saepe occasio peccati voluntatem fecit peccandi. Isidor. Soliloq.
l. 2.
entangled, they come to be the second time overcome. As David says of
himself, Psalm. 142.3.
In the way that I walk, have they hid their snare for me. Satan has his Omne
iter istius vitae plenum laqueort mest. Ambr. de bon. mort. c. 6.
snares and his ginnes set in all our ways for us, in our meat, our drink,
our apparel, our recreation, our lawful delights, our trading, our traffic,
our buying and selling, etc. In regard whereof, as those that Job 22.10.
walk among snares, we had need Prou. 4.25, 26.
tread warily, and Ephesians. 5.15.
walk wisely, and circumspectly, and Hebr. 12.13.
make straight steps to our feet. Remembering that Satan prevails more against
those that make any conscience of their courses, by the unlawful, immoderate,
or inordinate usage of things in themselves lawful, than by the practice of
things merely evil and unlawful in themselves. And that it is safer, and
easier by much ordinarily, Nam vitare plagas in ^moris ne laciaris Non ita
difficile est, quam captum retibus ipsis Exire, and validos veneris perrumpere
nodos. Lucret. de rer. not. l. 4.
to pass by the snare, than Non avis utiliter viscatis ef^ugit alis: Non been
de laxis cassibus ^xit aper. Saucius arrepto piscis retinetur ab ham^. Ovid.
art. l. 1.
to wind out when we are once wrought in. You know what was Eues overthrow.
Satan suggested unto her, that though she were forbidden to eat of it, yet it
was not unlawful to look on it. And so by Genesis 3.7. Oculos tendo, non manum.
Non est interdictu^ ne videam, sed ne comedam. Bern. de humil. grad. 4.
gazing on it, she came to have a liking to it, and from taking liking to it,
fell to a longing after it, she had Etsi culpa non est, culpa tamen occasio est
^ and indicium est commissae, and causa commit tendae. Bern. ibid.
tasted it in her heart, ere it came into her hand, and so at length by eating
of it, Hausit virus peritu^a, and perituros paritura. Ibid.
she took in that that proved the bane both of her and hers. In regard
whereof, the Prophet promises eternal happiness with God to that man alone,
Esaias 33.14, 15.
who not only Psalm. 15.2.
speaks truly and walks uprightly, but D^ut. 16.19. Ne iniquos accepto
munere, si non ^^verit, ingratus; si foverit, i^^quus habeatur. Author ocul.
mor. c. 6.
shakes his hands also from taking of gifts, and Sep^ spinis aures tuas. S^rac.
stops his ear from hearing of blood, and Job 31.1. Psalm. 119.37. Vitijs
nobis in animum per o^ulos est v^a. Quint^l. declam. Itaque (...). Clem. Alex.
paedag. l. 3. c. 11.
shuts his eyes from seeing of evil: shunneth those things as well that may
be occasions of evil, as the evil, whereof they may be occasions, it self.

Means 7.
7. Luke 18.1. Romans 12, 12. Coloss. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.17.
Be frequent in prayer unto God for support. Matthew. 26.41.
Watch and pray, says our Savior, that you may not enter into temptation.
Watch and pray; because Psalm. 127.1.
all our watching will be of no force or efficacy at all without prayer. For
Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 13.
from God it is, that strength must be had to stand steadfast and firm: Romans
8.37. Phil. 4.13.
it is his power that must support us. 1 Pet. 1.5.
We are vpheld by the power of God through Faith, says the Apostle. It is the
Ephesians. 3.16. Colos. 1.11.
power of God then that must enable us to persevere: and it is Ephesians. 6.18.
prayer that must procure this power. This holy exercise therefore we must be
diligent in, if we desire thus to hold out; praying, as David does in the
Psalm; Psalm. 86.11.
Lord, teach me thy ways, that I may walk in thy paths: O knit mine heart
unto thee, that I may fear thy Name. As on the other side we may observe,
that when men grow negligent herein, a general decay of grace usually ensues.
Psalm. 14.3, 4.
They are all gone aside, etc. says the Psalmist: While they call not upon
God. And how can we hope to have strength thus to stand, if we be not careful
to seek it, where it is only to be had?

8. Keep the fear of God fresh in thy soul. Means 8.
Psalm. 86.11.
Knit mine heart unto thee, that I may fear thee, says the Psalmist. The
fear of God, if it be fresh in us, will make us keep home with him, Deuteronomy.
10.20.
cleave and cling close to him, be afraid to stir but an inch (as we say)
from him, Deuteronomy. 6.2, 13. and 5.29. Eccles. 12.13.
be careful to use all means of retaining his favor, of approving our selves
and all our courses unto him, and Job 1.1. and 31.13, 14, 21, 22. Nehem. 5.15.
Prou. 8.13. and 16.6.
of eschewing whatsoever may either offend him, or savor of any disloialtie
and unfaithfulness in us toward him. Qui op^ratur ut accedamus, id^m operatur
ne discedamus. Aug. de bon. persever. c. 7.
God, says Augustine, that has wrought on us to bring us home to him, must
also work in us, that we depart not again from him. But this he does by
means; which he points at, when he says by the Prophet, I^rem. 32.40
I will put into their hearts such fear of me, that they shall never depart
again away from me. Fides facit formidinem: sormido facis solicitudinem:
solicitudo parit perseverantiam. Tertull. ad Marc.
Faith breeds fear, and fear breeds care; and carfulness causes
perseverance. The Devil could never prevail with our first Parent to withdraw
her from God, till he had Genesis 3.4.
wrought this Fear out of her. Nor had he ever been able so to prevail with
her, Means 9.
had she been careful to keep this Fear fresh in her soul.

9. Take heed of standing still. Think not with thy self, that having run
thus long, thou may now stand still a while; or having gotten thus far, thou
may now sit down and breathe thee. 2 P^t. 3.17.
Take heed, says St Peter, l^st you be drawn aside, and fall from your
steadfastness. And if you ask him, what you must do to prevent it: Ibid. 18.
But grow, says he, in grace. Vnum ^ duobus necesse est, aut semper proficere,
a^t prorsus desicere. Bern. de diverse. 36. Qui non proficit, deficit; qui non
progreditur, regreditur. Nolle proficere, deficere est* Idem epist. 25.4.
If we be not growing, we are decaying: if we be not making on, we are going
amain back. As Non aliter quam qui adverso^^ flumine l^mbum Re^^g^s subigit,
si brachia forte remisit, Atque illum in praeceps pron^ rapit ^^veus amni.
Virg. georg. l. 1. and Apud G^ll. noct. Attic. l. 10. c. 29. Vide Greg. mor. l.
11. c. 8.
in rowing up a River, that runs with a strong current, if the Oars do but
stay, the Boat falls backward. There is no staying of our hands: N^hil stat,
nihil sixum manet. Aug. in Joan. 31.
There is no standing at a stay. Inter profectum and desectum nihil medium
invenitur. Bern. ep. 254.
Between mending and pairing there is no medium, says Bernard. Damnum parata
sentient, si para^e cessaveris. Pelag. ad Demetr.
That we have will be gone, unless we strive to get more.

10. Mica. 6.8.
Walk in humility. When we have done all this, take heed of pride: (Remember
2 Chronicles. 26.16.
Vzziah; remember 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26.
Ezekiah:) It is a deadly poison that spoileth and kills all where it
comes; Means 10.
so dangerous, that 2 Cor. 12.7.
of another poison is a counter-poison confected, to preserve St Paul from it.
And A^a quaecunque iniquitas in malis operibus exercetur, ut fiant: superbia
vero bonis operibus insidiatur ut pereant. Aug. epist. 109.
we are never more in danger of it than when we have done most, and made
greatest progress in the profession and practice of piety. For it is as Quod
de fisco Iulianus Imper. Fiscus ut lien. Ammian. hist. l. 25.
the spleen in the body, that grows most when the other parts waste; Multis
quippe vitia conculcasse, and virtutes acquisivisse fit occasio superbiae. Rad.
Ardens post Trinit. 5.
it grows fastest often, when other evils decay, and out of the decay of them,
sucketh matter to feed and foster it self with. This therefore must be
carefully eschewed and avoided. When we have done well, we must take heed,
how in that regard we begin to think highly of our selves. Humilitas est
conservatrix virtutum. Et qui sine humilitate caeteras virtutes congregat,
qua^i pulverem in ventum portat. Idem. ibid. ex Greg. mor.
If we do so, all is gone, Qui gloriantur vitia devicisse se, ipsi
devincuntur. Ardens ibid.
we are undone. Be affected rather as Paul was. After he had gone so far,
done so much: 2 Cor. 11.5.
I make account, that I come not short, says he, of the very chief Apostles.
Yea, 1 Cor. 15.10.
I have labored more than them all. For, Romans 15.19.
from Jerusalem round about, even unto Illyricum, (that is, from Syria to
Sclauonie) have I plentifully preached the Gospel: Yet, Phil. 3.14.
I forget, says he, what is past. I regard no more what I have done, than as
if yet I had done nothing, or had clean forgotten what I did. And Ibid.
I put on forward to what is before; pressing on toward the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus. He did as men in a race that Instat equis auriga suos
vincentibus, illum Praeteritum temnens. Horat. satyr. 1.
look not back to see how many they have out-stript, or how far they have
gotten, but have their eyes fixed on those that have got ground of them, and on
the ground before them, that they are to measure, ere they can come to the
mark. Let us More viatorum nequaquam debemus aspicere quantum jam iter egimus,
sed quantum superest ut peragamus: ut paulisper fiat praeteritum, quod
indesinenter and timide adhuc attenditur suturum. Greg. mor. l. 22. c. 6.
Oblivis^ere omne praeteritum: and quotid^e inchoare tepu^a: ne pro praesenti
die, quo debes servire Deo, praeteritum imputes. Pelag. ad Demetr.
not consider so much how far we have gone, and how many others come short of
us, but Summun illud bonum imitari ^onemur: quod quantumvis quis in hac vita
vires protenderit, neutiquam tamen consequi poterit. Stella in Luc. 1.
how far we are to go, and how far we come far short of that Christian
perfection, that we should all strive and contend to attain unto. And as our
Savior advises us, Luke 17.10. Vide Chrysostom. in Oziam sermon. 3.
When we have done all that we can, let us say, that we are but unprofitable
servants; we have done no more, nay Job 9.3. Romans 7.17, 23. Galat. 5.17.
far less, than we ought to do, Means 11.
than was our duty to have done.

11. Consider we the short stint of time, that this laborious course is
required of us; it is but till death. And since that our Psalm. 39.4, 5. and
89.47. (...). Hippocr. aphor. 1. Quid tam circumcisum, tam breve, quam hominis
vita longissima? Plin. ep. 7. lib. 3.
life here is not long; (it is but (...). Plut. paedag. Punctum ^st quod
vivimus, and adhuc puncto minu^. Sen. ep. 49. Minorem portionem aetas nostra
quam partem puncti habet, si tempori comparetur omni. Id^m ad Marc. c. 20.
a point, says the Heathen man, or less than so, that we live here) that
emploiment cannot be long that must end with it. For what can be long in that,
that is not long it self? It is but till death only that our Savior Christ
requires this of us. It is a note of stint, as well as of extent, here. Not
that our fidelity and loialtie unto Christ shall not last longer; but ^inem
dico qua vita ista finitur, in qua tantumm^do periculum est, ne cadatur. Aug.
de persever. c. 1.
because after that there will be no difficulty in our loialtie, no danger of
disloialtie, if till then we hold out. Matthew. 13.41. Vbi omni and host and
peste carebimus. Aug. nom. de continent. c. 14.
All scandals, stumbling blocks and impediments being then removed; and all
occasions of provocation and temptation to the contrary being the^ utterly
abolished. It is but for a spurt therefore, to speak of, that this is required
of us, it is but Propone profundi temporis vastitate^, and universum
complectere: deinde hoc, quod aetatem vocamus humanam, compara immenso;
videbimus quam exigu^m sit, quod optamus, quod extendimus. Sen. ep. 9^. Omnia
humana brevia and caduca sunt, infinui temporis nullum spatium occupantia. Idem
ad Marc. c. 20.
a spurt, in comparison of that that after ensues. And who would not for a
spurt, for a short brunt endure any difficulty, any hardness, to live at
hearts ease for ever after? Who would not serve, even an hard and an unkind
Master, and much more then so kind and liberal a one as our Lord and Master
Christ is, (that Matthew. 20.28. Philip. 2.7. Luke 22.27.
came to serve us and for us, ere he required this service of us) with all
fidelity and diligence for a day or two, that he might after be a free man,
yea an happy man for ever? Vt non sit hic necessarium Epicuri solamen illud, Si
longus, levis est; Si gravis est, brevis est. Cic. Tuscul. l. 2. Sen. epist.
24. and 30. and 78. and 94. Moras and I^lius in epigr.
It is not long, and it is but light, that is required of us, in respect of
that that is expected for it, and is promised thereunto. For 2 Cor. 4.17.
(...). Chrysostom. de compunct. 1.
this light hardship that is but for an instant, says the Apostle, procures
unto us an exceeding excessive everlasting weight of glory.

12. Be often Op^s te terret, merce^e vide. Aug. de verb. Dom. 6.
eying, Means 12.
and meditating on the royal reward, that is both here and elsewhere
propounded and promised to all those that thus persevere. This made Moses hold
out the rather, and Heb. 11.25, 26. (...). Chrystom. 8. ser. 13.
endure not constantly only, but cheerfully, choosing rather to suffer
hardship with the people of God, than to enjoy some sinful delights for a
season; and esteeming the reproach, that for Christ's sake he suffered, greater
riches than all the Egyptian treasures; because he had an eye to the
recompense of reward. And 2 Cor. 4.8, 10, 16, 18.
therefore we faint not, says the Apostle, though we be straightened on every
side; and bear about with us in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, being
delivered up daily for him to death; because we look not on the things that
are seen, but on the things that are not seen: for the things that are seen,
are temporal; but the things that are not seen, are eternal. For though Gods
children be Galat. 4.7.
no hirelings, to serve him only for hire sake, but out of love, (...). Gr^g.
Nazianz. de Bapt.
duty, and good will; yet are they animated and encouraged, the rather to do
that they do the more cheerfully, comfortably, and constantly, when they
consider what a blessed issue their l^bours, endeavors and sufferings are like,
nay, are sure to have, if they hold out in them. For, Galat. 6.9.
we shall reap in due time, says the Apostle, if we faint not: Yea, of our
Savior himself it is said, whom we are will^d therein also to imitate, that
Heb. 12.2, 3.
For the glory set before him, he endured the Cross, and set light by the
shame of it, and is now seated at the right hand of God. And Heb. 10.35.
cast not therefore away your confidence, says the Apostle, Considerations 2.
nor give over, say I, your fidelity, that you owe unto Christ; since that it
has so great recompense of reward. Consider. 1. Loss.


Yea, consider we as well what we lose, if we give over, as what we win and
gain, if we persevere.

For the former; Apoc. 3.11. (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. ^^m. 24.
Hold fast what thou have, says our Savior, lest the Crown be taken from
thee. And it is a Question canuased to and fro among the Schoolmen, Vide Thom.
Sum. par. l a. 2 ae. q. 88. ^. 4. Dura^d. in sut. l. 2. d. 33. q. 3. Al^x. Ales
sum. p 1. q. 39. m. 3. a. 4.. 1. and p^r. 2 q. 114. m. 3. (...). Chrysostom. in
Matthew. ^om. 23.
whether is the greater evil to forgo the joys of heaven, or to undergo the
pains of Hell. But how soever it be, an heavy thing it will be, if we faint
and fail now, hereafter to think, as he sometime said, who for a draught of
drink in distress gave up his command; (...); Ly^^macl^ apud Plut. in ap
p^^b. vel u^idem in prac. salubr. (...).
For what a trifling matter have we bereft our selves of a great command, of a
Crown, of a Kingdom? For what a toy (to speak of) have we deprived our
selves of eternal felicity?

For the latter; Be faithful, says our Savior here, unto death, and I will
give thee a Crown of life.

The latter clause whereof, containing a free and a large promise, Consider. 2.
Gain.
annexed to the precept, which hitherto we have handled, albeit it might well
minister much matter of further Consideration, Part 2. Promise. Motive.
yet for the present we will consider it only, as a Motive, in its several
branches, to induce to, and enforce on us, such constant fidelity, and
faithful perseverance, as we have showed to be here required.

1. He that promises, Branch. 1. Giver.
it is Verse. 8.
Christ. I will give. I will give that have power to give; that have ability
and authority so to do. Point 1. Ability.
Mat^h. 4.9.
I will give thee all these, said he sometime to our Savior, who had no power
to make good what he said: But he that speaks it here, is able to perform
what he here promises. Ap^c. 2.16, 18.
As I have received power, so I will, says he, give them power. For Matthew.
28.18.
all power is given me in heaven and earth. Point 2. Fidelity.
And, Apoc. 3.21.
To him therefore that overcomes, will I give to sit with me in my Throne; as
I have overcome, and sit now with my Father on his Throne.

Again, I will give, who am Apoc. 3.14.
Amen, True and Faithful. He that is faithful to me, shall find me faithful
to him. Heb. 10.23.
Let us keep the profession of our hope without flitting and wavering, says
the Apostle, for he that has promised is faithful. What he says, he will
make good: he will perform what he has promised. He will do it? Yea, he
has done it. He is not like that Antigonus, whom they used to call (...).
Plut. in Paul. Aemyl.
Antigonus that would give. He will give; and he has given. We tread but in
the steps of those that already Hebr. 6.11. (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 3.
c. 8.
have inherited these promises. Point. 3. Liberality.


3. He will give. What he does, is of free gift, not of due debt. Such is his
goodness, that though Romans 8.12. Quicquid es, qu^cquid pot^s, d^bes creanti,
d^bes redim^nti. Bern. de diverse. 19.
we owe unto him whatsoever we do or can do, Romans 11.35, 36.
nor can we claim ought as of right from him for all that we do for him; he
owes us not so much as thanks, as Luke 17.9.10.
himself elsewhere shows, for it: yet O magna Dei b^nitas, cui cum pro
condition reddere d^beamus obsequia, vt servi Domino, famu^^ Deo, subiecti
potenti, mancipia redemptori, amicitiarum nobis praemia repromittit. Aug. de
^erb. Dom.
of his mere bounty he will not suffer us to go unrewarded; Branch 2. Gift.
but of his free goodness will give us, what we could not otherwise require.

Point 4. Crown.
2. The Gift, or the thing promised, it is 2 Timothy 4.8.
a Crown; it is Luke 12.32. Matthew. 25.34.
a Kingdom. (...). Euripid. Phoeniss. Nam si violandum est jus, regnandi
gratia violandum est. C^c. offic. l. 3.
Who would not strain hard for a Crown? Perpessi sunt exercitus inopiam rerum
omnium, vi^erunt herbarum radicibus, and dictu foedis tulerunt famem. Haec
omnia passi sunt proregno, and (quo magis mir^ris) alieno. Sen. op. 17.
Who would not endure much for a Kingdom? Who would stay by the way, or give
over ere he came at it, if he saw a Crown at the goal, and were sure to have
it, if he held but out, till he came there?

3. This Crown, it is Iam. 1.12.
a Crown of Life. It is not like the Crowns that worldly Kings wear, that
cannot (...). Plut. de tranq.
free them from diseases, much less save them from Death. Point 5. Life.
They may die, and Psalm. 82.7. and 146.3, 4.
do die, for all their Crowns, and return to their dust. But this is a
Crown that gives life to him that has it. It is a Crown that keeps him in
life that wears it.

4. The Life that this Crown gives (though it be not expressed here) is
Matthew. 26.46. Galat. 6.8.
an eternal, an everlasting life. 1 Cor. 9.29.
They strive for a corruptible, we for (...).
an incorruptible Crown, says St Paul. It is a Crown or (...). 1 Pet. 5.4.
a garland of Est spica purpurea verius quam flos. Mirum in eo gaudere decerpi
and laetius renasci. Mi^eque, postquam defecere cuncti flores, madefactus aqua
reviviscit and hibernas coronas facit. Summa eius natura in nomine est,
appellato, quoniam non marcescat. Plin. hist. not. l. 21. c. 8.
Amarantum, or of Everlasting, says St Peter, Point 6. Everlasting.
alluding to a Flower, or a Tuft ra^ther, commonly so termed. Therefore so
termed, because by it, as we are now 1 Pet. 1.4.
kept unto, so we shall hereafter be kept, and preserved in, a Kingdom (...).
incorruptible, untainted, that never withers away, reserved for us in the
Heavens.

All which laid together; Conclusion. Use. Persuasion, and Encouragement.
the giver so able, so free, so faithful; and the gift it self so great; a
Crown, of life, and everlasting life: so glorious and excellent an estate,
Romans 8.18.
that all that ever we do, or can endure here, is not worthy once to be
named with it; should persuade and encourage us with all constancy and
cheerfulness to go on and hold out in the faithful service of our Savior,
Matthew. 19.2^, 28. Mark 10.28, 29, 30. Luke 14, 26, 33.
whatsoever it should cost us, though we should lose liberty, living, life by
it, and all that ever we were worth; that so continuing faithful unto death,
he may bestow upon us a Crown of Life.

Now it is, The Testimony given to Mr* William Winter deceased.
I know, expected that I should, as the manner is, say, somewhat concerning our
Christian brother deceased, to whose corpse we perform now Acts 8.2. 2. Sam.
3.31.
the last Christian office. It shall not be needful to say much of him to
those that knew him, as I suppose the most here did. As Bernard says of one
Humbert; his whole life was Factitium vobi^ sermon^m in omni forma sanctitatis
Dei servus exhibuit. Bern. in obit. Humb.
a real and vital Sermon of that, whereof you have had a verbal and vocal
one now; to wit, of piety and godliness, of fidelity and faithfulness to
his Lord and Master Christ Jesus. He had been an ancient Professor: nor was
he one (as Romans 2.24.
too many there are) that did stain and blemish his Christian profession,
either by Unchristian courses, or indiscreet carriages; but by his pious and
prudent behavior rather Tit. 2.7, 8, 10.
graced and adorned it. It had pleased God to endow him with singular gifts and
parts (for a private man especially) of understanding, memory, and speech;
which he was not slothful or negligent to improve and employ, to the glory
of Gods name, and Many, I doubt not, may say of him, as Bernard of Humbert,
Separavit a nobis dulcem ami^^^, prudentem consil^arium, sor^e^ auxiliarium:
God has taken from us, a sweet friend, a wise counselor, a strong helper.
the edification of others: As the maine course of his life and conversation,
so his ordinary speech, conference, and communication being Coloss. 4.8.
seasoned with salt, sauouring of sound sanctification, and such as might
Ephesians. 4.^^.
minister much grace to the hearers. And albeit, God saw it good to afford him
but a mean estate for (...). 1 Cor. 6.4.
the things of this life, (he will stir up those, I doubt not, that 2 Samuel
9.3, 7.
out of their religious disposition and affection to him, will do for those
that he has left behind him) yet he had made him Iam. 2.5.
rich in grace; and by help of that grace he lived with that small pittance
Quod de Cratete Plut. lib. de tranq. (...).
more cheerfully and comfortably, than many do with large and ample estates.
Nor saw I him ever more cheerful, than in this his last sickness. As Ambrose
said sometime when he lay a dying to his Millainers; Non sic vixi, ut ^e pud^at
intervos vivere: nec mori timco. qu^a bonum Dominum hab^mus. Ambros. test^ Paul
^o in vita Ambr.
I have not so lived among you, that I am ashamed to live longer with you; nor
yet am I afraid to die, because we have a good Master: And Martine of Tours
being now near his end, when his friends stood about him, lamenting their
loss of him, Domine, si adhuc topu^o tuo sum necessarius; non recuso laborem;
f^^t volu^tas tua. Sever. de Martin ep. 3. and Bern. sermon. in fest. Mart.
Lord, if I may do thy people yet any service, I think not much of my pains,
thy will be done: So was it one of this blessed Servant of God his last
speeches unto me, willing to be disposed of by God, though As Paul, Philip.
1.25. As Simeon, Luke 2.29.
desirous of departure in regard of his own good; If God have any more work
for me, I am well content to live longer, though my life should be never so
tedious unto me: But if my work be at an end, I am most willing to be gone,
well knowing, though I be altogether unworthy of ought, what he has in store
for me. What should I say more of him, but as it is in my Text? He was
faithful to Christ his Master unto Death; and he has now received from him a
Crown of Life. Which that we may also, in Gods due time attain, he vouchsafe
unto us, Apoc. 1.5, 6. and 5.9, 10.
who has purchased and procured it for us, JESUS CHRIST, Romans 9.^.
to be blessed for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

