THE SPIRITVALL WATCH, OR CHRIST'S GENERAL WATCHWORD. A MEDITATION ON MARK.
13. 37. What I say unto You, I say unto All, WATCH.By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D.
and Pastor of Rotherhith.

The second Edition; Amended and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for William Bladen, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND RELIGIOUS HIS VERY kind Cozen, Sr ROBERT COOK
Knight, eldest Son and Heir to that worthy Knight Sr WILLIAM COOK late
deceased: Long life and good days, with increase of Grace here, and eternal
Glory hereafter.
HOPEFVLL SIR,
This weak work was intended your worthy Father now deceased, unto whom so
many bonds of alliance, of dependence, of ancient acquaintance, and of
continued beneficence so straightly tied, so deeply engaged me; and whom
therefore next after mine Honorable Patron, and that Worshipful Society,
wherein I spent so much time, and whereof I remain yet an unworthy and
unprofitable member' I could not in this kind ouer-slip without some just note
of ingratitude. But since it has pleased God unexpectedly (to our great loss
and grief, though, no doubt, his (...).
far greater gain) to remove him hence, and to receive him thither where he
now rests, as without Philip. 1. 23.
need, so beyond reach of these Offices, I know none that may better lay claim
to it then your self, who are to rise up in his room, and to stand in his
stead, as Firstborn in that Family, whereof he lately was Head. I shall not
need to add, w^ inducements and encouragements* I might further receive to
address these my poor endeavors that way, from those pregnant prints as well
of piety as other good parts evidently discovering themselves in your own
person, observed by others as well as my self, and the rather observed,
because so rare ordinarily in others of your years, and of your rank. The
consideration whereof, as (...). - Menand.
it ministered much comfort to your worthy Father before his decease, esteeming
it no small Honor unto him that God had graced him with a Son of such parts
and hopes in the judgment and by the testimony of so many as well judicious
obseruers as impartial reporters: so it helps not a little to mitigate the
great grief of all his and your friends, not without great cause conceived for
the loss (if they may be termed lost, that God finds to their eternal
weal and welfare) of one whom they so highly ever prized, and now so
deservedly desire; and ministers good ground of hope, that you will further in
due time, (as he said sometime of Constantines Sons) (...). Eusebius. in vita
Constant.
wholly put on your worthy Parents, so (...). Ibid.
exactly resembling them in their virtuous parts, and treading so precisely in
their religious steps, that both they may seem to survive in you, and you be
known thereby to have come of them. And this the rather it stands you upon
to contend and strive unto, considering (as I doubt not but you do) that as it
is a double (...). Eurip. Herad. Et idem Helen. (...).
grace for a good man to be well descended, while both his parentage is a grace
to him, and he likewise a grace to it: So it is (...); etc. Plut. de and: poet.
Ita^e tandem maiores fama^ tradide^unt tibi tui, vt virtute eoru^ anteparta per
flagitiu^ perderes? Pla^t. trinum. T^errimis ignauiae aut nequitiae sordibus
imbuta, portenta nobilia. Val. Max. lib. 3. c. 5. Qui acceptam a maio^ibus
lucem in tenebras conue^tant. Ibid* c. 4.
a foul disgrace and a double stain for one so descended to degenerate from
the good courses or come short of the good parts of those Dos est magna
parentum virtus. Hor. carm. lib. 3. ode 24. (...). Eurip. Hippoly.
he came of, and so to prove either a blot or a blemish to them that might
otherwise have been a grace and an honor to him, but shall now help rather
to condemn him then to acquit or excuse him. It was the speech of one for a
natural man notably qualified, though but meanly bred, to a dissolute person
well borne, vpbraiding him with his birth, Ego primus illustraui d^mu^ meam; tu
dedecorasti tu^m* Cicero post Iphicratem.
I am a grace to my stock, thou a blot to thy lineage: as another not unlike
him in the like case, (...), Socrates.
My stock is some stain to me, but thou art a stain to thy stock. And
indeed as it were Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis Aeacidae
similis; - Quam te Thersitae simil^m producat Achilles. Iuvenal. satyr. 8.
better for a man to come of a Thersites so he prove like Achilles, then to
come of an Achilles if he prove like Thersites: So it had been less evil for
Manasses to have descended immediately from an Achaz or an Achab, then
descending (as he did) immediately from an Ezechias to prove in conditions and
course of life a second Achaz or an other Achab. This consideration may well be
a strong engagement to godliness, where but either parent only has been
religious. For if 1 Cor. 7. 14.
either party believing, though the other be an infidel, be of force
sufficient to bring the Children bred between them within compass of Gods
Covenant: surely the godliness of either, though the other were profane, must
needs be no small tiall to oblige their issue the more straightly to that course,
which they stood bound to have taken, though their parents had been both of
them utterly irreligious. But in this kind has God to you been more
abundantly gracious, in blessing and honoring you on both sides with two such
worthy Parents, whose memory as it is and will ever be deservedly honored
with all those that here knew them; so it is justly expected that it be reviued
in you especially, and the residue of their issue, as (...). Euripid. Meleagr.
(...); Sophocl. Antigon.
in a lively monument, and one better than of marble or brass, not of their
earthly and worldly, but of their spiritual and worthiest parts. Yea, as k
David's Courtiers sometime wished, that his son Solomon might in state and
honor not succeed only, but exceed David his father: so the like may well in
some regards be expected at your hands, in well-doing and piety not to parallel
only, but to surpass him you sprang from. For, to omit that God has
furnished you with some abilities of learning that he had not, that he has
called you sooner and entered you earlier, you have the more day before you:
Your worthy Father has broken the ice to you, he has laid you to your hand a
good foundation of religious courses in that Family that you are to be Head
unto hereafter; he has settled near you and obliged unto you M^ T. Baily
sometime Fellow of Maudlins in Oxford.
a man of singular parts, who as he was sometime your Tutor and Governor, so
will not cease now to be a Counselor and Coadiutor unto you, by whose advice
and assistance you may have plentiful means of furtherance in that godly
course that by Gods gracious goodness you have already made entrance into.
Sir, you see what a task is exacted of you, what a necessity of well-doing
and of proceeding in good courses is every way imposed upon you. Let all laid
together prevail with you to make you as the more careful to affect and
embrace all good means of help and furtherance therein; so the more forward
and diligent from time to time instantly and incessantly to crave further grace
at his hands, by whose strength we all stand; who as he has begun this his
gracious work in you, so is alone able to finish it (and I doubt not but he
will so do) to his own glory in you, and your eternal glory with him. And to
this purpose may this loose discourse afford you any the least help, I shall
esteem it a sufficient recompense of my labor in the publishing of it, what
ever the issue be otherwise: If any other beside shall reap benefit thereby, I
desire but that God may have the praise of it, and my self only their
prayers. Howsoever it prove, it shall remain a testimony of the sincere love
and respect that he bears and owes to you and the house you come of, who
both is and shall by Gods grace always continue

Your Worships hearty well-wisher and affectionate Kinsman, Thomas Gataker.

Euripides Helena.
(...)
Imple tuorum vota, dum refers pij
Mores parentis: namque honoris culmen hoc
Summum, parente siquis editus pio
Pietate patrem and ipse prosequitur pium.
CHRIST'S GENERAL WATCHWORD.
MARK. 13. 37. WATCH.
. 1. THere be Aduentus du^: alter in humilitate, alter in sublimitate. Tertull
^polog. Aduentus Demini duplex. Ber^: in aduent, sermon. 4. imo triplex, ad
homines, in homines, co^tra homines. ib. 3. Primus in humilitate, postremus in
maiestate, Greg. Romans mor. l. 17. c. 19. (...), quo veni^ iudicandus;
manifestus, quo veniet iudicaturus, Aug. de temp. 220. Venit enim saluator,
veniet damnator, Idem in Joan. tract. 4.
two commings of our The Occasion.
Lord and Savior Christ mentioned in Scripture: the former of them in mercy,
Matthew. 18. 11. Ioh. 12. 47.
to save the world; the latter of them in majesty, Matthew. 16 27. Ioh. 5. 22,
27, 28.
to judge the world. Some of those that lived in the time of the former, had De
illo ab eo quaesierunt qu^m sperabant, non de illo quem iam videbant, Aug.
epist. 80.
moved question to our Savior himself concerning the latter; Marc. 13. 4.
Matthew. 24. 3.
When will the coming of the Son of man be?

Now our Savior, in way of answer unto this question, lays down both the
certainty and the uncertainty of his second coming: the certainty, that it
shall be; the uncertainty when it shall be. That, which is wont to be said of
the day of Death, being no less true of the day of Doom; Nihil certius; nihil
incertius. Bernde Coena Dom. ser. 2. and medit. c. 3. and epist. 105.
There is nothing more certain, and yet nothing more uncertain: Caetera
nostra and bona and mala incerta sunt: sola mors certa est. Aug. verb. Dom. 21*
Incerta omnia: sola mors certa, ^uius etiam hora incerta est, Idem in Psalm. 38.
Nothing more certain than that it shall be: as sure, we use to say, as Death;
and may well say, as Doom: For Mark. 13. 31. Matthew. 24. 35.
Heaven and earth (says our Savior) shall pass away, but so shall not my
word. And yet Poena certa, hora incerta: mors certa, dies mortis incer^us, Aug.
ibid.
nothing more uncertain than when it shall be. For, Mark. 13. 32. Matthew. 24*
36.
Of that day and hour knows no man ought, no nor the Angels in heaven, nor
the Son ( (...). Greg. Naz. ad Eunom. sermon. 4. and ex eo E^logius c^nt.
Agnoitas apud Photiu^ biblioth. c^d. 230. (...). Ephrem. ad Anatol. quaest. 1.
Secundum formam (...), Aug de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 12. In statu humiliationis,
Vorst. apolog. disp. 2* ^. 33. Parum ^nim selidum* quod Aug in Psalm. 36. and in
Genes. contra Manich lib. 1 cap. 32. and 8^. q^aest. 60 sed and de Trinit. lib.
1. cap. 12. nescit, i. nesci^e facit. Neque sirm^m satis quod Greg. R^m. lib.
8. epist. 42. and Cyril. thesaur. lib. 9. cap. 4. In humanitate norat; sed ex
humanitate non norat.
as he was Quod ante passionem nescit, post resurrectionem nouit, Chrysostom.
in Act. ^. 7. Et Origin. in Matthew. homil. 3. Vise Iansen. concord. Euang. cap.
123.
then) himself.

Hereupon he takes occasion to Mark 1^. 33. Matthew. 24. 42.
exhort his Disciples whom he then spoke to, and Non illis solis dixit, quibus
tunc audientibus loquebatur, sed illis etiam qui suerunt post illos ante nos,
and ad nosipsos, and qui erant post nos vsque ad nouissimii eius aduentum,
August. epist. 80.
us all in and by them, unto circumspection and wariness, unto vigilancie and
watchfulness: Vt semper paratum sit cor ad expectandum, quod esse venturum
scit, and quando venturum scit, nescit. Aug. in Psalm. 36.
that since such a day must once come, and they know not how soon it may come,
wherein they shall all be called to give up their accounts, that therefore they
live in a continual expectation of it, in a perpetual preparation for it;
that whenever it shall come, they may be found ready and fit for it.

Which exhortation having urged* and enlarged by sundry arguments of
inforcement and illustration in Mark. 13. 34, 35, 36. Matthew. 24. 43, etc.
the words before going, he does Mark. 13. 37.
here repeat and conclude, winding up the sum of all before delivered in this
one word,

WATCH. A word not consisting of many syllables or letters; The Division.
but containing much matter, and matter of Part 1.
much use. Which that it may the better and the The Sense.
more orderly be unfolded, we will refer all that shall be spoken to these
four heads:

The Sense, the Proofs,

The Manner, and the Means: Or,

1. The Meaning of the word, what it is to watch. 2. The Reasons, why we ought
so to watch. 3. The manner, how we must watch. 4. The Means, whereby we may
watch.
The two former belong to Doctrine; the two latter to Use.

. 2. For the first of them, to wit, what it is to watch. Watching is, to speak
properly, Corporu^ est somnus, sicut and mors cum speculo suo somno. Anima
quiet^ nunquam succedit. Tertull. de anim^ c. 32. and 25. Iacet enim dormienti^
corpus vt mortui, viget autem and viuit animus. Cicer. de divine. l. 1. Somnus
siquidem e corpore est, atque in corpore operatur, Aug. de immortal. anim. c.
14. Corpore aut^ dormiente a^ima insomnis agit. Hippo^r. de insomn. Totaque
sibi sua est, Iul. Scalig. ad eundem.
an affection of the body; and is by way of metaphor only applied unto the
soul. In regard whereof it will not be amiss to consider briefly what it
imports in the one, that we may the better conceive thereby what it
signifies in the other.

(...), sieve (...), vt Phrynichus: Et (...), sieve (...). Sicutdormitione
transitur ad somnu^, sic exper* gesactione transitur ad vigilatione^, Aug. in
Psalm. 3.
Watching therefore and waking are two several things: it is one thing to
wake, or to be awake, and another thing to watch. For example: we are all here
(I presume) at this present waking; but cannot properly be said to be watching,
because neither is it now the ordinary time of rest, neither (it may be) have
we any present inclination thereunto. But the Disciples of our Savior the
night before he suffered, are said to have watched with him, Matthew. 26. 40.
Could ye not watch an hour with me? because both it was then the ordinary
time of repose, and they very sleepie and drowsy also themselves.

Again, Psalm. 77. 3.
the Psalmist complains that God held his eyes waking, or (...)
watching; (but in an improper sense) that he was forced to keep waking, and
so in some sort to watch as it were against his will. A man lies often awake
when he would feign sleep, but (...), vt Herodot. loquitur. i. insomnia
laboram, vt (...) apud Nonium.
cannot, either through disease of body or distraction of mind: And a man
that is set to watch, may keep awake, but not mind or regard his charge: and
neither of them in such case are said properly to watch. But those that sit by
such a sick man as cannot sleep, to tend him, are said to watch by him: And
the Shepherds are said to have been Luke 2. 8. Pastores, dum super gregem suum
vigilant, gregis ipsius p^store^ in praese^io i^uenire, videre, t^re meren^r
and autorem. Petrus Chrysol. sermon. 24.
watching over their flocks, when the Angel appeared to them that brought them
tidings of Christ's birth.

So that bodily watching (to speak properly and precisely) is then, when a man
strives to keep himself corporally waking for the tending or heeding of
something, at such time as he is or may be inclining to sleep.

. 3. But it is no such bodily watching that is here intended. A man may not
watch thus, that keeps himself so awake: and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 10. Si d^rmituri
sum^, quomodo vigi^amus? Cord vigilamus, ^tiam c^m co^pore dormimus, Aug. de
verb. Dom. sermon. 22.
a man may not keep himself so awake, and yet watch. Acts 12. 6.
Peter watched thus while he slept in the prison between two soldiers tied
fast with two chains. And so did Psalm. 3. 5. and 4. 8.
David, when trusting to Gods gracious protection, he laid himself quietly
down to sleep. Whereas on the other side, Matthew. 26 47.
Judas sat up all the night long (as Job 24. 14. Vigilat fur, and expectat vt
homines dormiant. Aug. in Psalm. 125.
thieves and murderers also do many times) to put his treason in practice,
Matthew. 26. 40.
while his fellow Disciples slept; and yet watched he no more, nay not so much
as they did. And 2 Samuel 11. 2, 3, 4.
David was broad awake, when he spied Bathsheba from off his terrace; and yet
watched he not so well as before he did, when on his pallet he lay fast
asleep: he rose from one sleep, to fall into another, a worse sleep. It is
not (...). Pythagoras apud S^um, l. 2. c. 1. Est somnus corporis; est and
animae: illud ergo cauere debemus, ne ipsa anima nostra dormiat. August. in
Psalm. 62.
a corporal, but a spiritual; not a proper, but a figurative, a metaphorical
watching, (and yet a watching that has reference to that proper, some
resemblance of that corporal watching) that our Savior here intends.

To apply therefore what was before said of watching, to the Soul, and so to
our present purpose. Sin is in the word compared to a sleep. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6,
7. Pe^catores (...) similes, Anastas. in Hexam. lib. 1. (...). Cl^m. Alex.
p^dag. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Let not us sleep, as others sleep, says the Apostle: For those that sleep,
sleep in the night: and, We are not of the night, but of the light and of the
day. He speaks as of a spiritual Romans 13. 12.
night of ignorance, so of a spiritual sleep of sin. Repentance is said to
be an awaking (as it were) out of this sleep. 1 Cor. 15. 34.
Awake to righteousness; and sin not, says the same Apostle. And again,
Ephesians. 5. 14. Animam (...) exci^at. Aug. in Psalm. 6^.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, from the deadly sleep of
sin, and Christ will illighten thee. And, Quare vitia sua n^mo confit^tur?
quia adhuc in illis ^st. S^mnium narr^re vigilantis est: and vitia sua
confiteri sanitatis indicium est. Exp^rgiscamur ergo vt errores nostros
coarguere possimus. (...). epist. 54.
As it is a sign that a man is awaked out of his sleep, when he tells what
dreams he saw in his sleep: so it is a sign, says the Heathen man, of one
truly repentant, when a man makes sincere confession of his former offense.
And lastly, the striving to keep our selves from future relapse and from
falling back into this our former deadly slumber again, is that which by the
same metaphor is termed watching, as here, so Matthew. 24. 42* and 25. 13. and
26. 41.
elsewhere.

So that it is as much in effect, as if our Savior had said, when he wills
us to watch; that It is not The Doctrine.
sufficient for us, that we have been awaked out of the deadly sleep of
sin; but we must with all heedfull diligence for the time to come strive to
keep our selves thus waking. Watch we cannot till we be awaked; and Nam
vigilare leave est; peruigilar^ grave. Martial* l. 9. ep. 70.
when we are once awaked, we must ever watch. And so have we both the true
sense and signification of the word; and the point also therein propounded.

. 4. Now the Reasons of this point may be Part 2.
four: The Proof.


The first taken from the drowsinesse of our own natural disposition. The
second from the diligence of our Adversary the Devil. The third from the
necessity of perseverance. The fourth and last from the danger of relapse.
For the first of them, to wit, the drowsinesse of Reason 1.
our own natural disposition. Matthew. 26. 43.
He came the second time, says the Evangelist of our Saviors Disciples, whom
he had but lately before awaked, and found them asleep again; for their eye
were heavy. And as it is with those that be of an heavy constitution, of a
drowsy disposition, that though they be awaked out of sleep, yet unless they
use some diligence (yea though they so do) to keep themselves awake, they are
ready ever anon to be napping and nodding, and (if they be not the more
careful) to fall even fast asleep again: So it is naturally with every one
of us in regard of our souls: We are all generally Languido sumus ingenio, and
in somnum ituro, aut in vigiliam somno simillimam: vt Senec. de prouid. c. 5.
of a very dull and drowsy disposition, by reason of that lumpish flesh of
ours, Romans 7. 17, 23.
that abides much even in the best of us. By means whereof it comes to
pass, that we are often slipping and slumbring, be we never so careful and
diligent; yea in danger often, after we have been awaked out of this dreery and
deadly sleep, to fall eftsoone back again into the same, if we keep not a
constant watch over our selves and our souls. Beside that the Devil is ready
and busy ever to help forward, besprinkling of our tempels with his
spiritual Opium of evil motions and suggestions, to further the matter, and
to cast us again (if it be possible) into a Lethargy irrecouerable.

. 5. A second Reason therefore may be taken Reason 2.
from the diligence of this our Adversary. 1 Pet. 5. 8. (...). Joan. (...).
depoenitent.
Be sober and watch, says the Apostle, for your Adversary the Devil goes
about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Vt iugulent
homines, surgunt de nocte latrones: Vt ^eipsum serves, non experg^sceris?
Horat. lib. 1. epist. 2.
Shall men watch, says the Heathen man, to slay and destroy others? and wilt
not thou watch to save thy self? So say I: Shall Satan be more vigilant in
watching to do us a shrewd turn or a mischief, then we in watching to keep
our selves safe from his malice? Pernicicsus nimis est repentinus hostis, nam
aut inscios praeuenit, aut (...) praeoccupat, aut opprimit dormientes. Chrysol.
sermon. 27.
Undoubtedly if he watch thus continually to assault us, unless we watch as
constantly on the other side to prevent him, we shall soon come to be
surprised and vanquished again of him. (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 3.
Continual watch therefore is to be held of us, because Psalm. 56. 6.
our enemy continually lies in wait for us: nor can we ever in regard thereof
(be we never so watchful) be overmuch wary, yea or wary enough.

A thing the rather to be regarded, because it is not here, as in bodily or in
worldly watch and ward; where Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis Cautum
est, in horas. Hor. carm. 2. 13.
some watch for the rest, and the rest sleep while they wake: as that
Epaminondas.
Greek Commander sometime said in a general solemnity, that (...). Plut. ad
prefect. indoct. and in Apophthegm. reg. and duc.
he kept sober and watched, that others the whilst might drink and sleep:
And Philip of Macedon used to say, that (...). Ex Carystij histor. Athenae
dipnosop. lib. 10.
he might safely drink deep, as long as Antipater kept sober and watched. But
it is not so in this spiritual watch; we cannot here watch by deputy; no man
can watch for us; but every one must watch for himself.

. 6. But (may some say) are not the Ministers of God in the word called Ezech.
3. 17. and 33. 2. Ierem. 6. 17. Esai. 52. 8. and 61. 6.
Watchmen? and are they not said Hebr. 13 17.
to watch for our souls?

I answer: True it is indeed; they are called Watchmen: and they are said to
watch, yet not so much for, as (...).
over your souls. Now it is one thing to watch for one, and another thing to
watch over one. To watch for one (to speak properly) is Quom^do Plut, in
Apoph^h. refert Philippu^ a somno diuturniore experr^ctu^ dixisse, (...). Et
Parmenio Graecis indignantibus quod is interdiu obdormiret, (...).
to watch in his stead that he may not watch: as in a City besieged, or in a
set Camp some few watch by night in their turns that the rest the whilst may
sleep: and as Princeps (...) vt quiescant subditi. Iustintan. in authent.
Coll. 2. tit. 2. and Coll. 8. tit. 10. Et Bonifac. 8. in prooem. 6. Decret. and
Innocent. 4. ibid. l. ^. tit. 5. c. 1. Omnium somno^ illius vigilia defendit,
omnium otium illius labor, omnium delitias illius industria, omnium vacationem
illius occupatio. Sen. ad Polyb. c. 26.
the Prince is said to watch, that the subject may rest at ease: or the
Somnosque non defendit excubitor meos. Sen. Thyest.
Princes guard to watch, that he may sleep safely. But to watch over one is to
watch by him to keep him awake; as those that watch Dear to tame them by
keeping them from sleep; or as those that tend a sick Patient in some drowsy
disease, or Vt post elle^orum sumptum praecipit Hippo^r. aphor. 4. 14.
after some medicine received, or a vein opened, or the like, where sleep may
be prejudicial and dangerous unto him. In this latter manner are we said to
watch over you; and the maine end of our watching is to keep you waking. Which
unless it be therefore by our watching effected, all our watching in regard of
you is to no purpose; no more then their watching about the Patient before
spoken of, if he sleep amids them, while they watch about him.

The Pastor then indeed must watch over his people: but Ierem. 6. 17.
the people must watch also with their Pastor, and must be kept waking by his
watching. Yea as Act. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15, 16
he must watch over both himself and them; so Matthew. 7. 15. and 16. 6. and 24
4. 2 Joan. 8.
must they in person also watch each one over himself. To which purpose, if we
should demand of our Savior, as Peter did sometime in the very same case, and
upon the like occasion; Luke 12. 41.
Master, speak thou this unto us alone, or unto all? Do thou speak this
to thine Apostles only, or to Pastors alone, that are to watch over others, or
to the people also, to thy Disciples all in general? our Savior would no
doubt answer, yea so expressly he does answer, Mark. 13. 37. Quod vni dictum
est, quisque sibi dictum putet. Ausen. in ludo 7. Sapient. in Solone.
What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. Others may watch over us; but none
can watch for us: each one in person must ever watch for himself.

. 7. To the adversary before mentioned, we Enemy 2.
might well add another, no less dangerous than the former, to wit, the
world, as Exodus 32. 22.
Aaron says of his people, 1 Ioh. 2. 16. and 5. 19. (...). Quomodo Plant.
Cassin. 2. 5. and Merc. 5. 3. In fermento tota iacet v^r.
wholly set upon wickedness. This though we be John 15. 19.
not of it, yet are we John 17. 11.
in it, neither can 1 Cor. 5. 10.
we go, or (...). Plut. de fera vind.
get out of it, Quomodo ille apud Plut. de Tranqui^. (...). lyse Deus,
simulatque volam, me soluet. - Hor. ep. 17. l. 1.
when we will our selves; Ioh. 17. 15.
we must stay in it, till it please God Gen 5. 24.
to call us out of it. And so long as we are in it, P^. 6. 28. (...). Aristoph.
(...). In^dis per ign^ Suppositos ci^eri doloso. H^rat. carm. 2. 1.
we tread upon embers, Job 22 10. Ier. 18. 22. Eze ^. 2 6. I^ter medi^s laqueos
in hac vita inceditur. Bern. in Cant. 52.
we walk among snares, of P^l. 2. 17, 18.
evil example, of allurement by Number. 22. 7. 17.
profit and Pr^u. 7. 18.
pleasure, of shame and abashment by 1 Pet. 4. 4. Hebr. 11. 36.
derision, scorn and contempt, of terror and affrightment by John 15. 19. and
16. 2.
opposition, threats, and discountenance, if we do not as others do. We are
in as much danger (if not much Hom^ malus ipso est Diabolo nocentior. Iustum
siquidem hominem Diabolus timet, homo malus contemnit. Diabolus homini nisi
permissus non nocet, malus homo nocet etiam prohibitus. Author oper. impers. in
Matthew. homil. 24. Ludolf. vita Christ's, ^. 52. and Vo^ag. de Sanct. 210.
more) by evil men as by devils, by John 6. 70.
devils incarnate, as by (...). Contrario sensu quam id Graeci efferunt.
devils indeed: they are John 8. 44. 1 John 3. 8.
limbs of the devil, and Homo malus telum Diaboli: sine bomin^ aduersus
hominem nil potest. Author oper. imperf homil. 24.
the instruments that he oftest makes use of. Iam. 3. 6, 7, 8. Ezech. 2. 6.
Fera qu^uis ipse (...) est, Qui (vt Martial, spectac. epigr.) iubet ingenium
mitius esse feris. Fera siquidem nisi irritata aut fame coacta non s^uit: homo
gratis crudelis est. Fera habet crudelitatem, sed rationem non habet: homo and
crudelis est and rationalis. Fera malum vnum aliquod habet, homo omnia. Author
operis imperf. homil. 24.
We are more in danger of wicked men for our souls, then they are for their
bodies that live in the wide wilderness, where wild beasts are most frequent.
They were men like themselves that our Savior warned his to beware of, when he
said, Matthew. 10. 17. Quid ista circumspicis, quae ^ibi possunt fort^sse
euenire, sed possunt and non euenire. incendium dico; ruinam, and alia quae
nobis incidunt non insidiantur. Illa potius vide, illa deuita, quae nos
obseruant, quae captant. Rari sunt casus, etiamsi grauet, naufr^gium facere,
vehiculo euerti: ab homine homini qu^tidianum periculu^. Aduersus hoc te
expedi, hoc intentis oculis intuere. Nullum enim malum frequentius, nullum
blandius. Tempestas minatur antequam surgat, praenunciat fumus incendium,
crepant aedificia antequam corruant. Subito est ex homine pernicies, and eo
diligentius tegitur, quo pr^pius accedit. Sen. ep. 103.
Take ye heed of men: for they are they that may do you most mischief. They
were (...). Lycurg. apud Stob. c. 2. H^u quam mala atque deprauata prorsus est
Natura nostra? - Putas ne tu interesse inter hominem and feram? Nec paululum,
nisi in figura corporis. Curuantur aliae, inambulat recta haec fera. Lips.
Lupus est homo homini, non homo. Plaut. Asin. 2. 4. Erras si istor^m qui
occurrunt tibi, vultibus credis. Hominum essigies habent, anim^s ferarum. Nisi
quod illarum perniciosiore est primis incursus, quos transire non queunt. Nun
quam enim illas ad nocendum nisi necessit as in^git: aut fame aut timore
coguntur ad poenam. Homini perdere hominem libet. Sen. ep. 103.
Men-wolues that he forewarned them of, when he told them, that he should send
them out Matthew. 10. 16.
as sheep among wolves. And had not they need Ephesians. 5. 15. (...).
to walk warily, that Psalm. 57. 6 and 141. 9. and 142. 3. Vigilandum est
semper; multae insidiae sunt bonis. Ex Trag. Cic. pro Plane.
have so many snares in their way? Had they not need to stand continually upon
their guard, that have their enemies (...). Thucyd. hist. Vtrinque conciduntur
in medio siti.
on either side, nay Psalm. 17. 11. Intus caro, extra Satan, mundus vndique
on every side of them? Have they not just cause to Luke 2. 8.
watch night and day, that abide there where Psalm. 57 4.
Lions, Wolves, and wild beasts of ravenous disposition are most rife?

. 8. But there is yet a third enemy, as vigilant and diligent, yea more
incessant and more dangerous then either of the former, and that is our own
corrupt nature.

For the other two are without us, this is within us, it is an inbred, an
homebred adversary. A man's enemies, says Mica 7. 6.
the Prophet, and Matthew. 10. 36.
our Savior from him, shall be those of his own house. (...). Plut. de tranq.
Molestissimum maelum intestinum and domesticum. B^rn. in Cant. 29.
An household foe is much more dangerous then a forainer, then one out of the
house, though dwelling at the next door. But this enemy of ours is not in our
house, but Mat. 15. 18, 19. Genes 6. 5. Ierem. 17. 9.
in our heart, lodged and seated in the very inwardest and secretest closet of
our soul.

The other two are professed adversaries, this a pretended friend. And Aditum
nocendi perfido praestat fides. Sen. Oedip. 3. Nullae sunt occul^iores
insidiae, quam hae quae late^t in simulati^e offi^ij, aut in aliquo
necessitudinis noi^e. Na^ eum q^i palam est aduersarius, facile cauendo vitare
possis: hoc vero intestinum ac domesticum malum, non modo existit, verieetiam
opprimit, antequam perspicere atque explorare possis. Cicer* Verrin. 3.
a pretended friend is more dangerous then a professed foe. Psalm. 55 12, 13.
It was not a professed enemy, says David, that did me this wrong; for then
could I well have borne it: nor was it an open adversary, that set himself
against me; for then could I have shunned him: but it was thou o man, my
companion, my counselor, my guide, my familiar. And therefore, Mi^n 7. 5.
Trust not a friend, says the Prophet, take heed especially of a false friend;
put no confidence in a counselor: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that
2 Samuel* 12. 8. In accubitu mos ille vt accumberent (...) in sin^ vir^ru^.
Lips^ad Ta^. annal. l. 11. Hine Caesarem a D^lobella dictum Spendam interiore^
regiae lecticae, r^fert (...). c. 49. Sic Joan. 13. 23, 25.
lies in thy bosom. But this false-hearted friend of ours lies not in our
bosom, but within our breast.

Again, the other two cease sometime their opposing of us, this is incessant,
it never cease. Though there be a continual Genes. 3. 15.
enmity, a perpetual hostility, (...), vt Aesch. in Ctesiph. and Demost. pro
coren. Sieve (...), vt Plut. P^ricl.
a war without truce between Satan and us: yet are we not always actually
In bello perpetuo, at non in praelio. Quo modo Liu. hist. l. 30* ^on praelis
mod^se, sed bello victum.
in skirmish and combat. We are not always in fight, though we be always in
the field. Nor is the devil himself always about us or with us. But (...).
Basil. ep. 1. Q^l teccas al^o calente* S^le matamus? Patriae quis exul Se
quoque fugit. Hor. carm. 2. 16. Recte Varro, L^nge fugit, quiquos fugit: At
longius, qui se.
our corrupt nature is never from us, it is always N^n est extrinse^um malu^
nostru^: intra nos est* in visceribus nostris sedet. Sen. epist. 50.
in the very midst of us; (...). Basil. Hoc se quisque modo fugit: at, quem
scilicet, vt sit, Effugere haud potis est, ingratis haeret and angit. Lucret.
l. 3. - teque ipsu^ vitas fugitiuus and erro; Frustra: nam comes atra premit,
sequ^urque fugacem* Horat s^rm 27. Vitia n^s (...), quocunque transierimus,
secuturasunt. Sen. epist. 50. Nihil tibi prodest peregrinati^, quia t^cum
peregrinaris. Peregrinaris cum affectilus tuis: and (...)* sequentur. Sen.
epist. 104.
we carry it about with us continually, whithersoeuer we go, or wheresoever we
become. And In hoc genere militie nunquam qu^s, nunquam (...) datur. Sen. epist
^2.
it is never idle in us, but incessantly working on us, continually either
hindering us in well-doing, or provoking and egging of us on unto evil. Galat.
5. 17.
The flesh, says the Apostle, lusts and strives against the Spirit, so that
ye cannot do what you would. And, Romans 7. 22, 23.
I find by woeful experience, that when I would do good, evil is present
with me. For mine inner man delights in the Law of God: But I see and feel
another law in my limbs rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me
captive to the law of sin that is in my limbs.

. 9. Lastly, without the help of this traitor (...). Sim^. epist. 40. Nec
noleus quisquam lae^ur, sed (...) v^lens. Nemo laed^tur nisi a se. Tu ipse tibi
ni ^quid fa^as, malus qu^d faci^t? Aug. homil. 29.
no other enemy can hurt us. Deb^lis est adue^sarius, nisi v^ientem non
vi^cit. Pelag. ad Demetr. Loge Chrysostom. or^t. 67. ^om. 6. and orat. 2. hom. 7.
The devil himself cannot foil us, unless w^ our selves will. Suadere and
sel^citare potest, cogere omnino ^on potest. Aug. hom. 52. Habet af^utiam
s^adendi, non potestatem ^gendi. Idem in Psalm. 91 and in I^an. 12.
He may persuade and entice, suggest and provoke, but he cannot enforce or
constrain, nor unless our own heart give consent, cause us to sin. As we
use therefore to say of the Land and State that we live in, that We need not
fear any foraine foe, if we be true among our selves: So may it be said much
more* truly of our spiritual estate, Quid a foris conturbare aut contristare
poterit, si intus been estis, and fraterna pace gaudetis? Bern. in Cant. 29.
Pau vobis a vobis sit, and omne quod extrinsecus minari videtur, non terret,
quia non nocet. Ib.
we should not need to fear any outward adversary, either world or devil, if
our own heart were, and would be sure to keep true to us. But Diabolus plus
co^fidit in adiutorio carnis, quoniam magis nocet hostis domesticus: illa ad
subuersionem meam cum illo foedus inijt. Bern. medit. c. 14. Huit accedit, ha^
vtitur serpens malignus: baculo nostro nos cedit, manus nostras cingulo proprio
ligat. Ibid.
it is our own heart within us that is ready to join with our adversaries
without us, and to betray us unto them. John 14. 30.
The prince of this world, says our Savior, has been dealing with me; but
he found nothing in me; and therefore prevailed not against me. But Diabolus
quum aliquid suggerit, tenet consentiente^, non cogit inuitum. non enim seducit
aut trahit aliquem, nisi quem inuenerit ex aliqua part iam sibi si^ilem. Aug.
de diverse. 20.
he never comes to assault us, but he finds enough and too much in us; the
maine cause why so often he prevails against us. Hosts intra nos multos
habemus, carnis concupiscentias, carnis fructus. Hugo de continent. c. 3.
He finds a many Iudasses within us, that are ready to join with him, to
second him, to assist him, to fight for him, to betray us into his hands.

Without this intestine traitor then, the devil himself cannot hurt us: but
it alone is able to hurt us without him. We need no other Tempter to tempt or
entice us to evil: we have Genes. 3. 6. Portamus omnes impressum nobis
cauterium conspirationis antiquae, Eua nostra caro nostra, perquae
concupiscentiam Serpenti nos prodit. B^n in Cant. 72.
an Eve, a Tempter of our own each one within us, more powerful and more
effectual then any is or can be without us, and one that needs not any help
from without. Iam. 1. 14, 15. Romans 8. 12, 13.
Every man, says the Apostle, is tempted, when he is enticed and drawn aside
by his own lust. And so lust having conceived brings forth sin, and sin
being consummate brings forth death. (...). Chrysostom. ^rat. 67. tom. 6.
Hostem si foris non habes, domi inuemes. Li^. hist l. 30.
No need is there of other devil to delude or destroy us; there is devil
enough in the hearts of every one of us to do either, there is enough in us
without any devils help to effect either.

. 10. We have as much cause then (...). Epictet. enchirid. c. 72.
to watch even against our selves, as against any adversary whatsoever. Since
that as the Heathen man sometime said, (...). Plut. de adulat.
Every man is the first and the greatest flatterer of himself: and others
could never come to fasten their flatteries upon us, if we did not before
flatter our selves: So (...). Anacharsis apud Stob. eclog. tom. 2. c. 2.
every man is the first and the greatest enemy to himself: and other enemies
could never do us any harm, if we did not first conspire with them to hurt
our selves. And if they had need to be exceeding vigilant, and extraordinarily
circumspect, that have not only many open enemies, besetting and assaulting
them on every side without, but many close traitors also, that have busy heads
and working brains, plotting and practicing continually their ruin at home;
then surely no less cause have we to be extraordinarily watchful, whose case,
as we see, is the very same. If Nusquam securitas, neque in coelo, neque* in
paradiso, multo minus in mundo. In coelo* n* cecidit Angelus sub praesentia
diuinitatis, Adam in paradiso de loco voluptatis, Judas in mundo de schola
Saluatoris. Bern. de diverse. 30.
our first parents had cause to watch in Paradise, when there was no adversary
but without: Much more have we cause to watch, and to watch most diligently
now, when we have adversaries 2 Cor. 7. 5.
both without and within. For therein is the difference, as Faber in Iac. 1.
Nonnunquam tentatio praeuenit concupiscentiam, vt in Eua: nonnunquam sequitur,
vt in Judah.
one says well, between Genes. 3. 1, 6.
Adam and Ieh. 12. 6. and 13. 2.
Judas, so between our first parents and us, that Outward temptation prevented
inward corruption in them, inward corruption preuenteth outward temptation in
us. So many adversaries therefore, so vigilant, so diligent, round about us, on
every side of us, before us, behind us, above us, beneath us, without us,
within us, Ire vides quadrato agmine exerci^u^, vbi hostis ab omni part
suspectus est, (...) p^ratu^. Hoc aliqua^to nobis magis necessarium. Illi enim
saepe hostem tim^ere fin^ causa. Nobis nihil pacatu^ est. Tam superne quam
infra metus est. Virumque trepidat latus. Sequa^tur pericula and occurrunt.
Sex^us apud Sen. ep. 60.
must needs enforce on us an incessant watchfulness, if we have any care of
our own safety.

. 11. A third Reason may be taken from the necessity of perseverance. Matthew.
10. 22. and 24. 13. Nonqui inceperit, sed qui perseuerau^rit, sal^us erit.
Incip^re multoru^ est; perseuerare paucorum. Bern. de grad. obed. Multi enim
magna aggrediuntur, sed in via defi^tunt: in desertum multi exeunt, sed ad
terram promissionis pauci perueniunt. Aug. ad fratr* in er^m. ser 8.
Who so endures to the end (says our Savior, he alone) shall be saved. The
Christian course is compared to a race. Hebr. 12. 1.
Let us run with patience (says the Apostle) the race set before us. And 1
Cor. 9. 24.
in a race (says the same Apostle) all run; but all win not. If we ask
who win, he tells us elsewhere, that 2 Timothy 2. 5.
they only win the wager or get the garland, that run (...). Non certat
legitime, nis^ qui certat ad finem vsque. Aug. ibid.
according to the laws of the game, to the rules of the race. Now in worldly
races the law of the game is, that none but he gains the prize, that gets
first to the gole: But in the spiritual race the law is otherwise. For Non qui
primus venerit, sell quien nque peruen^rit. Chrysostom. in Matthew.
there not who so comes first, but who so holds out to the last, Matthew. 19.
30. and 20. 16. and 22. 14.
be he in order of place or time first or last, is sure to win and to do
well. Apoc. 2. 10.
Be faithful to death, and thou shall have the crown of life, says our
Savior to each Christian soldier and soul.

I^cassum bo^u^ agitur, si ante t^rminum v^tae descratur: quiae and frustra
velotiter currit, qui priusquam ad ^etas veni^t, deficit. Greg. mor. l. 2. c.
40. Non inchoantibus siquidem praemiu^ (...), sed perseuerantibus. Ifidor. de
sum. b^n. lib. 2. cap. 7.
As in a race then it is to no purpose for a man to set out with the first, and
to run eagerly a while, if after some time he sit down, and stay at the
midway: yea if he give over when he is within but a foot or two of the gole,
it is all one as if he had never set foot into the field: So here for a man
Gal. 5. 7. and 3 3.
to run well for a spurt, and then to give over, yea to break off that good
course that he was entered into but a day or twain before decease* it is enough
to annull all his former proceedings, and to make him to be in no better estate
then if he had never set foot into the good ways of God. For Perseuerantia
sola virtu^u^ coronaiur. Bern. de temp. 114. Aeternitatis imaginem
perseuerantia prae se fert. Sola est cui aeternitas red^ur. Idem de consider.
l. 5.
It is perseverance alone in well-doing, that carries away the crown. Cedunt
primae postremis. Tacit. annal. l. 13.
The latter part of a man's life ouer-swayeth the former: and Vita posterior
priori praeiudi^at. Hieron. in Ezech. 18.
the former yields it to the latter. Ezech. 18. 24. Vides obliuione pr^sunda
s^peliri virtutes, quas perseuerantia non insigniuit. Bern. de grad. obed.
Neque enim incepisse, vel facere, sed perficere virtutis est. Ex Hiero^. Gloss.
ad Matthew. 10. 22. Atqui non est magnum bonum inchoare quod bonu^ est, sed
consummare, hoc solum perfectum est. August. ad fratres in eremo, sermon. 8.
if the righteous man (says the Prophet, or rather God himself by the
Prophet) shall turn from his righteous course of life that before he lived in,
none of his former good deeds shall be remembered or reckoned; but in the evil
that then he does, he shall die.

Yea to keep to the comparison that we have in our text: If a Servant or
Soldier appointed to watch for his Masters coming, or against the enemies
approach, shall continue watching till within an hour or some shorter time of
the arrival of the one or the assault of the other, but shall then chance to
fall fast asleep; he shall be no less in danger either to be shent of the one
or to be slain by the other, then if he had slept all out, and watched no time
at all. And the like may be said of our spiritual Watch; which if we shall for
any time intermit, or after any time give over, we may chance in the interim to
be surprised either by the justice of God, or by the malice of Satan, and so
Non enim ex praeteritis, sed ex praesentibus iudicamur. Cauendu ergo semperque
^mendu^, ne (...) gloriam and solida^ firmitate^ vnius horae procella
subuertat. Hieron. in Ezech. c. 26.
be in danger of perishing everlastingly by either, notwithstanding all our
former watch. To which purpose says our Savior in the words next before my
text; that it is in this case Mark. 13. 34, 35, 36. Luk* 12. 36, 37, 38.
As when a man going from home for a time, leaves his servants to keep house,
and sets each one his task, and wills the Porter to watch: and he warns
us all therefore to Luke 21 36.
watch incessantly, (because Mat. 24. 42, 43.
we know not what time our Lord and Master may come) lest if he come suddenly,
he t^ke us asleep.

. 12. A fourth Reason may be taken from the Reason 4.
danger of relapse: Joan. 5 24.
Go thy way (says our Savior to the Criple he had cured) and sin no more;
lest a worse matter befall thee. As we stand continually in no small danger of
relapse, partly through the drowsinesse of our own disposition, and partly
through the diligence of our Adversary the Devil, (as before we have showed:)
so is there I^gens periculu^ ad deterior^ rede^di. Sen. epist. 72.
no small danger in relapse, and in relinquishing this our spiritual watch:
which if ever therefore we give over and fall from, it shall not be barely all
one to us, as if we had ever lien still asleep, but it shall be far worse
with us, then if we had never been awaked.

For as it is in the diseases of the body; so it is likewise in the sickness
of the soul. As Grauius agr^tat ij, qui cum l^uari morbo videntur, in cum de
integro in^iderunt. Cic. fam. ep. 30. lib. 12.
in bodily sickness the relapse usually is worse and more dangerous, more
incurable and irrecouerable then the disease it self was at first: so it
falls out commonly, yea so it is eue^* ordinarily in this spiritual
Lethargy, that the relapse proves more desperate then the disease was in it
self. 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.
For if men (says the Apostle) having escaped these worldly defilements (...).
by the acknowledgement of Christ (or the profession of Christianity) come
after to be entangled and again overcome of them; Matthew. 12. 45.
the latter estate of such is worse then the first. For it had been better for
them never to have (...). quod plus est qu^ (...).
taken notice of the good way of God, then after notice taken of it, to turn
again away from it. Since that such, as the Proverb truly speaks, are
Prou. 26. 11.
like the Dog that resumeth his own vomit; (...). Iambus est, and poeticum
quid spirat.
and like Swine that after washing return again to their wallowing in the
mire. As if he had said in words applied to the present comparison, It had
been better for men to have lien fast asleep still, snorting securely in
their sanne, then having been by the word and Spirit of God, raised and roused
out of it, to fall afterward back again into some deadly fit of it.

. 13. They seldom awake again, that fall the second time so fast asleep.
Partly, for that through their own inbred corruption (the evil humor that
feeds this drowsy disease) waxing commonly in such cases more fierce and
furious then before (like a mastiue that breaks loose, when he has been
tied up sometime; or like Torrens ab (...) savior iba^. Ouidmetam. l 4.
the stream of a river that has recovered scope again, where it had found
some restraint formerly, either pent in with arches, or bounded with banks)
this spiritual Lethargy in the return of it grows stronger upon them, and
so harder to be subdued and expelled then at first; like a malady that has
got masterie of, and now contemns those remedies that curbed and abated the
force of it for a while.

As also partly through Satan's malicious policy, who endeavors all he can by
plunging of such as have broken or been breaking away from him (if he can
fasten again upon them) as deep as may be in all manner of impiety and
impuritie, thereby to make them surer then ever to himself: Stella ad illud
^uc. 11. 24, 25, 26.
like the Iaylor, that having laid hold on his prisoner again, that had either
attempted or made escape from him, lays load on him with irons as many as he
may bear, to make him sure from starting a^ide any more.

Yea and partly through the just judgment of God, who upon such Apostataes
(as, though he have been so gracious and merciful unto them as to awake them
out of this deadly slumber sometime, yet he finds them not thankful to him
for it, nor steadfast and faithful with him, nor careful to keep their watch
so as they should, but willing to sleep again, Esai. 56. 10. (...)
delighting in slumber, and repenting that ever they were awaked) is wont Esa.
29. 10. (...) p^rfudit spiritu s^poris alti. Iun. (...) dormitare, (...)
dormire, (...) s^ore al^o (...). Liu^l.
to pour out the spirit not of slumber, but of deep and dead sleep; so that
it may be said of them, as of Saul and his troops, 1 Samuel 26. 12. s^por altus
I^ouae, ^* maximus and diuinitus immissus. Iun. post Aug. ad Simpli^. l. 2. q.
1.
A deep sleep of God was upon them, that they did not awake: as he is said
even Esai. 6. 9, 10. Rom* 11. 8.
to close up the eyes, and to make the very hearts of such (not their heads
only) heavy, that they may not return or repent, that is, be awaked any more
again out of their dead sleep, and so healed of this their spiritual
Lethargy.

And no marvel then if they seldom awake or recover, whom God, and the
Devil, and their own corrupt heart, God in justice, the Devil in malice, and
their own corrupt heart out of its own drowsy disposition, shall all
conspire as it were together to withold from waking, and from returning to
their wonted watch.

. 14. So that whether we regard the drowsinesse of our own natural
disposition; or the diligence of our Adversary ever watching against us; or the
necessity of perseverance, and holding out to the end; or the dreadful danger
of relapse, if we fall from our former forwardness, and either intermit or
give over our watch, and our standing upon our Guard: we cannot but see the
truth of the point formerly propounded, to wit, that it is not sufficient for
us that we have been awaked out of this spiritual sleep of sin, but there
is further need of perpetual care to be had for the keeping of us from
falling back into that deadly slumber again.

. 15. Now what may be the Use of all this, but The Use.
to exhort and excite us to the diligent practice and performance of a duty so
necessary, that so nearly concerns us, and that is so often and so earnestly
exacted of us and pressed upon us, both by Matthew. 24. 42. and 25. 13. and 26.
41. Mark. 13. 33, 35, 37. Luke 12. 40. and 21. 36.
our Savior Christ himself, and Ephesians. 6. 18. Coloss. 4. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. 1
Petr. 4. 7. and 5. 8.
his Apostles, as here, so elsewhere.

Which that we may do the more readily and with the better success, it shall
not be amiss in the next place to consider of, both the Manner, how it is to
be performed; as also the Means, whereby it may be effected.

For the former, to wit, the Manner how this Part 3. The manner.
spiritual watch is to be held, we will pitch upon four points, wherein the
same does principally consist:

The 1. is a due Examination of our several actions; The 2. a diligent
observation of our special corruptions; The 3. a careful auoidance of the
occasions of evil; The 4. a constant resistance of temptations unto evil;
And of these in order.

. 16. The first point then of this Christian Point 1.
watch is the due (...). Scitu^ Bia^is referente Demetrio Phalar. apud S^ob. c.
3.
Examination of our several actions, before we undertake them, lest we be
otherwise unawares overtaken with sin in them, especially where they may be
doubtful and questionable. Prou. 4. 26.
Ponder, says Solomon, the paths of thy feet, that thy ways may all be
ordered aright. And again, Prou. 14. 15.
A prudent man (will not run on head, but) will consider his steps. Those
that go in Psalm. 35. 6.
ways dark and slippery, and in that regard dangerous, are wont to tread
gingerly and step warily, feel with hand and foot their way before them,
whether it be clear and firm, and will not lift up the one foot, till they
find sure footing for the other. And so should it be with us that are here
traveling through the dark and dangerous way of this worlds wilderness, like
Genes. 14. 10.
the vale of Siddim, slimy and slippry, and full of limepits, of such pitfalls
and springes as Satan diggeth and sets for us, and of such stumbling-blockes
as he lays before us, thereby to maime and to mischief us: (...). Pythag.
aur. car^. apud Stob. p. 2. c. 3. (...). Epicharm. ibid. c. 1. Look ere ye
leap. Alioqui saliens antequam videat, cas^rus est antequam debeat. (...). de
b^n. deser. Palpebrae praecedu^t gressus, ^um operationem consilia rect^
prae^eniunt. Qui enim negligit considerand^ (...) q^od faci^, gressus tendit,
sed (...) claudi^, pergend^iter con^cit, sed prae^idend* sib^metipsi non
antecedit; atq^ idcir^ citius (...), quo^iam vbi pedem operis ponere debeat,
per consilij palpebram non attendit. Greg. Romans de Pastore par. 3. c. 2. 16.
we have great reason to look about us, and to have an eye to our footing,
that we step not unwarily and unadvisedly upon that that may prove and procure
either our woe or our bane, either our ruin or our ruthe.

. 17. This is that that the Apostle seems to have an eye unto, where he
exhorts some to walk 1 Cor. 5. ^. (...).
in sincerity; (as also 2 Cor. 1. 12.
he professes of himself that he so did:) and prays for others, Phil. 1. 9,
10.
that they may discern those things that differ, to the end they may be (...).
sincere. The word used by the Apostle in both places signifies properly
(...). E^ymolog.
something tried by the light of the Sun. And it is a Metaphore (as some
suppose) taken from the custom of the Eagle, whose manner is (if we may
believe Aristot. histor. animal. l. 9. c. 34. Et Plin. hist. nature. l. 10. c.
3. and l. 29. c. 6. Nisi quod ille (...), hic Haliaee^o tribuit.
those that write the natural story) to bring her young out of the nest before
they be full flegde, and to hold them forth against the full sight of the
sun; the light whereof those of them that can with open eye endure, she
retains and brings up as her own; the rest that cannot brook it but wink
a^it, she rejects and casts off as a bastardly brood. In like manner
should we do with those manifold motions that arise in our minds, and that
are hatched as it were in our hearts, ere we proceed to put them in practice;
Assu^scat animus solicita (...) custodia discernere cogitationes suas, and ad
primu^ animi motum vel probare, vel reprobare quod cogi^at, vt bo^ a^at, mal^
stati^ extinguat. Pelag. ad Demetriad.
we should bring them forth first to the bright sunshine of Gods word; let
them look upon that, and it upon them: if they can endure it, we may on in
them with courage and comfort; if not, we must stay both our hand and our
heart too from further following or fostering of them.

. 18. Others think it rather taken from the usual practice of Chapmen in the
view and choice of their wares. A wise and wary Chapman that has to do with a
deceitful Merchant, Draper, or other, one that keeps his wares in obscure
places where the defects of them cannot so easily be discerned, or has false
lights that may help to give a counterfeit gloss to them, he will take no
ware of him upon his word, but he will first diligently view it, toss it and
turn it to and fro over and over, try how it is in the midst as well as at
both ends, bring it forth into the light, hold up his cloth against the sun,
see if he can epsy any defect or default in it; he knows well he may
easily else be ouer-reached. The like should be our practice, because our
case is alike. We have to deal daily with diverse crafty Merchants; Qui cauet
ne decipiatur, vix cauet, quum etiam cauet: Etiam quum cauisse ratus est, saepe
is cautor captus est. Plaut Capt. 2. 2.
by whom we are sure to be often cozened, be we never so careful, and can
never therefore take heed enough how we deal with the^. There is first the
Devil, for his slienesse and subtlety termed Genes. 3. 1. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
a Serpent, for his experience and antiquity styled an Apoc. 12. 9.
old Serpent: one that, Sicut Mercator de falso pan^o non ^stendit empteri
medium neque finem, sed caput tant^: sic Diabolus qui est mercator peccati,
^stendit fatuo peccatori solum caput pa^ni, i. delectationem culpae, no^
medium, i. remorsum conscientia, vel finem, i. poenam gehennae. Bon^uent. di^ta
salut. c. 2.
like a deceitful Draper (says one,) to draw men on unto sin, shows them
the present pleasure or profit of sin as the one end of the cloth, but
concealeth and keeps out of sight the middle and the other end of it in the
internal remorse here, and the eternal punishment hereafter. Then there is
the world, which our selves are wont to say is wholly set upon deceit, and the
Spirit of God says 1 John 5. 19. (...).
is wholly set upon sin: of whom we may well say as one sometime of an
Historian, (...). Plutarch. de Herodoto.
Both the words and the shows of it are all full of fraud. Yea there is lastly
our own Heart as fraudulent and deceitful as any of them. For, Ierem. 17. 9.
The heart of man, says Jeremy, is wicked and deceitful above all things:
who can know it? So deceitful, that oft-times Galat. 6. 3.
it deceives a man's own self, and so consequently Iam. 1. 26. Read Dike of
Selfe-deceit.
it self. Having to deal then with such crafty ones, we had need to be
exceeding wary, that they take nothing up from them, that they shall offer to
obtrude on us, either by outward persuasion, or inward suggestion, or
otherwise, especially where there shall be some good ground and just cause of
suspicion, until we have turned it every way, and tried it by the light of
Gods Law, Galat. 6. 4. (...).
examined both ends, weighed well every circumstance, and searched every corner
of it; that we may have Romans 14. 5. (...). Been siquidem praecipiunt, qui
vetant quicquam agere quod dubites aequum sit an iniquum. Cic. Offic. l. 1.
Tutiusque istud cautissimi cuiusque praeceptum, Qu^d dubites, ne feceris. Plin.
ep 18. l 1.
good assurance, as the Apostle wills, of the lawfulness and the
warrantablenesse of it, before we venture upon the admission of it to consent,
or to practice.

. 19. This was David's course: Psalm. 119. 24.
Thy testimonies (says he) are my comfort and my counsel. David was a very
wise Prince himself, 2 Samuel 14. 20.
prudent like an Angel of God, as the woman sometime told him. And he had
besides a learned Council about him; Achitophel among the rest, 2 Samuel 16. 23.
One whose words went in those days for Oracles. But yet had David a
Counselor beyond and above all these, to wit, the voice of God himself in his
word: This had a negative voice in all David's consultations; so that though the
matter propounded seemed good in his own eyes, yea and had the approbation of
his learned Council withal, yet if this his head Counselor went not with it,
it was not for David to deal with. And this Counselor so long as David
hearkened unto (for sometime to his own woe he ouer-shot himself by neglecting
it; but for the most part he did so) so long he did well, and thriued and found
comfort, and had prosperous success in whatsoever he went about. And the like
must we do, if we desire to fare as he did; make Gods word our Counselor, if
we would have it our comforter: do as worldly-wise and wary men are wont to
do; they will do nothing without counsel; If they dwell near to a Lawyer,
whom they may freely repair and have access to upon every occasion, and of
whom they may have counsel, and cost them nothing, as often as they will, they
will be sure to do nothing of moment, where the least matter of doubt or
suspicion of danger may be, without his advice. And such a Counselor have we
Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13, 14. Romans 10. 8.
ever at hand with us, ready on all occasions to advise us, never weary of
conferring with us, Esai. 30. 1. and 31. 1. Prou. 1. 25. Non est verendum, ne
dedignetur condescendere nobis, qui potius si v^l ex iguum quid absque illo
(...), indignatur. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 17.
angry with us for nothing but either for not asking or not following his
advice; whom therefore if we shall neglect to consult with, and take counsel
of upon every just occasion, the common wariness of worldly men, yea our own
wariness in worldly things will one day worthily condemn us.

. 20. Yet is this that that most men can be hardly drawn to condescend unto,
to take advice of Gods word, that is so willing to advise them. There is none
but would have comfort from it: and there is none almost willing to take
counsel of it. We like all well to have a Comforter of it; but we have no lust
to make a Counselor of it. But as David, and Gods Spirit by David joins
these two together: so Matthew. 19. 6.
we must not disioyne or sever them the one from the other; or if we do, we
shall but delude our selves with vain hopes. For he that takes not counsel
of Gods word, shall never receive comfort from Gods word. He that makes it not
a Counselor, shall never find it a Comforter.

The neglect of this has been the cause that many, wise otherwise and
religious, have often shamefully ouer-shot themselves, because (with Josh. 9. 16.
Joshua and the Israelites in their agreements with the Gibeonites) they have
not been careful to consult with the voice of God in his word. In which kind
comes justly to be censured the unadvised carriage of those that practice
first and advise afterward: run on head into ambiguous actions, and then
after fall to examining whether they have done well, and as they ought in them,
or no. Of which course well says the Wiseman; Prou. 20. 25. Sero a^que stulte
(prius quod factum opo^tuit) postquam com^dit rem, rati^nem putat. Plaut.
Trinum. 2 4.
It is a snare for a man to devour a thing consecrated, and then afterward to
inquire of the vow. A man is ensnared and entangled now by his own act; so
that he is not so free, ^male verum examinat omnis Corruptus iudex. Horat. ser.
2. lib. 2.
nor fit now to judge aright of it, because his practice has forestalled, and
(as it may fall out) corrupted and perverted his judgment: ready therefore as
Quisque sua in lite est iudex corruptus.
one partial in his own cause, or as a Judge that has taken somewhat of the
one side, to pass no sincere, nor indifferent sentence.

. 17. As also their preposterous course comes here not unworthily to be
taxed, that first resolve, and then consult; determine first what they will
do, and then ask advice what they should do. Thus did the Jewish Captains
sometime with Jeremy. Ierem. 42. 2, ^7.
They come to him very demurely, and make deep protestations, calling God
solemnly to witness of the truth of their intention, of their willing mind
and full purpose to put in execution and practice whatsoever God by the Prophet
should advise them unto, were it good or bad. But (as Ierem. 42. 20.
Jeremy after truly told them) they dissembled but with him. For they were
resolved before what course they would take; and came only to make trial
whether the Prophet would concur therein with them or no. Which when they
found that he did not, they fly off fairly from him; yea they stick not to
give him the lie, and to tell him to his teeth, Ierem. 43. 2, 3.
that the answer he brought them was no divine Oracle, but an untruth of his
own coining at the instigation of Baruc. And in like manner do many now
adays repair to Gods Ministers for their opinion in cases of conscience
concerning the lawfulness of some act that they are resolved on already; that
if they deliver their opinions with them, they may then be able to say, they
had the judgment of good Divines for it, before they did it, or attempted ought
in it, to stop the mouths of those with that may afterward question it: but
whether they concur or no, resolved to go on, and so often do directly
contrary to the judgment and advice of those whom they made show to consult
with. I say not, but that a man consulting with a Divine, if he receive not
good satisfaction from him, is free still notwithstanding his sentence. But
(...). Ariani Epictet. l. 2. c. 7. Et c. 21. (...).
for a man to resort to Malac. 2. 7.
Gods Ministers and Messengers for advice, when he is resolved before what he
will do, how soever they shall advise, or how soever he may be convinced by
Gods word of the contrary, is no other but a mere mockery both of them, and
of him; yea and, as it falls out often, a means of deluding himself too, and
betraying his own soul to sin: the rather while Ezech. 14* 9, 10, 11.
God in his just judgment many times fitteth such hypocritical Consulters
with such corrupt Counselors, as speak not what they deem agreeable to Gods
holy will and word, but what they suppose the party resorting to them is
willing to hear.

. 18. A second point wherein this spiritual Point 2.
Watch consists, is, the diligent Observation of our own special
corruptions. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
I beseech you, brethren, says the Apostle, as Pilgrims and Strangers,
abstain from fleshly lusts, that fight against the soul Sin is the maine
enemy and the 1 Cor. 15. 56.
bane of man's soul. And Omnia vitia contra naturam pugnant. Senec. ep. 112. Et
cum constet omnes ab omnibus impugnari, diverse tamen modo and ordine singuli
laboramus. Serapion. apud C^ssian. collat. 5. c. 13.
all sins in general fight against every man's soul; but some sins more
specially against some then against others. And as in the world, where two
neighbor kingdoms are at open war either with other, there is an hostility
in general between all the Subjects of either, even between those that never
bore arms against, nor ever saw either other; but this hostility is more
specially executed and exercised between those that either border either upon
other, or are up in arms in the field together either against other: So here,
there is a general hostility between each Soul and all Sin, but that
exercised in more special manner between each particular soul and some
peculiar sins; and these commonly of two sorts, the sins of a man's calling
or particular vocation, and the sins of a man's nature, or of his natural
constitution.

. 19. First, the sins of a man's Calling; under which head also may be
comprehended the sins either of the places that men abide in, or of the times
that they live in.

When I say the sins of a man's Calling, it is not so to be understood, as if
the works or duties of any lawful Calling were evil or sinful in
themselves: but that a man by occasion of his place and vocation, or his course
of life and conversation, may have more, and more frequent occasions of some
sins then of others, greater and stronger inducements and inticements to some
sins then to others, which he is therefore more specially to keep watch
against. Thus the Courtiers sin is with 2 King. 5. 1^.
Naaman to make a God of his Prince, in being content to please the one by
displeasing the other: The Captains sin with 1 King. 2. 5.
Ioab, to be a man of blood, ready to use, or abuse his weapon rather, to
private revenge: Luke 3. 14. Populatore^ terrae, quam a populationibus
vindicar^ debebant. C^t. degest. Alex. lib. 3.
The Soldiers sin to pill and spoil, and make a prey of those whom he
ought to protect: Patron^ praeu^ricatur and decipi^. Cyprian. lib. 2* ^p. 2.
The Lawyers sin to betray, or to delay his Clients cause, to draw the more
fees from him: Esai. 1. 23. Mica 7. 3.
The Judges sin to pervert judgment, or to refuse to do justice, for fear,
favor, or reward: Ezech. 13. 16, 22.
The Ministers sin to sooth up men in their sin, or Ier. 1. 17. and 20. 9.
to forbear to reprove sin for fear of man's face: The Handy-craftmans sin
to Ezech. 13. 11.
do his work deceitfully and unfaithfully, there especially where he thinks
that he cannot be discovered: The Tradesmans sin Amos 8. 5, 6. Sirac. 27. 1,
2.
to use lying and fraud in the uttering of his wares: Mica 2. 1, 2.
The sin of great men to be oppressors of the poor: and the sin of the
meaner and poorer fort Esai. 8. 21.
to be discontent with their estate, (...) miscroru^, vt maleuolentes sint,
atque inuideant bon^s* Plaut. capt. 3. 4.
to envy those that exceed them, and to be instruments of evil offices for
their own advantage to others. And so upon each course of life and Calling are
there some special sins attending, which those therefore that follow it are
the more subject unto, and more in danger to be surprised by, then by many, or
ordinarily by any other.

Again, when it is said that the sins are to be observed of the times and
places that men live in; it is not so to be conceived, as if all sins were
not in some sort to be found in all places, or Hominum sunt ista non temporum:
nulla aetas vacabit a culpa. Se^ ep. 97.
as if all sins had not been more or less in all ages; but that - ardet
vitio gentisque suoque. Ovid. de Tereo Metam* l. 6. Omnes gent^ peculiaria
(...) mala: Gothorum gens perfida est, Alanorum impudica, Franci mendaces,
Saxones crude^es. Saluian. de prouid. l. 7. Geni Saxonum fera est, Francorum
infidelis, Gepidaru^ inhumana, H^nnorum impudica: omnium vita vitiosa. Ibid. 4.
Sunt tam ^uitatum, quam singulorum hominu^ mores: gentesque alia iracundae,
aliae audaces, quaedam timida; in vinum, in Ven^rem pronicres aliae sunt. Live.
hist. l. 45.
some sins in some places are rifer then others, some sins in some ages
more in request then some other: as some diseases reign more in some places
then in others, some infirmities are more frequent at some times then at
others: which those therefore that live in such times or such places, must more
specially watch against, as being more in danger to be infected and tainted
therewith.

. 20. The second sort of special corruptions are the sins of a man's nature,
or of his natural constitution, such as he is naturally more addicted and
inclined unto then unto other. For as it is with the body, so is it also with
the soul. As in every man's body there is a general mixture of all the four
humors, Blood, Fleame, and the two Cholers, in some degree more or less, but
there is some one of them predominant, in regard whereof a man is said to be of
a Sanguine, a Flegmatike, a Melancholic, or a Cholerike Constitution: or as in
grounds vntoiled and untilled there grow evil weeds of all sorts, but there is
some one commonly that ouer-toppeth the residue, and grows rifer and rancker
usually then the rest: So in the soul of man (since the fall of our first
Parents (...). Empedoclis vocabulum apud Aristot. de gener. animal. l. 4. c. 3.
a general seed-plot of evil) there are spiritual weeds of all sorts, a
mixture of all vice, the seed and spawne of all sin, Ephesians. 2. 12. (...). Et
cupidi omnes, and maligni omnes, and timidi omnes, and ambitiosi; adijce and
impij omnes. Sen. de benes. l. 5. c. 17.
Atheism it self not excepted: but there is Nullu^ mihi m^rbi genus ign^u^
est: vni tamen morbo quasi assignatus sum. Se^. epist. 55.
some one pestilent Humor or other lightly more predominant then the rest,
some one maine and master vice, that gives a denomination, in regard whereof
men are said to be, some ambitious, some covetous, some superstitious, some
lascivious, and the like: not as if such persons had no other vice, but that
that they are so named by: for it is most true that the Heathen man says, Qui
(...) (...)* vitiu^, ^abet oi^a. Se^. de ben^f. l. 5. c. 15. Malus quisque
nullo vitio vaca^. Ibid. l. 4. c. 27.
He that has any one vice, has all other with it; but Stulius oi^^iti. 1
habet ^ sed non in omnia natura pronus est. Senec. de ben^f lib. 4. cap. 27.
Omnia in omnibus vitia sunt; sed non omnia in singulis extant. Ibid. c. 26.
Omnia omnibus insunt; s^d in quibusdam singula eminent. Ibid. c 27.
because that bears the sway, though the other be all there too in a lower,
and a less eminent degree. This is that which David seems to have aimed at
when he says; Psalm. 18. 23.
I was upright also with him, and kept my self from mine own sin, Eas^ie in
Ps. 51.
Every David (says one well) has his Bathsheba, and every Bathsheba her
David. David had no doubt his sin, Dilecta delicta.
his beloved, his dear, his darling sin, that which naturally he delighted
in and was addicted unto. And so has every man ordinarily some one corruption
or other, that is the delight of his heart and the joy of his eyes, that he is
naturally most wedded unto, most carried away with.

Now Alia in alijs vitia principatum obtinent, tyrannidem exercent: ideoque
oportet vnuniquemque nostru^ secundum qualitate^ belli quo principaliter
infestatur, p^gnam ar^ipere: v^que vitia in nobis principatum tenent, ita
imp^gnationis modus exigitur* etc. B^r. de ord. vitae. Et Cass. collat. 6. c 27.
this maine sin, this master sin is it that we must principally bend our
Watch against; as 1 King. 22. 31. 2 Chronicles (...). 30. Sic and Agesilaus de Ep^,
test Plut. in apopth.
the King of Aram bade his soldiers fight neither against more nor less, but
against the King of Israel. For as 1 King. 22. 36.
when he was once slain, the whole Host was soon vanquished: so if this
master sin be once mastered in us, other petie and inferior ones will the
more easily be subdued.

. 21. But this is it that flesh and blood will not abide almost to hear ought
of. It is in stripping us of sin, as in flaying of a beast, the skin comes
away with ease, till you come to the head. Men are well enough content, at
least outwardly; to conform themselves to good courses, till it come to the
master corruption, to the head sin; to the Hab. 1. 16.
fat sin that their profit comes in by, or their Io^ ^0. 1^.
sweet sin that they do naturally take pleasure and delight in: but there it
sticks fast, and goes not on, (if at all) without much ado, but with great
difficulty.

The worldly minded for other matters will be as conformable as you will
desire: But for his State-sinne, or his Trade-sinne, with 2 King. 5. 18.
Naaman, he must have a protection, that must not be stirred, it may not be
touched: he will do any thing else that you will have him; but therein must
God be merciful unto him: It is a thing incident to his trade and course of
life; he cannot do otherwise; it is his living; and it is no other then every
one does: and if he should not do so as well as others, there were no living
for him in the world. A wretched speech of a distrustful heart, refusing to
trust him with the body, whom they would seem to trust with the soul. Fides
faemem non formidat. Hieron. ad Heliodor. ex Tertull. de idololat. Matthew. 6.
30, 31.
Faith (says one well) fears no famine. Yea a fearful sign of an
ungracious heart, loving and regarding 1 Timothy 6. 5.
gain more then godliness, and preferring temporal living before life
everlasting. Matthew 5 26, 27. and 18. 8, 9.
It is better, says our Savior, to go halt and blind to heaven, then to go
with health and sight to hell. So it is far better for a man, with Luke 16.
20, 21, 22.
Lazarus, to beg and starve in the streets, and so to be conueighed hence to
heaven; then, with Luke 16. 22, 23.
the richman at whose door he lay, to live in good fashion, or gather a great
estate together here, and then be Luke 12. 20.
snatched away hence to hell.

. 22. Yea, but it is not our fault; it is the fault of the times; or, it is the
fault of the Land, or the City, that we do as we do. To omit, that Qu^dam
locis (...) temporibus ascribimus: at illa quocunqu^ transierimus, sec^tura
sunt. Intelligas tua vitia esse, quae puta^ rerum. Sen. epist. 50.
we ascribe often those things to the times and places we live in, that indeed
proceed principally from our selves and our own corrupt hearts: like the
Philosophers fool Fatua s^bito videre destit; and nescit esse se c^cam: ait
domum esse tenebrosam. Ibid.
that complained the room was so dark she could not see, when she had
suddenly by some disease lost her sight. The rifer any evil is in those
places or ages we live in, the more careful should we be to shun and avoid
such a sin. Ephesians. 5. 25, 16.
Take heed, says the Apostle, that you walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise men; because the days are evil. Are the times then we live in, or the
places we abide in, more then ordinarily evil in this or that kind? That
gives us no liberty; but should make us walk the more warily; as men that
live in bad aires, or in time of general contagion, are more careful to fence
and arm themselves by taking of preservatives, eating in the morning ere they
go abroad, carrying some things about them to smell to, etc. against danger of
infection: that we may be like Pisces in sal^ ^ti and alti, salem tamen non
referunt. Lips. constat. lib. 2. cap. 16.
the fish, that though it live and swim in the salt sea, yet it tastes not of
the salt: that it may be said of us as it was of Noa, Genes. 6. 9.
But Noah was a just man in his generation: not, Non iuxta consummata^
iustitiam, sed iuxta iustitiam generationis su^. Hier. quaest. in Genesis Sicut
Senec. ad Mart. consol. cap. 1. Illo saeculo magna pietas erat, ^ih il impie
facere.
a just man as just men went in those days, ( Non est bonitas possimis esse
mel^orem. Senec ep. 79.
that were but a poor praise of so worthy a Patriarch) but Solus iustus, cum
generatio omnis erraret. Ambr. de arca Noe, refaren^e Aug. ad 2. Epist. Pelag.
l. 4. c. 11.
Noah was a just man in that generation wherein the whole world was ouer-growne
with wickedness; he continued just then when there were none almost just but
himself and his family, and Genesis 9. 22, 25.
not all of them neither.

Let us remember in this case that as it is an height of impiety and
ungodliness for a man Esai. 26. 10. and 65. 20. esse m^dum inter (...), (...)
prauitatis.
to be bad in a good age, and to continue unreformed in a time of general
reformation; so it is a special commendation, and a note of true godliness,
for a man Esse bonum inter malos, culmen pietats. Nunc licet and fas est; sed
(...) sub Principe dur^, T^poribusque malis ausus es esse bonus. Martial.
epigr. 6. lib. 12.
to be good in a bad age, and to continue uncorrupted in times of general
corruption: yea that it is the office of good Christians (that are in their
kind and degree Matthew. 5. 14.
the light of the world, while they are in the world, as Ioa^. 9. 5. and 12.
35, 46.
Christ also was when he was in it) Philip. 2. 15.
to shine as lights in the midst of a naughty and perverse nation, striving
to show more sincerity and more zeal and forwardness in the best things, the
more dissolute the times grow, and the more corrupt those are they live among;
like the lamp that shines brightest where the air about it is most dark, or
the room that it is in; and like the fire that burns hottest and scaldeth
most, when the weather is most cold, in the sharpest of winter.

. 23. Again, in the like manner it is with men for their native corruptions.
For to pass from the worldly to the fleshly minded: Come we to the lascivious
and incontinent person; we shall find him affected as Herod was, Mark. 6. 20.
ready to hear John Baptist gladly, and upon his motion to do many good
matters: but if you begin once to deal with him about his Herodias, Mark 6.
17, 18.
he can no longer endure you. Some such have not sticked openly and plainly to
profess, that they cannot, nor will not leave their lust and their lechery,
no not for the saving of their souls.

So deal we with the drunkard; we may chance to find him tractable enough
otherwise: but if you come once to his drink, to pull the cup from his mouth,
or pluck it out of his hand; you may as soon Clauum Herculi extorquere.
Macrob. Saturn. l. 5. malu^ Miloni. Plin. l. 7. c. 20.
wring ought out of the fist of some Giant, (...). Eurip. Cyclop.
it is so fast glewed to either: he will make you answer with the vine in
Iothams parable; Non possum relinquere vinu^ meu^. Iud 9. 13.
I cannot leave my wine; nor give over my good fellowship: Malle se ^itam sibi
quam vinu^ eripi. Aug. de temp. sermon. 131.
take away my good liquor, and you take away my life.

So for the angry man, that is of an hasty and a furious disposition: reprove
him for his furious and outrageous behavior, his cursing, and banning, and
blaspheming of Gods name. What will his answer be, but this? I confess, it is
a fault indeed to do thus: but you know my nature. I am of a choleric
constitution: and sear fuel is soon fixed. 1 King. 8. 46. Eccles. 7. 20. 1
John 1. 8, 10. Sua cuique sun^ vitia. Quintil. instit. orat. l. 11. c. 3. Nemo
nostrum non peccat: homines sumus, non Dij. Petron. satyr. N^mo sine vi^ijs
est. Senec. l. 2. contro. 5. Nam vitijs n^mo sine nascitur. Horat. sermon. l. 1 -
nec licuit fine cr^mine vitam D^gere. Virg. Aen. l. 4. Vnicuique dedit vitium
natura creato. Propert. l. 2. Et nullum sine venia pl^cuit ingenium. Sen. ep.
114.
Every man has his fault: that is my natural infirmity: and it must be borne
with. I cannot mend it, and my life lay upon it. Yea men account it an
allsufficient Apology, and an unanswerable plea for their grossest
corruptions, if they can say but, It is my* nature.

Socrates (as Alex. Aphrodis. li. (...). Et Cicer. li. de fa^o. Qui and
Stilponem Megaricum natura (...) and malier^sum fuisse; sed vitiosam naturam ab
(...) sit domit^, vt nemo v^quam vinolen^um eum, hemo in eo libidinis vestigium
viderit.
they report of him) when there came one Zopyrus to Athens that professed by
men's physnomie to tell how they were affected, and having guessed shrewdly at
the matter with many other, was at length brought to him, and after a diligent
view of his visage censured him for a man blockish, proud, ambitious, vicious
of life, and tainted with many foul matters, whereupon the standers by fell a
laughing at him as now out of his Art; bade them stay their laughter, for the
man, he said, spoke not amiss: true it was, that he was naturally indeed so
affected as Zopyrus had said, but by the help of Philosophy he had altered and
overcome nature. Can a natural man then by natural helps so restrain and
curb his own natural corruptions, that they shall not come to break forth
on him, or to be discovered in him? And cannot Christian men, having spiritual
and supernatural helps, do as much, yea or much more? A foul shame it is for
us, and no small stain to our profession, if by Gods grace assisting us we
cannot do that, which by humane learning alone Heathen men have effected
before us: Not to add, what our Savior says, that, Matthew. 5. 20, 46, 47.
unless we go beyond such, we shall never be saved.

. 24. Is it a corruption of thy nature? or is it a sin incident to thy
calling, or to thy course of life and condition? Then it is that sin that God
specially calls thee to keep watch and ward against. For what need or use
is there of watching there, where there is no fear or danger of assault? Were
it not a wise watching, for men to keep watch and ward against such enemies as
are many hundred miles off them, and neglect those the mean while that are
nearer at hand with them, ready every hour almost to be setting upon them? If
there were (as often there has been) hostility between France and us; were it
a wise part, or would it deserve the name of watching, to set some about the
Cinque Ports to keep out Turkish men of war, but to let French-bottomes
pass freely in and out to land forces at their pleasure? Sua quisque vitia
fugiat: nam aliena non nocebunt. Guigo Carth. medit. c. 2.
They are thine own corruptions, not other men's, that wage war against thy
soul: those it stands thee therefore in hand to keep watch and ward
against; because those they are that thou stand most in danger of; and
Variae sunt in hominibus morum conspersiones; quas a^tendens Diabolus, ex ea
part tentationem applicat, qua hominem pro conspersionis ratione ad peccatum
inclinante^ conspe^erit. Bern. de ^rd. vitae.
those they are that the Devil is readiest to assault thee withal: such as
are the sins either of thy birth and constitution, or of thy breed and
education, or of thy course of life and conversation, or of thy state and
condition, or of the times thou live in, or of the places thou abidest in;
which because Point 3.
they be nearest or dearest unto thee, thou may soonest therefore be drawn
away by them, and can hardliest in that regard be withdrawn away from them.

. 25. A third point or head of this spiritual Watch, is the careful auoidance
of all occasions of evil. Prou. 22. 3. and 27. 12.
A prudent man, says Solomon, foreseeth the plague, and hides himself: but
the foolish go on still, and are plagued. And it is indeed a point of true
spiritual wisdom to foresee sin afar off in the occasions of evil, and
Vitare peccatum est vitare occasiones peccatorum. Melanc. in loc. com. 22.
by eschewing the one to prevent the other. Sirac. 21. 2.
Fly from sin (says Sirachs son) as from a Serpent. Quousque vicin^
serpente tua male securadormitat industria? Bern. epist. 125. Circa serpentis
antrum positus non eris diu illaesus. Isidor. solil^q. l. 2.
He were evil advised that would sleep near the hole where he knew that a
Serpent harbored; or that seeing a Serpent making toward him, would use no
means to keep it from him, till it got within reach of him; alleging for
himself that Noxia serpentu^ est admisto sanguine pestis: Morsu virus habent,
and fatum in dente minantur. Lucan. b^ll. Pharsal. l. 9.*
he were safe enough, so long as the Serpent fastneth not upon him.
Praeoccupanaus est aditus cunctis insidijs, ne hostilitas prior obrepens
^ccurrat improuidis. Author de singular. Cleric.
Nor were they better then stark fools, that should sit still and suffer the
enemy, whom they were informed to be up in arms and coming for them, to
enter their territory, approach their City, sit down before it, and raise
rampires against it; pretending the mean while, that all is well enough with
them (what should they need to fear or care?) so long as their walls are not
scaled, nor the City it self surprised: The latter is like enough soon to
follow, if way be given to the former. In like manner here Qui peccati
occasiones non fugit, necipsum a se peccatum sem^uet. S^ella in Luc. 11.
it is but a sorry watching that we hold against sin, unless we keep watch
withal against the occasions of evil. If we wax remiss in our watching
against the one, we shall soon be surprised and subdued by the other.

It was the wile that Genes. 3. 1. - 7.
that wily one used against our first parents, and by it prevailed with them.
He would have the woman at first but go and see the forbidden fruit; Ocul^s
tendo, non manum; non est interdictum ne videam, sed ne comedam. Ber^, de
bumil. grad. 4.
though they were not to eat of it, yet they might lawfully enough look on it;
it was the taste, not the view of it that God had forbidden them. But Quid tuu^
malu^, o mulier, tam intent intueru? quid illo tam crebro vagantia ^mina
iacis? quid spectare libet, quod manduca^e non licet. Bern. ibid.
What meanest thou, O woman, (says one of the Ancients) to eye thine own bane
so wishfully? Why should thou have such a mind to gaze on that which thou
may not meddle with? And indeed it fell out full unhappily with her; as with
the fish, (...). - Oppian. depiscat. l. 3.
that is nibbling so long upon the bait, till at length it be suddenly unawares
caught with the hook. For Etsi culpa non est, culpae tamen occasio est: and
indicium est commissae, and causa est c^mmittendae. Ibid.
from gazing upon it she proceeded to gaping after it; and from sight and view
to touch and taste, to Hausit virus peritura, and perituros paritura. Bernard.
ibid.
the taking in of that that proved the bane both of her and hers.

And it is the course whereby Satan yet to this day prevails with a many;
such especially as seem to make any conscience of their courses; by drawing
them into bad company, combining and linking them in league with lewd ones,
egging them on to unnecessary contentions and Lawsuits, enticing them to some
kind of lawful, but dangerous delights, and such like wiles at the first
sight not appearing to be such, he leads them into such sins as themselves
at first intended not, nor once dreamed (it may be) that they should ever be
drawn unto.

. 26. To this purpose as the Apostle Paul says of the Ministers of the word,
that they must not 2 Timothy 2. 4. (...).
entangle themselves with worldly affairs: thereby implying that the Minister
of God by giving way to multiplicitie of worldly businesses, though he intend
not in so doing to neglect or grow slack in the work of his own function,
yet may come to be so pusseld and snarld in them, that he shall not be able to
get well out again when he is once in. and so may be, beside his purpose,
with-drawne from that which he should 1 Timothy 4. 13.
principally attend. So the Apostle Peter of many Christians, that 2 Pet. 2. 20.
having escaped the defilements of this world (that is, such sins as worldly
men are wont to be ordinarily defiled with) by being (...). Saepe familiaritas
implicauit. Saepe occasio peccandi voluntatem fecit. Isid. soliloq. l. 2.
entangled, (to wit, in the like occasions of sin, and such 2 Timothy 2. 26.
snares as Satan had in the same set for them) they come at length to be
overcome and vanquished again; to wit, by being drawn again to the practice
of such foul enormities as in themselves they had formerly reformed.

In regard whereof it is that our Savior does admonish his Disciples to Matthew.
26. 41.
Watch and pray, that they enter not into temptation. For that Non facile
esuri^ pofita reti^ebere mensa: Et multum saliens incitat vndae sitim. Ovid*
remed. l. 2.
if they do enter, an hundred to one it is, (such is man's natural weakness
and pronenesse to evil) that they come not out without some foil. And Et
oratione operatio, and operatione fulciatur oration. Hieron. ad Thren. 3. 41.
and Greg. Ro^. moral. l. 18. c. 3. and Isidor. de sum. bon. l. ^. c. 7.
agreeable to our prayer should our practice be; or else it is but a
mock-praier, and a mockery of him whom we pray to. As we are taught to pray
that we may not enter into temptation; so must we take ^eed how we offer our
selves unto temptation. Else Tanta solicitudine petere audebis, quod in te
posit^m recusabis? Tertull. exhort. ad castit.
what is it but a mere mocking of God, to ask that of God, which we wilfully
deny to our selves, when we might have it? Or (...); Manuel Palaecl. ad fill.
how can we hope that God should hear us when we hear not our selves, when we
refuse to put an Amen to our own prayer? We must 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Quicquid
male coloratu^ fuerit Bern. de consid. l. 3.
shun, says the Apostle, and be shie of the very show and shadow of sin: be
afraid, not, with ^lammam puellus digito ab^xusto pauet, and ca^et etiam.
the burnt child, of the fire, and the flame only; but of the very smoke it
self of sin: remembering that Semper, in s^ito, flamma fumo proxima est: Fumo
co^^uri vt nil possit, fla^ma potest. Plaut. Curcul. 1. ^.
though the smoke can do no great hurt it self, yet the fire that may burn
us shrewdly, is not far from it.

. 27. Where comes to be met with the idle plea of those, who when they are
admonished or advised to forbear some courses, some companies, that may in
this kind prove prejudicial and dangerous unto them, are wont to say; Why? Is
it not lawful to do this or that? or, Is it simply unlawful to be in such
and such company? Yea but, says the Apostle to such; 1 Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23.
Sicut non omne quod libet, licet: sic non omne quod licet, sta^im etiam
expedit. Bern. ep. 25.
All things (that is, all things in their own nature indifferent) are lawful:
but all (such) things are not expedient. Things in themselves lawful, in the
use of them prove often inexpedient; and then become they in that regard, and so
far forth unlawful to us. The use of a thing and the abuse of it are many
times so close twined and twisted together, that a man cannot lay hold on the
one but he shall be taken with the other; he cannot pull the one to him, but
the other will come with it and accompany it in spite of his heart, though he
do not desire the company of it, or to have any dealing at all with it.

Yea sure it is (as one well says) that (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 2. c. 1.
He that will needs do all that ever he may do, will be soon drawn to do
somewhat also that he ought not to do. And better it were for a man to
forbear many things that he might do; (there is no hurt in such forbearance;
1 Samuel 25. 31.
it will never begriefe or offense of heart to him, as she said to David in
another case, that he has so done) then by venturing so far between wind
and water, in what he may do, to be but once overtaken in what he should not
do; which may prove a corasiue to him as long as he lives.

And certainly as F^cte ambulare, vbi a d^xtra spatiosa est terra, nec
angustias pateris, a laeualocus est praeceps; vbi eligas incedere? super finem
terrae in praecipitij labro, an long inde? puto quia long inde. Aug. de verb.
Ap. 28.
it were but a fond course for a man that is traveling by the way, when he
has a fair broad path to walk in, to press so near Verendu^ est dormienti
in ripa, ne cadat. Author. de singul (...).
the brinke or bank of a brook that runs along by it, and that, Vbi non in
prae^upto tantum stabis, sed us lubrico. Sen^c. epist. 84.
where the ground is slippery, and when the wind is high and blows stiff,
that Proximus peri^lo di^ tutus non eris I^dor. soliloq. l. 2. - ^emo se tuto
diu Periculis offerre tam crebris potest. Se^. Herc. fur. 2.
ten to one he is in over shoes, if not over head and ears, ere he go far,
yea that at every step almost he is in danger to slip in: So here it is a very
unwise and improuident carriage, for a man, when he has the Psalm. 119. 96.
broad rhoad of Gods law, giving him scope enough to walk at large without
danger in the use of Gods good creatures and in the ordering of his courses,
yet to press needlessly so near upon the borders and confines of sin, that
as David says to Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 3.
as sure as God lives, there is but a step between death and me; so there is
but a step between sin and them; or as he of men at sea, (...). Anacharsis
apud Laert.- (...). Arat. Phaenon. 27. ^. (...). Theo^. schol. I nunc, and
ventis anima^ commit dolato Confisus ligno, digitis a morte remotque Quatuor,
aut septem, si sit latissima taeda. Iuven. sat. 14. Aud^x nimium, qui ^reta
primus Rate tam fragili perfidrupit, Terrasque suas post terga videns, Animam
leuibus credidit Euris; Dubioque secans aequora cursu, potuit t^nui fidere
ligno, Inter vitae mortisque vias Nimium gracili limite ducto. Senec. in Med.
act. 2. Nam prope ^am letum, quam prope cernit aquam. O^id. de Pont. lib. 2.
but a three inch plancke between them and death; so but an inch or two
between them and that that may be their bane and the very break-necke of their
soul: and that step or inch further may the Devil soon push them, or the
very swinge and sway of their own corruption may of it self easily carry them.

For Prou. 15. 24. (...). Hesiod. - facilis descensus A^erni. Sed reuocare
gradum, superasque ascendere ad aur as, Hit labor, hoc opus est. - Virg. Ae^.
it is in going to Godward, as in climbing an hill; a man shall be enforced to
stay and breath himself often ere he would; Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit. -
Iure^. sat. 1. Facilis in procliuia vitiorum decursus est. Senec. de ira lib.
2. cap. 1. Per procliue currentium non vbi visum est gradus ^stitur, sed
incitato corporis pondere se rapit, and longius quam voluit effertur. Idem
epis^. 40. Non gradu, sed praecipiti cursu a virtute desciscitur, ad vitia
transcurritur. Vbi semel d^rratum est, in praeceps peruenitur, adc^ matur^ a
rectis in praua, a prauis in praecipitia peruenitur. Pater^. hist. lib. 2.
it is in walking to sin-ward as in running down an hill; a man shall not be
able to take up his fierce and disordered affections, and to stay himself
where he would: Men's cum ad meliora enititur, quasi contra ictum flaminis
conatur: cum vero ab intention ascendendi resoluitur, sine labor ad ima
relabitur. Quia enim in ascensu labor est, in descensu otium, nisi mentis
contentio serueat, vnda mundi non vincitur, per quam animus semper ad ima
reuocatur. Greg. moral. lib. 11. c. 28.
A man is carried with the strong stream of his own affections in the one,
he must strive and struggle against the maine current, yea the swift and
stiff torrent of his own corruptions in the other: so that Non vides quam
diuersus sit ascendentium habitus and descendentium: qui per pronum eunt,
resupinant corpora, qui in arduum incumbunt. nam- se descendas, pondus suum in
priore^ partem dare; si ascendas, retro abducere, cum vitio consentire est. In
voluptates descenditur; in res asperas and duras subeundum est. bic impellamus
corpora, illic refraen^mus. Se^, ep. 123.
unless he strive and strain hard, if he grow but remiss he will soon be
going amain backward; and when he is once going on toward sin, or never so
little gone in sin, it is not easy for him to stop and stay, when he will.

And how careful had we need then to be of keeping aloof off from that, how
fearful of making toward it, or pressing near upon it, which if we do but
approach unto, we shall hardly keep out of, if we once chance to step into,
we shall hardly but go on in; and if we step but once into, may be, if we go
on in, will be our end.

Oh let us consider then how dangerous it is even to approach near to this
whirlpit, where we may so soon be wheeled in ere we are aware: let us take
heed how we be Esai. 11. 8.
playing about the hole of the Aspe, or near the den of the Cockatrice: let us
remember that it is in the use even of things indifferent that Satan most
usually sets his snares for Gods servants: and that he prevails against
those that be not grossly profane and ungodly more often by the immoderate
and inordinate use of things in themselves lawful, then by drawing them to
such things as are simply evil and unlawful in themselves. And withal, that
it is as Nam vitare plagas in amoris ne laciaris Non ita difficile est, quam
capiu^ retibus ipsis Exire, and validos Veneris perrumpere nodos. Lucret. de
rerum not. l. 4.
easier, so safer, for the foul to pass by the snare while she is yet out,
then it is to wind her self out again, when she is once in: She is safe
enough for being caught, if she keep aloof of it; she ventureth catching,
though she be not caught, if she come ouer-neere it. Prou. 5. 8. and 4. 15. Id
agere debe^us, vt vitiorum irritamenta quam longissime profugiamus. Sen. epist.
51. Pronimus enim a t^ctis aeg^e defenditur ignis: Vtile finitimis abstinuisse
locis. Ovid. remed. l. 2.
Keep aloof of her (to wit, the Harlot) says Solomon lessoning his son, come
not so much as once near the door where such a one dwells. He is in danger
that so does, whether he go in to her or no. And Exponens se periculo mortalis
peccati peccat mortaliter. Gerson. de vita spirit. lect. 4. cor. 8.
he sins dangerously that wilfully exposes himself to the danger of any
sin.

. 28. Now in this kind is more special regard to be had, as before of our
special corruptions, so here of such special temptations as we have formerly
found our selves either to have fallen, or to have been in danger of falling
by, Sit verae compunctionis indic^u^, opportunitatis fuga, occasionis
subtracti^: quia non satis piget eccidisse hominem, qui adh^c disponit manner
in lubrico. Bern. de temp. ser. 56.
that we may the more warily for the time to come shun such things, as though
not evil in themselves, yet we find to have been formerly occasions of evil
unto us. Psalm. 119. 37. Qui deponere vult desideria r^ru^ omnium, quarum
cupiditate (...), and oculos and aures ab his quae reliquit ^ertat: alioqui ci^
rebellat affectus. Se^. ^p. 70.
Turn mine eyes away, says David, o Lord, even from beholding of vanity: not
mine heart only from affecting it, but mine eyes also from beholding it. It is
not likely indeed (though some have so thought) that David penned that Psalm
after his foul ouer-sight with Bathsheba: it may seem rather by the maine
matter of it to have been made during the time of his exilement under Saul,
before he came to the crown. But (...). Amphis Com. Nemo libenter recolit, qui
laesit, locum. Phaedr^ fabul. 18. (...). Dio Chrysoft. orat. 74. Remember where
we last fell or stumbled, to take better heed: se do passengers when they come
by a place where they had a fall, remember it and are more wary. Easlie on
Psalm. 119. - sic disco cauere cadendo. Goodwi^ Pneumato sarcom. Vise and
Lactant. institut. 16. c. 24.
well might David, or any other in David's case, calling to mind after the like
offense, what had been the occasion of his fall, how by letting his eyes run
at random, and not watching over them as he ought, he had come to be caught in
Satan's snares; well, I say, might such a one pray earnestly unto God, as David
there does, that his eyes as well as his heart might be kept within compass,
left by the one Satan might come again to surprise and to seize upon the other.

Yea not only ought such a one so to pray with David, but to join practice
also with his prayer, by Job 31. 1.
making (as Job sometime did) a covenant with his eyes, Inutile est ^bro
videre, per quae aliquando captus sis. Hieronymus ad Ioui^ian. lib. 2.
that they should no more be fixed and set upon such objects as had been
formerly occasions to him of folly and of fall: and so others in the like case
to forbear such company, cast off such acquaintance, shun such private
familiarities, and break off such needless businesses, as have been the
means formerly to ensnare them unto sin. Remembering what the Prophet says,
describing the man that shall both dwell in safety here, and behold the glory
of God to his eternal comfort hereafter, that Esai. 33. 14, 15, 16, 17.
he is such a one as walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, and refuses
gain by oppression; that shakes his hands from taking of gifts, (he will not
only not consent to do a man wrong, but will Deuter^nem. 16. 19. Munus ex^cat
oculo^ sapientum, ((...). Pynd. Pyth. ode ^.) and peruertit verba iustorum.
not so much as receive a gift Ne iniquos accepto munere, si non iuverit,
ingratus censeatur, si fouerit, iniustus habeatur. Author de ocul. moral. c. 6.
mirat. 3.
whereby he may be engaged or inclined so to do;) and stops his ears
from hearing of blood; (he will not only have no hand in the shedding of it,
but he cannot endure to hear any communing of it;) and lastly, that shuts
his eyes from seeing of evil: he not escheweth only the practice of it, but he
even (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. lib. 3. cap. 5. (...). Achil. Stat. lib. 1.
Vitijs nobis in animum per oculs^ est via. Quintil. declam. Illud Ier. 9. 21.
de morte per fenestras ingrediente, and Thren. 3. 51. de oculo animam
depraedante; vti legit Vulgata: ad Satanam per oculorum fenesiras animam
depraedantem accommodant Clem. Alex. paedag. lib. 2. cap. 8. Greg. Nazianz. ad
Eunom. lib. 1. sermon. in Theoph de S. Cyprian. and de Greg. Nyss. Hieron. ad
Iovin. lib. 2. Ambros. (...) ^ug. s^c. cap. 2. August. homil. 35. and de
honest. mul. cap. 4. Chrysolog^ homil 39. Greg. Rom moral. lib. 21. cap. 2. and
in Psalm. poenitent. 4. B^n. de humil. grad. and de conuers. cap. 6. and 9. and
in Cant. 35. and medit. cap. 14. and de temp. 68. and 80.
shunneth the very sight of it, so far forth as it may be a means to
inueigle his heart; or the sight of ought that may betray his heart thereunto.

. 29. The fourth and last point wherein this spiritual Watch consists is the
constant resistance of temptations unto evil. Matthew. 18. 7.
It cannot be, says ou^ Savior, but that offenses will come: So it cannot ^e
avoided, walk we never so warily, but that occasions of evil too too many
will be offered. Herein therefore stands a further part of this our Watch,
as in a careful auoidance (so much as in us lies) of the occasions of sin
that they be not offered: so in a constant resistance of temptations and
encitements to evil when they shall be offered, yea when they shall be urged
and enforced upon us; that which the Apostles James and Peter call James 4. 7.
1 Pet. 5. 9. (...).
the withstanding of the Devil and his instruments; and the Apostle Paul
Ephesians. 6. 13. (...).
withstanding and standing, or standing firm and fast by standing out, in the
evil day, that is, in the time of temptation.

Ester 6. 1.
On that night, says the story of Assuerus, the Kings sleep went from him. It
is no watching to speak properly, neither is it thank-worthy, for a man to lie
awake, because he cannot sleep: but when long continuance of waking, and the
usual hour of rest, and the drowsinesse of his own brain, and the
heaviness of his eyes, and the example of others fast asleep by him, shall
all concur and conspire as it were to cast him into a slumber, for a man
Oculos vigilia fatigatos cadentesque in opere detinere. Senec. epist. 8.
then to strive to keep waking is true watching, and is thank-worthy indeed.
So here for a man to keep himself sober, when he cannot come by wine or
strong drink, or when he wants his good-Fellowes to drink with (for this it
is one of those sociable sins; there is no life in it without company) it is
Necessitas no^ habet ^audem.
not thank-worthy, the will is as good, or as bad rather, still as ever. But
for a man to be careful not to break the bounds of sobriety, when he shall
be in place where wine is plenty, and no restraint of it, and where company
will be egging him on, and urging him with instance to take more then is meet,
that is true temperance and praiseworthy indeed. In like manner Nunquam ^egaui
rem alienam: quia fortasse ne^o tibi commendauit, vel si quis commendauit, sub
testibus commendauit. Dic mihi, Reddidisti, quod a solo solus accepisti? si sic
reddidisti, si mortuo qui commendauerat, nescienti filio reddidisti; tunc te
la^dabo quia post auru^ non isti. Aug. de verb. Ap. 19.
for a man to keep a true man, as we say, because he was never put in trust,
or to deal faithfully, where a due and strict account is taken of his actions;
it is no commendation the one, and it is but a very slender commendation (if
any at all) the other. But for a man that has trust reposed in him, and none
to look after him, or to call him to account (as Genesis 39. 6.
Joseph, as 2 King. 12. 15.
the workmen about the Temple sometime) to deal then truly and faithfully,
especially when want and penury shall be persuading him to the contrary, Sir^
31. 13. qui transgredi potuit, and non transgressus est; and cum posset mal^
facere, non fecit. Bonus ille est, qui and quando potest mala facere, non
facit. Aug. in Psalm. 93.
that is indeed a matter of high commendation; that is watching over a man's
hands and fingers indeed. Thus also for a man to live chastely and keep
continent, Nulla laus est, non facere, quod facere non potes Ex Lactant.
instit. l. 6. ^ ^3. M^. Dum. de ^or. Nulla laus est ibi esse integru^, vbi nemo
est, qui aut possit aut conetur c^umpere. Ci^. in Verr. orat. 1.
when he wants his lewd company, or for a woman to live honestly whom no man
looks after, or Siqua metu demp^o casta est, e^ denique casta est: Qu^ qui^
non potuit, non facit, illa facit. O^id. ^r. l. 3. eleg. 4.
because she is otherwise looked after, and a narrow watch is set over her,
deserves not the name of watchfulness in either, yea the heart may be never a
whit the less faulty with either. But for 2 Samuel 13. 12, 13, 14.
Tamar to deny Ammons incestuous suit, and to stand out against him, till by
mere force she be constrained Corpora sanctaru^ m^ierum non vis mac^at, sed
voluntas. Hieron. quaest. in Genesis Inui^a virgo vexari potest, violari non
potest. Aug. ep. 180 and 122. and de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 18. and de mend.
l. 1. c. 7, 19, 20. and l. 2. c. 19. Vise and Chrysan Psalm. 95.
to endure rather the dishonest act of another, then to do any of her own;
for Gen^s. 39. 6-13.
Joseph sued and sought to by his Mistress Vna hac in reblanditur and
supplicat, quae in reliquis imperabat. Pelag. ad Dem^triad. nec poluit
extorquere, quod voluit imper^re. Ambros. de Joseph. ^ap. 5.
that had some kind of command over him, yea urged and solicited day after day
to condescend to her adulterous desires, Magnus vir, qui venditus, servile
tamen nesciuit ingenium; adamatus non (...), rogatus non acqui^t, comprehensus
a^fugit. Ambros. ibid. Vel vt Aug* de temp. 83. M. v* q^i v. seruire tune
nesci^it, inge^uam a. non r. etc.
to refuse to yield to her allurements, (her inforcements I might well say) and
Maluit liber criminis mori, qu^m potentie ^iminosae consortium eligere. Ibid.
to choose rather to hazard loss of present liberty (such as then he had) by
not sinning, then to gain further enlargement and advancement (there might
well be hope of future preferment) by consenting to sin; it was a part and
practice of due watchfulness indeed.

. 30. Where comes to be met with that vain and idle Apology that many are
wont to make in defense or excuse at least of their inordinate behavior, that
they were provoked and urged to do that they did. Are you not ashamed to be
ouerseene with drink in such sort as to make your self a scorn and a
laughing stock to every one that beheld you, and to become no better then a
beast? Oh; says he, I was urged to it: I was in company with Chapmen or
Customers; (they are those that a man lives by) and I could not do otherwise
then I did. Yea but no man could or can ( Infirmus est hostis, nisi volentem
non vincit. Pelag. ad Demetriad. Suadere and solicitar^ potest, cogere omnino
non potest. Aug. homil. 12. habet astutiam suadendi, non potestatem cogendi.
Idem in Ps. 91. and in Joan. tract. 12.
nor the Devil himself) compel thee to sin, unless thou will thy self.
And there were no need for thee, or for any man to watch against such sins as
these are, if there were no such occasions of falling into them, or if no such
temptations to incite or entice thereunto.

Again, says another reproved for his outrageous behavior in cursing and
banning, swearing and swaggering, and blaspheming, as before; I did nothing but
what I was urged and provoked unto: It would have angered an Angel; it would
have made a Saint swear, to be used as I was, to endure what I did. Alas! and
Apoc. 13. 10. and 14. 12. Luke 21. 16, 17, 19. Virtutes quaedam vt stellae,
quae interdiu latent, n^cta lucent. Bern. in Cant. ser. 27. Apparet virtus*
argu^urque malis. Ovid. trist. lib 4. el^g. 3. Imperia dura t^lle: quid virtus
erit? Sen. H^. fur. act. 2 sc. 2.
what use were there of patience, were there no prouokement to impatience? or
what praise is it there to be patient, where there is no occasion (for just
cause none can be) of impatience? Romans 12. 21. Ne vinc^tor a malo. Cur r^pis in
te id, quod in alio tibi displicet? iram scil. irasceris ergo quia ille
irascitur: imo iam tibi irasc^re, quia irasceris. Guigo. medit. c. 1. Pas^ sus
^s malum? ign^sce; ne duo mali sitis. August. in Psalm. 54. and in 1. Joan.
tract. 8. (...) igitur (...) sse^mo pii^ and i^us p^nter eoru^ malitiam (...),
quos fieri bonos q^aerit, vt (...) potius crescat bonorum, ^n vt p^ri maliti^
se queque numero ^ddat ma^rum. Idem epist. 5. Ridiculum est enim ^dio n^ntis
p^dere innocen^m. Sen^. r^ferente Io^n. de Tamb^. in ^onsol. Theol. vel potius
M^in. Dumi^ns. lib. de morib. Nullius tam vehemens nequiti ^st, vt mot^ meo
dignasit. Symmach. l. 9. ^p. 105.
Shall another man's wickedness make thee wicked like him? Will thou imitate
him in that, wherein thou condemnest him? and be like him in that which thou
mislikest in him? Yea shall man's wronging thee make thee wrong God? his abusing
thee make thee abuse Gods blessed name? his flying in thy face make thee fly
in Gods face? What watching call we this, for a man to keep no longer awake,
then till his eyes begin to grow heavy, and then of his own accord to settle
himself unto sleep? Or what watching is it to keep watch and ward, to fence
and fortify, where no assault is made, and to set no watch nor make resistance
when we are indeed assaulted? to watch, till we see the enemy whom we should
watch against, approach; and so soon as we descrie him, as John 10. 12.
the hireling, when he spieth the Wolf coming, to leave instantly and give
over our watch? No: it is in regard of continual danger that we are in,
either by inward defect or by outward default, that this Watch is required: And
therefore there must watch be most diligent, where is most likelihood of
danger, or where hottest assault is made: Yea continual watch must be held
and joined with resistance, not till assault only be made, but so often as
assault shall be made, and so long as it shall continue: Which because it will
so do ever even till we die, this our Watch must continue also even unto death.

. 31. Hitherto then we have considered of the Part 4.
manner of this Watch, and wherein the same does principally consist: Let us
now further consider of some Means of help and furtherance, whereby we may be
the better enabled to go through therewith.

The first may be the practice of Sobriety and Help 1.
Temperance, Luke 21. 34, 36.
Take heed, says our Savior, lest at any time your hearts come to be
oppressed or surcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and with the cares of
this life: and so that day come upon you and surprise you unawares: But watch
and pray continually. And surely as it is with the body; so is it also with the
soul. Temperate diet is a great help to bodily watching: and on the other
side (...). Isid. Polus. ep. 130. lib. 1. Saturitas vigilare nescit. Quippe
cibum sequitur somnus. - and mult^ sopor ille grauissimus extat, Quem saturi
capiunt. Lucret. l 4.
when men have ouer-liberally eaten and drunk, they are wont to be heavy and
drowsy, ready to slumber as they sit, fit for nothing but for sleep. And no
less enemy to this spiritual Watch is such riot and excess. Ephesians. 5. 17,
18.
Be not filled with wine, (says the Apostle) wherein is excess; but be filled
with the Spirit: as if when the one went in, the other went out; and there were
no room left for the one, when men are filled so with the other. We are wont
to say that When the wine goes in, the wit goes out: but the Apostle says,
that when wine is thus taken in, the Spirit of God is expelled, (wherewith we
should watch) and the Spirit of Satan is entertained, (against which we should
watch) and the Temple of the one is made a stie and a stable for the other. For
such excess is a mean even (...). Basil. homil. 14. (...). Synes. de insomn.
-nam corpus onustum Hesteruis vitijs animum quoque praegrauat vna, Atque
affligit humi diuinae particulam aurae. Horat. sermon. 2. 2.
to drown the mind, and by casting reason and understanding into a dead and
deadly sleep, to make men vnableto watch against the motions of sin, Omnibus
and virtutibus ianuam claudit, and delictis aperit. Val. Man. lib. 6. cap. 5.
ex. 10.
to shut the door of the heart against all virtue, and to set it wide open to
all vice. By means hereof came Genes. 9. 21, 22. Ad vn^us horae ebrietatem
nudat femora, quae per 600. annos sobrietate co^te^erat. Hieron. ad Ocean.
Noah to discover his own shame in the sight of his sons, to his disgrace
and reproach. Yea by means hereof came Genesis 19. 32-37. per temulentia^
nesciens libidi^i miscet incestum: and quem Sod^ma non vicit, vina vicerunt.
Hieron. ibid. Vise Cle^. Alex. paedag l 2. c 9.
Lot in beastly manner to abuse himself by filthy incest with those that came
out of his own loins, and so became he the father of an accursed bastardly
brood. And no marvel if Sin and Satan find free entrance at will, when
that is shut out, or laid up that should watch against either.

. 32. On the other side (...). Basil. Caes. homil. 1.
Sobriety is a special help unto vigilancie: which the Apostles therefore
are wont usually to join the one with the other. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6.
Let not us sleep, as others do, says the Apostle Paul; but let us watch,
and be sober. And, 1 Pet. 4. 7. and 5. 8. (...). Plut. praecept. polit.
vigilantes and sobrij. C^c. pro Calio.
Be sober and watch, says the Apostle Peter. Which sobriety also must be
understood to consist, not in the temperate taking of meat and drink only, but
in a moderate usage of all other temporal blessings, such especially as we are
wont to take pleasure and delight in. For there is (as the Prophet says in
another sense, Thou that art drunk, but not with wine; and, Esai. 29. 9.
They are drunk, but not with wine; and they stagger, but not with strong
drink,) there is, I say (as I have showed Of Lots, chap. 9.. 3.
elsewhere) g Esai. 51. 21.
(...). Consule Deus. in Proverb. ^ 31 32.
a drunkenness without either wine or strong drink; yea and a surfeiting too
without flesh or food. A man may surfeit of, and be drunk with prosperity,
with pleasure, with game, with disport, with other the like delights; and may
well be said so to do, when he is so transported with them, so distempered by
them, that he breaks forth into such disordered and outrageous behavior;
as, of immoderate rejoicing, and excessive laughter, of howting and showting,
and of gesture unseemly, or of fretting and chafing, of cursing and banning,
of swearing and blaspheming, or the like, as will not stand with sobriety, and
such as they could not but condemn in themselves, were they not for the time
in a manner drunk and beside themselves; yea sometime, not such only as all
sober minded men would abhor, but - dicisque facisqu^ quod ipse Non sani esse
hominis non sanus iuret Orestes. Pers. sat. 3.
such as even a mad man himself, if he be not stark mad, will esteem to be
mad carriage.

. 33. Whereas some therefore use to say, when they are rebuked and reproved, as
for their abuse of Gods good creatures, so for their drunken and disordered
behavior at game, or otherwise; Is it not lawful to eat and drink? and, Is
it not lawful to use game? and, Is it not lawful for neighbors to be merry
together? Yes undoubtedly: Christianity enioyneth not, nor exacteth of us any
Stoicall austerity. God has given and granted us, as Psalm. 104. 14, 15.
bread to strengthen our bodies, so wine to cheer our hearts withal: he has
liberally afforded us the free use of his good creatures, not for necessity
alone, but for lawful delight too. Non enim sequitur, vt cuimens sapit, ei
palatum non sapiat. Cic. de fi^ib. lib. 1.
Neither does it follow, that Gods children take no delight at all in such
outward delights, because they have other more principal ones that they take
far greater delight in. It is promised as a blessing even unto Gods people,
that Zach. 8. 5.
there should be boys and girls playing together in the streets of Jerusalem:
and that Zach. 3. 10.
they should have liberty to inuit and entertain either other, each man his
friend or his neighbor under his vine or his figtree, in his orchard or in his
arbor. But can we not use Gods creatures, unless we abuse them, and make that
the bane and poison of our souls, that was given us to be the food and stay
of our bodies? Or Nobis ridere and gaudere non sufficit, nisi cum peccato atque
insania gaud^amus; nisi risus noster impuritatibu^, nisi flagitijs misceatur?
Nunquid latari and ridere non possumus, nisi risum nostrum atque l^titiam
scelus esse faciamus? Saluian. de provident. l. 6.
can we not be merry unless we make the devil our play-fellow? Can we not be
merry, unless we be mad? Erras, homo, non sunt haec ludicra sed crimina* qui
iocari voluerit cum Diabolo, non poterit gaudere cum Christo. Chrysol. sermon.
155.
Is there no mirth at all but in swearing and swaggering, and in blaspheming of
Gods blessed name? Rideamus, laetemur quantumlibet iugiter, dummodo innocenter.
Quae vecordia est and amentia, vt non put^mus ^isum and gaudium tanti esse,
nisi Dei in se habeat iniuriam? Saluian. Ibid. An forte infructuosum putamus
gaudium simplex, nec delectat ridere sine crimi^e? Ibid.
Is our mirth (think we) nothing worth, if it be not mixed with profaneness;
if it be not seasoned, or tainted rather, with impiety and ungodliness, or
with impurity and uncleanness? Such eating and drinking is accursed eating and
drinking: such Luke 6. 25. O miseri, quorum gaudi^ crimen habent! Maxim. eleg.
1.
mirth is accursed mirth, euill-beseeming any Christian, and such as will at
length Pro. 14. 13.
end in mourning and woe, yea in eternal mourning and everlasting woe, if it
be not speedily prevented. As the Apostle says, in regard of others, so is it
no less true in regard of a man's self; Romans 14. 20.
It is evil for a man to eat with offense; and with the disabling of himself
unto good duties: And it is evil for a man to use game or any other lawful
delight in that manner, as it shall be an occasion, either of stumbling to
others, or of sin and evil to himself. And, Romans 14. 21.
It is not good therefore for a man to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor use
game, nor do ought else, whereby either himself, or any other shall be
occasioned to sin. For what we owe unto others, Romans 8. 12, 13.
we owe much more to our selves; being enjoined Romans 13. 8, 9. Leuit. 19. 18.
Matthew. 22. 39. Galat. 5. 14.
to love others indeed, but as our selves. And therefore ought we to have a
care as well to Tit. 2. 12.
live soberly in regard of our selves, as to Romans 14. 15.
walk charitably in regard of our brethren.

. 34. The rather are we to be heedfull and careful in this kind, because
(that which made Job 1. 4, 5.
Job so fearful and suspicious of his children, lest they should ouer-shoot
themselves when they were feasting together) Per voluptatem facilius vitia
s^rrepunt. Senec. epist. 7.
we are more prone to be carried away unto evil in our pleasures and delights,
in mirth and game, in sport and pastime, then amids our sadder and more serious
affairs. With these commonly is Satan tempering his poison to infect our
souls with unto death; under these is he usually hiding his hooks to catch us
withal to our destruction: as those that seek by poison to make a man away
are wont not to minister it alone, but to mix it with such meat as the party
ordinarily feeds on, and takes most delight in, or to give it him in his
ordinary drink; and Et quae piscis edax auido male deuoret ore, Abdii supr^mis
era recuru^ cibis. Ovid. remed. l. 1. Et sera and piscis spe aliquae
obl^ctante decipitur. ^iscata sunt haec, insidiae sunt. (...). epist. 8.
as the Fisherman baiteth his hook for each fish with such bait as the fish
usually feeds on and most greedily gapeth after. Besides that we are in
danger by such means to be soonest surprised of him; as 2 Samuel 13. 28, 29.
Ammon was sometime by Absaloms Followers, and 1 King. 16. 9, 10.
Elah by Zimry his own traitorous Servant, and Judge. 18. 7, 10, 27.
the Citizens of Laish by the children of Dan, for that we are in such cases
commonly most secure, and least mistrustfull; and Tunc maxim oppugnaris, si
oppugnari te nescis. Hier. ad Heliodor.
the more in danger therefore, the less we misdoubt it, or dream of it.

. 35. A second help unto Vigilancie is the society of Saints, the company of
those that be godly Help 2.
and religious. Eccles. 4. 9, 10.
Two, says the Wiseman, are better then one. For if the one of them fall, the
other is at hand to help him up again. But woe be to him that is alone. Hic
si solus f^isset, quo adiutore superasset? Hieron. ad Rustic. Est op^ auxilio:
turba futura tibi est. Ovid. remed. l. 2.
For if he fall, he has none to help to raise him again. A drowsy person,
if he be alone, is ready presently to fall asleep. But if he be in company,
Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis assi^iat. Senec. ep. 11.
Quid beatius, quid securius, quam eius^odi custodes simul ritae and testes
habere? quibus me totum refundam quasi alteri mihi: qui de^iare non sinant,
fraenent prae^ipitem, do^itantem excitenc; quorum reuerentia and libertas
extollentem ^eprimat, excedentem corrigat; constantia and fortitudo nutantem
firmet, erigat diffidentem, fides and sanctitas ad honesta and sancta prouocet.
Bern. de consider. lib. 4.
the very presence of others, besides their mutual conference and discourse,
is a good means to keep him awake; and if he begin but to nod, some one or
other of the company is ready to iog him on the elbow, and either to keep him
awake, or to awake him soon again, if on a sudden he be sleeping. As it is
dangerous therefore for a man to be left alone, when he is heavy, and sleep
may (as after a vein opened or some potion taken) prove prejudicial unto him:
So Nemo est ex imprudentibus qui relinqui sibi debeat. Senec. epist. 10. Nemo
borum est, cui non satius sit cum qu^libet esse quam secum. Ibid. 25.
it is dangerous for us in regard of our drowsy disposition to be solitary;
Omnia nobis m^la solitudo persu^det. Senec. epist. 25. Solitudo est, quae virum
etiam fortem fortissime praecipitat in reatum. Petr. Bles. epist. 9. ^ l^ca
sola nocent: l^ca sola ca^to. Quo fugis? in populo t^tior esse po^. ^id. remed.
l. ^.
we may the sooner be surprised with sinful suggestions, the more easily be
drawn to yield to Satanicall temptations, and the longer may it be (if ever it
be) ere we recover our selves again after them: Whereas if we be in company
with those that be wise and wakefull, it may be a mean to keep us waking
often, when we would otherwise be slumbring, and to recover us the more speedily
when we are suddenly fal^e into slumber unawares.

To this purpose the Apostle exhorts Christian men Hebr. 10. ^4.
to observe either other: that is, Philip. 2. 4.
to have an eye one to another, and not each one to himself only; to keep
watch one over another, and not each one over himself only, like cursed Caine
that asks of God, Genes. 4. 9.
whether he were his brothers keeper. And to what end would he have them thus
to watch over their brethren? (...).
to whet them up, or whet them on, says the Apostle: (that which we all stand
in need of:) to provoke and egg them on unto godliness and well-doing, to
keep them watching with themselves. And how is that done? Surely, Prou. 27. 17.
As iron, says Solomon, whetteth iron; so the very face of a man whetteth his
friend. Nulla res magis honesta induit, dubios and in prauu^ inclinantes
reuocat ad rectu^, quam bonorum virorum conuersatio. paulatim enim descendit in
pectora, and vim praeceptorum obtinet, frequenter audiri, ^spici. occursu^ ipse
sapientum iuuat. est and aliquid quod ex magno (bono) viro vel tacente
proficias. Sen. epist. 93.
The very presence of a religious person, and much more y ^ fungar vice cotis,
acutum Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secandi. Horat. in art poe^.
All^sit ad Isocratis dictum, (...)* Plut. vita Isocr.
his good speech, and his godly carriage, his holy advice, his discreet
admonition, his seasonable reproof may be a mean to encourage and cheer us
up when we do well, to restrain and stay us up, when we are slumbring and
sinking down, to recover and raise us up again when we are down unawares. In
which kind, a as the whet-stone, though dull and blunt it self, yet is able to
sharpen iron tools: so even those that be but dull and drowsy of themselves,
but yet diligent, and desirous to keep waking both themselves and others, may
help to sharpen and quicken even those that be otherwise more wakefull (it
may be) then themselves. For as Fieri posse non ambig^, vt aliquid imp^rito
and in* locto cuipiam scire co^: ingat, quod doctus aliquis and p^ritus
ignorant. Aug. de orig. animae l. 4. c. 1.
there is none so learned, but he may learn something from the very meanest,
even from those that be far inferior in gifts to himself: Act. 28. 26.
Apollos though a learned Teacher and well read in the word, yet may be taught
something by a silly Tent-maker and a weak woman, that he was ignorant of
before: and R. David in radic. Mercer. in Pagn. these. and Seldom in praef it.
to Titles of Honor.
the Jewish Rabbines acknowledge that they came to understand a place of the
Prophet Esai. 14. 23. (...) euerram eam. Iun.
Esaias by hearing an Arabian woman mention (...)
abroome, or a beesome in her language to her maid: so there is none so
watchful of himself, but he may have need of others to watch over him, and
may receive benefit in that kind, even from a drowsy soul, one that is less
wakefull then himself. In a word, drowsy persons, if they desire to keep
waking, can better do it in company together one with another, (it is not
likely they should all suddenly fall fast asleep at once) then they can being
severally apart either from other.

. 36. Well therefore and wisely adds the Apostle in that place; Hebr. 10. 25.
Not forsaking the fellowship; as the manner is of many. And again; Hebr. 10.
39.
But we are not of them that withdraw themselves to their own ruin. Lugente^
timentemque custodire solemus, ne solitudine mal^ vtatur.
It is not safe for a melancholy man to be much solitary: and it is a matter of
no small danger for a Christian man to affect a solitariness, or a sullen
kind of priuacy and retiredness, and by occasion thereof to sequester
himself from the company and society of others, though it be upon some good
and godly pretense. Thus as in the Church of Rome, at this day many affect a
Monkish course of life, under color of withdrawing themselves from the world:
So among the Ancients we find that some worthy men otherwise had sometime
some cogitations and proiects looking and bending somewhat that way, yea that
sometime they made some trial of conclusions in that kind.

But what does one principal man among them confess, writing to another of
them out of the wilderness, whither he had withdrawn himself, how he found
himself th^e affected? (...). etc. Basil. ep. 1. ad Greg. Naz. Legatur and
Senec. epist. 104.
What I do here night and day (says he) I am even ashamed to relate. For the
City business I have shunned as an occasion of many evils: but my self yet I
cannot shun. But it fares with me, as with men at sea that are seasicke
because they cannot brook the sea: when they are in a greater ship, they
think they should be better, if they were in a less bark; it is the rolling
of the great ship they think that makes them so evil: and so out of the ship
they get them into the boat or the bark. But in the ship or in the bark they
are bad still, as evil as ever, (...).
so long as the bitter choler abides with them that pestereth their stomach.
In like manner it is with us. (...).
Carrying about with us our inbred and inmate passions, we are every where
encombred with the like perturbations: and so (...).
gain no great matter by this*our solitariness, and sequestring of our selves.

And another of latter and more superstitious times, though a great admirer and
practiser of Monastical life himself, aduising a woman that had a great mind
to the Wilderness; Non est sapere, vt opulentiam, ita vrbis frequentiam
fugere? an non m^a mihi pudicitia tutier erit in eremo, vbi in pace cum paucis
aut sola conuersans soli placeam, cui me probaui, Bern. epist. 115.
Is it not wisdom, says he, peradventure you will say, to eschew as the
wealth, so the throng of the City? will not my chastity be there safer, where
conuersing with few or none, I may please him alone whom I desire principally
to approve my self unto? Nequaqua^: nam volenti perperam agere and desertum
abundantiam habet, and nemus vmbram, and filentium solitudo. Malum quippe quod
nemo videt, nemo arguit. Vbi autem non time tur reprebensor, secu^ius accedit
tentator, licentius perpetratur iniquitas. In cenuentu ver^ malum si facere
vis, non licet. Mox enim a pluribus comperitur, arguitur, emendatur. Ber^* ibid.
No, by no means, say I: One that will do evil, shall find matter enough in
the Wilderness to work upon, and beside shady shelter in the thicket, and
silence in solitude. For the evil that none sees, none finds fault withal.
And where there is none to find fault, the Tempter is the bolder to assault,
and the fault is committed the more freely. Whereas being in company you cannot
do evil though you would: for you are presently e^ed, chid, rebuked and
reclaimed by the rest. Denique aut de fatuia virginibus vna es, aut de
prudentibus. Si de fatuis, congregatio tibi necessaria est; si de prudentibus,
tu congregation^. Ib.
To conclude, either you are a wise Virgin or a foolish one: if a wise one, the
company has need of you; if an unwise one, you of it. And elsewhere dealing
with some other in like manner affected; Forte vult eligere solitudinem, non
satis attendens propriam infirmitate^, and periculosam Diaboli luctam: Quid
enim periculosius quam solum luctari contra antiqui hostis versutias, a qu^
videatur and quem videre no^ possit? Acies potius multorum pariter pugnantium
quaerenda, vbi tot sint auxiliarij, quot so^ij, etc. Bern. de temp. 26.
Perchance, says he, you will make choice of solitariness, not well weighing
either your own weakness, or Satan's assaults. For what can be more
ieopardous then to wrestle alone with such a sly adversary as sees us when we
see not him? We had more need to seek out some troop to join our selves
with, where we may have as many Fellow-helpers as fellows. For it is the
congregation that is Cant. 6. 3.
terrible, as an army well ranged. But Eccles. 4. 10.
woe be to him that is alone: for if he fall, he has none at hand to help him
up. Quoties been perficientibus inuidens daemonium meridianum obtentu quasi
maiaris puritatis eremum petere persuasit? Et cognonerunt miseri tandem, quam
verus sit sermo quem frus^ra legerant, Vae soli etc. Bern. in Ca^t. 33.
That which a many find too true by woeful experience, when Ex Psalm. 91. 6.
verse. vulgat.
the noonday Devil has enticed them out into the Wilderness under pretense
of greater holiness, and strictness of life.

And undoubtedly, as there is none but are more prone to slumber when they are
alone, then when they are in company with others that are awake; so there is no
man, if he well consider himself, but he shall find that he is more prone to
be assailed with evil suggestions and motions, when he is alone by himself,
then when he is in company with others that be religiously affected. In regard
whereof it is not without good cause that the same Author says, Magis timeo
malum, quod facio in abscondito, quam quod in aperto. Ide^ medit. c. 14.
I more fear the evil that I may do alone, then what I cannot do but in
company. Those therefore that shunnnig the society of others, sequester
themselves, and Viuat necesse est alteri, qui vult sibi* Sen. epist. 48.
will needs live wholly to themselves, do but in so doing deprive themselves
of a maine help unto watchfulness, and expose themselves unwisely, (though it
may be unwittingly) unto the wiles and snares of their subtle Adversary, who
is then with them unseen, when there is no body else by them; and is then
readiest to assault them, when there is none by to assist them.

. 37. But as Crates cum vidisset adolescentem secreto ambulante^, interrogauit
quid illic solus faceret. Mecum, inquit, loquor. Cui Crates, Cave, inquit,
rogo, and diligenter attend, ne cum homine malo loquaris. Senec. epist. 10.
Atqui Laert. de Cleanthe, (...). Alterutrum lubens ex altero correxerim.
he said sometime to one that was talking, as he said, with himself, He had
need be well advised, that he talked not with a bad Companion: so here, a man
that not without good cause desires company, (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 3.
c. 11.
had need yet be wary what company he lights on and associateth himself
unto. For Sumuntur enim a conuersantibus mores. Nec tam val^tudini profuit
vtilis regio and salubrius c^lu^, quam animis parum firmis in turba meliorum
versari. Sen. de ira l. 3. c. 8. Tam bonorum enim quam maloru^ long a
conuersatio amorem inducit. Idem de tranq. c. 1.
as the benefit is great that comes by good company, so is the danger and
harm no less that accreweth by bad. Associatio^ is of much force both the one
way and the other. (...). Arriani Epictet. lib. 3. c. 16. Non est carbo ita
ignitus, quin aqua a^fusa extinguatur; sicut contra vix est carbo ita madidus,
quin (...) aceru^ accendatur. Vincent, de vita spirit. c. 17.
Our society with others, and theirs with us, cannot but prevail much either
to make us like them, or to make them like us. Prou. 13. 20. (...). Men. (...).
Ex Sophocl. and Eurip. Plato in Theag. and Polit. l. 8. Gell. noct. Attic. l.
13. c. 17. (...). Theog^. Ea Philosophiae vis est, vt no^ solum students, sed
etiam co^^ersantes (...). Qui in sole^ venit, licet non in hoc venerit
colorabitur. Qui in vnguentaria taberna (...), od^re^ secu^ lo^ fe^nt. Et qui
apud Philosophos fuerunt, traxeru^t aliquid necesse est, quod prodesset and
negligentibus. Sen. ep. 108. Vt qui per solemn ambulant, aut ^lorem mutant, aut
vrentem sen^unt cal^rem: sic du^ consuetudine bono^um vtimur, aut dotes quasdam
amando in nos (...), aut desiderium aliquod admirando concipimus. Put^. cent.
1. epist. 14.
He that walks but with the wise, says Solomon, shall wax wiser thereby: and
he that keeps company with fools, shall be the worse for it. The very
company of either is wont ordinarily to work even with some efficacy on those
that much or often converse though for other ends with either. A third help
therefore unto Watchfulness may be the shunning of the society and fellowship
of wicked and profane persons. Psalm. 6. 8.
Away from me, says David, all ye workers of iniquity. And, Psalm. 101. 4.
A wicked person I will not know: I will have no acquaintance with any such.
Yea to this purpose, as he inuiteth good company to him, Psalm. 119. 63.
I am a companion of all those that fear thee, and keep thy precepts. Such as
feared God, were they high or low, were they rich or poor, they were for his
company, he was content and desirous to be acquainted with them. So on the
other side he bids all profane ones away from him, Psalm. 119. 115. Velut
mus^ molestas a c^rdis oculis abigit. August. in Psalm. 118. conc. 24.
Away from me, ye wicked ones: I will keep the commandments of my God. As
if he could not keep Gods commandments, at least not so well as he would, so
long as the wicked were in company with him.

And in this regard as elsewhere he professes of himself, that Psalm. 26. 4,
5.
he would neither sit among, nor go abroad, nor keep any company with such:
so Psalm. 1. 1.
he pronounces him a happy man, that neither walks with, nor stands amids,
nor sits among, that in no sort or manner conuerseth with those, that are
wicked, sinful, and scoffers at goodness and godliness. Not that a man
should by and by in a Inde* eni^ Pharisaei dicti a (...) s^parare: vt recte
Drus. and Scalig. elench. Trihaeres. Serar.
Pharisaicall humor condemn or contemn every one that comes short of
himself either in knowledge or in practice of sanctification, or should
sequester himself from every one that is not so forward in, or zealous of the
better things, as were to be wished and desired; like those proud Hypocrites in
Esaias, Esai. 65. 5.
that say, Stand aloof of me; come not near me: for I am holier then thou.
Romans 14. 1.
Weak ones are to be received, not to be rejected: Heb. 12. 13.
to be healed and strengthened, not to be turned out. But for those that be
openly profane with Heb. 12. 16.
Esau; scoffers and deriders of religion with Genes. 21. 9, 10.
Ismael; by their loose and lewd course of life proclaiming and publishing not
an utter want only of goodness and godliness in them, but a perverseness of
heart and an auersenesse thereunto; 2 Timothy 3. 5.
such, says the Apostle, should men shun: Vise Chrysostom. in Joan. homil. 57.
and Greg. in Ezech. homil. 9.
lest they corrupt us, when we cannot correct them. For D^m spectant laesos
oculi, laeduntur and ipsi: Multaque corporibus transitione nocent. Ovid. remed.
l. 2.
the very sight of bleare eyes may hurt those that have whole, but tender,
eyes: when (...). Li^iens sanum afficit; at san^ lippientem haud sanat.
Aphrodiss. problem. 1. 35.
the sight of the whole will not help the bleare-eyed. Sooner may evil be
fastened upon good ones, weak ones especially, then good things conveyed unto
and wrought into those that be obstinately evil.

. 38. And surely as some bodily diseases are said to be catching and
contagious; a man may soon catch them by being in company of or drinking with
those that have them: So (...). Chrysostom in Joan. homil. 57. Res est contagiosa
societas mala. - (...) lit ha^ contagio (...), Et d^it in plures: si^ut grex
totus in agris Vnius scabie cadit, and p^rrigine porci; Vu^que conspecta
liuorem ducit ab vu^. Iuvenal. sa^yr. 2. - contagia vites: H^c etiam pecori
s^pe noce^ solent. Ovid. re^d lib 2.
it is with most diseases of the soul; this spiritual Lethargy is a
contagious, a catching disease, we take it easily one from another. Non tantum
corpori, sed etiam moribus salubrem locu^ eligere debemus. Senec. epist. 51.
Sicut enim aer malus assiduo flatu tractus inficit corpus, ita peruersa locutio
assi^ue audita infirmantium inficit animum. Greg. Romans in Ezech lib. 1. homil.
9. Valetudinem firmissima^ l^dit aer grauis, aura pestilen^: and mentem optimam
conuersatio cum malis. V^de Ben Syra, V^ malo, and e^ qui ei adhaerent. Drus.
lib. 2. cent. 1. proverb. 45. (...). Corrup^re probos mores commercia praua. Ex
Menandro in 1 Corinthians. 14. 33. (...).
Evil company is infectious, as evil aires are. There is Vt quaedam in
contactu corporis vitia transiliunt: ita animu^ mala sua proximis tradit.
Ebriosus conuictor in amorem vini traxit: impudicorum coetus fortem quoque and
siliceum vir^a (...): auaritia in vicinos virus suum transtulit. Sen. de ira l.
3. c. 8.
a kind of contagiousnesse in loose and lewd companions, as well as in those
that are possessed of some pestilent disease. And we have great reason
therefore, if our souls health be dear to us, (...). Plut de laud. sui.
Serpunt enim vitia; and in proximum quemque transiliunt. Itaque vt in
pestilentia cauendum est, ne corrup^is iam corporibus and m^rbo flagrantibus
assideamus, quia pericula trahemus, afflatuque ipso laborabimus: ita in
amicorum legendis i^genijs dabi^ operam, vt quam minime inquinatos ass^. S^n.
de tranq. c. 7.
to be careful of shunning, so much as may be such places, and such persons,
or to be very wary in conuersing with them, where it cannot be avoided. The
bodily plague is not so soon taken by sitting by the sick man's bedside; but
a spiritual plague, worse far then it, more deadly, more desperate, may much
sooner be gotten by sitting with profane, and debauched persons. (...).
Arriani Epictet. l. 3. c. 16. (...). Plut. de adulat. N^mo non aliquod nobis
vitium aut commendat, aut imprimit, aut nescientibus allinit. Sen. epist. 7.
Conuictor delicatus paulatim eneruat; vicina dives cupiditatem irritat:
malignus com^s quamuis candido and simplici rubiginem suam affricat. Ibid.
A man shall hardly come with fair apparel amongst colliers, and carters, and
chimney-sweepers, but he shall carry some of their soil and their soote away
from them; but his white apparel will be soyled and sullied at least by
them. And we shall hardly be in company long or often with ungodly ones, but we
shall bear away some tincture of their ungodliness with us. Esai 6. 5.
Woe is me, says the Prophet Esaias, I am undone; for I am a man of polluted
lips, and I dwell amids people of polluted lips: as if a man could not lightly
live among such, but he should in part be such as they were.

One slothful person infecteth another: As (...). Plato Menino^. Torpedo
pisci^ contactu suo torpidum facit. Eras. chil. 3. cent. 4. adag. 25. ^ise
Aristot. hist. animal. l. 3. c. 5. and l. 9 c. 37. Plin. hist. not. l. 9. c.
42. and l. 31. c. 1. and Oppi^. halient. l. 2. and 3. and Claudian c^m eodem
commissum a Iul. S^al. poet. l. 5. c. 16.
the Cramp-fish benummeth those that touch or come near it. One wicked one
fasteneth his wickedness upon another. The very sight of others sleeping may
make a man sleepy that were wakefull otherwise: (...). Plato Charmid. (...). A
istot. problem. 7. 1, 2, 6. and Aphrodis. 1. 34.
as the very sight of those that yawne is wont to set others also on yawning.
Yea such is the deuillish disposition of man's wicked and wretched heart, that
as some infected and infectious persons have a strong desire to be infecting of
others; and those that have already moyled themselves, take a delight in, and
make a sport of moyling others, that come in with fair clothes among them,
thereby to make them like themselves; so Natural est vnumquemque velle sieve in
vitijs sieve in virtutibus associare sibi consortes. B^rn paru. sermon 17. Et
peccantibus voluptatem facit simul peccantium co^sortium. Aug. confess. lib. 2.
cap. 8. Noui ego seculum hoc moribus quibus siet: Malus bonum malum esse v^lt,
vt sit sui similis. Plaut. Trinum 2. 2.
wicked and profane persons usually desire nothing more, delight more in
nothing, then in transfusing of their wickedness and profaneness unto
others. Besides that Nemo non in vitia pronue est. Lactant. inst. l. 3. c. 17.
Ad deteriores faciles sum^, quia nec d^x potest, nec comes d^esse. Et res etiam
ipsa sine duce, sine comite procedit. Non pronum est tantum ad vitia, sed
praecep^. Sen. ep. 97.
we are prone enough of our selves to take infection without help. Our
corruption within us is as tinder or gun-pouder rather, ready to be on a light
flame, if but the least spark light on it, or it come but any thing near the
fire: like Judge. 15. 14.
flax that of it self catches and draws the flame to it, and is all on a
flash, so soon as it but feels the fire.

. 39. As good company therefore ought diligently to be sought and kept; so
evil company ought as warily to be shunned and avoided. Not that we may not at
all have commerce with such: for 1 Cor. 5. 10. Solitudin^m quaera^, qui vult
cum i^ocentibus vine^e. Martin. D^m. de morib.
he that would so do, must go out of the world: nor yet that we should deny
Christian offices to such: Tit. 3. 3.
such we were also sometime our selves: and it were inhumane cruelty to shut up
persons infected together, and so suffer them to starve. But as we are wont to
deal with those that are so diseased, though we be careful to relieve them,
and to make provision of things necessary for them, as well physic as food,
to restore health, if it may be, as well as to preserve life; yet we are wary
of coming ouer-neere them, or conuersing so with them, as whereby to take any
infection from them: So here, howsoever by occasion of our calling and course
of life, we may be called and constrained to have dealings sometime with such
as are openly ungodly and professedly profane; and so far forth as we have
opportunity and just occasion so to do, we perform offices about them,
spiritual ones especially, as stands with our duty, and may be for their
good: Yet John 17. 15. 1 John 5. 18.
we take heed how we enter into any league of familiarity and inwardnesse
with such, whereby we may through ordinary companying with them take spiritual
infection from them, when we intend it not, ere we be aware.

Prou. 22. 24.
Make no league, says Solomon, with a wrathful man: nor keep company with
one that is of a furious and outrageous behavior, Lest thou learn his ways;
and thy conuersing with him prove a snare unto thy soul. For Vt cum in sole
ambulem, etiamsi aliam ob causam ambulem, fieri natura tamen vt colorer; sic
cum istos libros studiose legerim, sentio orationem meam illorum cantu quasi
colorari. Cic. de orat. l. 2. Noxiae sunt conuersationes cum malis: inficiunt
sobriam mentem and decolorant. Ambr. epist. 4. Frequenter accidit, vt quis
contra propositum suum intemperantem audiens, cum velit ipse continentiae
disciplinam tenere, fuco insipientiae coloretur. Ibid. Visendus idem de bono
mort. c. 9.
as those that walk in the Sun, though for other end and purpose, become
tanned with it and sunne-burnt, whether they regard it or no: so those that
come often in company with profane and evil disposed persons, though for no
evil end, intending nothing less then to become like unto them, yet draw they
a tincture often from them, learn to (...). Plut. de adul.
lispe and to (...). Pindari Schol. Nem. 7. and Plut. de liber. educ. Claudo
vel vni si (...) manferis, Disces and ipse claudicare protinus. Eras. Chil. 1.
cent. 10. adag. 73.
limpe after them, come in time somewhat to resemble them both in speech and in
practice, and Minuta quaedam, vt ait Phaedon, animalia cum mordent, non
sentiuntur, adeo tenuis illis and valens in periculum vis est: tumor indicat
morsum, and in ipso tumore nullum vulous apparet. Idem tibi in malorum
conuersatione eueniet, non deprehendes quemadmodum aut quando tibi obsit,
obfuisse deprehendes. Sen. paucis immutatis ep. 93.
to have a strange change wrought on them, in regard of what they have been,
though they perceive not how nor when they change. Exodus 32. 1, 4.
Isreal's posterity had learned Egyptian superstitions by their long abode in
Egypt: and Psalm. 105. 36.
Heathenish impieties from those heathen people among whom they were mingled in
the land of Canaan. Yea Joseph himself by living in Pharaoes Court had learned
to swear at every word almost by the life of Pharao, ( Genesis 42. 15, 16.
By the life of Pharao ye are but Spies; and, By the life of Pharao ye go not
hence) as the other profane his Fellow-courtiers usually did. Such ^ doc^les
imitandi^ Turpibus and prauis omnes sumus. Iurenal. sat. 14.
apt Scholars are we all generally, to learn ought that is evil: and so
easy a matter it is even Ante ignem consistens, e^si ferreus sis, aliquando
dissolueris. Isid. soliloq. l. 1.
for the best and the strongest to take taint by such societies; and if not to
become wholly profane like them, yet by often sight of sin to have it wax more
familiar with them, nothing so distastful unto them as in times past it was;
and so to have the edge of their former zeal and feruor against it abated, and
the intention of their watchfulness consequently in some degree slackned. And
it is one degree unto evil to be less eager against evil; yea Qui aequo
animo malis immiscetur, malus est. Martin. Dum. de morib.
it is no small degree of evil, when a man can well away with evil in others.
Help 4.


. 40. A fourth Help to further us in this spiritual Watch is to labor to
keep the fear of God fresh in our souls. Prou. 14. 16.
A wise man, says the Wiseman, fears and departs from evil: And Prou. 16.
6.
By the fear of God men depart from evil. Metus cum venit, rarum habet somnus
locum. P. Syrus.
There is no affection Omnem formido somnolentiam excutit. Et rapit somn^s
pauor. Sen. Her^.
more watchful then fear. Luke 22. 45.
Grief and sorrow make men many times heavy and drowsy: but Vigilabis, si
timebis. Aug. de verb. Ap. 28. Cauebis, si pauebis. Ro^. 11. 21.
fear and care are wont to make them vigilant and watchful. Genes. 37. 7, 13.
Jacob after he heard news of his brother Esaus coming against him, could not
for his life take any rest all that night long. Yea Judge. 16. 19, 20.
Sampson himself when he lay with his head in Dalilaes lap, no sooner was
admonished that the Philistines were upon him, but he start up instantly and
began to look about him, he had little list to continue his wanton daliance
with her, or his sleeping upon her knee. Tutissimum illis iter, quod
suspectissimum est. Senec. epist. 59.
In fear of invasion men are wont to keep due watch and ward: Victor timere
quid potest? quod non timet. Sen. Agam. 4. 1. Nemo enim celerius opprimitur,
quam qui nihil timet. Vell. hist. l. 2. Animus vereri qui scit, scit tuto
ingredi. P. Syrus.
where no such danger is misdoubted, like Judge. 18. 7.
the men of Laish, there are they more careless and secure. In like manner is
it here? The fear of God if it be kept fresh in our hearts, it will keep us
spiritually waking, it will make us careful to shun, and fearful to do
ought, that may offend him whom we fear. Job 1. 2.
Job was a just man, says the holy Ghost, fearing God and eschewing evil.
And, Hebr. 11. 7.
By faith Noe forewarned of things to come long after, moved with fear
prepared the Arc for the safety of him and his. What made him so careful,
when the whole world was so careless, but his faith and his fear? Fides facit
formidinem: formido facit solicitudinem: solicitudo facit perseuerantiam.
Tertull* contra Marcion.
Faith bred fear, and fear bred care. In regard whereof, the Spirit of God by
Solomon justly pronounces that man Prou. 28. 13. No^ cito perit ruina, qui
ruinam praetimet. P. Syrus.
a blessed man that fears continually. For who so so does, will ever stand
upon his guard, will never slumber in security. And Sola isthic securitas est
nunquam esse securum, sed sumper pauidum and trementem. Rob. Grosthed. epist.
65.
it is our only security, our only safety for us, never to be secure.

On the other side, when the fear of God begins to decay and wax faint in
us, then are we wont to grow less watchful and careful of shunning sin,
and Frequentissimum initium calamitatis securitas. Vell. hist. l. 2.
to lie more open to all Satan's temptations thereunto. That subtle serpent
could not prevail with our first Parents to induce them to disobedience and
breach of Gods charge, till he had wrought this fear of God out of their
hearts, by persuading them that there was no such danger in the matter, Genesis 3.
4. Non moriemini.
they should not die, though they did it. And therefore it is not without cause
that David admonishes his malicious Adversaries in that manner; Psalm. 4. 4.
Stand in awe, and sin not: as implying, that this was the reason why they
took such ungodly courses against the godly, because they stood not in awe of
God. And undoubtedly the maine cause of so much looseness in the lives and
courses of most men, is for want of this awe, because Ierem. 2. 19.
the Fear of God is not in them.

. 41. Psalm. 36. 1.
The wickedness of the wicked man, says the Psalmist, enformeth me in the
very midst of mine heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. Come
we to any wicked man, that lives never so loosely, and tell him that there is
no fear of God in his heart; he will be ready to cry out of presumptuous and
uncharitable censurers, that take Gods office upon them to see into men's
souls, and to tell what is in men's hearts. But the Spirit of God it self
tells such, that Ex fructibus siquidem arbor dignoscitur: ex ramulis de
radice iudicatur. Matthew. 7. 20. and 12. 33.
their own lives evidently discover to any understanding eye what is within
them; their profane and secure courses proclaim a want of this awe in them.
For were there any the least measure of that fear of God in them, that they
would be thought to have, yea were it but the servile fear only, that Iam.
2. 19.
the Devils themselves baue; they would not, nay they could not continue and
go on so carelessly, so securely in their dissolute courses as they do; Timor
torporem excussit and nollentibus. Nec tutum patitur esse securu^ pauor.
this very fear it self alone would rouse them up and raise them out of their
spiritual slumber; it would even enforce them to look about them in spite of
theirteeth; at least not suffer them so securely to lie snorting in sin.

To this purpose Romans 3. 12. 19.
the Apostle Paul having ripped up and dissected the natural man from top to
toe, and made as it were an Anatomy of him, finding Psalm. 5. 9.
his tongue tipped with fraud, Psalm. 140. 3.
his lips tainted with venom, Psalm. 10. 7.
his mouth full of gall, Psalm. 5. 9.
his throat a gaping grave; Psalm. 55. 21. and 57. 4. and 59. 7. and 64. 3.
his tongue as a rapier to run men through with, and his throat as a sepulcher
to bury them in; Esai. 59. 7.
his feet swift to shed blood; and Prou. 1. 16.
all his ways full of mischief: at length he concludes all with this as the
cause of all this evil both in heart and life, Romans 3. 18.
There is no fear of God before their eyes. Which place one of the Ancients
alluding unto says, that Timor Domi^t ianitor animi. Bern. alicubi. and 10.
Ranlin quadrag. ser. 8.
The fear of God is as a Porter set at the door of our Soul. If the Porter
that is setto watch at the door to keep suspicious persons out, grow sleepie
and slumber, they will be stealing in that should not, now one and then
another: but if he fall fast asleep, or be knocked on the head and slain
outright, then who will may come in hand over head. In like manner here: When
the fear of God begins to grow faint in the soul, not to be so fresh as
formerly it has been, then evil motions find some entrance and begin to
steal in upon us. But Vbitimor diuinus consopitur, indifferenter iam libitis
pro licitis vtitur, iam ab illicitis cogitandis, perpetrandis, investigandis,
non animus, manus, vel pedes ampliu^ prohibentur: sed quicquid in cor, in
buccam, ad manum venerit, machinatur, garri^ and operatur, maleuolus,
vanil^quus, and facinorosus. Bern. de grad. humil. c. 12. In ownem libidine^
ebu^ire, solennes voluptates frequentare circi furentis, cauea saeuientis,
scenae lasciuientis, summus vitae fructus Deum non timentibus. Tertull. ad Man.
l. 1. c. 20.
if the fear of God be utterly extinct and put out in us, then lie we wide
open, exposed indifferently to all sorts of sins: There is no sin so heinous*
so hideous, that men are privileged or exempt from, where this fear is once
abandoned and abolished. Genes. 20. 11.
I thought, says Abraham, there is no fear of God in this place: and
therefore they will kill me to have my wife away from me. Murder and
Adultery, are E^od. 20. 13, 14. Deuteronomy. 5. 17, 18. Matthew. 19. 18. Mark. 10. 19.
Romans 13. 9.
the two foremost sins in the second Table, and such as the very light of
nature does of all other most, and most evidently condemn; and yet is there no
bones made of them in Abraham's account, where this fear of God is wanting, and
much less then of any other that seem lesser and lighter then they.

. 42. So that if the question be, how it comes to pass that such sins and
the like are so rife in these times, we need go no further to seek the cause
of it; it is because Job 6. 14.
Men have cast off the fear of God, that should and would otherwise better
keep them within compass. And herein is wicked and wretched man become worse
then the bruit beasts. For whereas Duo animi a Deo dati custodes domestici,
Pudor and Timor.
There be two homebred Tutors as it were that God has set over each of us,
Shame and Fear, the shame of sin, and the fear of wrath: Qui pudorem
amisit, bestiae par est; qui timorem excussit, bestia p^ior est.
He that has cast off shame, is no better then a beast; he that has shaken
off fear is worse then a beast. For Oneramus asinu^, and non curat, quia
asinus est* At si in ign^m impellere, si in foueam praecipitare velis, cauet
quantu^ potest, quia vita^ amat, and mortem ^imet. Be^n. de diverse. 12.
we lay load upon an Ass, and he is well content with it, because he is an
Ass, Hinc Heraclidae Sophistae (...) dixit (...) Ptolomeus Sophista.
a beast made and borne to bear burdens: But if you offer to thrust him down
some steep hill, or to drive him into the fire, he holds back, and shunneth
it all he can, because he loves life, and fears death. Whereas wretched man,
more blockish and senseless then the very Ass, more Ier. 10. 8. (...).
Simocat. ep. 7. (...). Chrysostom. sermon. de ascens* Bestijs bestialior. Bern.
Caut. 35. iumentis insensibilior. Idem de diverse. 12.
brutish then the bruit beast, then the brutishest of beasts, has no fear or
dread of that that may be his eternal bane, that may bring everlasting death
and destruction upon him.

Yea wicked man, Joan. 6. 70.
a Devil incarnate, comes short herein in some sort of the Devil himself.
For Iam. 2. 19. Miru^ est quod homines inferni supplicia no^ considerant, vel
st considerent, non formidant; cum tamen daemones credant and contremiscaent.
Author oc^l. moral. cap. 13. contempl. 3.
the Devils, says James, believe and tremble: they believe Gods word, and they
tremble at his wrath. Whereas wicked man, in that regard worse then they,
neither believes the one, nor fears the other; Esai. 5. 19. and 28. 15.
Ierem. 5. 12, 13. and 23. 33.
makes but a scoff and a jest of either. And no marvel then, if there be no
watching against sin, where there is no fear or expectation of any evil or
danger by sin, no dread or awe of Gods wrath against it.

. 43. A fifth Help to further us in our spiritual Help 5.
Watch, and a mean to keep this fear of God fresh in our souls, is to be
thoroughly persuaded, and often seriously to consider, of Gods continual presence
about us and with us, wheresoever we are, and whatsoever we are about. Psalm.
16. 8. ^quaecunque capesses, Testes factoru^ stare arbitrabere diuos. Silius
bell. Pun. l. 15. In omnibus quae agis, Deu^ praesentem cogites. Cave itaque ne
vel signo vel facto offendas, qui vbique praesens cernit quicquid facis. B^rn.
medit. ^. 6.
I have set the Lord always before mine eyes, says David: For he is at my
right hand: therefore shall I not fall. And it would be indeed a sovereign
preservative to keep us from falling into this spiritual slumber, and a
singular means to make us watchful of our ways, if we could at all times
remember and did seriously consider, that Prou. 16. 8.
There is an eye of God in every place viewing both good and bad: yea that that
God who is Deus totus est sensus, totus vis^, totus audit^. Plin. hist. not. l.
1. c. 7. Totus auris, totus oculu^. Iren. l. 1. c. 6.
all eye, and (...). He^od. oper. ^.
whose eye sees all, (...). Eurip. apud Clem. Alex. (...) quod tamen Philemoni
tribuit Justin. (...). Qui and ibid. (...).
that sees all himself unseen of any, is present in all places; 1 King. 8.
27.
not penned up in heaven, but Ierem. 23. 25.
filling heaven and earth; as Intra omnia, nec inclusus: Extra ^a, nec
exclusus. Hild^bort.
without all things, and yet not excluded from any, so within all things, and
yet not included in any; being like Sphaera, cuiu^ centru^ vbique,
circumferentia nusquam. Empedocles apud Trithem. ad Caesar. quest. 1. contra,
and aptius quam Trismegistus apud Sealig. de subtle. exere. 363.
a sphere, as the Heathen man sometime said, whose Center is every where, and
its Circumference no where. So that as David said sometime of himself, Psalm.
139. 7. 13.
There is no flying for any man from the face of God; no shunning of the Spirit
or presence of God: if we climb up into heaven, we are sure there to find
him: and if we creep down into hell, we shall not miss of him there
neither; (full glad would those damned wretches be, if they could) if we could
take the wings of the morning, and fly as far as the world is wide, yet
there should we be sure to find the hand of God ready to catch hold of us. Or
if we imagine that the darkness and the nightly shade may cover and conceal
us from his sight, he is able to turn Am^ 5. 8.
as the day into dark night, so the dark-night into day. Yea Psalm. 39. 11, 12.
darkness is no darkness with him; but the night is as clear as the day;
light and darkness, day and night are with him both alike.

It is the argument that Solomon uses with the incontinent person to withdraw
him from his loose and licentious courses; Prou. 5. 20, 21.
Why should thou delight, says he, in a strange woman, or embrace a
strangers bosom? Since the ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord; and
he pondereth all his paths. Yea not his ways alone, but Heb. 4. 12.
the secret motions of his mind, and the inward intentions of his heart, they
are all (...).
naked and broken up, as the inwards of a beast that is cut up and quartered,
to him that we have to deal with. For Psalm. 139. 13, 2.
thou have possessed my very reins, says David, and thou understand all my
thoughts: yea, Psalm. 139. 2.
thou understand them afar off, or long before: E longinquo, i. longi
antequam animo insederi^t meo. Iun. Intra hominu^ mentes non solum tractata,
sed etiam voluenda cognoscit. Ambr. offic. l. 1. c. 14.
he sees them ere they are, they are conceived of him, ere they be conceived
in us, he knows as well what we will either think or do, as what we have
already thought or done. And Prou. 15. 11. Sic certe viuendum est, tanquam in
conspectu viuamus: sic cogitandu^ tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum inspicere
possit. Quid enim prodest ab homine aliquid esse secretum? Nihil Deo clusum
est. Interest animi^ nostris, and cogitationibus medijs interuenit. Sen. ep. 83.
Hell and destruction, says Solomon, are before the Lord: and how much more
then the hearts of the sons of men? And it is the argument that Elihu uses
to dissuade and deter men from wicked practices; Job 34. 21, 22.
Gods eyes are upon the ways of man; and he eieth every step he takes: And
there is no darkness, nor deadly shade, that can shadow wicked workers from
his sight.

. 44. This was that that kept David in compass: Psalm. 119. 168.
I have kept, says he, thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are
in thy sight. As Psalm. 18. 22. and 119. 6.
all Gods laws in his sight: so all his ways in Gods sight* Gods laws in his
sight by dutiful regard; his ways in Gods sight through his all-seeing
providence, whereby (...). Greg. Naz. epitaph. Athanas. and Potter funer. ser.
like a well-drawne picture, that eieth each one in the room, he eieth in
that manner each one in the world, and all the ways of each one, Sic curat
vniuersos quasi singulos, sic singulos quasi solos. Ang. confess. l. 3. c. 11.
Sed and sic spectat, etc. Hinc Greg. mor. lib. 25. cap. 19. Sic intendit
singulis, a^si vacet a cunctis, and sic simul intendit omnibus, ac si vacet a
singulis.
as if his eye were upon none but him alone.

This was it that made Joseph so vigilant and watchful, that he would not
yield unto sin, though he were solicited and urged thereunto, when there was
both opportunity and secrecy withal, none by to see them or to bewray them,
and so to incense his Master against him: Genes. 39. 9.
How can I, says he, do this great wickedness, and sin against God? It was
the fear of God arising from the consideration of his presence there, that
kept Joseph at that time from that sin. As if he had said; Though there be
no creature by to see what we do, yet Est profecto Deus, qu^ qu^ nos geri^us,
auditque and videt. Plaut. Capt. 2. 2. (...). - Hesiod. oper.
there is a God that ouer-looketh us. And, as he says, (...). Isocr. ad
Demonic. Quid autem prodest non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam? Ex
Seneca Lactant instit. l. 6. c. 24.
What avails it to have none privy to our evil acts, when we have our own
consciences privy thereunto? so what avails it to have no creature privy to
them, when Qui^ fur ^deret furari, si sciret a Iu^ce se videri? Author oculi
moral. c. 5. propr. 2.
we have him privy to them who must one day be our Judge, and who as he
abhors them, and ^ab. 1. 13.
cannot brook or abide them, so Exodus 34. 7.
has threatened to punish and take vengeance upon us for them.

Cassian. in collat.
We read of two religious men that took two contrary courses with two lewd
women, whom they were desirous to reclaim from their lewd manner of life. The
one came to the one as desirous of her company, so it might be with all
secrecy: and when she had led him from room to room, and he made still many
doubts, as very shie and fearful, lest at this window, that keyhole, this
creuice, or that crany, some or other might chance to peep in and espy them
together, at length she brought him to the inwardest room in the house, where
she said she was full sure that none upon her life could possibly come to pry
in or see ought: but Illum time cui cura est vt videat te, and timendo casius
sis: aut si peccare vis, quaere vbi te no^ videat, and fac quod vis. Aug. de
verb. Dom. 46. Parietibus oculi hominu^ submouentur; numen diuinum nec
visceribus submouetur, quo minus totum hominem perspiciat and norit. Lactant.
instit. l. 6. c. 24.
then he told her that all the bolts and bars that were could not keep God
out, all the walls and d^ores that were could not hinder his eyesight: and
what should they gain by shunning man's eyes, when they lay open still to Gods
eye?

The other of them came to another of like condition in like manner, as
desiring her company, but Si honest^ sun^. quae facis, omnes sciant: si (...),
quid refert* nemine^ scire, cum tu scias? O ^e miserum, (...) co^temnis hunc
testem. Sen^c. epist* 43. Populo test fieri credam, quicquid me conscio
facium. Ide^ de beat. c. 20.
so as she would go out at doors and company with him openly in the street:
Which when Nullu^ for^ (...) auderes in oculis homin^, (...) magis confundi*
deberet aliquid turp^ committere ante Domini conspectu^? Ocul* moral. c. ^5.
she seemed to reject as a mad man's request; he thereupon told her, that
Better and safer it were to commit that or any other sin in the eyes of a
multitude of mortal men, then in the sight of God alone the immortal Judge of
mankind; in the eyes of the whole world, then in the sight of Genes. 18. 25.
Magna tib^ custodia necessaria est, magna tibi necessitas indicta probitatis,
qui ante ^cuios iudicis viuis cuncta cernentis. Bern. medit. c. 6. and Boet.
consol. l. 5.
the Judge of the whole world, Act. 17. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
before whom one day we must all be judged. How warrantable the course was, I
stand not to discuss: and* what effect it had with them, I remember not now:
But sure I am that it would be very effectual unto us to keep us vigilant and
watchful, and so to preserve us from many ouer-sights, which for want hereof
we are often overtaken withal, if we could ever seriously consider of this
presence of God with us.

. 45. This would keep us within the bounds of Sobriety and Temperance in the
use of Gods good creatures, in our recreations and disports; if we remembered,
that we eat and drink in Gods presence; that we feast and make merry
together, yea that we play and sport us in Gods presence: that as well, when
we are playing, as when we are praying, we are ever still in Gods eye.
Children, though they take more liberty to be wanton and waggish, when they
are out of their Parents eye, yet are they more careful commonly to carry
themselves more decently even in their sports, when they play in their
presence. And so would we do, were we assured that we were in Gods presence,
and that God ouer-looked us even at our game.

Sic fac (...), tanquam spectet Epicurus. Epicurus ipso. Prodest fin^ dubio
custodem sibi imposuisse, and habere quem respici^, quam interesse
cogitationibus tui^ iudic^. Sic viu^ tanquam sub alicui^ vi^i, ac se^per (...);
oculis. Sic (...), (...) feteri^, tanqua^ spectet Cato, aut Scipi^, aut L^lius
aliquis. Sen. ep. 25. Aliquis. eligendus est, and semper ant^ ocul^ habendus,
vt sic tanquam illo spectante vi^ius, and (...) tanquam illo vidente faciamus.
Id^ ^pist. 11. Et Bernard. ad fratr. de^te Dei; Elige tibi aliquem, cuius vitae
exemplar sic cordituo inh^serit, reuerentia insederit, vt quoties recordatus
futris, ad reuerentiam cogitati assurges, vitam, ordines, mores compo^as. Hic
pr^sens tibi sit quandocunque v^lueris, occu^rat s^pe and cum nolueris. Omnia
facta, cogitata tua cum ab eo videri cogita^is, a^si videat, ^diat, ^endare
cogetis, etc.
The Heathen man advises a friend of his to propound to himself and set
before him some grave man or other, and so to carry himself in all his courses
as he thought he should do, i^ such an one were then eying him: that when he
were moved to do ought that were indecent, he might think with himself,
Would I do this, or do thus if such an one were in presence? And sure it is
that man's (...) many times, such an ones especially as we reverence and stand
in some awe of, is a special mean to keep men in compass. For do we not
see it by common experience, that Sic Philippus rex cum (...) ludenti Antipatr^
ven^re (...), (...), alutum quo ludebat, in lectum reiecit. Athen. dip^osop. l.
10.
when men are swearing and swaggering, or otherwise disordered, if one chance
to come in whom they have some reverend conceit of, or one that they know
cannot abide such behavior, they are by and by hushed and quiet, and break off
their disorders, and behave themselves more orderly so long as he is in
presence. Yea if such an one be by unseen behind the back of some one of
them, when he shall rap out an oath, or break a bawdy jest on some other of
the company, will not the rest be ready to say to him, Do not you see who is
behind you? as ready it may be, otherwise to vie oaths with him, and to
requite his unsavory jest with the like. Can man's presence then so far
prevail with us? And would not Gods much more, if we were assured of it; or
had we the eye of our soul open to see the one, as we have the bodily eye to
see the other? Or are we not ashamed of our selves, that man's presence should
prevail with us more then the presence of God should? Quouis loco, quouis
angulo reuerentiam habe Angelo qui te custodit, (...) illo praesente facere
audeas, quod me praesente non auderes. Bern. Hic est magni consilij Angelus,
cui patensest omnis angulus. Et quidam ait; Cum quid turpe facis, quod me
spectante ruberes; Cur spectante Deo no^ magis inde rubes? Ocul. moral. cap.
15. propr 2.
that what we would blush and be ashamed to do in any man's, yea - siquid
Turpe paras, nec iu pueri contempseris annos, Sed peccaturo obstiterit tibi
filius infans. Iuven. sat. 14. per admonitionem dictum.
in any childs eye, that had but wit enough to conceive what we did, that we
blush not, nor are abashed to commit in Gods sight.

. 46. Again this would keep us Nullum putaueris locum sine test. Martin.
Dum. de mor. Memineris Deum habere te testem. Ex Cicer. Lactant. instit. lib.
6. cap. 24.
from taking liberty to our selves of sinning in regard of secrecy and priuacy,
were we never so solitary, never so private. It is true that wicked wretches
take occasion by such opportunities to offend the more freely. Job 24. 15.
The eye of the Adulterer, says Job, waits for the twilight; and then he
disguiseth himself, and says, No eye shall see him. Yea of God himself they
think, Job 22. 13, 14.
He walks aloft on the heavenly tarase, and there is many a thick cloud
between him and us: How can he see or discern what we do in the dark? But
Psalm. 94. 8, 9, 10. Oculum in se non intendit suum, qui fecit tuum? Aug. de
verb. Dom. 10.
Understand, ye unwise ones, as the Psalmist speaks; and ye brutish ones,
will ye never be wise? He that formed the eye, shall not he himself see? he
that planted the ear, shall not he himself hear? yea he that made the
heart, knows not he what is in the heart? Or he that framed thy soul, cannot
he see as much and as well as thy soul? But (...). Epictit. Arian. l. 1. c. 14.
when thou art in the dark, does not thy soul see what thou do? And (...);
Clem. Alex paedag. l. 2. c. 10.
does not God then 1 John 3. 20.
that is far above thy soul, Ierem. 17 9, 10.
that knows thy soul better then thy soul knows it self, that Psalm. 19.
12. Job 9. 3, 21.
knows more by thee then thou know by thy self, does he not much more
know, and much more easily and clearly discern what thou do in the dark?
Oh how watchful and wary would we be in all our ways, were our hearts but
once thoroughly possessed with this undoubted persuasion of Gods perpetual
presence with us, of his all-seeing eye ever and every where ouer-looking on
us? What temptation could prevail against us, were this consideration at hand
with us? If we could follow that good rule though by an Heathen man given, Sic
viue cum hominibus, tanquam Deus videat: sic loquere cum Deo, tanquam homines
audiant. Sen. epist. 10.
So converse with men, as if God ouer-looked thee; so commune with God, as if
men ouer-heard thee: If we could have that continually before the eyes of our
soul that a reverend and religious man had before his eyes ever in his study;
Nali p^ccare: na^ Deus videt, Angeli astant* Diabolus accusabit: Conscientia
testabitur: I^fernum cr^ciabit.
Sin not; (be thou never so secret) for God sees thee: the good Angels
stand by thee: the Devil is ready to accuse thee; thine own conscience to
give in evidence against thee; and hell fire to torment thee: it would not be
so great a mastery to keep us waking and watchful, as for want hereof usually
it is.

. 47. A sixth help to this spiritual watchfulness is the (...). Zaleucu^ in
legu^ prooemio apud S^ob. c. 42.
frequent consideration of our end, and of that last day either of death or
doom, wherein we must every one appear before God to give up our accounts to
him. 1 Pet. 4. 7.
The end of all things, says the Apostle Peter, is at hand: be sober
therefore, and watch unto prayer. And our Savior often; Matthew. 24. 42. and 25.
13. Mark 13. 33, 35. Luke 21. 35, 36.
Watch therefore; for you know not in what hour your Master will come. And it
is the last Argument that the Wiseman uses (hoping, if by any, by it to
prevail) to the unruly youngster, that will needs have his own swinge;
Eccles. 11. 9.
But know that for all these things God will call thee to account. As those
therefore that are to give an account of their actions, as Inde (...) dicti. Et
(...) apud quos rationem quisque reddebat. Visantur Iul. Pollux and Harpoor.
Sic and Dan 6. 2.
at Athens most of their Magistrates did at the years end when they went out
of office, are wont to be more wary and chary how they carry themselves in
their affairs, then those that are not liable to account, nor look ever to
come to reckoning, especially if it be uncertain how soon they may be
called upon to give up their accounts: Semper ita viuamus, vt rationem
reddenda^ nobis arbitremur: putemusque nos momentis omnibus, non in aliquo
orbis terrae theatro ab hominibus, sed desuper spectari ab eo, qui and iudex
and testis idem futu, us est, etc. Ex Citer. Verrin. 4. Lactant. instit. l. 6
c. 24.
So ought it to be with us, since we may well remember, yea so it cannot but
be with us, if we shall duly consider, that 2 Cor. 5. 10.
we must all of us one day appear at Christ's Tribunal, and there Romans 14. 12.
every one give account unto God for himself. And if we shall withal take
notice, what a strict account it shall be, wherein we must answer not for
every wicked work only, but Matthew. 12. 36.
for every idle word also, and as well Romans 2. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
for the very Thoughts of our hearts, as for the actions of our lives; and that
this we know not how soon it may be, (God has prefixed us no set time for
it; (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. orat. 67. Vltimum diem latere voluit, vt omnes
obseruarentur. August. homil. 13. Dies vltimus salubrit^r ignoratur, vt semper
proximus esse credatur. Gregor. mor. l. 12. and Bern. de mod. viu. ser. 69.
he would have the last day hid from us, because he would have us every day
watch for it:) it must needs make us keep a most strait watch, and that
constantly and continually too, not over our feet and our hands only, but over
our hearts and our minds also, as Prou. 4. 23, 25, 26, 27.
the Wiseman does well admonish us.

. 48. Yea but that day, may some say, is not so near yet, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2.
the Apostle Paul himself says so. There are some fore-running signs of it
as yet unfulfilled, as Romans 11. 25, 26, 31.
the conversion of the Jews, and Apoc. 18. 2, 9, 10, 17, 18.
the subversion of Antichrist: And till these have been, it shall not be.

To this I answer, with some of the ancients; that (...). Joan. Damasc.
orth^d. fid. l. 2. c. 1.
there is a twofold doomes-day: a general Doomes-day, at the end of the world:
and a particular Doomes-day, at the end of each man's life. Every man's
Deaths-day is each man's Doomes-day. For Heb. 9. 26.
It is reserved for all men, that once they must die, and then comes
judgment. And Eccles. 12. 7.
when the body returns to dust, Genes. 3. 19.
whence it was taken, the Spirit goes to God, to give account to him Genes. 2.
7.
that at first gave it. And that which is wont to be said, (though, it may be,
Visatur Piscat. in n^tis.
at first spoken in another sense) Eccles. 11. 3.
As the tree falls, so it lies: Qu^tlem te inuen^t (...) cum vocat, talem
pariter and iudicat. Cyprian. de mortal. Qualis quisque hinc exierit suo
nouissimo die, talis inuenietur in nouissimo saeculi die. Aug. de verb. D^m.
21. and epist. 80. Et Greg. dialog. l. 4. c. 37. and apud Gratia^. did. 25.
as Death leaves thee, so shall the last judgment find thee, and so shall
thou abide then for all eternity. Matt. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51. Luke 12. 45, 46.
If the evil servant therefore shall say in his heart, My Master will not come
yet: and shall take occasion thereby either to sleep with the slothful, or
to be drunk with the riotous, which he ought not to do, to give over his
vigilancie, and live more remissely or more loosely; that Servants Master will
come when he is not aware, and by death (...).
cut him in two, sever body and soul asunder, and give him his portion with
Hypocrites, in that place of torment, where is nothing but weeping and wailing
for pain and grief, and gnashing of teeth for indignation and vexation of
Spirit.

. 49. And Etsi concluso superessent tempor^ seclo, Vt posset longos mundus
habere dies: Nos tamen occasum nostru^ obseruare deceret, Et finem vitae
quemque videre suae. Nam mihi quid prodest, quod longo flumina cursu Semper
inexhaustis prona feru^tur aquis? Multa quod annosae vicerunt saecula syluae?
Quodque suis durant flor^a rura locis? Ista manent: nostri sed non mansere
parents. Exigui vitam temporis hospes ago. Prosper ad voeorem.
what shall it avail a man that the world stands still, if he die, and so
the whole world be as good as gone with him? if the river run still that he
dwelt by, the house stand still that he dwelt in, when himself is taken away
from either? Though the last day of the world be never so far off, yet may
the last day of thy life be near at hand. Long est quide^ dies iudieij; sed
vniuscuiusque hominis di^s vltimus long esse non potest; quia breuis est vita,
and vitae breuitas incerta. Aug. de verb. Dom. 16. and de 10. chord. 2. and
homil. 28.
Though the worlds Doomes-day come not yet, thine may come long before it:
though it be never so long before that come, it cannot be long ere thine will
come. And if it be uncertain when the general day of Doom will be, it is
no less uncertain, yea in some sort more uncertain when thy particular day
of doom will be.

There are both affirmative and negative signs of the one; there may be
affirmative, but there are no negative signs of the other. Of the general day
of Doom there are some affirmative signs; such as argue the near approaching
of it, Matthew. 24. 32, 33. Luke 21. 30, 31.
as the tenderness of the bough and the sprouting out of the figtree does the
Summers approach. And there are some negative signs; such as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
till they come that day shall not be, as Romans 11. 25, 26, 31.
the gathering in of the Jews again; and Apoc. 17. 16, 17.
the destruction of the Beast and the woman that sits on her.

But of each man's particular Doomes-day, to wit, of his dying day, there may be
signs affirmative, as decay of nature, old age, and some incurable diseases;
Vise Culsum de re medica l. 2. c. 6.
by which it may be known that the day of death is not far off. But negative
signs of it there are none, of which we may say, till such or such things be,
a man shall not die: a man cannot say, I am not weak, nor sick, nor old yet;
and therefore I know I shall not die yet. For our Amos 8. 9.
Sun may set at noone, as the Prophet speaks in an other sense: our life
may be Psalm. 55. 23. and 102. 24.
cut off in the midst of our years: we may be Job 15. 33. and 21. 23.
snatched away suddenly in the prime of our strength. 2 Samuel 12. 18. Mors tam
iuveni ante oculos deb^t esse quam seni: no^ enim citamur ex censu. Senec. ep.
12. Fata enim seriem non servant. Ibid. 63. Quis est adolescens, cui exploratum
sit se ad vesperam esse victurum? Cic. de sen. Senibus mors in ianuis,
adolescentibus in insidijs est. Bern. de conuers. c. 14. Et sub eodem pueritia
fato est. Fuscus apud Sen. suasor. 2.
The young goes many times as soon as the old; and 2 Samuel 11. 25.
the strong often before the weak. Yea as for one apple that hangs on the tree
til it be rotten or full ripe, there are twenty or more blown down or beaten
down, or nipped with the frost or blasted before they be ripe: So for one man
that Esai. 65. 20. Pauci veniunt ad senectute^. Cic. de se^.
fulfilleth his natural course, there are an hundred intercepted and have
their lives shortened, by surfeit, by sickness, by the sword, by pensiveness,
by some one casualtie or other.

. 50. Could we then but seriously consider thus much with our selves, that we
know Job 14. 1, 2. Psalm. 90. 3-10.
our life cannot be long, though we should live the full length of it: Psalm.
39. 5.
Our life it is but an hand-bredth; and our whole age it is as nothing in
regard of God: it is but (...). Plut. (...). Punctum est quod viuimus; and
adhuc puncto minus. Sen. epist. 60.
a point to sempiternitie, Matthew. 26. 46.
the time after decease that has a beginning, but no ending; it is just (...).
Plut. de sera number. vindict.
nothing to eternity, Psalm. 102. 12, 24. and 90. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 16. Aetas in
nobis: aerum in Angelis: aeternitas in Deo; quae Deus ipse est. Scal. de
subtle. exerc. 359.. 7.
Gods age, that has neither beginning nor ending: And again, that we know
not how soon death may come; Erras si in nauigatione tantum existimas minimis
esse quo a morte vita diducitur. In omni loco aeque ^enue interuallum est. Non
vbique se mors tam prope ostendit; vbique tam prope est. Sen. ep. 49.
it is never far off indeed; Ecce hic vltimus dies: vt non sit, prope ab
vltimo est. Ibid. 15.
The day present if it be not it, yet it is not far off it: but it is nearer
by much many times then we are aware of; it is very near at hand often ere it
appear so to be; (...). Basil. Sell. Indenuntiatae sort rapimur. Fuscus apud
Sen. suasor 2.
it comes frequently without warning, and strikes a man starke-dead ere he
be discerned to be dying: And lastly that when it comes, we must instantly
come to our reckoning without further respit or delay: for Eccles. 8. 8. Nulli
iusso cessare licet; Nulli scriptis proferre diem. Senec. Herc. fur.
no man, says Solomon, has power over his own Spirit, to retain it in the
day of death: there is no taking or gaining of further time then; Heb. 9. 26.
(...). Basil. Sell. homil. 26.
nor shifting off of the account that we are then called unto, and shall be
enforced, will we nill we, then to give up: It could not choose but keep us
continually waking and watching for it, as Incertis est quo te loco mors
expectet; itaque tu illa^ omni loco expecta. Senec. ep. 26. Mors vbique te
expectat, and tu igitur, si sapis, eam vbique expectabis. Aug. de spir. and
anim, c. 51. Ocul. moral. c. 7. and Bern. medit. cap. 3.
death waits and watches every where for us; it would make us the mean
while walk wisely and warily, as those that desire to give up a good account
whenever they shall be called to it, which they are sure they shall, but
uncertain how soon they shall be.

Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
O, says Moses, that men were wise: they would then understand this, they
would think upon their end. As on the other side it is noted as a point of
folly in Gods people, and an occasion of their fall, that Lament. 1. 9.
they minded not, nor remembered their end. Yea Quicquid facies, vespice ad
mortem. Sen. ep. 114. Nulla res magis pr^derit, quam cogitatio mortalitatis.
Idem de ira l. 3. c. 42.
did men seriously think on this, it would make them wise. Psalm. 90. 12.
Were they so wise as to number their days aright, they would apply their
hearts to further wisdom. Had they Matthew. 2^. 60. John 19. 41.
with Joseph of Arimathea their tomb hewed out in their garden, where 1 King.
4. 25. Zach. 3. 10.
the use was in those parts to solace themselves, and to make merry with their
friends, that in the midst of their mirth, they might have their end in their
eye: or were they affected as that ancient Father was, that said, Sieve
comedam, five bibam, five aliud aliquid faciam, semper vox illa terribilis
auribus meis insonare videtur, Surgite mortui, venite ad iudicium. Hieron. in
Matthew. citante Pepin. de confess.
Whether he ate or drank, or whatsoever he did, he thought he heard in his
ear that dreadful sound of the last trumpet, Arise ye dead, and come to
judgment: it would keep them waking amids their mirth, much better then the
loudest music; it would make them, as the Apostle wills them, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Whether they be eating or drinking, or whatsoever else they be about, to do
all so to Gods glory, as those that once must be, and presently may be, called
to render an account of that they then do.

. 51. To this purpose it is a good rule, understood aright, that is commonly
given, that Sic quotidie viuamus, quasi die illa iudicandi simus. Hieron. in
Matthew. 24. Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Horat. epist. 4. l. 1.
Dies omnis pro vltimo habeatur. Martin. de morib. Et Senec. epist. 12. Sic
ordinandus est dies omnis, tanquam cogat agmen, and consummet atque expleat
vitam. Et de bren. vit. c. 7. Qui omnes dies tanqua^ vltimum ordinat, nec optat
crastinu^, nec time^.
A man should so live every day, as if that day were his dying day: for that
Prou. 27. 1. Iam 4. 13, 14 (...); Ana^r. Nesc^ quid serus vesper vehat. - Varro
satyr. and Liu. hist. l. 45. Quis scit an adijciant hodiernae tempora summae
Crastina dij superi? Hor. c^rm. l. 4. ode 7. - aetas quid crastina voluat Scire
nefas homini. - Stat. Theb. l. 3. Nihil de hodierna die promittitur: nihil de
h^: hora. Sen. ad Marciam. c. 10.
so it may prove, for ought he knows.

It is true indeed that an Heathen man says, Male viuit, quisquis nescit been
mori. Sen* de tranquil. c. 11.
He lives but evil, that knows not how to die well. And it is as true that,
as one of the Ancients says, Sic vi^e, vt quotidio merearis accipere. Qui non
meretur quotidio accipere, non meretur post ann^ accipere. Ambros. de sacram.
l. 5. c. 4.
He lives not as a Christian man should, that is not fit every day to come to
Gods board; so (...). Musonius apud Stob. c. 1.
he lives otherwise then he ought, that is not every day prepared for death,
that is not ready to go to God every day, if God should call for him that day;
as who knows but that he may? For Genesis 19. 23, 24, 25.
how many have risen well in the morning, that never went to bed again? Nonne
multi sani dormierunt, and obdormieru^t? Aug. homil. 28. Et mors somno
continuata est. Senec. ep. 66.
how many have gone well to bed, tha never saw daylight again? And Cuiuis
potest accidere, quod cuiqua^ potest. P. Syrus apud Sen. ad Marc. c. 9. and de
tranq. c. 11.
look what has befalne one man, may befall any man: Hodie fieri potest,
quicquid vnquam potest. Senec. ep. 63.
that may well fall out this day, that may fall out any day, and 2 Samuel* 14. 14.
that must needs come to pass one day.

But yet that rule of living every day as if that day were a man's dying day,
must be conceived for the manner of our behavior and carriage, not for the
matter and substance of it.

To make this more plain. For the maine matter and substance of a man's
employment, that is, the works, duties and offices to be performed of him, it
is not true. For did a man know that this day should be his last day, or had
he some strong presumption that it were so to be; it were not lawful for him
to follow, either his lawful disports and delights, or the ordinary works of
his special calling; but rather leaving either of them, he ought wholly to
apply himself to the setting of his house in order, as Esai. 38. 1.
Esaias willed Ezechias, and the making of all straight and even between God and
his own soul, to prayer and supplication, and such holy meditations, as the
present occasion should require.

But for the manner of a man's carriage in those duties that he is daily called
unto, or is conversant about, it is true; a man ought continually so to behave
himself in them, in being Hoc citra diem mortis praesta: moriantur ante te
vitia. Senec. epist. 27. Vno die ante morte^ poenitentiam agito. Sapiens quida^
Hebraeus. i. omni die. Quomodo enim de die in diem differendo peccas, cum
extremum diem (...) nescias? Aug. epist. 145.
as careful to eschew all evil whatsoever, or to repent him without delay of
whatsoever evil he has been overtaken withal; and Id ago vt mihi instar
totius vitae sit dies. Nec tanquam vltimam rapio, sed sic illum aspicio,
tanquam esse vel vltimus possie. Hoc animo tibi ha^c epistola^ scribo, tanquam
cum maxim scribentem mors euocatura sit. Paratus exire sum. Sen. epist. 61.
to do whatsoever work he does as sincerely and as circumspectly, as he would
do, if he were to do such duties upon his deathbed or upon his dying day, or
as he would do them, if instantly upon it he were to answer, not before man,
but before God, for the doing of them.

. 56. And surely a special mean it would be to keep us in compass, if we
could but think with our selves, when we are about to behave our selves in
ought otherwise then we ought, and then our conscience tells us that we
should, Would I do this, or do thus, if this were to be my last work; were I
to die upon the doing of it, or were I presently to give up an account, and to
make mine answer before God for it? And Dic tibi dormituro; Potes non
expergisci. Dic experrecto; Potes non dormire amplius. Dic ex^unti; Potes non
reuerti. Dic reuertenti; Potes non exire. Senec. ep. 49.
who knows but that that work, whatsoever it be, may be thy last work? Who
can tell but that thou may be taken away in the very act of it, as Number. 25.
8. 2 Samuel 6. 7.
some have been in the very act of iniquity? Oh how sincerely, how
circumspectly would we in all things behave our selves, did such thoughts
possess our souls?

. 57. A seventh help to this watchfulness is Help 7.
To^i incumbamus huic operi, tam sancto* tam necessario, scrutemur vias and
studia nostra: and in eo se quisque iudicet profecisse, non cum iam non
inuenerit quod reprehendat, sed cum quod inuenerit reprehendet, etc. Bern. in
Cant. 58.
to be often sifting and examining our selves, viewing and surueying our hearts
and our lives, taking account of our selves how we watch and how we walk, how
the case stands between us and God, how we go backward or forward in the
good ways of God, and how we thrive or pare in the gifts and graces of his
spirit. 1 Cor. 11. 31.
If we would judge our selves, says the Apostle, we should not be judged. As
Bonum iudicium quod diuinum praeuenit, quod diuino subducit. Volo praesentari
vulturi irae iudica^us, non iudicandus. Bern. in Cant. 55.
there is no surer way to prevent the judgment of God, then by our judging of
our selves: so there is no better course to prepare us for the judgment of
God, then by fore-iudging of our selves. 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Let a man therefore, says the same Apostle, examine himself, and so repair
to Gods board. As examination of our selves is a mean to fit us for Gods
table, so is it a mean also to further us in our account, which we are to
give up unto God. We should live every day, as we would, if we were to go
that day to Gods board; and we should so address our selves when we are to
repair to Gods board, as we would if we were then to go unto God: and the
diligent discussing of our selves and our courses is a good mean to further us
in, to fit us for either.

. 58. Psalm. 4. 4.
Stand in awe, says the Psalmist, and sin not: examine your own hearts on
your beds, and be still. And of himself elsewhere, Psalm. 119. 59.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet again to thy testimonies. And,
Zephan. 2. 1, 2* (...) Excutite v^s, i^erumque excutite. Iun.
sift or search your selves, says one Prophet, and search again and again,
(for so the words would there be read) before the sentence be executed, and ye
be carried away as chafe; before the fierce wrath of God come upon you* and
the day of Gods indignation overtake you. And, Lament. 3. 40.
Let us search and fifth our ways, and our courses, says another, and return
unto the Lord. And, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Prove your selves, says the Apostle, whether you be in the faith or no: that
ye may know whether Christ be in you or no; whether you be sound and sincere,
or but (...).
counterfeit Christians. And again, Galat. 6. 4, 5.
Let each man try his own work; that he may have whereof to rejoice in
himself and not in others: ( Vt testimonium perbibeat conscientia propria, non
lingua aliena. Aug. in 1 Joan. 6.
in that which he knows by himself, not in that which others conceive of
him:) For every man must bear his own burden: And it is 2 Cor. 1. 12.
the testimony of his own heart concerning his estate, not the opinion or
report that others have given him or had of him, that must one day before God
either Romans 2. 15.
excuse or accuse him, either 1 John 3. 20, 21.
acquit or condemn him.

No better means therefore by the testimony of Gods Spirit to keep us in awe,
to prevent Gods wrath, to restrain us from sin, to bring us back into Gods
way when we have gone out of it, to stay us from going out of it again when
we are once in it, to uphold us in the state of grace, to afford us sound
comfort of our present estate, to preserve us from the danger of selfe-deceit
and of inward decay in good things; then Coram Deo indicatur, qui cord Dominu^
conspi^it, and actus eius sub eius praesentia solicita inquisitione discernit,
que^ tanto quis securius expectat, quanto quotidie vitam suspectius ^minat.
Qui. ^. ad extremum eius iudicium venit, no^ iam coram ill^, sed ab ill^
indicatur. Greg. m^r. l. 25. c. 6.
the often view and surueigh of our own works and our ways, and the diligent
discussing of our daily courses and carriage.

. 59. We see how A^arus totus in rationibus.
careful worldly men are in this kind; I mean, of keeping duly, and often
casting up their accounts. And not without cause: they find much benefit by
it: they come thereby to understand aright their own strength and ability,
which they might be else mistaken in: and if in any matter of expense they
have gone beyond their compass, or have slipped unawares into some course more
chargeable then gainefull, they can soon come by this mean both Quod apud
lu^uriosum, sed diligentem euenit, ratio mihi constat impensae. Non possum
dicere, me nihil perdere, sed quid perdam, and quare, and quemadmodum dicam.
Sen. ep. 1.
to discover and to correct it betimes, ere it grow to a greater evil. And on
the other side for want of due care in this kind, men fall often far behind
hand before they be aware of it; so that they are quite sunk many times ere
they perceive themselves sinking, they are gone past recovery ere they discern
that they are going. And were we Luke 16. 8.
as careful for the state of our souls, as the children of this world are for
their worldly estates; we would be as careful (much (...). Greg. Naz. apud
Anton. Meliss. l. 1. c. 64. Satius est vitae suae rations, quam frumenti
publici noss^. Sen. de bre^. vit* c. 38.
better cause we have so to be) of keeping and often casting up our accounts
concerning the one, as they are theirs concerning the other: That which as it
would much further our growth in grace, and by way of prevention preserve us
from decay and relapse; so for want whereof many that have made fair shows
have fallen backward, and have become spiritual banckrupts ere they have
perceived that they were breaking.

. 60. As Tradesmen therefore and those that have much dealings in the world,
are wont to have their day-booke, to keep particular account of each days
both receipt and expense: So an exceeding great help would it be unto us in
good courses, if we could bring our selves in a constant course to Quotidie cum
vita paria faciamus. Sen. epist. 101.
take every day at Even an account of our selves, how we have spent that day,
and what account we are able to give of it unto God. It is wisdom in worldly
men so to do, even where they are not liable to account; because their worldly
well-being depends much thereupon. But it were much more wisdom Ratione^ cum
Domino crebro putet. De Villi^o Cato de re r^stic. c. 5.
for that man so to do, that were to give up a strict reckoning of all his
affairs and of his carriage in each of them, and that at an hours warning:
^hee should by means hereof have his accounts ready by him upon any occasion,
having kept them thus diligently from day to day. It is a point then of double
wisdom in us Animus quotidie ad rationem reddend^m v^candus est. Senec. de ira
l. 3. c. 36.
to be diligent in the daily practice and performance of this duty; both for
that our spiritual welfare depends much thereupon; as also for that we are
liable to the most strict account that may be, to be given up, not at an
hours, but at less then an hours warning, if it shall be so called for;
which this course duly observed would be a special mean to fit us for.

. 61. This even Heathen men have done. They have taught it their Scholars:
they have used it themselves. For so (...); Pythag. carm* aur. and Plut. de
curiosit.
Pythagoras enjoined his disciples each of them to rehearse every evening this
verse to himself;

What good, or ill have I done (this day)? or what not done, that I should do?
And Pythagoreorum more, quid quoque die dixerim, audierim, eg^rim; commemoro
vesperi* Cato apud Ci^. de senect.
accordingly was it their usual manner at Even ever to run over what they
had said, or heard, or done the day past. And Seneca, as F^ciebat hoc quotidie
Sex^us, vt co^summato die cum se ad nocturnam quietem recepisset, interrogaret
animu^ suum; Quod hodie malum tuum sanasti? cui vitio obstitisti? qua part
melior e^? Senec. de ira l. 3. c. 36.
he tells us of one Sextius a Stoicke, whose daily practice this was, to
call himself at Even, to a reckoning, what evil he had healed in himself
that day, what vice he had withstood or subdued in himself, wherein he was
oughts better, being that he had lived a day longer: So Vtor hac potestate, and
quotidie apud me causam dico. Cum sublatum e conspectu lumen est, and conticuit
vxor moris mei iam consci^, totum diem iam mecum scrutor, facta ac dicta mea
remetior. Sen. ibid. Et alibi ad L^cil. Scrutor me prius; deinde hunc mundum.
he professes of himself, that it was his usual guise, every night after he
was laid in bed and the light out, when all was quiet about him, to cite
himself as it were to appear before himself, to render an account of his
courses, and so privately with himself to recount and record his whole days
work, all his words and his deeds, passing such censure upon each of them as
the condition or quality of either did require. And Vir bonus and sapiens, -
Non prius in dulcem declinat lumina somnum, Omnia quam longi reputauerit acta
diei; Quo praetergressus? quid gestu^ in tempore? quid non? Curisti facto decus
absuit, aut ratio illi? Quid mihi praeteritum? ^ur haec sententia sedit, Quam
melius mutasse fuit? Quid volui quod n^lle b^num suit? v^ile h^nesto Cur malu^
antetul^? sic dicta and facta p^r omnia Ingrediens, ortoque a (...) cuncta
reuoluens, Offensus prauis, da^ palmam and praemia rectis. Auson. idyll. 16.
a Latin Poet describing a wise and a good man, makes this his daily
practice, Not to suffer his eyes to sleep, till he have run over all his
actions of the whole liuelong day past, and taken notice what was well done,
and wherein he had faulted and failed, to approve himself in the one, to
reprove himself for the other.

. 62. Thus have Heathen men done: And as he sometime said, Tanti vitrum,
quanti margaritum? Post Tertull. ad Martyr. Hieron. ad Demetr. and ad Saluinam
and alibi.
Shall they set so much by their glassie bugle, and not we much more by our
precious pearl? Shall they be so careful to use these means for the
furthering of themselves in matter of mere morality: and shall not Christian
men much more do the like for the helping of themselves forward in the
practice of true piety? A shame it were for us that they should take more
pains and use greater diligence about the nutshell, then we should for the
kernel; that they should be enamored more on the shadow, then we are with the
substance; they ravished more with a dead picture then we with the person whose
picture it is, and whose surpassing beauty and excellency the picture comes
far short of; that mere ciuility and humanity should prevail more with them
then true Christianity and divinity does or can do with us.

As we are to think therefore daily of that general account; so Si semper
hoc, cum opus est, facis; semper facis* Bern. in Cant. sermon. 58. Nobis enim
putationis semper est tempus, quiae semper est opus. Ibid.
let us call each one himself daily to a particular reckoning. Quid pulchrius
^ac consuetudine e^cutiendi totum diem? moderatior erit, qui sciat sibi
quotidi^ ad i^dicem esse veniendu^. Qualis ille somn^ post recognitionem sui
sequitur? quam tranquillus, altus, liber, cum aut laudatus est animus, aut
admonitus? etc. Senec. de ira l. 3. c. 36.
We shall walk every day the more warily being to pass such a censure; we
shall sleep and rest more freely, more quietly, more soundly, more sweetly,
having past such a censure: we shall be sure, when we have ransacked our
selves in this manner over night, to have no known sin unrepented of lodge
with us till the next day. Yea he that has thus acquit himself ere he lay
him down to sleep, shall be sure to watch even while he sleeps; and though
he were taken away suddenly in his sleep, should be found spiritually awake.
In a word, as the often rubbing of our eyes is a good mean to keep us
corporally waking: so the frequent ransacking of our hearts and lives will
prove a sovereign help to keep us spiritually watching.

. 63. An eighth help to further us in this spiritual Help 8.
Watch is to be jealous of our selves and of our own infirmity and weakness,
that we may soon be ensnared and easily surprised, foiled at least, if we be
not exceeding wary, before we be aware. As the fear of God will make us
careful to shun all sin, and whatsoever is evil in it self: so this
jealousy of our selves, and fear of our own infirmity, will make us
careful to eschew all occasions of sin, and whatsoever by means of our
weakness may become matter of evil unto us. For as those that know themselves
to be of a weak stomach, ready to take check at such meats as many other
ordinarily are wont to digest well enough, are very chary of their diet, and
careful to eschew and forbear not such meats only as are simply unwholesome,
but even such also as they suspect or suppose to be hard of digestion, and will
not in that regard so well accord with their weakness: So Panaetius
adolescentulo quaerenti, An Sapiens amaturus esset; De Sapiente, inquit,
videbimus: mibi and (...) qui adhuc a sapiente long absumus, non est
committendum, vt incidamus in re^ commotam, impotente^, alteri ^mancipatam;
vilem sui. Itaque conscij nobis imbecillitatis nostra quiescamus. Quod ille de
amore, hoc ego de omnibus: nec vino infirmum animum committamus, nec for^, etc.
quantum possumus, nos a lubric^ recedamus* in sicco quoque parum fortiter
stamus. Sen. epist. 116.
the man that is suspicious of himself, and jealous of his own corruption,
will be careful to walk warily, and diligently to avoid not those things
alone that he sees and knows to be simply evil, and in that regard
prejudicial to all in general, but even those things also that, though
indifferent, and in themselves otherwise not unwarrantable, such as may be done
by some sometime without hurt or offense, yet that in regard of the strength of
his corruption, his natural disposition, the weakness of grace in him, and
his pronenesse to slip and be overtaken in them, may in that regard prove
dangerous and prejudicial to him in particular, howsoever Sapienti non soli
ite custodire se tut^m est: gradum vbi volet, sistet. Nobis, quia non est
regredi facile, optimum est omnino no^ progredi. Sen ibid.
others wiser or stronger, or not so affected as he finds and feels
himself, might without danger deal with them.

This religious jealousy had Job of his children, when they were feasting
together, knowing how prone youth are to ouer-shoote themselves in mirth and
disport: Job 1. 5.
Peradventure, says he, my sons may have sinned, and (blessed, that is, as
the Hebrews use the word (...). So 1 King. 2. 13. Vise sis Drus. observe. l.
16. c. 7.
by a kind of fairness and finenesse of speech) blasphemed God in their
hearts. And the like godly It is a fools best wisdom to be jealous of his
own folly.
jealousy of our selves it is good for each of us to have, as to say with our
selves, when we are moved or solicited to some ieopardous course, though we
cannot condemn it as simply evil; Peradventure I may sin, and be overtaken
(...) I be aware; I may fail in it or fall by it, though other stronger then I
may deal in it without danger. Yea the like jealousy had Job of himself: he
was no less suspicious of himself, then he was of his sons. Job 9. 28.
Verebar omnia opera mea.
I was afraid, says he, of all my works; knowing, that if I did wickedly,
thou would not acquit me. And this suspitiousnesse of himself no doubt was
it that caused him to Job 31. 1.
make a Covenant with his eyes, not to seize on such objects, as might prove
occasion unto him of any spiritual evil.

. 64. Matthew. 26. 41.
Watch and pray, says our Savior, that ye enter not into temptation: the
Spirit indeed is ready; but the flesh is weak. As if he had said more at
large; Considering your own infirmity and feebleness, ye have great need to
take heed and earnestly to desire, that ye may not so much as touch upon any
temptation: For such is the pronenesse of your corrupt nature to give way to
them, that if you do but enter into any temptation, though the Spirit purpose
otherwise, yet the flesh faltring with you, it is an hundred to one that you
come not out as you went in, but you receive some foil or other.

Do we not see how careful they are that have gunpowder in their houses, to
look that no fire or candle come near where it is? And in like manner Aduersa
est confidentia, quae periculis vitam suam pro certo commendat. Et lubrica
spes, quae inter fomenta pe^cati saluari se sperat, Author de singular. cleric.
did we consider that our corrupt heart is like tinder or gunpowder, apt in
temptation to be soon fired and inflamed, it would make us the more careful
to keep aloof of, and fearful to come nigh ought that might be a mean to
tempt or to entice us unto evil. And on the other side, as those that set such
materials to dry before the fire, as are apt soon and suddenly to take
fire, by the sudden lighting but of a little spark in them, though they be
never so heedy, though they stand still by them and have their eye ever on
them, may chance to have all on a light fire, ere they can help or prevent it:
So falls it out here not seldom, that Vt ignis, vbi foenum vel culmum
arripuerit, sine mora simulac materia^ attigerit, flammam lucidam accendit: ita
ignis concupiscentia simul^t per oculorum intuitum formam elegantem at^igerit,
animum statim exurit. Chrysostom. de Oziaserm. 3.
while we venture too near, and presume as John 18. 25, 26.
Peter sometime did to stand bathing himself against the fire in the
Highpriests Hall; we are suddenly caught, as he was, ere we think on it, we
have by some sudden iniection our affections so fired, that the very frame of
our heart is all on a flame, ere we are aware of it, or are able now well
either to prevent it, or easily to suppress it.

. 65. Again, this jealousy of our own weakness will make us the more
careful, as to shun all occasions, whereby we may be endangered; so, because
it is not in our power ever to avoid them, to use diligently all good means,
whereby we may be supported and strengthened against them. To which purpose
our Savior joins watching and prayer together, as Matthew. 26. 41.
there, so Luke 21. 36.
elsewhere: as also Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 Pet. 4. 7.
his Apostles often couple them the one with the other. Multos impedit a
firmitate praesumptio firmitatis. Nemo a Deo fit fir^, nisi qui se a seipso
sentit infirmum. Infirmatus est in se, vt firmus secret in te. Non firmaretur,
si non infirmaretur, vt abs te in te perficeretur. Aug. de verb. Dom. 13.
No man, says one of the Ancients, is enabled by God, that is not enfeebled
first in himself. And no marvel; For so long as we find our selves (as we
suppose) strong enough to stand alone on our own legs of our selves, we
think scorn to use crutches, or to be supported by others: so long as we
think our selves wise enough and able to wade well enough through with our
affairs, Consilij satis est in me mihi. - Arachne apud Ovid. met. l. 6.
we regard not to take advice or to seek help and aid from others: So here,
so long as we misdoubt not our own weakness, as we are ouer-forward to
presume upon our own strength, so we are ouer-backward and careless of using
those means whereby we might attain true strength indeed. And on the other
side, the more conscious men are to themselves of their own wants, the more
diligent are they wont to be in resorting to those by whom their wants may be
supplied: and the more suspicious we are of our own infirmity and weakness,
the more careful will we be daily and hourly to repair unto him, who alone
is able to confirm and strengthen us, yea who is able so 2 Timothy 4. 17.
to enable us notwithstanding our weakness, that 2 Cor. 12 9, 10.
his power and might shall appear in us amids our feebleness, and 2 Cor. 4. 7.
our very infirmity shall make much for his glory. And surely, In hac part
expedit plus been timere, quam male fidere. Et vtilius est, infirmum se homo
cognoscat, vt fortis existat, quam fortis videri velit, and infirmus emergat.
Author de singular. cleric. Sed and Tertull. de cultu foem. Vtilius si speremus
nos posse delinquere. Sperando enim timebimus, timendo cauebimus, cauendo salui
erimus. Qui securus agit, non est sollicitus, non possidet tutam and firmam
securitatem: at qui sollicitus est, is rere poterit esse securus.
In this kind, as one well says, it is more behouefull for a man to be
somewhat too fearful and heedy, then to be a little too confident and
foole-hardy: to take notice of his own weakness, that he may become strong,
then while he thinks himself strong in his own conceit, to prove weak. In
regard whereof also the Wiseman, as we said formerly, not unworthily
pronounces him Prou. 28. 14.
happy, that continually stands in fear: as Romans 11. 21. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
afraid, though he may seem to stand fast and firm, lest through infirmity
he should chance to fall.

. 66. The want hereof has been the fault, and has proved the fall of not a
few. For, to pass by that fearful downfall of our first Parents hereby
occasioned: What but this was the maine ground of Peter's miscariage? but
Praesumpsit nescio quid, quod in illo nondum erat. Aug. in Psalm. 55. Posse se
putauit quod non potuit. Bern. de temp. sermon. 88.
this presumption, I mean, of his own might, and neglect of those means
whereby he might have been enabled to stand, while John 13. 36, 37.
he trusted to his own strength? A threefold offense some have observed in
his behavior in that business; that (...). Se Christo opposuit; se caeteris
praeposuit; sibi totum imposuit. Chrysostom. in Matthew. homil. 82.
he opposed himself to our Savior forewarning him of his fall, he preferred
himself indiscreetly before the rest of his Fellow-disciples, and he took the
matter wholly upon himself, as that which he knew himself able well enough
to go through with. Matthew. 26. 33, 34, 35.
Thou will deny me, Peter, says our Savior, Nay, but I will not; says Peter.
Though all should deny thee, yet will not I deny thee: I will never deny thee,
though I die for it. And no doubt of it but that Volebat plane pro Domino
anima^ ponere, volebat: neque enim Deum id pollicendo fallebat: sed quas vires
haberet voluntas ipsa nesciebat. August. de orig. animae l. 4. c. 7.
Peter then both meant as he spoke, and spoke what he thought; he misdoubted
not himself, nor his own inability, but he would and should do as then he
said. But Non se norat aegretus: sed agretum norat medicus. Veriorque inuenta
est medici praedictio, quam agroti praesumptio. Aug. in Psalm. 138.
the Physician felt Peter's pulse, and discerned that in his Patient, which the
Patient did not, nor could then see in himself.

And surely, as it befell Peter, so falls it out with many other. They are
like sick men, - iussus requiescere, postquam Tertia compositas vidit nox
currere venas etc. Pers. sat. 3. Qui acuta febre diu laborauit, si morbus per
bidnum triduumue intermiserit, dicit statim, Iam licet ad satietate^ edere,
etc. Stella ad Luc. 11. Quod aegris euenit, quos longa imbecillitas vsque to
affecit, vt nunqua^ fine offensa proferantur; hoc accidit nobis* quorum animi
ex longo morbo reficiuntur. Senec. epist. 7.
that when they have had a good day or two after some fits of a fever, think
they are now perfectly well recovered again, and so presuming contrary to the
Physicians advice to venture abroad into the air, or to cast off their sick
kerchiefe, or to misdiet themselves, either they catch cold or take surfeit, and
so fall back by relapse into their former disease, handling them then more
fiercely by far, and endangering them much more then before. And so is it here
with a many: they think themselves strong enough to encounter with Satan,
especially if they have stood out and come off well (as they think) in a
temptation or twain, and so Qui praesumit, minus veretur, minus praecauet,
plus periclitatur. Tertull. de cultu foem. Timor salutis fundamentum est:
praesumptio impedimentum timoris. Ibid.
grow careless either of eschewing the occasions of evil, or of using means
whereby they may be enabled to withstand them when they are offered: Which when
they so do, it is just often with God to leave them to their own strength, as
the nurse does the child that will not endure to be lead, and so to suffer
them to fall, as soon then they will, sometime to their eternal ruin, that
they may deservedly perish through their own folly and foole-hardinesse;
sometime to their present pain, but their future amendment, that having had
experience of their own feebleness and inability to stand of themselves, they
may in time to come be more wary, more distrustful of their own strength, and
more careful to resort from time to time unto him, from whom only true
strength is to be had.

And for this end no doubt has the Holy Ghost left upon record the foul slips
and falls of many of Gods worthy Saints and Servants, not that any should
thereby be encouraged or emboldned unto sin; but Vt cautela minorum sit ruinae
maioru^. Greg. mor. lib. 33. c. 15. Scriptae sunt ruinae priorum ad cautelam
posteriorum. Stultus quippe est, qui praecedentem cadere videt and ipse non
cauet. Rad. Ardent post Trinit. 9. Cautum itaque debet reddere, non sequacem,
error alienus. Cassiod. l. 7. ep. 2. Cum magnos cecidisse attendu^t, parui
timeant. Augustine. in Psalm. 50. Nimium praceps est, qui tranfire contendit,
vbi alium conspexerit cecidisse: and vehementer infraenis est, cui non
incutitur timor alio pereunte. Amator vero est salutis suae, qui euitat alienae
mortis incursum: and ipse est prouidus, qui sollicitus fit cladibus caeterorum.
Author de fingul. cleric. Vita itaque f^ueam in quam alium vides cecidisse:
aliena pericula in te pertimesce: alterius perditio tua sit cautio. Isidor.
soliloq. l. 1.
that the ruin of such great ones might make weaker ones more wary; that where
we have seen them slip for want of watchfulness, there might we be more
watchful: that when we see others foiled far stronger then our selves, it
might make us the more to distrust our own strength: Which the more we
distrust, the less shall we presume on it, and the more careful shall we be
to use all good means, whereby true strength may be achieved of us and
increased in us.

. 67. A ninth Help to further us in this spiritual Watch is a sincere hatred
of evil, that we labor not only to condemn sin in judgment, but even to
hate and detest it in heart. Prou. 8. 13.
The fear of God, says Solomon, is to hate evil: not to forbear it only,
but, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 12. 9. (...).
to abhor it. The servile fear may make a man break off the practice of
sin outwardly in his life, (wicked men, had they but it, durst not go on in
their wicked courses as they do) but the filial fear will do more then
that, it will make a man hate and detest it also inwardly in his heart: For
this fear it is a loving fear, Timor Dei cum amore coniunctus. Calvin*
instit. l. 1.
a fear joined with love, yea proceeding from the love of him whom we fear.
And Psalm. 97. 10.
ye that love the Lord, says the Psalmist, hate that that is evil. Amas Deum?
debes odisse quod odit. Aug. in Psalm. 96.
Do thou love God, says Augustine; thou must hate then what he hates: Yea
if thou love him indeed, thou can not but hate what he hates.

Neither indeed can we Romans 12. 9.
closely cleave to that that is good, till we have brought our hearts to
detest and abhor that that is evil. Which thing if it were once thoroughly
wrought in us, there should not need much Rhetoric to persuade us to watch
both against sin and against all occasions of it: We would of our selves be
careful enough to shun and avoid that, which our hearts abhorred, and could
not brook or abide. For as the meat that a man loatheth, he cannot endure so
much as the sent or savor of it, nay nor, it may be, the sight of it: so would
it be with us in regard of sin, had we the like inward dislike and loathing
of sin in our souls. And Stomachum fecit illi luxuria: cito tamen cum illa
redibit in gratiam. Tunc de illo feremu^ sententiam, cum fidem nobis fecerit,
inuisam iam sibi esse luxuriam. Nunc illis male co^uenit. Sen. ep. 112.
one maine cause of relapse into sin, and of want of due watchfulness
against it, in those that for some time have surceased the practice of it, is
because they never hated it in heart, though they could not but in judgment
condemn it, being evidently convinced in conscience of the euilnesse of it:
Psalm. 66. 18.
their heart looked still after it (though their hand for fear or other
respect were for a while with-drawne and withheld from it) ready therefore
when such respects as before stayed and restrained it were at any time removed,
to give friendly entertainment unto it again.

. 68. Would we therefore keep a constant Watch against sin? Oh let us
labor then to have wrought in us a true hatred of sin; of such sins
especially, as we have been most addicted unto, or have most delighted in
before. The more formerly we have loved them, the more now let us loath them:
the more we have for the time past delighted in them, the more for the time to
come let us even detest and abhor them. (...). Plut. de virt. m^r.
As the meat that we have sometime sursetted of, we not only know now to be
evil for us, but even our stomach rises and goes against it: so those
sins that we have formerly glutted our souls with, let us not only condemn
now as the bane of our souls, but endeavor even so to be affected toward
them, that our very hearts may rise against them upon the memory and
remembrance of them. Let it be with us in regard of them, as it was with Ammon
in his affection to Tamar. 2 Samuel 13. 15.
He loved her earnestly at first, though with an incestuous love, or lust
rather: But after that he had abused her and defiled himself with her, (...).
Clemens Alex. paedag. l. 2. c. 10.
his love was in a strange manner so turned into hatred, that the love
wherewith before he loved her, was not so great, but the hatred wherewith he
then hated her, was far greater. So for those sins that we have formerly
defiled our souls with, we should labor to have our love in like manner
turned into hatred; and Si quaeris odio misera quem statuas modum; Imitare
amorem. - Senec. Med. act. 3.
strive to bring our hearts to it, to abhor them now as much, yea (if it were
possible, as there is good ground for it and just cause of it) much more, then
ever we loved them, or delighted in them before.

This could we do with Ammon; we would do further as he did. 2 Samuel 13. 16,
17.
He thrust Tamar instantly out at doors, when his affection was thus altered;
he could no longer endure so much as the sight of her: and not that only, but
he caused the door to be bolted fast after her, that she might not have any
free or further access in unto him again. So were our hearts and affections
estranged from such sins, as they had been linked and fastened unto before,
we would not only be careful without further delay to dispossess our souls
of them, but we would be constantly watchful to keep the door of our heart
surely bolted against them, that they might never be able to gain entrance
again with us.

. 69. The tenth and last help, that we will Help 10.
propound for the present, to further us in this spiritual Watch, is the
diligent and constant practice and performance of good duties and offices.

Which help divides it self into two branches; the one opposing to
Idleness, and the other to worldliness.

The former is the constant following of the Branch 1.
works of our particular callings. Ephesians. 4. 28.
Let him that stole, says the Apostle, steal no more; but let him labor
rather and work with his hands some good thing or other, that he may have to
give to him that needs. Let him that stole steal no more: that is well; but
that is not enough. Let him steal no more, but labor rather: because else
though he leave stealing a while, Prou. 23. 21. and 24. 30. ad finem. Otio
nihil deterius; quod nec noua acquirit, and parata consumit. Pelag. ad Demetr.
if he live idle, he will come to suffer want soon, (for Prou. 18. 9.
Sloth wastes as well as excess and riot:) and so be falling anon to his
former trade again: Not to add, that (...). Phocylid. (...). Quidam apud
Socratem hist. lib. 4. cap. 23.
he that lives so, even in that he so lives, living like a drone on the
labors of others, is little better then a Thief.

Prou. 19. 15.
Sloth, says Solomon, causes sleep. And sure as we see it to be with
drowsy persons, that if they sit still and do nothing, they will soon fall
asleep: so is it here; Paulisper vigilantia amittitur, dum a been operandi
studio cessatur. Greg. Pastor. p. 3. c. 1.. 16.
if we give our selves over to idleness, we shall soon come to be overtaken
again with this deadly sleep of sin. Ezech. 16. 49.
Fullness and idleness are noted to have been two maine causes of those
filthy sins of Sodom. It is a common byword with us, that Of idleness
comes no goodness: And Nihil agendo male agere homines discunt. Ca^onis
oraculum, quo nihil verius. Colum. de re r^st. l. 11. c. 1. (...). Chrysostom.
tom. 6. sermon. 90. Et Sirac. 32. 28. (...). Chrysostom. in Genes. homil. 14. and
de prouid. l. 1. and in Matthew. homil. 35. and in 1 Cor. homil. 23.
By doing nothing, says the Heathen man, men learn to do evil things. Ab
otiosis ad noxia, a leuioribus ad grauiora facilis est lapsus. Greg. de pastor.
p. 3. c. 1.. 15. and dialog. l. 3. c. 15.
It is easy slipping out of an idle life into an evil and a wicked life: yea
an idle life, it is of it self evil. For man was made for action, not for
idleness. And howsoever, says one well, we count him Bonum est non fecisse
malum.
a good man that does no evil, he is indeed rather Malum est non fecisse bonum
Chrysostom. ser. de virt. and vit.
an evil man that does no good.

(...). Eustath. ad Homir. Il. (...). Et lethi consanguineus sopor. - Virgil.
Aen. 6. (...). Basil. Caes. hom. 1. Et Senec. Her. fur. act. 4. sc. 2. Frater
durae languide mortis, Pauidum leti genus humanum Cogis longa^ discere mortem.
Et Gorgias senex in somnum prolapsus, (...). Aelian. hist. var. lib. 2. cap. 35.
Sleep and death are said to be brethren or Cosen-germanes: or the one at
least to be Speculum mortis somnus. Tertull. de anima c. 24. Per imaginem
mortis fidem initiaris resurrectionis. Ibid. c. 25. Quid est mors? somnus
consuet^ longior. Chrysoft. ad pop. homil. 5. Inde Chrysolog. sermon. 59. Vt
resurrecturum t^ iugi and verna^ulo instruaris exemplo, quoties dormis and
vigilas, toties moreris and resurgis. (...). Menand.
an image and a resemblance of the other. And as 1 Cor. 15. 6, 51. (...).
Basil. Sell. homil. 31. Inde (...) dicta.
those therefore that are deceased are said to be fallen asleep: so Hinc
Alexidis griphus de somno, (...). Athen. l. 10. (...). Eustath. Iliad. (...).
Itaque Plato apud Laert. (...). Ex legum l. 3. Nihili est, qui piger est.
Plaut. R^d. act. 4. sc. 2.
they that lie asleep may well be said to be in some kind or degree of
decease.

Now what difference is there (...) esse. Aristot. Ethic. Ni^m. l. 1. c. 13.
between him that lies fast asleep, and him that is idle though awake? save
that the one is restrained from action by the course of nature, whereas the
other voluntarily restrains himself: and that is no sin therefore in the
one, that is no small sin in the other. Slothfulness therefore not only
causing sleep, but being it self of it self Vigilia somno simillima. Sonec.
de prouid. c. 5.
a kind of spiritual sleep, it is consequently also Somno delectari est
quasi mortem moliri. Martin. Dum. de morib. Vita enim* profecto vigilia est.
Plin. prafat. hist. nature. Et revera plus vigilare, plu^ viuere est. Nam quid
tam mortis simile quam dormientis aspectus? Quid tam vita plenum quam forma
vigilantis? Chrysolog. sermon. 24.
a kind even of spiritual death: And the idle and slothful may be well
said to be not only spiritually asleep, even when they are awake, but to be
spiritually 1 Timoth. 5. 6. Otium fine literis mors est, and viui hominis
sepultura. Senec. epist. 83. Itaque de Vacia idem, latente non viuente, quem
tamen solum viuere Asinius aiebat, ta^quam de sepulto, Hic filus est Vacia.
Epist. 55. Qui enim latitant and torpent, sic in domo sunt, tanquam in
conditiuo. Horum licet in limine ipso nomen marmori inscribas: mortem suam
antecesserunt. Idem epist. 60.
dead also, even while they live: their very waking, while they so wake, being
no better then sleep, and their very life, while they so live, no better then
death: yea worse then natural sleep, (because against nature) for a man to
sleep waking; worse then corporal death, for a man to be as dead ere he die,
Iusta sibi faciunt. Senec. epist. 122. se esserunt. Idem epist. 12. - se
quisque, and viuit, and effert. Manil. l. 4. de coecis.
to be his own Bearer, to wind himself quick, and to (...). Plato. Impij
etst videantur viuere, miseriores tamen sunt omnibus mortuis, carn^m suam vt
tumulum circumferen^es, cui infoelicem infod^runt animam suam. Ambr. de Ca^n
and Abel lib. 2. cap. 9.
bury himself yet breathing.

. 70. Idleness therefore, it is both evil of it self; and it exposes men to
further evils. Matthew. 12. 44.
Satan where he finds (...).
the house vacant, that he had before quit, he does easily make a reentry
again. He does as Vise Ambr. hexamer. l. 5. c. 8.
the Crab, that desirous to prey on the Oister, but finding the fish enclosed
and her self excluded with two such shells as all her power is not able to
pierce, watches the time when she lies bathing her self in the sun and
gaping to take in some pleasant refreshing, while the winds are calm, and the
waters still; then she slily and suddenly casts in some sandy grit that
keeps her two shells from closing again, and by that means comes she to
get in her cleyes, one after another, and so to prey upon the fish. In like
manner does Satan, where he desires to seize upon the soul, but sees some
likelihood of resistance; he watches men's idle times, and when he finds the
heart vacant and the mind free from present employment, then is he busy to
iniect first idle and sandy thoughts, by which he makes way for worse matters,
and after wicked and noisome motions, by which he comes many times to take
full seisen of the soul, and to work its utter ruin. In regard whereof it is
no unnecessary counsel that one of the Ancients gives, that Semper aliquid
operis facito, vt Diabolus te semper occupatum inveniat. Hieron. ad Rustic* Res
age, tutus eris. Ovid. remed. - nam si non Intendes animum studijs and rebus
honestis, Inuidia vel amore vigil torqueberis. - Horat. lib. 1. epist. 7.
(...). Hipponact. apud Stob.
We be always about some good business or other, that the Tempter whenever
he come, find us not unoccupied.

. 71. Yea for this cause is it that God has ordained that every man should
have some certain course of life wherein to be ordinarily employed. 1 Cor. 7.
20, 24.
Let every man, says the Apostle, in that calling wherein he was called,
therein (...).
with God (or, in Gods name, as we use to say) abide. There is a twofold
calling by the Apostle there mentioned; Vocatio in qua. ad qu^.
The calling wherein a man was called, and the calling whereunto a man was
called, when he was converted and became a Christian at first: there is the
general calling of a Christian, that whereunto he was called; and there is
the particular calling or special course of life wherein a man lived, before
(as it may fall out) he was called thereunto. A man must not imagine therefore,
when he is called to be a christian, that he must presently cast off all
worldly employments, give over the works of his former vocation, and apply
himself wholly (as some Mesaliani, fi^e Euchetae, de quibus Epiphan. haer. 80.
and Aug. de haeres. c. 57. and Theodoret. hist. l. 4. c. 11. and Fab. haer. l.
4. c. 25.
Heretics sometime supposed, misled by Luke 18. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
some places of Scripture misexpounded) to prayer and contemplation, and mere
matter of devotion: but he must retain the one calling still as well as the
other, follow the one still as well as the other, make conscience as well of
executing the duties of the one as of frequenting the exercises of the other:
and not think that under color of following of Sermons and frequenting of
godly exercises, he may lawfully neglect those necessary duties that by virtue
of his special calling he stands in conscience bound unto.

In a word, each Christian man that is able, must, as the Apostle wills, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12.
earne, and eat his own bread, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
work with his own hands, and follow his own affairs, that is, such
business as to his particular place and special calling appertains: else he
is 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. (...).
branded by the same Apostle for 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 11.
an inordinate walker, that is, a disorderly liver; 1 Timothy 5. 8.
a Denier of the faith, not in word, but Tit. 1. 16.
in deed; and one little better, if not 1 Timothy 5 8.
worse then some Heathen and Infidels, that have even by natures dim light
(...). Pittacus referente Demetrio Phalar. apud St^b. c. 3.
condemned idleness in any.

. 72. But here is great Caution to be used, and Branch 2.
due regard to be had, Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt. Et,
Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Cha^ybdin. Horat.
lest while we shun a rock, we fall into a whirle-poole: lest while we seek
to eschew idleness on the one hand, we be swallowed up with worldliness on
the other: lest while we labor to keep our left eye waking by the diligent
following of our worldly affairs, we suffer our right eye to close and fall
fast asleep by neglect of religious exercises either public or private.

Zachar. 4. 1.
The Angel that talked with me, came again, says the Prophet, and awaked me
as one that is raised out of his sleep. It fared with the Prophet when he was
attending on Gods Angel, as with a drowsy person, who though he be awaked and
set to work, yet he is ready to sleep at it, and to be ever and anon
slumbring, if he be not now and then iogged and stirred up: And in like manner
it is with our drowsy spirits, and will be continually, Excitandus esomno and
rellicandus est animus. Senec. epist. 20. Excitandus est semper animus stimalis
spiritualibus. Oration, lectio, etc. incitamenta eius sunt. Pelag. ad Demetriad.
if they be not frequently rowsed and raised up by the constant use of
religious exercises. In regard whereof Paul wills Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
(...). Honestarum rerum semina animi nostri gerunt: quae admonitione
excitantur, non aliter quam scintilla flatu leui adiutaignem suum explicat.
Sen. ep. 95.
to quicken by stirring up the grace of God that is in him, (...). Homer.
Odyss. (...). Eustath. ibid.
as men do embers that lie raked up in the ashes.

. 73. Now this is done by means either public or private. First by
frequenting the public ministry of the word at due times. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20.
Quench not the spirit, says the Apostle: despise not Prophecy: as if the
neglect, or contempt (and it is the contempt of it that is the maine ground of
neglect) of the one were a principal mean of extinguishing and quite
quenching the other. And undoubtedly so is it. For either fire or light is put
out, not by pouring on of water only or some contrary matter; but besides
that, either by withdrawing from it and denying that unto it that should feed
it; (for Pro. 26. 20. Deficientibus lignis deficit ignis.
if the fuel fail, the fire will of it self out:) or by neglecting to blow
it, and to stir it up by times; as we often see it fall out that it goes out
of it self also, where yet there is wood and coal enough to have longer
continued, had some such industry been used. And even so is spiritual grace
often impaired and decaieth, not by the practice of sin and wickedness only,
as by water poured on it; but by neglect of the word, the means that should
foster and feed it, and that by raising and rowsing up our dull and dead
spirits should Psalm. 119. 28, 37, 50, 93.
put spiritual life and alacrity, as it were, unto us. And no marvel then,
if, as Solomon says, Prou. 29. 18.
Where vision fails, there the people perish: if the grace of God go out,
where these means are neglected; if they fall fast again into this deep and
deadly sleep, though they were sometime awaked out of it, that are not
careful to keep within the sound of Gods Esai. 58. 1.
Trumpet, and to frequent the house of God where it may be heard, that, as at
first John 5. 25.
it did awake them, so should keep them still awake.

. 74. Neither are those free therefore from danger of discontinuing this their
watchfulness, that out of a vain presumption of their own spiritual parts,
can content themselves with their own private devotions; supposing that they
may as well, and as effectually sanctify a Sabbath by reading and meditating
and praying apart by themselves, as by being present at, and adjoining
themselves to the public assemblies of Gods Saints. It is a spice of
intolerable pride and presumption for any to be so conceited of themselves.
David was of a far other mind, and therefore led by another spirit, then
they are that so imagine. He was 1 Samuel 13. 14.
a man after Gods own heart; and a man of excellent parts. The word of God not
only Col^ss. 3. 16.
dwelt plentifully in him; but John 7* 38.
flowed abundantly from him: he was able not to Psalm. 16. 7.
admonish himself alone, but Psalm. 32. 8. and 51. 13.
to instruct, direct, and edify others: he could not only sing Psalms, but
2 Samuel* 2^. 1. The sweet Songster of Israel.
pen hymns, both of praise and of prayer: many holy and heavenly meditations
had he in the time of his exilement, as may appear by Psalm. 7 and 22. and 34.
and 52. and 54. and 56. and 57. and 1^9. etc.
those divine ditties during it composed of him. And yet could not he content
himself with these his private devotions. But, as Psalm. 42. 4. and 122. 1.
it was the very joy of his heart, when he was at home, to repair to the
Temple, to the public assemblies there held: so nothing made his banishment,
and his abode in foreign parts, more bitter unto him, then this, that by
means thereof he was restrained of repairing unto them, and of joining with
Gods people in such holy duties as were there daily performed. Read diverse of
the Psalms framed by him during that time; and consider well, Psalm. 27. 4. and
42. and 63. and 84.
how bitterly he bewaileth his restraint in this kind; how instantly he
sueth to God for freedom of resort; how he blesses those that had liberty of
repair or place of abode there, even the very birds themselves that had
access but to build thereabout: and you will soon see a strange difference
between that worthy man of God and these, that so highly ouer-prize their own
private devotions, as thus to undervalue the public assemblies of Gods
Saints, and the ministry of his word.

. 75. And yet neither also is this sufficient indeed, that we frequent the
public means: private helps must be added and adjoined thereunto, of
meditation, of conference, of supplication, of examination, of confession, and
the like: that though much or most of the week be taken up with our worldly
affairs; yet we reserve some time amids them constantly every day for some
spiritual employment. For as it is with our clockes and our watches, that
unless they be wound up at certain times, they will slacken their motion,
yea by means of the heavy weights and plummets of lead that hang on them, they
will at length come down to the ground, and so stand stone still: So is it
with our souls; we have our earthy affections and our worldly thoughts, as
heavy weights, hanging so at the heels of them, that unless they be at some
certain times wound up, as it were, by the use of some holy exercises, they
will grow slack and sluggish in their mounting up to heauen-ward, yea at
length, it may be, come to an utter cessation of all endeavor in that kind.

For this cause David, as Psalm. 1. 1, 2.
he makes this one property of a Blessed man, that he makes Gods law his
daily, yea and his nightly meditation: So he professes of himself, that it
was Psalm. 119. 97.
one of his daily exercises to meditate on Gods word; and Psalm. 16. 7. and 63.
5, 6. and 119. 62.
it was his nightly imploiment to be singing of Gods praises. He had certain
set times every day for meditation and invocation, Psalm. 55. 7.
at morning, at noone-tide, and at even: And besides those ordinary set times,
he took occasion often extraordinarily, as opportunity was offered, even Psalm.
119. 164.
seven times a day, that is, many times, to be lauding of the Lord, either for
his judgments, or for his mercies.

And the like should we do every one of us, if we desire to keep this
spiritual watch fresh in our souls, and Rebus non me trado, sed commodo.
Quocunque co^stiti loco, aliquid in animo salutare verso. Cum me amicis dedi,
non tamen mihi abduco: nec cum illis moror, quibus me causa ex efficio nata
civilly congregauit, sed cum optimo quoque sum; ad illos animum m^m mitto.
Senec. epist. 62. E^ ad Lucil. ibid. 15. Quicquid facies, cito redi a corpore
ad animum: illum diebus ac nectibus exerce.
would not have them wholly dulled with or drowned in the world: we should set
some time apart every day from our worldly affairs, to be spent in reading, in
meditation, in conference (with God, at least) in prayer and invocation of his
name, in search of our souls, in acknowledgement of our sins, etc. And so
intermingle the one with the other, that by ouereager attending the one we do
not wholly neglect the other.

It is that that would fit us for the public ministry, and make it the more
effectual with us: As on the other side Logatur Chrysostom* de Lazaro and
Diuite, homil. 3.
it is well observed, that the want of such private employments makes the
public ministry altogether unprofitable with many; 2 Timothy 3. 7.
who hear much, and are at many Sermons, but gain little by any, because they
are not careful hereby, either to prepare their hearts beforehand, to
receive the seed of the word as into ground fitted for it, or to water and
cherish what they have taken in on the Sabbath, by a constant course of
religious offices in the week following.

. 76. Nor let any man allege here in way of excuse for himself, that for the
works of his calling, they are so many, so manifold, he cannot possibly find
any spare time to spend thus in religious employments. For (to omit what might
be said further in way of answer hereunto) did they esteem so highly of holy
things as the worth of them well deserves, they would find time for them as
well as they do ordinarily for matters of far less weight then it. Yea
(that which is a foul shame to consider) those that will pretend such straites
of time to shift off such employments, can find many of them time enough (if
not more then enough) to follow their vain and idle disports. And can thou
find every day almost spare time enough at large for the one? and can thou
no day almost find the least spare time at all for the other? Undoubtedly that
day may thou well esteem but evil employed, whereof thou spendest more part
in thy vain delights, then in the advancement of thy spiritual good.

To conclude, if we will watch aright and as we ought; as the works of our
special callings must not be neglected, so our spiritual good, and those
means either public or private that tend directly to the nourishing and
improuing of it, are to be principally regarded: And therefore so are we to
ply and follow the one, that yet even amids them we take time for, and Sicut
laborantibus manibus nec ocu^us propterea clauditur, nec auris abstinet ab
auditu: sic, imo and multo melius laborante corpore, men's quoque ipsa sua
intenta sit operi, vt non prorsus vacet. Bern. de diverse. 40.
exclude not wholly all minding and meditation of the other; yea so warily in
their due season to attend either, that neither we be surprised with sloth
and idleness on the one side, nor yet with worldliness on the other.

And thus have we seen both what it is to watch, why we are so to watch; the
manner how we must watch; and the means whereby we may be enabled so to watch
in some measure.

. 77. Now here, ere we end, would a Question Question*
be answered. For may some say; But is it possible for any man living by this
manner of watching to keep ever waking; by thus watching against sin, to
keep himself wholly free from sin?

To pass by here that conceit of some Schoolmen, Answer.
that a man cannot keep himself free from all sin in general; but that he
may from any one sin whatsoever in particular; that he may, though not from
all, yet from this or that sin. Which they express by a similitude Exemplum
ponitur de existente in vase perforato, qui licet possit quod libet singulorum
foraminum obstruere, non tamen omnia: dum enim vnum obstruit, aliud patens
relinquitur. Scotus in 2. did. 28. q. 1.
of a man enclosed in a barrel full of holes let down under water, that may
with his finger or some other help stop any one hole and keep the water out
at it, which yet he cannot avoid but that it will come in the whilst at the
rest, any of which yet also he may stop if he will. But to pass by this, which
I take to be not all out so sound; for answer hereunto some distinction must
be made.

Sins therefore are of two sorts, either voluntary, Sins.
or inuoluntary; either with the will, or without it.

Some sins are inuoluntary, or without the Sort 1.
will, such as be absolutely either beside or against it; as are all sins, In
quibus est voluntas facti, sed non voluntas peccati. Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 15.
of pure ignorance, and of mere infirmity.

Sins of pure or bare Ignorance I call those in which ignorance is simple or
single, not affected, and Et comes and causapeccati. Nauarr. enchirid. cap.
23.. 46.
not a Companion only but a Cause. It is not with men in them, as it is with
those that affect Ignorance, and please themselves in it; and Vt liberius
peccent, libenter ignorant. Bern, de bon. deser.
that without check of conscience they may more freely offend, are content so
to continue: but they desire to be informed aright, and use the best means
they can so to inform themselves; but yet are mistaken, and so do that out of
ignorance, Si scissent, non secissent. Tertull. apolog.
which for a world they would never have done, had they known it to be evil.

Sins of mere Infirmity or frailty I call those, Romans 7. 21, 23. Gal. 5. 17.
velimus nolimus, habemus illas: titillant, bla^diuntur, stimulant, infestant.
Aug. de verb. Dom. 45. Vt non sint, vultis, sed non potestis. Ibid. and de
verb. Ap. 4. Non potes, and velles posse, Ovid. rem. l. 1.
that a man knows to be evil, and yet is not able by any means to avoid,
though he do what he can, even as much as he would or could if his life lay
upon it. Thus in hearing the word, a man, it may be, cannot listen so
attentively for any long time together, but that many bythoughts will come
buzzing and fluttring about him, as Genesis 15. 11. Stella in Luc. 11. Hildebert,
epist. 7. Et Berengos. de luce visib. and invis.
the fowls did about Abraham when he was offering of his sacrifice, and will
often, Distinguendum inter cogitationes illas, quibus voluntas fauet, quas cum
dilectione amplectitur, and illas quae repugnanti atque invito animo
suggeruntur, quibus men's cum horrore quodam renititur, vt resistat, quibus vt
contristatur admissis, ita gaudet repulsis. Pelag. ad Demetriad. Aliud est enim
nolentem tangi, aliud consentientem animu^ perimi, Greg. mor. lib. 21. cap. 7.
pressing in upon him in spite of his heart, disturb him and hinder him in
that holy exercise: yea sometime the more a man strives and bends himself
to banish and beat them away, the more he comes to be pestred and encombred
by them, and his attention to be tainted and infected withal. Thus in prayer
often Psalm. 43. 3, 4, 5.
a man cannot shake off that deadness or dullness and drowsinesse of spirit,
that possesses his soul, and depriueth him of that alacrity and feruency that
ought then to be in him. Thus a man railed upon and reviled, though he can
keep his tongue from breaking out into evil language, and can stay his hand
from striking in way of revenge; yet he cannot for his heart blood, it may be,
do he what he can, Nam neque chorda sonum reddit quem vult manus and men's,
Poscentique grauem, persaepe remittit acutum. Hor. art. poet.
keep down his heart from rising, and R^m. 7. 23.
rebelling against the law of his mind, or from swelling and boiling with some
wrathful passion and inordinate motion within him. Thus Psalm. 42. 5, 6, 11.
Mark. 9. 24.
in distress or danger even a godly man many times cannot rest and rely upon
God with that firmness and confidence of faith, and with that quietness and
tranquillity of mind, that he ought, and not only desires with all his
heart, but with all his might and best ability endeavors to do.

. 78. Now sins of this kind cannot be avoided, be a man never so careful,
never so wary and watchful: (a man cannot watch there, where he suspecteth no
evil; nor can his watching avail him beyond his ability:) which 2 Chronicles. 30.
18, 19. Nehem. 1. 11. Romans 7. 17, 20.
God therefore in mercy vouchsafes his children a daily pardon of course for,
and is content graciously to pass by and put up in them; though Luke 12. 48.
Romans 7. 15, 16, 21, 23. 1 John 3. 4*
in rigor of justice he might deservedly call them to a strict account for
them. And yet by the constant use of this religious watch having our judgments
better cleared, and our hearts confirmed and strengthened, we may come in time
to be less subject to the former sort of them, and less exposed also to the
latter.

Other sins besides those are all more or less Sort 2.
voluntary, and are committed in part at least with the will of the committer:
such are sins Matthew. 13. 25.
of negligence and oversight, escaping us through carelessness; Matthew. 26. 31,
74, 75.
of mixed infirmity, proceeding from temptations of much terror; of Deuteronomy. 17.
12.
presumption, Psalm. 19. 13. Number. 15. 30, 31.
pride, and 2 Cor. 12. 21. 1 Timothy 5. 6.
wantonness, occasioned by delightful objects, and the like. Yea such are the
most, if not all, outward gross sins joined with knowledge, which even a
natural man therefore might forbear if he would; and which it were an unjust
thing for humane laws to forbid and to punish offenders for, were it not in
man's natural power to forbear.

And these voluntary sins are those that we are principally to keep watch
against: which if we shall diligently and constantly apply our selves unto,
there will a twofold benefit redound thereby unto us.

. 79. First, (...); Joan. Ieiun. de poenit. Nem^ vnquam vigilans (...) est.
(...). Aristot. de epilepticis quibusdam, de somn. c. ^.
we shall avoid many, even a Benefit 1.
multitude of sins, which for want of this watchfulness we may be, and are
ordinarily overtaken withal. (...). p^l. l. 5. c. 11.
Nor should the enemy so often as he does prevail against us, and foil us, if
he found us standing on our guard and keeping duly this watch. To exemplify
this by an instance or two:

Compare we first David and Joseph together, tempted both in the same kind,
though not with the like fierceness of assault: but the one foiled, where the
temptation was weaker; the other vnvanquished, where the temptation was
stronger. David a man See 2 Samuel 5 4, 5.
well in years, and 2 Samuel 2. 2.
a married man too, having the remedy already by Gods ordinance provided to
relieve man's infirmity in case of incontinency; yea enjoying it 2 Samuel 3. 2,
3, 4. and 5. 13.
not sparingly, but somewhat Deuteronomy. 17. 17.
more freely then was fit, having not one wife alone, but 2 Samuel 12. 2, 8.
a many, beside 2 Samuel 5. 13. and 15. 16.
Concubines not a few; This David thus furnished, 2 Samuel 11, 2* 3, 4.
by chance espieth, not some single woman, but another man's wife, washing her
self: he is not sought unto by her, but he is to make suit unto her,
uncertain of success; and to use messengers to her, that must therefore to
his shame and reproach, and his dishonorable engagement to them, be privy to
his dishonest desires and his adulterous designs.

On the other side Genes. 39. 7* 13. Co^cupiscitur a Domi^a adolescens, nec ad
concupiscentia^ prouocatur: rogatur, and fugit Vna hac in re and blanditur and
supplicat, quae in caeteris imperabat. Cast^m animum nec ae^as adolescentiae
p^rmouet, nec diligentis autoritas. Non aspect ^ solum, sed ipso poe^e complex^
prouocatus a foemina, foeminam non concupi^it. Pelag. ad Demetriad.
Joseph, a young man, Legatur Chrysostom. de prouid. Deil. 2.
in the heat of his youth, in the prime and flower of his years; Joseph a
single man, not enjoying yet the benefit of (...). Iuuentutis portus
matrimonium. Plut. apud Drus. lib. 1. quaest. 18. (...). Chrysostom. de Ozi^ 3.
marriage, that might help to support him in temptations of this kind; being
not to sue to any other, but sued earnestly to by another, by a Superior, by
his Mistress, by such an one as had no small command of him otherwise;
opportunity offered for the doing of the act desired with all priuacy and
secrecy; no fear of danger to hinder, where none were near to take notice of
it; great hope of future benefit, to entice and encourage, by liberty, or
further advancement likely enough by her means to be procured.

Now (...); Chrysostom. de Job and Adam t^m. 5. sermon. 90.
in this great inequality of motives and inducements on either side, what is
the reason, why Joseph stands, when David falls; that he holds out
worthily, who is the more strongly assailed, when the other is so foully and
fearfully foiled, who is far more weakly assaulted, or rather, is not so
much assaulted, as is ready to exalt the honest of another: but that the one
stood upon his watch, when the other did not?

It was Non vidisse crimen est; sed cauendum ne orig^ criminis sit: incideri^
oculus; sed non intendat affectu^. Ambros. de poeni^* l. 1. c. 14.
no sin for David by chance to epsy a naked woman, his neighbors wife,
washing her self; neither was it a thing in his power (how should he forecast
it?) to avoid: but the object being thus casually offered unto him, David, that
ought (as he prayed sometime) to have Psalm. 119. 37.
turned his eyes away from it, Innocens intuitu^ aspectis fit noceu^. Greg.
mor. l. 21. c. ^.
wilfully fixed them so long there, where they had occasionally seized, that
his heart came to be tainted with filthy concupiscence, and his affections all
inflamed with lustful desires; and so grew he restless within himself, till
he had brought that about, that Psalm. 32. 3, 4. and 38. 3.
deprived him of true rest indeed.

On the other side Joseph after motion had once in that kind been made to him
by his Mistress, was Genesis 39. 9, 10*
both careful to shun all occasions of that sinful act whereunto he was
tempted; (he would not endure to be so much as in company alone with her:) and
again Genesis 39. 11, 12.
as constant in withstanding the temptation when it was offered, and Excusatur,
quod ingressu^ est; praedicatur quod ^lapsus est. Ambros. (...) Joseph. c. 5.
the occasion could not be shunned: for though she pressed him to it day
after day, he would not hearken unto her: yea he chose rather to hazard loss
of liberty and life then to yield unto her impious and adulterous desire. In a
word, the one watched, and so did not the other; and therefore the one was not
vanquished so, as was the other. And by watching with the one may others
escape, and might that other have escaped that, which for want of this watch
he was vanquished in.

. 80. Again, as Machetes the Macedonian appealed sometime from Philip, to
Philip, (...) Pl^t. ap^ph. reg. and duc.
from Philip sleeping, to Philip waking: so compare we now Joseph and Joseph
together, Joseph watching with the same Joseph somewhat neglecting this watch.
Joseph himself that stood thus steadfast in a stronger temptation, yet slipped
after swearing Genesis 42. 15, 16.
by Pharaoes life in a feebler But the evil was not so evident, so open-faced
in the one as in the other: and therefore Aduersus mai^ra vigilantibus quedam
(...) min^tiora surrepunt. Aug. in Psalm. 118. Dura prae^auentur magna, non
timentur minuta. Idem in Psalm. 39. and Ruffin. ibid.
being not so carefully watched against or regarded, by being often heard grew
familiar, and gained admittance with him, who might otherwise in all likelihood
have kept himself free from it, with much less difficulty and danger then he
did from the former.

This watch therefore duly and diligently kept, would keep us from many sins
that we are daily ouer-taken with. And (...). Chrysostom. de compunct. 2. (...).
Idem to^. 6. sermon. 67.
the greatest part of outward sinful acts, that the godly fall into, may be
justly ascribed to the want of it as the maine cause of the most of them, Non
pecca^is, ^i vigil. (...). Aug. de verb. Ap. 28.
which by this course therefore were it constantly observed of them, might be
prevented and avoided.

. 81. Again, even in those slips and faults either Benefit 2.
of mixed infirmity and ouer-sight, yea or of presumption it self too, (for to
sin in contempt of God Number. 15. 30. Hebr. 10. 29.
with an high hand, I doubt much, whether Gods children ever do,) that even
godly men themselves are oft-times overtaken withal, yet there is great
difference between the watchful and the watchlesse Christian; between the
party that ordinarily keeps this watch, though not so carefully and
constantly all out as he ought, and such as keep no such watch at all: and
that in three things, Ante peccandu^* inter peccandu^, post peccatum.
before sin, in sin, and after sin.

First, before sin: For the one, Galat. 5. 17. velle^ enim omnino nec
concupiscere. Aug. de verb. Ap. 4. and de ver^. D^m. 43.
his maine desire Difference 1.
and purpose, his general resolution and endeavor is not to sin at all,
howsoever Matthew. 26. 41.
of infirmity, or Galat. 6. 1.
through ouer-sight, or Ephesians. 6. 12.
through violence of temptation, or Romans 7. 23. Iam. 1. 15, 16.
strength of corruption, he slip and slide into, or be pusht upon, or enticed
unto and ensnared in sin often ere he be aware: whereas the other stands
indifferently affected to sin or to forbear sin, as occasion shall be
ministered and offered of either; or rather inclining, as his corrupt heart
naturally carries him, to the ready embracing of any evil that opportunity is
offered of, and that stands with his own natural desire. So that the one is
like unto a Watchman that being appointed to watch, so soon as he comes to
the place where he should watch, Pro. 27. 33. Conserit man^ vt dormiat. (...).
L^cian. de mercenar.
lays himself down to sleep, or sits rechlesly, not regarding whether
he sleep or keep awake. Whereas the other is like one that being set to
watch, Non vaco somno, sed succumbo. Senec. epist. 8.
strives to keep himself waking, and desires so to do, but yet through the
drowsinesse of his disposition and long continuance without rest, chances
sometime to slumber, though he purposed it not. Or the one is like a man that
goes to Church to try if he can catch a nap there, and so soon therefore as
he is in his seat sets him to sleep, which the sooner he falls into, the
sooner has he his desire: The other is like Act. 20. 9.
Eutichus, that came not, in all likelihood, to Paul's Sermon with a purpose to
sleep at it: (if he had purposed it, he would never have made choice of the
place he did to sit in, where he should no sooner slumber but he should be in
danger of downfall and of as much as his life was worth:) but yet through
Paul's long preaching, and his own long waking, he was a^ length overcome with
sleep, though he little thought or meant, it may be, when he came in, that
he so should. Like the former is that man that keeps not watch at all, like
the latter he that keeps ordinarily some watch over his soul. The one Sic
Homer. Iliad. (...). Et Iliad. (...), etc. Vbi Eust^h. (...) Et rursus, (...).
sleep finds; whereas the other seeks sleep.

. 82. Again, in the very act of sin there is Difference 2.
no small d^ference between these twain. For the one Cave ne aliquando totus
dormias. Bern. de ord. vitae. Animus quo peius se habet, minus sen. ^it. Nam
qui leuiter dormit, and species secundum quietem capit, aliquando dormire se
dormi^ns cogitat: Grau^ autem somnus etiam insomnia extinguit, animumque altius
mergit, quam vt vti intellectu vllo sinat. Sen. ep. 54. D^lcis and alta quies,
placidaeque ^imillima morti. Virg. Ae^. l. 6.
sleeps wholly, as he says: he sleeps a deep and a dead sleep: he is
carried with full swinge of heart and will unto sin. Nulla quies somnis: ne^,
non cessura quieti, Cura s^poratur: sed in illa pace sop^ris Pacis eget studij
labor insopitus, and ips^ Cura vigil somno libros operamque ministrat. Ex
Architreni^. Aut^r oculi moral. c. 11. ^ond. 5. Et Putean. Attic. epist. 1.
Ipsa quies quae curarum sepultura esse solet, securitatem denegabat, dum
periculi imago per somni nebulam aucta ligatum animum non sinebat constantia
sua v^i.
The other sleeps but unquietly, like the Watchman that against his will in
part falling asleep, has but an unquiet sleep of it, and even watches in
some sort in his sleep, he is dreaming of the danger that he is or may be in,
and of the enemies approach, whom he is set to watch against. It is that which
we may observe in the Churches sleep in the Canticles; Cant. 5. 2.
I sleep, says she, but mine heart is awake. We use to say of children, that
their heart is asleep even when their eyes are awake: contrariwise it is said
of the children of God, that their eyes often are asleep when their heart is
awake: so that though they be outwardly borne-downe and carried away with the
stiff wind, or the strong stream of some violent and untoward temptation,
yet their heart inwardly is not wholly surprised with it, they sin not with a
full and an absolute consent of will in it; there is some secret mislike still
of themselves in that they do, and some inward strife and reluctation (though
not at all times alike sensible) more or less against it, even in the very act
usually of committing it. In a word, Eustath. ad illud Homeri Il. (...).
the one willingly falls fast asleep; the other unwillingly in some sort,
slumbreth rather then sleeps.

. 83. Lastly, after sin committed; the one Difference 3.
as he wilfully laid himself down to sleep, and fell presently fast asleep,
so 1 John 5. 18. (...).
he lies sleeping and snoring, securely snorting in sin, without touch or
remorse usually, till by some extraordinary accident of outward affliction,
danger, distress, or the like, as by his Generals alarm or the enemies
assault, he be waked again and roused up out of his sleep. Whereas the
other, as he fell asleep beside his purpose, and was never indeed thoroughly or
soundly asleep, but in a slumber rather then any deep or dead sleep; so he
is easily awaked, as those are that are but slightly asleep, yea Dormienti^
qu^ que insomnia tam turbulenta sunt q^a^ dies. Sen. ep. 56. E^ somni quiet
inquieta, vt Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l. 22. c. 22. vel pauore ipso expergiscuntur,
vt Plin. hist. not. l. 10. c. 75.
his own very unquietness, if nothing else, ere long awaketh him again, like
one in a fearful dream, whose very fear many times is a means to awake
him, and to free him from his fear. David's heart smote him, says the holy
Ghost, as 1 Samuel 24. 6.
after his cutting of the skirt of King Saul's coat; so presently 2 Samuel 24. 10.
Conclusion.
upon his attempt of taking the number of his people: and immediately thereupon,
as one start out of his sleep, he begins to rub up his eyes and to look
about him; and in most hum^le and submisse manner betaketh he himself unto
God, confessing his fault, craving forgiveness of it, and never resting till
by renewing of his repentance he had recovered himself, and returned again to
his former watch. The one sleeps soundly till he be raised out of his sleep
again; the other awaketh again eft-soones even of himself. And thus much
briefly of the benefit that we may reap by this watch, and how far forth
we may be help of it keep our selves free from sin

. 84. Now to draw to an end, and (...) Quod matres facere solent, cum poma,
bellaria, vel tale quidpiam in puerilem sinum immiserint, nequid excidat,
contractam vndique tuniculam singulo subijciunt: Idem and nos faciamus,
orationem in lo^gum protr^ctam contra^amus, and in memoriae cust^ (...) (...).
Chrys^st* de Oz^a ser. 3. in fine.
to trusse or tucke up as it were in few words, after our Saviors own example
here, the sum of all that hitherto has been handled: Considering the
drowsinesse of our own natural disposition, and how easily in that regard we
may again fall asleep; and the diligence of our Adversary watching
continually against us, by whom we may soon be surprised if at any time we
do sleep; as also the necessity of perseverance, that if we hold not out in
our watch to the end, it is all in vain and to no end; and the danger of
relapse, if we fall back into this spiritual Lethargy, likely to be in
worse case and more irrecouerable then we were at the first: Let it not
suffice us, that we have been awaked out of our sinful and secure courses,
but let us be careful by all good means to keep our selves so waking and
watching; by due examination of our several actions ere we enter upon them;
diligent observation of our special corruptions that we may contend and strive
against them; careful auoidance of the occasions of evil, that they be not
offered; and constant resistance of temptations unto evil, when we are
therewith assaulted: And that we may the better so watch and hold out in this
our watch; let us labor to keep an holy moderation and sobriety in the use of
all Gods good creatures; hold fellowship with the godly that may have an eye to
us; shun the society of wicked ones that may taint and infect us; strive to
preserve the fear of God fresh in our souls; endeavor to persuade our hearts
of Gods presence ever with us; think often on our end, and our account to come
after it; be often casting up reckonings between God and our souls; have a
jealousy of our own infirmity and procliuity unto evil; labor to have a
sincere hatred of sin wrought in our hearts; and lastly be diligent in the
duties of our particular vocations, and constant in frequenting of religious
exercises as well public as private. Thus watching we shall prevent and escape
many evils, that for want of this watchfulness, to our woe afterward, we
might otherwise be overtaken withal; we shall have Psalm. 19. 12. Matthew. 6. 12.
a pardon of course daily signed us upon general suit, Peccata quotidi^ae
(...). Tertull. de pudi^.
for those that either through ignorance or mere frailty escape us: we shall
never sleep wholly, nor rest obstinately in sin, howsoever we may chance
sometime to be overtaken therewith, but shall recover our selves eft soon
again by renewed repentance: and we shall be continually Luke 12. 35, 36, 40.
prepared for Christ's second coming, so that, 1 Thessalonians. ^. 10.
whether we sleep or wake, R^m. 14. 8.
live or die, his we shall be both in life and in death, and with Matthew. 25. 10.
the wise Virgins, whenever he comes, being found spiritually waking, shall
be ready to enter in with him into the Bride-chamber of immortality, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 17.
there to abide with him in eternal felicity.

FINIS.

