The right Honble. Francis Lo: Verulam, Viscount Sct Alban. Mortuus 9 Aprilis,
Anno Dn^i, 1626. Annoque Aesat 66.


Et vidit Deus lucem quod esset bona. Mundus Intellectualis
SYLVA SYLVARVM or A NATVRALL HISTORY In ten Centuries.

Written by the right Honble Francis Lo: Verulam Viscount Sct Alban.

Published after Ye Authors Death by W. RAWLEY Dr of Divinity(...)

LONDON Printed for W. Lee and are to be sold at the Great Turks head next to
the Mytre Taurne in Fleetstreet

Anno ^^^^



TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty;
THe whole Body of the Natural History, either designed, or written, by the
late Lo. Viscount S. Alban, was dedicated to your Majesty, in his Book De
Ventis, about four years past, when your Majesty was Prince: So as there
needed no new Dedication of this Work, but only, in all humbleness, to let
your Majesty know, it is yours. It is true, if that Lo. had lived; your
Majesty, ere long, had been inuoked, to the Protection of another History;
Whereof, not Natures Kingdom, as in this, but these of your Majesty's, (during
the Time and Reign of King Henry the Eighth) had been the Subject: Which
since it died under the Designation merely, there is nothing left, but your
Majesty's Princely Goodness, graciously to accept of the Undertakers Heart,
and Intentions; who was willing to have parted, for a while, with his Darling
Philosophy, that he might have attended your Royal Commandment, in that
other Work. Thus much I have been bold, in all lowliness, to represent unto
your Majesty, as one that was trusted with his Lordships Writings, even to the
last. And as this Work affects the Stamp of your Majesty's Royal
Protection, to make it more current to the World; So under the Protection of
this Work, I presume in all humbleness to approach your Majesty's presence;
And to offer it up into your Sacred Hands.

Your MAJESTY'S most Loyal and Devoted Subject, W. RAWLEY.

SYLVA SYLVARVM: OR A Natural History. IN TEN CENTURIES.

WRITTEN BY THE RIGHT Honorable FRANCIS Lo. Verulam Viscount St. ALBAN.

Published after the Authors death, By WILLIAM RAWLEY Doctor of Divinity, late
his Lordships Chaplain.



LONDON, Printed by I. H. for William Lee at the Turks Head in Fleet Street,
next to the Miter. 1626.

To the Reader.
Having had the Honor to be continually with my Lord, in compiling of this
Work; And to be employed therein; I have thought it not amiss, (with his
Lordships good leave and liking,) for the better satisfaction of those that
shall read it, to make known somewhat of his Lordships Intentions, touching
the Ordering, and Publishing of the same. I have heard his Lordship often say;
that if he should have served the glory of his own Name, he had been better
not to have published this Natural History: For it may seem an Indigested
Heap of Particulars; And cannot have that Luster, which Books cast into
Methods have: But that he resolved to prefer the good of Men, and that which
might best secure it, before any thing that might have Relation to Himself.
And he knew well, that there was no other way open, to unloose Men's minds,
being bound; and (as it were) Maleficiate, by the Charms of deceiving Notions,
and Theories; and thereby made Impotent for Generation of Works; But only no
where to depart from the Sense, and clear experience; But to keep close to it,
especially in the beginning: Besides, this Natural History was a Debt of his,
being Designed and set down for a third part of the Instauration. I have also
heard his Lordship discourse, that Men (no doubt) will think many of the
Experiments contained in this Collection, to be Vulgar and Triuiall; Mean and
Sordid; Curious and Fruitless: And therefore he wishes, that they would have
perpetually before their Eyes, what is now in doing; And the Difference
between this Natural History, and others. For those Natural Histories, which
are Extant, being gathered for Delight and Use, are full of pleasant
Descriptions and Pictures; and affect and seek after Admiration, Rarities, and
Secrets. But contrariwise, the Scope which his Lordship intends, is to write
such a Natural History, as may be Fundamental to the Erecting and Building of
a true Philosophy: For the Illumination of the Understanding; the Extracting of
Axioms; and the producing of many Noble Works, and Effects. For he hops, by
this means, to acquit Himself of that, for which he takes Himself in a
sort bound; And that is, the Advancement of all Learning and Sciences. For
having in this present Work Collected the Materials for the Building; And in
his Novum Organum (of which his Lordship is yet to publish a Second Part,) set
down the Instruments and Directions for the Work; Men shall now be wanting
to themselves, if they raise not Knowledge to that perfection, whereof the
Nature of Mortal men is capable. And in this behalf, I have heard his
Lordship speak complainingly; That his Lordship (who thinks he deserves to
be an Architect in this building,) should be forced to be a VVork-man and a
Labourer; And to dig the Clay, and burn the Brick; And more then that,
(according to the hard Condition of the Israelites at the latter end) to gather
the Straw and Stubble, over all the Fields, to burn the Bricks withal. For he
knows, that except he do it, nothing will be done: Men are so set to
despise the Means of their own good. And as for the Baseness of many of the
Experiments; As long as they be Gods Works, they are Honorable enough. And
for the Vulgarnes of them; true Axioms must be drawn from plain Experience,
and not from doubtful; And his Lordships course is, to make Wonders Plain,
and not Plain things Wonders; And that Experience likewise must be broken and
grinded, and not whole, or as it grows. And for Use; his Lordship has often
in his Mouth, the two kinds of Experiments; Experimenta Fructifera, and
Experimenta Lucifera: Experiments of Use, and Experiments of Light; And he
reports himself, whether he were not a strange Man, that should think that
Light has no Use, because it has no Matter. Further, his Lordship thought
good also, to add unto many of the Experiments themselves, some Gloss of the
Causes; that in the succeeding work of Interpreting Nature, and Framing
Axioms, all things may be in more Readiness. And for the Causes herein by Him
assigned; his Lordship persuades Himself, they are far more certain, then
those that are rendered by Others; Not for any Excellency of his own Wit, (as
his Lordship is wont to say) but in respect of his continual Conversation with
Nature, and Experience. He did consider likewise, that by this Addition of
Causes, Men's minds (which make so much have to find out the Causes of things;)
would not think themselves utterly lost, in a Vast VVood of Experience, but
stay upon these Causes, (such as they are) a little, till true Axioms may be
more fully discovered. I have heard his Lordship say also, that one great
Reason, why he would not put these Particulars into any exact Method, (though
he that looks attentively into them, shall find that they have a secret
Order) was, because he conceived that other men would now think, that they
could do the like; And so go on with a further Collection: which if the
Method had been Exact, many would have despaired to attain by Imitation. As
for his Lordships love of Order, I can referr any Man to his Lordships Latin
Book, De Augmentis Scientiarum; which (if my Judgment be any thing) is written
in the Exactest Order, that I know any Writing to be. I will conclude with an
usual Speech of his Lordships. This Epistle is the same, that should have been
prefixed to this Book, if his Lordship had lived.
That this Work of his Natural History, is the World, as GOD made it, and not
as Men have made it; For that it has nothing of Imagination.

W: Rawley.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
I. Century.
DIGG a Pit upon the Sea shore, somewhat above Tide comes in, it will fill
with Water, Fresh and Potable. Experiments in Consort, touching the Straining
and Passing of Bodies, one through another: which they Call Percolation.
This is commonly practiced upon the Coast of Barbary, where other fresh Water
is wanting. And CAESAR knew this well, when he was besieged in Alexandria: For
by Digging of Pitts in the Sea shore, he did frustrate the Laborious Works
of the Enemies, which had turned the Seawater upon the Wells of Alexandria;
And so saved his Army, being then in Desperation. But Caesar mistook the
Cause, For he thought that all Sea-Sandes had Natural Springs of Fresh Water.
But it is plain, that it is the Seawater; because the Pit fills according
to the Measure of the Tide: And the Seawater passing or Strayning through the
Sands, leaves the Saltness.

I remember to have Read, that Trial has been made of Salt Water Earth;
through Tenn Vessels, one within an other, and yet it has not lost his
Saltness, as to become potable: But the same Man says, that (by the Relation
of Another,) Salt Water drained through twenty Vessels, has become Fresh.
This Experiment seems to cross that other of Pitts, made by the Sea side;
And yet but in part, if it be true, that twenty Repetitions do the Effect.
But it is worth the Note, how poor the Imitations of Nature are, in Common
course of Experiments, except they be led by great Judgment, and some good
Light of Axioms. For first, there is no small difference between a Passage of
Water through twenty small Vessels; And through such a distance, as between
the Low water, and High water Mark. Secondly, there is a great difference
between Earth and Sand. For all Earth has in it a kind of Nitrous Salt, from
which Sand is more free: And besides Earth does not strain the Water so
finely, as Sand does. But there is a Third Point, that I suspect as much, or
more, then the other Two: And that is, that in the Experiment of Transmission
of the Seawater into the Pitts, the Water rises; But in the Experiment of
Transmission of the Water through the Vessels, it falls: Now certain it is,
that the Salter Part of Water, (once Salted throughout) goes to the Bottom.
And therefore no marvel, if the Draining of Water by descent, does not make it
fresh: Besides, I do somewhat doubt, that the very Dashing of the Water, that
comes from the Sea, is more proper to strike of the Salt part, then where the
Water slideth of her own Motion.

Percolation or Transmission, (which is commonly called Straining,) is a good
kind of Separation; Not only of Thick from Thin, and Gross from Fine,; But
of more subtle Natures; And varieth according to the Body through which the
Transmission is made. As if through a woollen Bagg, the Liquour leaves the
Fatness; If through Sand, the Saltness; etc. They speak of Seuering Wine
from Water, passing it through Iuy wood, or through other the like porous Body;
But Non Constat.

Gumm of Trees (which we see to be commonly shining and clear) is but a fine
Passage or Straining of the Juice of the Tree, through the Wood and Bark. And
in like manner, Cornish Diamonds, and Rock Rubies, (which are yet more
resplendent then Gumms) are the fine Exudations of Stone.

Aristotle gives the Cause, vainly, why the Feathers of Birds are of more
lively Colors, then the Hairs of Beasts; for no Beast has any fine Azure,
or Carnation, or Green Hair. He says, It is, because Birds are more in the
Beams of the Sunn, then Beasts; But that is manifestly untrue; For Cattle are
more in the Sun then Birds, that live commonly in the Woods, or in some Covert.
The true Cause is, that the Excrementious Moisture of living Creatures, which
makes as well the Feathers in Birds, as the Hair in Beasts, passes in Birds
through a finer and more delicate Strainer, then it does in Beasts: For
Feathers pass through Quills; And Hair through Skin.

Clarifying of Liquors by Adhesion is an Inward Percolation; And is effected,
when some Cleaving Body is Mixed and Agitated with the Liquours; whereby the
grosser Part of the Liquor sticks to that Cleaving Body; And so the finer Parts
are freed from the Grosser. So the Apothecaries clarify their Sirrupes by
whites of Eggs, beaten with the Juices which they would clarify; which Whites
of Eggs, gather all the Dreggs and grosser Parts of the Juice to them; And
after the Sirrupe being set on the Fire, the whites of Eggs themselves
harden, and are taken forth. So Ippocrasse is clarified by mixing with Milk;
And stirring it about; And then passing it through a Woollen Bag, which they
call Hippocrates Sleeue: And the Cleaving Nature of the Milk draws the
Powder of the Spices, and Grosser parts of the Liquour to it; And in the
passage they stick upon the Woollen Bag.

The Clarifying of Water, is an Experiment tending to Health; besides Water is
Crystaline. It is effected by casting in and placing Pebbles, at the Head of a
Current; that the Water may strain through them.

It may be, Percolation does not only cause Clearenesse and Splendor,
Alexander; And we see, commonly, that Gumms have sweet Odours.

TAke a Glass, and put Water into it, and wett your Finger, and draw it round
about the Lipp of the Glass, pressing it somewhat hard; And after you have
drawn it some few times about; it will make the Water friske and sprinckle up,
in a fine Dew. Experiments in Consort touching Motion of Bodies upon their
Pressure.
This Instance does excellently Demonstrate the Force of Compression in a Solid
Body. For whenever a Solid Body (as Wood, Stone, Metal, etc.) is pressed,
Violent Motion. Wherein it is strange in the highest Degree, that this Motion
has never been observed, nor inquired; It being of all Motions, the most
Common, and the Chief Root of all Mechanical Operations. This Motion works
in round at first, by way of Proof, and Search, which way to deliver it self;
And then works in Progress, where it finds the Deliverance easiest. In
Liquours this Motion is visible: For all Liquours stricken make round Circles,
and withal Dash; but in Solids, (which break not,) it is so subtle, as it is
invisible; But neuertheless bewrays it self by many Effects; As in this
Instance whereof we speak. For the Pressure of the Finger furthered by the
wetting (because it sticks so much the better unto the Lipp of the Glass,)
after some continuance, puts all the small Parts of the Glass, into work;
that they strike the Water sharply; from which Percussion that Sprinkling
comes.

If you strike or pierce a Solid Body, that is brittle, as Glass, or Sugar,
Motion, upon the Pressure, searching all ways; and breaking where it finds
the Body weakest.

The Powder in Shot, being Dilated into such a Flame, as endures not
Compression; Moves likewise in round, (The Flame being in the Nature of a
liquid Body:) Sometimes recoyling; Sometimes breaking the Piece; But generally
discharging the Bullett, because there it finds easiest Deliverance.

Motion upon Pressure, and the Reciprocal thereof, which is Motion upon
Tensure; we use to call (by one common Name) Motion of Liberty; which is, when
any Body, being forced to a Preter-Naturall Extent, or Dimension, delivers
and restores it self to the Natural: As when a Blown Bladder (Pressed)
rises again; or when Leather or Cloth tentured spring back. These two
Motions (of which there be infinite Instances,) we shall handle in due place.

Motion upon Pressure is excellently also demonstrated in Sounds; As when one
Chimeth upon a Bell, it sounds; But as soon as he lays his hand upon it,
the Sound cease: And so, the Sound of a Virginal String, as soon as the
Quill of the Jack falls upon it, stops. For these Sounds are produced, by
the subtle Percussion of the Minute parts, of the Bell, or String, upon the
Air; All one, as the Water is caused to leap by the subtle Percussion of the
Minute parts of the Glass, upon the Water, whereof we spoke a little before in
the 9th. Experiment. For you must not take it to be, the local Shaking of the
Bell, or String, that does it. As we shall fully declare, when we come
hereafter to handle Sounds.

TAke a Glass with a Belly and a long Nebb; fill the Belly (in part) with
Water: Take also another Glass, whereinto put Claret Wine and Water mingled;
Reverse the first Glass, with the Belly upwards, Stopping the Nebb with your
fingar; Then dipp the Mouth of it within the Second Glass, and remove your
Fingar: Continue it in that Wine from the Water: The Wine ascending and
settling in the topp of the upper Glass; And the Water descending and settling
in the bottom of the lower Glass. Experiments in Consort touching Separations
of Bodies by Weight
The passage is apparent to the Eye; For you shall see the Wine, as it were,
in a small vein, rising through the Water. For handsomnesse sake (because the
Working requires some small time) it were good you hang the upper Glass upon
a Nail. But as soon as there is gathered so much pure and unmixed water in the
Bottom of the Lower Glass, as that the Mouth of the upper Glass dippeth into
it, the Motion cease

Glass be Wine, and the Lower Water; there follows no Motion at all. Let
the Upper Glass be Water pure, the Lowwer Water colored; or contrariwise;
there follows no Motion at all. But it has been tried, that though the
Mixture of Wine and Water, in the Lower Glass, be three parts Water, and
but one Wine; yet it does not dead the Motion. This Separation of Water and
Wine appears to be made by Weight; for it must be of Bodies of unequal
Weight, or else it works not; And the Heavier Body must ever be in the upper
Glass. But then note withal, that the Water being made pensile, and there
being a great Weight of Water in the Belly of the Glass, sustained by a
small Pillar of Water in the Neck of the Glass; It is that, which sesteth the
Motion on work: For Water and Wine in one Glass, with long standing, will
hardly sever.

This Experiment would be Extended from Mixtures of several Liquors, Simple
Bodies, which Consist of several Similare Parts: Try it therefore with Broyne
or Salt water, and Fresh water; Placing the Salt water (which is the heavier)
in the upper Glass; And see whether the Fresh will come above. Try it also
with Water thick Sugared, and Pure water; and see whether the water which
comes above, will loose his Sweetness: For which purpose it were good there
were a little Cock made in the Belly of the upper Glass.

IN Bodies containing Fine Spirits, which do easily dissipate, when you make
Infusions, the Rule is; A short Stay of the Body in the Liquour receives the
Spirit; And a longer Stay confounds it; because it draws forth the Earthy
Part withal; which embaseth the finer. Experiments in Consort touching
Judicious and Accurate Infusions, both in Liquors, and Air.
And therefore it is an Error in Phisicians, to rest simply upon the Length of
stay, for increasing the virtue. But if you will have the Infusion strong, in
those kind of Bodies, which have fine Spiritts, your Infusion of the Body
oftener. Take Violetts, and infuse a good Pugill of them in a Quart of Vinegar;
Let them stay three quarters of an hour, and take them forth; And refresh the
Infusion with like quantity of new Violetts, seven times; And it will make a
Vinegar so fresh of the Flower, as if a Twelue-moneth after, it be brought you
in a Saucer, you shall smell it before it come at you. Note, that it smells
more perfectly of the Flower, a good while after, then at first.

This Rule, which we have given, is of singular use, for the Preparations
Medecines, and other Infusions. As for Example; the Leaf of Burrage has an
Excellent Spirit, to repress the fuliginous Vapor of Dusky Melancholy, and
so to cure Madness: But nevertheless, if the Leaf be infused long, it yields
forth but a raw substance, of no Virtue; Therefore I suppose, that if in the
Must of Wine, or Wort of Beer, while it works, before it be Tunned, the
Burrage stay a small time, and be often changed with fresh; It will make a
Sovereign Drink for Melancholy Passions. And the like I conceive of Orange
Flowers.

Rubarb has manifestly in it Parts of contrary Operations: Parts that Rubarb
for an hour, and crush it well, it will purge better, and bind the Body less
after the purging, then if it stood twenty four hours; This is tried: But I
conceive likewise, that by Repeating the Infusion of Rubarb, several times,
(as was said of Violetts,) letting each stay in but a small time; you may make
it as strong a Purging Medecin, as Scammony. And it is not a small thing wonn
in Physic, if you can make Rubarb, and other Medecines that are Benedict, as
strong Purgers, as those that are not without some Malignity.

Purging Medecines, for the most part, have their Purgatine Virtue, in a fine
Spirit; As appears by that they endure not boiling, without much loss of
virtue. And therefore it is of good use in Physic, if you can retain the
Purging Virtue, and take away the Unpleasant taste of the Purger; which it is
like you may do, by this Course of Infusing often, with little stay. For it is
probable, that the Horrible and Odious Taste, is in the Grosser part.

Infusions, is gross and blind, except you first try the Issuing of the
several Parts of the Body, which of them Issue more speedily, and which more
slowly; And so by apportioning the time, can take and leave that Quality, which
you desire. This to know, there be two ways; The one to try what long stay, and
what short stay works, as has been said: The other to try in Order, the
succeding Infusions, of one and the same Body, successively, in several
Liquors. As for example; Take Orenge-Pills, or Rose-Mary, or Cinnamon, or what
you will; And let them Infuse half an hour in Water: Then take them out, and
Infuse them again in other Water; And so the third time: And then taste and
consider the First water, the Second, and the Third: And you will find them
differing, not only in Strength and Weakness, but otherwise in Taste, or Odor;
For it may be the First water will have more of the Sent, as more Fragrant;
And the Second more of the Taste, as more bitter or Biting, etc.

Infusions in Air, (for so we may well call Odours) have the same diversities
with Infusions in Water; In that the several Odours (which are in one Flower,
or other Body) issue at several times; Some earlier, some later: So we find
that Violetts, Woodbines, Strawberries, yield a pleasing Sent, that comes
forth first; But soon after an ill Sent, quite differing from the Former;
Which is caused, not so much by Mellowing, as by the late Issuing of the
Grosser Spirit.

Wine burnt, by reason of the Evaporating of the finer Spirit, enslameth
less, and is best in Agues: Opium leeseth some of his poisonous Quallity, if
it be vapoured out, mingled with Spirit of Wine, or the like: Sean leeseth
somewhat of his windines by Decocting; And (generally) subtle or windy Spirits
are taken off by Incension, or Evaporation. And even in Infusions in things
that are of too high a Spirit, you were better pour off the first Infusion,
after a small time, and use the latter.

BVbbles are in the form of a Hemisphere; Air within, and a little Skin of
Water without: And it seems somewhat strange, that the Air should rise so
swiftly, while it is in the Water; And when it comes to the topp, should be
staid by so weak a Cover as that of Bubble is. Experiment Solitary touching
the Appetite of Continuation in liquids.
But as for the swift Ascent of the Air, while is under the Water, that is a
Motion of Percussion from the Water; which it self descending, drives up
the Air; and no Motion of Leuity in the Air. And this Democritus called Motus
Plaga. In this Common Experiment, the Cause of the Enclosure of the Bubble is,
for that the Appetite to resist Separation, or Discontinuance, (which in solid
Bodies is strong) is also in Liquours, though fainter and weaker; As we see in
this of the Bubble: we see it also in little Glasses of Spittle that children
make of Rushes; And in Castles of Bubbles, which they make by blowing into
water, having obtained a little Degree of Tenacity by Mixture of Soape: We see
it also in the Stillicides of water, which if there be water enough to follow,
will Draw themselves into a small thredd, because they will not discontinue;
But if there be no Remedy, then they cast themselves into round Dropps; which is
the Figure, that saves the Body most from Discontinuance: The same Reason is
of the Roundnes of the Bubble, as well for the Skin of water, as for the Air
within: For the Air likewise auoideth Discontinuance; And therefore casts it
self into a Round Figure. And for the stopp and Arrest of the Air a little
while, it shows that the Air of it self has little, or no Appetite, of
Ascending.

THE Reiection, which I continually use, of Experiments, (though it appears
not) is infinite; But yet if an Experiment be probable in the Work, and of
great Use, I receive it, but deliver it as doubtful. It was reported by a
Sober Man, that an Artificial Spring Experiment Solitary touching the Making
of Artificial Springs.
may be made thus: Find out a hanging Ground, where there is a good quick Fall
of Spring of water: which is no marvel, if it hold, while the Raine-water
lasts; But he said it would continue long time after the Rain is past: As if
the water did multiply it self upon the Air, by the help of the Coldness and
Condensation of the Earth, and the Consort of the first Water.

THE French, (which put off the Name of the French Disease; unto the Name of
the Disease of Naples,) do report, that at the Siege of Naples, there were
certain wicked Merchants, that Barrelled up Man's flesh, Experiment Solitary
touching the Venomous Quality of Man's Flesh.
(of some that had been, lately slain in Barbary) and sold it for Tunny; And
that upon that foul and high Nourishment, was the Disease. Which may well be;
For that it is certain, that the Caniballs in the West Indies, eat Man's
flesh; And the West Indies were full of the Pockes when they were first
discovered: And at this day the Mortallest poisons, practiced by the West
Indians, have some Mixture of the Blood, or Fatt, or Flesh of Man: And diverse
Witches, and Sorceresles, as well amongst the Heathen, as amongst the
Christians, have fedd upon Man's flesh, to aid (as it seems) their
Imagination, with High and foul Vapors.

IT seems that there be these ways (in likelihood) of Version of Vapors, or
Air, into Water and Moisture. Experiment Solitary touching the Version and
Transmutation of Air into Water.
The first is Cold; which does manifestly Condense; As we see in the
Contracting of the Air in the Weather-Glasse; whereby it is a Degree nearer to
water. We see it also in the Generation of Springs, which the Ancients thought
(very Version of Air into water, helped by the Rest, which the Air has in
those Parts; whereby it cannot dissipate. And by the Coldness of Rocks; for there
Springs are chiefly generated. We see it also in the Effects of the Cold of
the Middle Region (as they call it) of the Air; which produces Dews, and
Raines. And the Experiment of Turning water into Ice, by Snow, Nitre, and Salt,
(whereof we shall speak hereafter,) would be transferred to the Turning of
Air into Water. The Second way is by Compression; As in Stillatories, where the
Vapor is turned back, upon it self, by the Encounter of the Sides of the
Stillatory; And in the Dew upon the Couers of Boiling Potts; And in the Dew
toward Rain, upon Marble, and Wainscott. But this is like to do no great
effect; Except it be upon Vapors, and gross Air, that are already very
near in Degree to Water. The Third is that, which may be searched into, but
does not yet appear; which is, by Mingling of moist Vapors with Air; And
trying if they will not bring a Return of more Water, then the water was at
first: For if so; That Increase is a version of the Air: Therefore putt water
into the Bottom of a Stillatory, with the Nebb stopped; Weigh the Water first;
Hang in the Middle of the Stillatory a large Sponge; And see what Quantity of
Water you can crush out of it; And what it is more, or less, compared with the
water spent; For you must understand, that if any Version can be wrought, it
will be easeliest done in small Pores: And that is the Reason why we prescribe
a Sponge. The Fourth way is Probable also, though not Appearing; Which is, by
Receiving the Air into the small Pores of Bodies; For (as has been said)
every thing in small Quantity is more easy for version; And Tangible Bodies
have no pleasure in the Consort of Air, but endeavor to subact it into a more
Dense Body: But in Entire Bodies it is checked; because if the Air should
Condense, there is nothing to succeed: Therefore it must be in loose Bodies, as
Sand, and Powder; which we see, if they lie close, of themselves gather
Moisture.

IT is reported by some of the Ancients; That Whelps, or other Creatures, if
they be put Young, into such a Cage, or Box, as they cannot rise to their
Stature, but may increase in Breadth, or length; will grow accordingly, as
they can get Room: which if it be Creature so pressed, and straightened, does
not thereupon die; It is a Means to produce Dwarf Creatures, and in a very
Strange Figure. Experiment Solitary touching Helps toward the Beauty and good
Features of Persons.
This is certain, and noted long since; That the Pressure or Forming of Parts
of Creatures, when they are very young, does alter the Shape not a little; As
the Stroaking of the Heads of Infants, between the Hands, was noted of Old, to
make Macrocephali; which shape of the Head, at that time, was esteemed. And the
Raising gently of the Bridge of the Nose, does prevent the Deformity of a
Saddle Nose. Which observation well weighed, may teach a Means, to make the
Persons of Men, and Women, in many kinds, more comely, and better featured,
then otherwise they would be; By the Forming and Shaping of them in their
Infancy: As by Stroaking up the Calves of the Legs, to keep them from falling
down too low; And by Stroaking up the Forehead to keep them from being
lowforeheaded. And it is a common Practice to swath Infants, that they may
grow more straight, and better shaped: And we see Young Women, by wearing
straight Bodies, keep themselves from being Gross, and Corpulent.

ONions, as they hang, will many of them shoot forth; And so will Penniroiall;
And so will an Herb called Orpin; with which they use, in the Country, to
trim their Houses, binding it to a Lath, or Stick, and setting it against a
wall. Experiments Solitary touching the Condensing of Air, in such sort as it
may put on Weight, and yield Nourishment.
We see it like wise, more especially, in the greater Semper-vine, which will
put out Branches, two or three years: But it is true, that commonly they wrapp
the Root in a Cloth besmeared with Oil, and renew it once in half a Year.
The like is reported by some of the Ancients, of the Stalks of Lillies. The
Cause Plants have a Strong, Dense, and Succulent Moisture, which is not apt to
exhale; And so is able, from the old store, without drawing help from the
Earth, to suffice the sprouting of the Plant: And this Sprouting is chiefly in
the late Spring, or early Summer; which are the Times of Putting forth. We see
also, that Stumps of Trtes, lying out of the ground, will put forth Sprouts for
a Time. But it is a Noble Trial, and of very great Consequence, to try whether
these things, in the Sprouting, do increase Weight; which must be tried, by
weighing them before they be hanged up; And afterward again, when they are
sprouted. For if they increase not in Weight; Then it is no more but this; That
what they send forth in the Sprout, they leese in some other Part: But if they
gather Weight, then it is Magnale Naturae; For it shows that Air may be made
so to be Condensed, as to be converted into a Dense Body; whereas the Race and
Period of all things, here above the Earth, is to extenuate and turn things to
be more Penumaticall, and Rare; And not to be Retrograde, from Pneumaticall to
that which is Dense. It shows also, that Air can Nourish; which is another
great Matter of Consequence. Note, that to try this, the Experiment of the
Semper-viue must be made without Oiling the Cloth; For else, it may be, the
Plant receives Nourishment from the Oil.

FLame and Air do not Mingle, except it be in an Instant; Or in the vital
Spiritts of vegetables, and living Creatures. Experiment Solitary touching the
Co^mixture of Flame and Air, and the great Force thereof.
In Gunpowder, the Force of it has been ascribed, to Rarefaction of the Earthy
Substance into Flame; And thus far it is true: And then (forfooth) it is
become another Element; the Form whereof occupies more place; And so, of
Necessity, follows a Dilatation: And therefore, lest two Flame, if there were
nothing else, except it were in very great quantity, will be suffocate with any
hard Body, such as a Pellet is, Or the Barrel of a Gunn; So as the Flame would
not expel the hard Body; But the hard Body would kill the Flame, and not
suffer it to kindle, or spread. But the Cause of this so potent a Motion, is
the Nitre, (which we call otherwise Saltpeter;) which having in it anotable
Crude and windy Spirit, first by the Heat of the Fire suddenly dilateth it
self; (And we know that simple Air, being preternaturally attenuated by
Heat, will make it self Room, and break and blow up that which resists
it;) And Secondly, when the Nitre has Dilated it self, it blows abroad the
Flame, as an Inward Bellows. And therefore we see that Brimstone, Pitch,
Camphire, Wilde-Fire, and diverse other Inflammable Matters, though they burn
cruelly, and are hard to quench; Yet they make no such fiery wind, as
Gunpowder does: And on the other side, we see that Quick Silver, (which is a
most Crude and Watery Body) heated, and pent in, has the like force with
Gunpowder. As for living Creatures, it is certain, their Vital Spiritts are a
Substance Compounded of an Airy and Flamy Matter; And though Air and Flame
being free, will not well mingle; yet bound in by a Body that has some fixing,
they will. For that you may best see in those two Bodies, (which are their
Aliments,) water, and Oil; For they likewise will not well mingle of
themselves, but in the Bodies of Plants, and living Creatures, they will. It is
no marvel therefore, that a small Quantity of Spiritts, in the Cells of the
Brain, and Canales of the Sinews, are able to move the whole Body, (which is
of so great Mass,) both with so great Force, as in Wrestling, Leaping; And
with so great Swiftnes, As in playing Division upon the Lute. Such is the force
of these two Natures, Air and Flame, when they incorporate.

TAke a small wax Candle, and putt it in a Socket, of Brass, or Iron; Then
set it upright in a Porringer full of Spirits of Wine, heated: Then set both
the Candle, and Spirit of Wine, on fire, and you shall see the Flame of the
Candle, open it self, and become 4. or 5. times bigger Globular and not in
Piramis. Experiment Solitary touching the Secret Nature of Flame.
You shall see also, that the Inward Flame of the Candle keeps Color, and
does not wax any whitt blewe toward the Color of the Outward flame of the
Spirit of Wine. This is a Noble Instance; where in two things are most
remarkable; The one; that one Flame within another quenches not; but is a
fixed Body, and continues as Air, or Water do. And therefore Flame would
still ascend upwards in one greatness, if it were not quenched on the Sides:
And the greater the Flame is at the Bottom, the higher is the Rise. The other,
that Flame does not mingle with Flame, as Air does with Air, or Water with
Water, but only remains contiguous; As it comes to pass betwixt Consisting
Bodies. It appears also, that the form of a Piramis in Flame, which we
usually see, is merely by Accident, and that the Air about, by quenching the
Sides of the Flame, crusheth it, and extenuateth it into that Form; For of it
self it would be Round: And therefore Smoke is in the Figure of a Piramis
Reuersed; For the Air quenches the Flame, and receives the Smoke. Note
also, that the Flame of the Condle, within the Flame of the Spirit of Wine, is
troubled; And does not only open and move upwards, but moves wauing, and to
and fro: As if Flame of his own Nature (if it were not quenched,) would roll
and turn, as well as move upwards. By all which, it should seem, that the
Caelestiall Bodies, (most of them,) are true Fires or Flames, as the Stoics
held; More fine (perhaps) and Rarefied, than our Flame is. For they are all
Globular, and Determinate,; They have Rotation; And they have the Color and
Splendor of Flame: So that Flame above is Durable, and Consistent, and in his
Natural place; But with us, it is a Stranger, and Momentany, and Impure; Like
Vulcan that haked with his Fall.

Take an Arrow, and hold it in Flame, for the space of ten pulses; And when it
comes forth, you shall find those Parts of the Arrow, which were on the
Outsides of the Flame, more burned, blacked, and turned almost into a Coal;
whereas that in the Midst of the Flame, will be, as if the Fire had scarce
touched it. Experiment Solitory touching the Different force of Flame in the
Midst and on the Sides.
This is an Instance of great consequence for the discovery of the Nature of
Flame; And shows manifestly, Flame burns more violently toward the Sides,
than in the Midst: And, which is more, that Heat or Fire is not violent or
furious, but where it is checked, and pont. And therefore the Peripatetickes
(howsoever their opinion of an Element of Fire above the Air is justly
exploded;) in that Point they acquit themselves well: For being opposed, that
if there were a Spbeare of Fire, that encompassed the Earth so near hand, it
were impossible but all things should be burnt up; They answer, that the pure
Elementall Fire, in his own place, and not irritate, is but of a Moderate Heat.

It is affirmed constantly by many, as an usual Experiment; That a Lamp of
Ure, in the Bottom of a Mine, will be tumbled, and stirred, by two Men's
strength; which if you bring it to the Topp of the Earth, will ask Six Men's
strength at the least to stir it. Experiment Solitary touching the Decrease
of the Natural motion of Gravity in great distance from the Earth; or within
some depth of the Earth.
It is a Noble Instance, and is fit to be tried to the full: For it is very
probable, that the Motion of Gravity works weakly, both far from the
Earth, and also within the Earth: The former, because the Appetite of Union of
Dense Bodies with the Earth, in respect of the distance, is more dull; The
latter, because the Body has in part attained his Nature, when it is some
Depth in the Earth. For as for the Moving to a Point or Place (which was the
Opinion of the Ancients) it is a mere Vanity.

Ancients took up Experiments upon credit, and yet did build great Matters
upon them. Experiment Solitary touching the Contraction of Bodies in Bulk, by
the Mixture of the more Liquid Body with the more Solid.
The Observation of some of the best of them, delivered confidently, is That a
Vessel filled with Ashes, will receive the like quantity of Water, that it
would have done, if it had been empty. But this is utterly untrue; for the
Water will not go in by a Fifth part. And I suppose, that that Fifth part is
the difference of the lying close, or open, of the Ashes; As we see that Ashes
alone, if they be hard pressed, will lie in less room: And so the Ashes with
Air between, lie looser; and with Water, closer. For I have not yet found
certainly, that the Water, it self, by mixture of Ashes, or Dust, will shrink
or draw into less Room.

It is reported of credit, that if you lay good store of Kernells of Grapes,
about the Root of a Vine; it will make the Vine come earlier, and prosper
better. Experiment Solitary touching the Making Vines more fruitful.
It may be tried with other Kernells, laid about the Root of a Plant of the
same kind; As Figgs, Kernells of Apples, etc. The Cause Kernells draw out of
the Earth Juice fit to nourish the Tree, as those that would be Trees of
themselves, though there were no Root; But the Root being of greater strength,
robs and deuoureth the Nourishment, when they have drawn it: As great
Fishes devour little.

The Operation of Purging Medicines, and the Causes thereof, have been thought
to be a great Secret; And so according to the slothful manner of Men, it is
referred to a Hidden Propriety, a Specificall virtue, Fourth Quality, and the
like Shifts of Ignorance. Experiments in Consort touching Purging Medicines.
The Causes of Purging are diverse; All plain and perspicuous; And thoroughly
maintained by Experience. The first is, That whatsoever cannot be overcome and
disgested by the Stomach, is by the Stomach, either put up by Vomit, or put
down to the Guts; And by that Motion of Expulsion in the Stomach, and Guts,
other Parts of the Body, (as the Orifices of the Veins, and the like) are
moved to expel by Consent. For nothing is more frequent than Motion of Consent
in the Body of Man. This Surcharge of the Stomach, is caused either by the
Quality of the Medicine, or by the Quantity. The Qualities are three: Extreme
Bitter, as in Aloes, Coloquintida, etc. Loathsome and of horrible taste; As in
Agarick, Black Hellebore, etc. And of secret Malignity, and disagreement
toward Man's Body, many times not appearing much in the Taste; As in Scammony,
Mechoacham, Antimony, etc. And note well, that if there be any Medicine, that
Purges, and has neither of the first two Manifest Qualities; it is to be held
suspected, as a kind of Poisons; For that it works either by Corrosion; or
by a secret Malignitie and Enmity to Nature: And therefore such Medicines are
warily to be prepared, and used. The Quantity of that which is taken, does
also cause Parging; As we see in a great Quantity of New Milk from the Cow;
yea and a great Quantity of Meat; For Surfets many times turn to Purges, both
upwards, and downwards. Therefore we see generally, that the working of Purging
Medicines, comes two or three hours after the Medicines taken; For that the
Stomach first makes a proof, whether it can concoct them. And the like
happens after Surfets; or Milk in too great Quantity.

A second Cause is Mordication of the Orifices of the Parts; Especially
Mesentery veins; As it is seen, that Salt, or any such thing that is sharp
and biting, put into the Fundament, does provoke the Part to expel; And
Mustard provoke Sneezing: And any Sharp Thing to the Eyes, provoke Tears.
And therefore we see that almost all Purgers have a kind of Twiching and
vellication, besides the Griping which comes of wind. And if this Mordication
be in an ouer-high Degree, it is little better than the Corrosion of Poison;
And it comes to pass sometimes in Antimony; Especially if it be given, to
Bodies not repleat with Humors; For where Humors abound, the Humors save the
Parts.

The third Cause is Attraction: For I do not deny, but that Purging have in
them a direct Force of Attraction; As Drawing Plasters have in Surgery: And we
see Sage, or Bettony bruised, Sneezing-powder, and other Powders or Liquors
(which the Physicians call Errhines,) put into the Nose, draw Phlegm, and water
from the Head; And so it is in Apophlegmatismes, and Gargarismes, that draw the
Rheum down by the Palate. And by this Virtue, no doubt, some Purgers draw
more one Humor, and some another, according to the Opinion received: As Rubarb
draws Choler; Sean Melancholy; Agarick Phlegm; etc. But yet, (more or less)
they draw promiscuously. And note also, that besides Sympathy, between the
Purger and the Humor, there is also another Cause, why some Medicines draw
some Humor more than another. And it is, for that some Medicines work quicker
than others: And they that draw quick, draw only the Lighter, and more fluide
Humors; they that draw flow, work upon the more Tough, and Viscous Humors.
And therefore Men must beware, how they take Rubarb, and the like, alone,
familiarly; For it takes only the Lightest part of the Humor away, and
leaves the Mass of Humors more obstinate. And the like may be said of
Worme-wood, which is so much magnified.

The fourth Cause is Flatnosity; For Wind stirred moves to expel: Purgers
have in them a raw Spirit, or Wind; which is the Principal Cause of Tortion in
the Stomach, and Belly. And therefore Purgers leese (most of them) the virtue,
by Decoction upon the Fire; And for that Cause are gluen chiefly in Infusion,
Juice, or Powder.

Cause is Compression, or Crushing: As when Water is Crushed out of a Sponge:
So we see that Taking Cold moves Looseness by Contraction of the Skinn, and
outward Parts; And so does Cold likewise cause Rheumes, and Defluxions from the
Head; And some Astringent Plasters crush out purulent Matter. This kind of
Operation is not found in many Medicines: Mirabalanes have it; And it may be
the Barks of Peaches; For this Virtue requires an Astriction; but such an
Astriction, as is not grateful to the Body; (For a pleasing Astriction does
rather Bind in the Humors, than Expel them:) And therefore such Astriction is
found in Things of an Harrish Taste.

Cause is Lubrefaction, and Relaxation. As we see in Medicines Emollient; Such
as are Milk, Honey, Mallows, Lettuce, Mercuriall, Pelletory of the Wall, and
others. There is also a secret Virtue of Relaxation in Cold: For the Heat of
the Body binds the Parts and Humors together, which Cold relaxeth: As it is
seen in Urine, Blood, Pottage, or the like; which, if they be Cold, break,
and dissolve. And by this kind of Relaxation, Fear looseneth the Belly;
because the Heat retiring inwards toward the Heart, the Gutts and other Parts
are relaxed; In the same manner, as Fear also causes Trembling in the
Sinews. And of this Kind of Purgers are some Medicines made of Mercury.

Cause is Abstersion; which is plainly a Scouring off, or Incision of the more
viscous Humors, and making the Humors more fluide; And Cutting between them,
and the Part. As is found in Nitrous Water, which scoureth Linen Cloth
(speedily) from the Foulness. But this Incision must be by a Sharpness,
without Astriction: Which we find in Salt, Wormwood, Oxymel, and the like.

Medicines, that move Stools, and not Urine; Some other, Urine, and not
Stools, Those that Purge by Stool are such as enter not at all, or little
into the Mesentery Veins; But either at the first are not digestible by the
Stomach, and therefore move immediately downwards to the Gutts; Or else are
afterward rejected by the Mesentery Veins, and so turn likewise downwards to
the Gutts; and of these two kinds are most Purgers. But those that move Urine,
are such, as are well digested of the Stomach, and well received also of the
Mesenfery Veins; So they come as far as the Liver, which sends Urine to
the Bladder, as the Whey of Blood: And those Medicines being Opening and
Piercing, do fortify the Operation of the Liver, in sending down the wheyey
Part of the Blood to the Reins. For Medicines Vrinatiue do not work by
Reiection, and Indigestion, as Solutiue do.

Medicines, which in greater Quantity, move Stock, and in smaller, Urine: And
so contrariwise, some that in greater Quantity, move Urine, and in Smaller,
Stool. Of the former sort is Rubarb, and some others. The Cause is, for that
Rubarb is a Medicine, which the Stomach in a small Quantity does digest, and
overcome, (being not Flatuous, nor Loathsome;) and so sends it to the
Mesentery Veins; And so being opening, it helps down Urine: But in a
greater Quantity, the Stomach cannot overcome it, and so it goes to the
Gutts. Pepper by some of the Ancients is noted to be of the second sort; which
being in small Quantity, moves wind in the Stomach and Gutts, and so expels
by Stool; But being in greater Quantity, dissipateth the Wind; And it self
gotteth to the Mesentery veins; And so to the Liver, and Reins; where, by
Heating and Opening, it sends down Urine more plentifully.

We have spoken of Euacuating of the Body; we will now speak something of
the Filling of it by Restoratines in Consumptions, and Emaciating Diseases.
Experiments in Consort touching Meats and Drinks that are most Nourishing.
In Vegetables, there is one Part that is more Nourishing than another; As
Grains, and Roots nourish more, than the Leaves; In so much as the Order of
the Foliatanes was put down by the Pope, as finding Leaves unable to Nourish
Man's Body. Whether there be that difference Living Creatures, is not well
inquired: As whether Livers, and other Entrails, be not more Nourishing, than
the Outward Flesh. We find that amongst the Romans, a Gooses Liver was a great
Delicacy; In so much as they had Artificial Means to make it fair, and
great; But whether it were more Nourishing, appears not. It is certain, that
Marrow is more Nourishing than Fat. And I conceive that some Decoction of
Bones, and Sinews, stamped, and well strained, would be a very Nourishing
Broth: We find also that Scotch Skinck, (which is a Pottage of strong
Nourishment,) is made with the Knees, and Sinews of B^est, but long boiled:
letty also, which they use for a Restoratiue, is chiefly made of K^uckles of
Veale. The Pulp that is within the Crafish or Crabb, which they spice and
butter, is more Nourishing than the Flesh of the Crabb or Crafish. The Yolks
of Eggs are clearly more Nourishing than the Whites. So that it should seem,
that the Parts of Living Creatures, that lie more Inwards, nourish more than
the Outward Flesh: Except it be the Brain; which the Spirits prey too much
upon, to leave it any great Virtue of Nourishing. It seems for the Nourishing
of Aged Men, or Men in Consumptions, some such thing should be Devised, as
should be half Chylus, before it be put into the Stomach.

Take two large Capons; perboile them upon a soft fire, by the space Pill of a
Sweet Limon, or a good part of the Pill of a Citron, and a little Mace. Cut off
the Shanckes, and throw them away. Then with a good strong Chopping-knife,
mince the two Capons, bones and all, as small as ordinary Minced Meat; Put them
into a large neat Boulter; Then take a Kilderkin, sweet, and well feasoned, of
four gallons of Beer, of 8.^. strength, new as it comes from the Tunning;
Make in the Kilderkin a great Bung-hole of purpose: Then thrust into it, the
Boulter (in which the Capons are) drawn out in length; Let it steep in it
three Days, and three Nights, the Bung-hole open, to work; Then close the
Bung-hole, and so let it continue, a Day and a half; Then draw it into
bottles, and you may drink it well after three days Botteling; And it will
last six weeks (approved.) It drinks fresh, flowreth and mantleth
exceedingly; It drinks not newish at all; It is an excellent Drink for a
Consumption, to be drunk either alone, or Carded with some other Beer. It
quenches Thirst, and has no whit of windiness. Note, that it is not
possible, that Meat and Bread, either in Broths, or taken with Drink, as is
used, should get forth into the veins, and outward Parts, so finely, and
easily, as when it is thus Incorporate, and made almost a Chylus aforehand.

Potado Roots, or Burr Roots, or the Pith of Artichoakes, which are nourishing
Meats: It may be tried also, with other flesh; As Phesant, Partridge, Young
Porke, Pigge, Venison, especially of young Dear, etc.

Mortresse made with the Brawne of Capons, stamped, and strained, and mingled
(after it is made) with like quantity, (at the least,) of Almond Butter; is an
excellent Meat to Nourish those that are weak; Better than Blanck-Manger, or
Ielly: And so is the Cullice of Cocks, boiled thick with the like Mixture of
Almond Butter: For the Mortresse, or Cullice, of it self, is more Sauoury and
strong; And not so fit for Nourishing of weak Bodies; But the Almonds that are
not of so high a taste as Flesh, do excellently qualify it.

Indian Maiz has (of certain) an excellent Spirit of Nourishment; But it must
be thoroughly boiled, and made into a Maiz-Creame like a Barley Cream. I judge
the same of Rize, made into a Cream; For Rize is in Turkey, and other Countries
of the East, most fed upon; But it must be thoroughly boiled in respect of the
Hardness of it: And also because otherwise it binds the Body too much.

Pistachoes, so they be good, and not musty, joined with Almonds in Almond
Milk; Or made into a Milk of themselves, like unto Almond Milk, but more
green, are an excellent Nourisher. But you shall do well, to add a little
Ginger, scraped, because they are not without some subtle windiness

Milk warm from the Cow, is found to be a great Nourisher, and a good Remedy
in Consumptions: But then you must put into it, when you milk the Cow, two
little bags; the one of Powder of Mint, the other of Powder of Red Roses; For
they keep the Milk somewhat from Turning, or Crudling in the stomach; And put
in Sugar also, for the same cause, and partly for the Tastes sake; But you must
drink a good draught that it may stay less time in the stomach, left it
Cruddle: And let the Cup into which you milk the Cow, be set in a greater Cup
of hot water, that you may take it warm. And Cow-milke thus prepared, I judge
to be better for a Consumption, than Asse-milke, which (it is true) turns not
so easily, but it is a little harrish; Marry it is more proper for Sharpness
of Urine, and Exulceration of the Bladder, and all manner of Lenifyings. Woman's
milk likewise is prescribed, when all fail; but I commend it not; as being a
little too near the Juice of Man's Body, to be a good Nourisher; Except it be
in Infants, to whom it is Natural.

Oil of Sweet Almonds, newly drawn, with Sugar, and a little Spice, spread
upon Bread tosted, is an Excellent Nourisher; But then to keep the Oil from
frying in the Stomach, you must drink a good draught of Mild Beer after it;
And to keep it from relaxing the Stomach too much, you must put in a little
Powder of Cinnamon.

The Yolks of Eggs are of themselves so well prepared by Nature for Malmesey,
or Sweet wine; You shall do well to put in some few Slices of Eryngium Roots,
and a little Amber-grice; For by this means, besides the immediate Faculty of
Nourishment, such Drink will strengthen the Back; So that it will not draw
down the Urine too fast; For too much Urine does always hinder Nourishment.

Mincing of meat, as in Pies, and buttered Minced Meat, saves the Grinding
Claret wine, Pill of Limon, or Orange, cut small, Sugar, and a very little
Cinnamon, or Nutmegg. As for Chaetts, which are likewise minced Meat, in stead
of Butter, and Fat, it were good to moisten them, partly with Cream, or
Almond, or Pistachomilke, or Barley, or Maiz Cream; Adding a little Coriander
Seed, and Carraway Seed, and a very little Saffron. The more full Handling of
Alimentation we reserve to the due place.

We have hitherto handled the Particulars which yield best, and easiest, and
plentifullest Nourishment; And now we will speak of the best Means of
Conueying, and Converting the Nourishment.

The First Means is, to procure that the Nourishment may not be robbed, Reins
draw not too strongly an ouer-great Part of the Blood into Urine. To this add
that Precept of Aristotle, that Wine be forborne in all Consumptions; For that
the Spirits of the Wine, do prey upon the Roseide Juice of the Body, and
inter-common with the Spirits of the Body, and so deceive and rob them of
their Nourishment. And therefore if the Consumption growing from the weakness of
the Stomach, do force you to use Wine; let it always be burnt, that the
Quicker Spirits may euaporate; or at the least quenched with two little wedges
of Gold, six or seven times repeated. Add also this Provision, That there be
not too much Expense of the Nourishment, by Exhaling, and Sweating: And
therefore if the Patient be apt to sweat, it must be gently restrained. But
chiefly Hippocrates Rule is to be followed; who advises quite contrary to
that which is in use: Namely, that the Linen, or Garment next the Flesh, be in
Winter dry, and often changed; And in Summer seldom changed, and smeared over
with Oil; For certain it is, that any Substance that is fat, does a little
fill the Pores of the Body, and stay Sweat, in some Degree. But the more
cleanly way is, to have the Linen smeared lightly over, with Oil of Sweet
Almonds; And not to forbear shifting as often as is fit.

Means is, to send forth the Nourishment into the Parts, more strongly; For
which, the working must be by Strengthening of the Stomach; And in this,
because the Stomach is chiefly comforted by Wine, and Hot things, which
otherwise hurt; it is good to resort to Outward Applications to the Stomach:
Wherein it has been tried, that the Quilts of Roses, Spices, Mastick,
Wormwood, Mint, etc. are nothing so helpful, as to take a Cake of New bread,
and to bedew it with a little Sack, or Alegant; And to dry it; And after it be
dried a little before the Fire, to put it within a clean Napkin, and to lay it
to the Stomach: For it is certain, that all Flower has a potent Virtue of
Astriction; In so much as it hardens a piece of flesh, or a Flower, that is
laid in it: And therefore a Bag quilted with Bran, is likewise very good; but
it dries somewhat too much; and therefore it must not lie long.

Means (which may be a Branch of the former) is to send forth the Nourishment
the better by Sleep. For we see, that Bears, and other Creatures that sleep
in the Winter, wax exceeding fat: And certain it is, (as it is commonly
believed) that Sleep does Nourish much; Both for that the Spirits do less
spend the Nourishment in Sleep, then when living Creatures are awake: And
because (that which is to the present purpose) it helps to thrust out the
Nourishment into the Parts. Therefore in Aged men, and weak Bodies, and such
as abound not with Choler, a short Sleep after dinner does help to Nourish;
For in such Bodies there is no fear of an ouer-hastie Disgestion, which is the
Inconvenience of Postmeridian Sleeps. Sleep also in the Morning, after the
taking of somewhat of easy Digestion; As Milk from the Cow, Nourishing Breath,
or the like; does further Nourishment: But this would be done, sitting
upright, that the Milk or Broth may pass the more speedily to the bottom of
the Stomach.

Means is to provide that the Parts themselves may draw to them the
Nourishment strongly. There is an Excellent Observation of Aristotle; That a
great Reason, why Plants (some of them) are of greater Age, than Living
Creatures, is, for that they yearly put forth new Leaves, and Boughs; whereas
Living Creatures put forth (after their Period of Growth,) nothing that is
young, but Hair and Nails; which are Excrements, and no Parts. And it is most
certain, that whatsoever is young, does draw Nourishment better, than that
which is Old; And then (that which is the Mystery of that Observation) young
Boughs, and Leaves, calling the Sap up to them; the same Nourishes the Body,
in the Passage. And this we see notably proved also, in that the often Cutting,
or Polling of Hedges, Trees, and Herbs, does conduce much to their Lasting.
Transfer therefore this Observation to the Helping of Nourishment in Living
Creatures: The Noblest and Principal Use whereof is, for the Prolongation of
Life; Restoration of some Degree of Youth; and Inteneration of the Parts: For
certain it is, that there are in Living Creatures Parts that Nourish, and
Repair easily; And Parts that Nourish and repair hardly, And you must
refresh, and renew those that are easy to Nourish, that the other may be
refreshed, and (as it were) Drink in Nourishment, in the Passage. Now we see
that Draught Oxen, put into good Pasture, recover the Flesh of young Beese; And
Men after long Emaciating Diets, wax plumpe, and fat, and almost New: So that
you may surely conclude, that the frequent and wise Use of those Emaciating
Diets, and of Purgings; And perhaps of some kind of Bleeding; is a principal
Means of Prolongation of Life; and Restoring some Degree of Youth: For as we
have often said, Death comes upon Living Creatures like the Torment of
McZentius; Mortua quinetiam iungebat Corporavinis,
Componens Manibusque Manus, atque Oribus Ora.
For the Parts in Man's Body easily reparable, (as Spirits, Blood, and Flesh,)
die in the Embracement of the Parts hardly reparable, (as Bones, Nerves, and
Membranes;) And likewise some Entrails (which they reckon amongst the
Spermaticall Parts) are hard to repair: Though that Division of Spermaticall,
and Menstrnall Parts, be but a Conceit. And this same Observation also may be
drawn to the present purpose of Nourishing Emaciated Bodies: And therefore
Gentle Frication draws forth the Nourishment, by making the Parts a little
hungry, and heating them; whereby they call forth Nourishment the better. This
Frication I wish to be done in the Morning. It is also best done by the Hand,
or a piece of Scarlet wool, wet a little with Oil of Almonds, mingled with a
small Quantity of Bay-sals, or Saffron. We see that the very Currying of Horses
does make them fat, and in good liking.

The Fifth Means is, to further the very Act of Assimilation of Nourishment;
Emollients, that make the Parts more apt to Assimilate. For which I have
compounded an Ointment of Excellent Odor, which I call Roman Ointment, vide
the Receipt. The use of it would be between Sleeps; For in the latter Sleep
the Parts Assimilate chiefly.

There be many Medicines, which by themselves would do no Cure, but perhaps
Hurt; but being applied in a certain Order, one after another, do great
Cures. Experiment Solitary touching Filum Medicinale.
I have tried (my self) a Remedy for the Gout, which has seldom failed, but
driven it away in 24. Hours space: It Pultasse; Of which vide the Receipt; And
then a Bath or Fomentation, of which vide the Receipt; And then a Plaster, vide
the Receipt. The Pultasse relaxeth the Pores, and makes the Humor apt to
Exhale. The Fomentation calls forth the Humor by Vapors; But yet in regard
of the way made by the Pultasse. Draws gently; And therefore draws the
Humor out; and does not draw more to it; For it is a Gentle Fomentation, and
has withal a Mixture, (though very little) of some Stupefactine. The Plaster
is a Moderate Astringent Plaster, which repelleth New Humor from falling. The
Pultasse alone would make the Part more soft, and weak; And apter to take the
Defluxion and Impression of the Humor. The Fomentation alone, if it were too
weak, without way made by the Pultasse, would draw forth little; If too
strong, it would draw to the Part, as well as draw from it. The Plaster alone,
would pen the Humor already contained in the Part, and so exasperate it, as
well as forbid new Humor. Therefore they must be all taken in Order, as is
said. The Pultasse is to be laid to for two or three Hours: The Fomentation
for a Quarter of an Hour, or somewhat better, being used hot, and seven or
eight times repeated: The Plaster to continue on still, till the Part be well
confirmed.

There is a secret Way of Cure, (vnpractized;) By Assuetude of that which in it
self hurts. Experiment Solitary touching Cure by Custom.
Poisons have been made, by some, Familiar, as has been said. Ordinary
keepers of the Sick of the Plague, are seldom Enduring of Torture, by
Custom, has been made more casie: The Brooking of Enormous Quantity of Meats,
and so of Wine or Strong Drink, has been, by Custom, made to be without
Surfeit, or Drunkenness. And generally Diseases that are Chronicall, as
Coughes., Phthisickes, some kinds of Palseyes, Lunacies, etc. are most
dangerous at the first: Therefore a wise Physician will consider whether a
Disease be Incurable; Or whether the Just Cure of it be not full of peril; And
if he find it to be such, let him resort to Palliation; And alleuiate the
Symptom, without busying himself too much with the perfect Cure: And many
times, (if the Patient be indeed patient,) that Course will exceed all
Expectation. Likewise the Patient himself may strive, by little and little, to
Overcome the Symptom, in the Exacerbation, and so, by time, turn Suffering
into Nature.

Diverse Diseases, especially Chronicall, (such as Quartan Agues;) are sometimes
cured by Surset, and Excesses; As Excess of Meat, Excess of Drink,
Extraordinary Fasting, Extraordinary Stirring, or Lassitude, and the like.
Experiment Solitary touching Cure by Excess.
The Diseases of Cotinuance get an Adue^titious Strength from Custom, besides
their Material Cause from the Humors: So that the Breaking of the Custom
does leave them only to their first Cause; which if it be any thing weak will
fall off. Besides, such Excesses do Excite and Spur Nature, which thereupon
rises more forcibly against the Disease.

There is in the Body of Man a great Consent in the Motion of the several
Parts. Experiment Solitary touching Cure by Motion of Consent.
We see, it is Childrens sport, to prove whether they can rub upon their Breast
with one hand, and pat upon their Forehead with another; And straight-waies,
they shall sometimes rub with both by Vomit. We find that in Consumptions of
the Lungs, when Nature cannot expel by Cough, Men fall into Fluxes of the
Belly, and then they dye. So in Pestilent Diseases, if they cannot be expelled
by Sweat, they fall likewise into Looseness, and that is commonly Mortal.
Therefore Physicians should ingeniously contriue, how by Motions that are in
their Power, they may excite Inward Motions that are not in their Power, by
Consent: As by the Stench of Feathers, or the like, they cure the Rising of the
Mother.

Hippocrates Aphorism, In Morbis minus, is a good profound Aphorism.
Experiment Solitary touching Cure of Diseases which are contrary to Predist
sition.
It imports, that Diseases, contrary to the Complexion, Age, Sex, Season of
the year, Diet, etc. are more dangerous, than those that are Concurrent. A Man
would think it should be otherwise; For that, when the Accident of Sickness,
and the Natural Disposition, do second the one the other, the Disease should
be more forcible: And so (no Quantity of Matter. But that, which makes good
the Aphorisine, is; Because such Diseases do show a greater Collection of
Matter, by that they are able to overcome those Natural Inclinations to the
Contrary. And therefore in Diseases of that kind, let the Physician apply
himself more to Purgation, than to Alteration; Because the Offense is in the
Quantity; and the Qualities are rectified of themselves.

Physicians do wisely prescribe, that there be Preparatiues used before Just
Purgations; For certain it is, that Purgers do many times great Hurt, if the
Body be not accommodated, both before, and after the Purging. Experiment
Solitary touching Preparations before Purging, and settling of the Body
afterward.
The Hurt that they do, for want of Preparation before Purging, is by the
Sticking of the Humors, and their not coming fair away; Which causes in the
Body great Perturbations, and ill Accidents, Purging; And also, the
diminishing, and dulling of the Working of the Medicine it self, that it
purges not sufficiently. Therefore the work of Preparation is double; To make
the Humors fluide, and mature; And to make the Passages more open: For both
those help to make the Humors pass readily. And for the former of these,
Sirrups are most profitable; And for the Latter, Apozumes, or Preparing
Broaths; Clisters also help, lest the Medicine stop in the Guts, and work
gripingly. But it is true, that Bodies abounding with Humors; And fat Bodies;
And Open weather; are Preparatines in themselves; because they make the Humors
more fluide. But let a Physician beware, how he purge after hard Frostie
Weather, and in a Lean Body, without Preparation. For the Hurt, that they may
do after Purging; It is caused by the Lodging of some Humors in ill Places:
For it is certain, that there be Humors, which somewhere placed in the Body,
are quiet, and do little hurt; In other Places, (especially Passages,) do
much mischief. Therefore it is good, after Purging, to use Apozumes, and
Broths, not so much Opening as those used before Purging, but Absterfine and
Mundifying Clisters also are good to conclude with, to draw away the Relics
of the Humors, that may have descended to the Lower Region of the Body.

Blood is stanched diverse ways. Experiment Solitary touching Stocking of Blood.
First by Astringents, and Repercussiue Medicines. Secondly by Drawing of the
Spirits and Blood inwards; which is done by Cold; As Iron, or a Stone laid to
the neck does stanch Testicles, being put into sharp Vinegar, has made a
sudden Recesse of the Spirits, and stanched Blood. Thirdly by the Recesse of
the Blood by Sympathy. So it has been tried, that the part that bleedeth,
being thrust into the Body of a Capon, or Sheep, new ripped and bleeding, has
stanched Blood; The Blood, as it seems, sucking and drawing up, by similitude
of substance, the Blood it meets with, and so it self going back. Fourthly
by Custom and Time; So the Prince of Aurange, in his first hurt, by the
Spanish Boy, could find no means to stanch the Blood, either by Medicine or
Ligament; but was feign to have the Orifice of the Wound stopped by Men's
Thumbes, succeeding one another, for the space at least of two Days; And at
the last the blood by Custom only retired. There is a fifth Way also in use,
to let Blood in an Adverse Part, for a Revulsion.

It helps, both in Medicine, and Aliment, to Change and not to continue the
same Medicine and Aliment still. Experiment Solitary touching Change of
Aliments and Medicines.
The Cause is, for that Nature by continual Vso of any Thing, grows to a
Sacietie, and Dullness, either of Appetite, or Working. And we see that
Assuetude of Things Hurtful Poison, which with use some have brought
themselves to brook. And therefore it is no marvel, though Things helpful,
by Custom, leese their force to Help. I count Intermission almost the same
thing with Change; For that, that has been intermitted, is after a fort new.

It is found by Experience, that in Diets of Guaiacum, Sarza, and the like
(especially if they be strict,) the Patient is more troubled in the beginning,
then after continuance; Which has made some of the more Experiment Solitary
touching Diets.
But the Cause is, for that all those Diets, do dry up Humors, Rheumes, and
the like; And they cannot Dry up until they have first attenuated; And while
the Humor is attenuated, it is more Fluid, then it was before, and troubles
the Body a great deal more until it be dried up, and consumed. And therefore
Patients must expect a due time, and not check at them at the first.

The Producing of Cold is a thing very worthy the Inquisition; both for Use,
and Disclosure of Causes. Experiments in Consort touching the Production of
Cold.
For Heat and Cold are Natures two Hands, whereby she chiefly works: And Heat
we have in readiness, in respect of the Fire; But for Cold we must stay till
it comes; or seecke it in deep Caves, or high Mountains: And when all is
done, we cannot obtain it in any great degree: For Furnaces of Fire are far
hotter, then a Summers Sun; But Vaults, or Hills are not much Colder then a
Winters Frost.

The first Means of Producing Cold, is that which Nature presents Expiring
of Cold out of the Inward Parts of the Earth in Winter, when the Sun has no
power to overcome it; the Earth being (as has been noted by some) Primum
Frigidum. This has been asserted, as well by Ancient as by Modern
Philosophers: It was the Tenet of Parmenides. It was the opinion of the Author
of the discourse in Plutarch (for I take it that book was not Plutarches own)
De prime Frigide. It was the opinion of Telesius, who has renewed the
Philosophy of Parmenides, and is the best of the Nouellists.

The Second Cause of Cold is the Contact of Cold Bodies; For Cold is Heat:
which is seen in those things that are touched with Snow or Cold water. And
therefore, whosoever will be an Inquirer into Nature, let him resort to a
Conseruatory of Snow and Ice; Such as they use for delicacy, to cool Wine in
Summer: Which is a Poor and Contemptible use, in respect of other uses, that
may be made of such Conseruatories.

The Third Cause is the Primary Nature of all Tangible bodies: For it is
Tangible) are of themselves Cold; Except they have an Accessory Heat by fire;
Life; or Motion: For even the Spirit of Wine, or Chy^icall Oils, which are so
hot in Operation, are to the first Touch Cold; And Air it self compressed,
and Condensed a little by blowing, is Cold.

The Fourth Cause is the Density of the Body; For all Dense Bodies are Colder
then most other Bodies; As Mettalls, Stone, Glass; And they are longer in
Heating than Softer Bodies. And it is certain, that Earth, Dense, Tangible,
hold all of the Nature of Cold. The Cause is, for that all Matters Tangible
being Cold, it must needs follow, that where the Matter is moist Congregate,
the Cold is the greater.

The Fifth Cause of Cold, or rather of increase and vehemence of Cold, is a
Quick Spirit enclosed in a Cold Body: As will appear to any that shall
attentively consider of Nature in many Instances. We see Nitre (which has a
Quick Spirit) is Cold; more Cold to the Tongue, then a Stone; So Water is
Colder then Oil, because it has a Quicker Spirit; For all Oil, though it
has the Tangible Parts better digested then Water, yet has it a duller
Spirit: So Snow is Colder then Water, because it has more Spirit within it: So
we see that Salt put to Ice (as in the producing of the Artificial Ice)
increases the Actiuity of Cold: So some In^^cta which have Spirit of Life, as
Snakes, and Silkwormes, are, to the touch, Cold. So Quick-filuer is the Coldest
of Metals, because it is Fullest of Spirit.

Cause of Cold is the Chasing and Driving away of Spirits, such as have some
Degree of Heat: For the Banishing of the Heat must needs leave any Body Cold.
This we see in the Operation of Opium, and Stupefactiues, upon the Spirits of
living Creatures: And it were not amiss to try Opium, by laying it upon the
Top of a Weather-glasse, to see whether it will contract the Air: But I doubt
it will not succeed: For besides that the virtue of Opium will hardly penetrate
through such a Body as Glass, I conceive that Opium, and the like, make the
Spirits fly rather by Malignity, then by Cold.

Effect must follow upon the Exhaling or Drawing out of the warm Spirits, that
does upon the Flight of the Spirits. There is an Opinion, that the Moon is
Magneticall of Heat, as the Sun is of Cold, and Moisture: It were not amiss
therefore to try it, with Warm waters; The one exposed to the Beams of the
Moon; the other with some Skreene betwixt the Beams of the Moon and the
water; As we use to the Sun for Shade; And to see whether the former will
cool sooner. And it were also good to inquire, what other Means there may be,
to draw forth the Exile heat, which is in the Air; for that may be a Secret of
great Power to Produce Cold weather.

We have formerly set down the Means of turning Air into water, in the
Experiment 27. Experiments in Co^sort touching the Version and Transmutation of
Air into water.
But because it is Magnale Nature; And tends to the subduing of a very great
effect; And is also of Manifold use; we will add some Instances in Consort
that give light thereunto.

Ancients, that Sailers have used, every Night, to hang Fleeces of wool on the
sides of their Ships, the Wool toward the water; And that they have crushed
fresh Water out of them, in the Morning, for their use. And thus much we have
tried, that a Quantity of Wool tied loose together, being let down into a
deep Well; And hanging in the Middle, some three Fathom from the water, for a
night, in the Winter time; increased in weight, (as I now remember) to a fifth
Part.

Ancients, that in Lydia, near Pergamus, there were certain Worke-men, in
time of Wars, fled into Caves; And the Mouth of the Caves being stopped by
the Enemies, they were famished. But long time after the dead Bones were found;
And some Vessels which they had carried with them; And the vessels full of
Water; And that Water, thicker, and more toward Ice, than Common Water: which
is a Notable Instance of Condensation, and Induration, by Burial under Earth,
(in Caves,) for long time; And of version also (as it should seem,) of Air
into Water; if any of those vessels were Empty. Try therefore a small Bladder
hung in Snow; And the like in Nitre; And the like in Quick-filuer: And if you
find the Bladders fallen, or shrunk; you may be sure the Air is condensed by
the Cold of those Bodies; As it would be in a Cave under Earth.

It is reported of very good credit, that in the East Indies, if you set a
Water open, in a Room where Cloves are kept, it will be drawn dry in 24
hours; Though it stand at some distance from the Cloves. In the Country, they
use many times, in deceit, when their wool is new shorn, to set some Pailes
of water by, in the same Room; to increase the weight of the wool: But it may
be, that the Heat of the Wool, remaining from the body of the Sheep; or the
Heat gathered by the lying close of the wool, helps to draw the watery
Vapor; But that is nothing to the Version.

It is Reported also credibly, that Wool new shorn, being laid casually
Vessel of Verinyce, after some time, had drunk up a great part of the
Veriuyce, though the Vessel were whole without any Flaw and had not the
Bung-hole open. In this Instance, there is (upon the by) to be noted, the
Percolation, or Suing of the Veriuyce through the wood; For Veriuyce of it
self would never have passed through the wood: So as, it seems, it must be
first in a kind of Vapor, before it pass.

It is especially to be noted, that the Cause, that does facilitate the Version
of Air into water, when the Air is not in gross, but subtly mingled with
Tangible Bodies, is, (as has been partly touched before,) for that Tangible
Bodies have an Antipathy with Air; And if they find and Liquid Body, that is
more dense, near them, they will draw it: And after they have drawn it, they
will condense it more, and in effect incorporate it; For we see that a Sponge,
or Wool, or Sugar, or a Woollen cloth, being put but in part, in Water, or
Wine, will draw the Liquour higher, and beyond the place, where the Water or
wine comes. We see also, that Wood, Lute-strings, and the like, do swell in
moist Seasons: As appears by the Breaking of the Strings, the Hard Turning of
the Pegs, and the Hard drawing forth of Boxes, and Opening of Wainseet deeres;
which is a kind of Infusion: And is much like to an Infusion in water, which
will make wood to swell: As we see in the Filling of the Chops of Boules, by
laying them in water. But for that part of these Experiments, which concerns
Attraction; we will reserve it to the proper Title of Attraction.

There is also a Version of Air into water, seen in the Sweating of Marbles,
and other Stones. And of Wainsces before and in moist weather: This must be,
either by some Moisture the Body yields; Or else by the Moist Air thickened
against the hard body. But it is plain, that it is the latter; For that we see
Wood painted with Oil Color, will sooner gather drops in a moist Night, than
Wood alone: which is caused by the Smoothness and Closeness; which lets in
no part of the Vapor, and so turns it back, and thickeneth it into Dew. We
see also, that Breathing upon a Glass, or Smooth body, gives a Dew; And in
Frosty Mornings (such as we call Rhyme frosts) you shall find drops of Dew upon
the Inside of Glasse-windowes; And the Frost it self upon the ground is but a
Version or Condensation, of the Moist vapors of the Night, into a watery
substance: Dewes likewise, and Rain, are but the Returns of Moist vapors
Condensed; The Dew, by the Cold only of the Suns departure, which is the
gentler Cold; Raines, by the Cold of that, which they call the Middle Region of
the Air; which is the more violent Cold.

Water into Ice, will likewise turn Air Some Degree nearer unto water.
Therefore try the Experiment of the Artificial Turning water into Ice
(whereof we shall speak in another place) with Air in place of water, and the
Ice about it. And although it be a greater Alteration to turn Air into water,
than water into Ice: yet there is this Hope, that by Continuing the Air longer
time, the effect will follow; For that Artificial Conversion of water into
Ice, is the work of a few Hours; And this of Air may be tried by a Months
space, or the like.

Induration, or Lapidification, of Substances more Soft, is likewise another
degree of Condensation; And is a great Alteration in Nature. Experiments in
Consort, touching Induration of Bodies.
The Effecting and Accelerating thereof is very worthy to be inquired. It is
effected by three Means. The first is by Cold; whose Property is to Condense,
and constipate, as has been said. The Second is by Heat; which is not proper,
but by consequence; For the Heat does attenuate; And by Attenuation does send
forth the Spirit and moister Part of a Body; And upon that, the more gross of
the Tangible Parts do contract and serre themselves together; Both to Avoid
Vacuums (as they call it;) And also to Munite themselves against the Force of
the Fire, which they have suffered. And the Third is by Assimilation; when a
Hard Body Assimilateth a Soft, being contiguous to it.

The Examples of Induration, taking them promiscuously, are many: As the
Generation of Stones within the Earth, which at the first are but Rude Earth,
or Clay: And so of Mineralls, which come (no doubt) at first, of luyces
Concrete, which afterward indurate: And so of Porcellane, which is an
Artificial Cement, buried in the Earth a long time: And so the Making of
Brick, and Tile: Also the Making of Glass, of a certain Sand, and
Brake-Roots, and some other Matters: Also the Exudations of Rock-Diamonds, and
Crystal, which harden with time: Also the Induration of Bead-Amber, which at
first is a soft Substance; As appears by the Flies, and Spiders, which are
found in it; And many more: But we will speak of them distinctly.

For Indurations by Cold, there be few Trialls of it; For we have Cold here
on the Surface of the Earth, so near the Beams of the Sun, and the Heavens.
The likeliest Trial is by Snow, and Ice; For as Snow and Ice, especially being
helped, and their Cold actiuated by Nitre, or Salt, will turn Water into Ice,
and that in a few hours; So it may be, it will turn wood, or Stiff Clay,
into Stone, in longer time. Put therefore, into a Conseruing Pit of Snow, and
Ice, (adding some quantity of Salt, and Nitre,) a Piece of Wood, or a Piece of
Tough Clay, and let it lie a Month, or more.

Another Trial is by Metalline Waters, which have virtuall Cold in Wood, or
Clay, into Smiths water, or other Metalline water; And try whether it will not
harden in some reasonable time. But I understand it, of Metalline waters, that
come by Washing, or Quenching; And not of Strong Waters that come by
dissolution; for they are too Corrosiue to consolidate.

It is already found, that there are some Natural Spring-waters, that Wood; So
as you shall see one piece of Wood, whereof the Part above the Water shall
continue Wood; And the Part under the Water shall be turned into a kind of
Grauelly Stons. It is likely those Waters are of some Metalline Mixture; But
there would be more particular Inquiry made of them. It is certain, that an
Egg was found, having lien many years in the bottom of a Moate, where the
Earth had somewhat ouergrowen it; And this Egg was comen to the Hardness of a
Stone; And had the Colors of the white and Yolke perfect: And the Shell
shining in small grains like Sugar, or Alablaster.

Another Experience there is of Induration by Cold, which is Metalls,
themselves are hardened by often Heating and Quenching in Cold Water: For Cold
ever works most potently upon Heat Precedene.

For Induration by Heat it must be considered, that Heat, by the Exhaling
Bricks, Tiles, etc; Or if the Heat be more fierce, makes the grosser part it
self, Run and Melt; As in the making of ordinary Gloss; And in the
Vitrification of Earth, (As we see in the Inner Parts of Farneces;) And in the
Vitrification of Brick; And of Metals. And in the former of these, which is
the Hardening by baking, without Melting, the Heat has these degrees; First it
Indurateth; and then makes Fragile; And lastly it does Inciuerate and
Calcinate.

But if you desire to make an Induration with Toughness, and less Artistotle
has well noted; But would be thoroughly verified. It is, to decoct Bodies in
water, for two or three days; But they must be such Bodies, into which the
Water will not enter; As Stone, and Metal. For if they be Bodies into which
the Water will enter, then long Seething, will rather Soften than indurate
them. As has been tried in Eggs etc. Therefore, Softer Bodies must be put
into Bottles; And the Bottles hung into Water seething, with the mouths open,
above the Water; that no Water may get in; For by this Meaues, the virtuall
Heat of the Water will enter; And such a Heat, as will not make the Body adust,
or fragile; But the Substance of the Water will be shut out. This Experiment
we made; And it sorted thus. It was tried with a Piece of Freestone, and with
Pewter, put into the Water at large. The Freestone we found received in some
water; For it was softer, and easier to scrape, then a piece of the same Stone
kept dry. But the Pewter into which no water could enter, became more white,
and liker to Silver, and less flexible, by much. There were also put into an
Earthen Bottle, placed as before, a good Pellet of Clay, a Piece of Cheese, a
Piece of Chalk, and a Piece of Freestone. The Clay, came forth almost of the
Hardness of Stone; The Cheese likewise very hard, and not well to be cut: The
Chalk and the Freestone much harder than they were. The color of the Clay
inclined not a whit to the Color of Brick, but rather to white, as in
ordinary Drying by the Sun. Note, that all the former Trialls were made by a
Boiling upon a good hot Fire, renewing the water as it consumed, with other hot
water; But the Boiling was but for twelve hours only; And it is like that the
Experiment would have been more effectual, if the Boiling had been for two
or three days, as we prescribed before.

Assimilation, (for there is a degree of Assimilation even in Inanimate bodies)
we see Examples of it in some Stones in ClayGrounds, lying near to the top of
the Earth, where Pebble is; In which you may manifestly see diverse Pebbles
gathered together, and a Crust of Cement or Stone between them, as hard as the
Pebbles themselves: And it were good to make a Trial of purpose, by taking
Clay, and putting in it diverse Pebble-Stones, thick set, to see whether in
continuance of time, it will not be harder then other Clay of the same lump, in
which no Pebbles are set. We see also in Ruins of old Walls, especially
toward the bottom, the Mortar will become as hard as the Brick; we see also,
that the Wood on the sides of Vessles of Wine, gathers a Crust of Tartar,
harder then the wood it self; And Scales likewise grow to the Teeth, harder
then the Teeth themselves.

Induration by Assimilation appears in the Bodies of Trees, and living
Creatures: For no Nourishment that the Tree receives, or that the living
Creature receives, is so hard as Wood, Bone, or Horn, etc. but is Indurated
after by Assimilation.

The Eye of the understanding, is like the Eye of the Sense: For as may see
great Axioms of Nature, through small and Contemptible Instances. Experiment
Solitary touching the Version of water into Air.
The Speedy Depredation of Air upon watery Moisture, and Version of the same
into Air, appears in nothing more visible, than in the sudden Discharge, or
vanishing, of a little Cloud of Breath, or Vapor, from Glass, or the Blade of
a Sword, or any such Polished Body; Such as does not at all Detain, or Imbibe
the Moisture; For the Mistiness scatters and breaks up suddenly. But the
like Cloud, if it were Oily, or Fatty, will not discharge; Not because it
sticks faster; But because Air preyeth upon Water; And Flame, and Fire, upon
Oil; And therefore, to take out a Spot of Grease, they use a Coal upon brown
Paper; because Fire works upon Grease, or Oil, as Air does upon Water. And
we see Paper oyled, or Wood oyled, or the like last long moist; but Wet with
Water, dry, or putrify sooner, The Cause is, for that Air meddleth little
with the Moisture of Oil.

There is an Admirable demonstration, in the same trifling Instance of the
little Cloud upon Glass, or Gemmes or Blades of Swords, of the Force of Union,
even in the least Quantities, and weakest Bodies, how much it Conduces to
Preservation of the present Form; And the Resisting of Experiment Solitary
touching the Force of Union.
For mark well the discharge of that Cloud; And you shall see it ever break
up, first in the Skirts, and last in the midst. We see likewise, that much
Water draws forth the Juice of the Body Infused; But little water, is imbibed
by the Body: And this is a Principal Cause, why in Operation upon Bodies, for
their Version or Alteration, the Trial in great Quantities, does not answer
the Trial in small; And so deceives many; For that (I say) the greater Body,
resists more any Alteration of Form, and requires far greater Strength in
the Active Body, that should subdue it.

We have spoken before, in the fifth Instance, of the Cause of Orient Colors,
in Birds; which is by the Finenesse of the Strainer; we will now endeavor to
reduce the same Axione to a Work. Experiment Solitary touching the Producing
of Feathers and Hairs of diverse Colors.
For this Writing of our Sylue Syluerum, is (to speak properly) not Neturall
History, but a high kind of Natural Magic. For it is not a Description only
of Nature, Pigeons, or other Birds, when they are but in their down; Or of
Whelps, cutting their Hair as short as may be; Or of some other Beast; with
some ointment, that is not hurtful to the Flesh; And that will harden, and
stick very close; And see whether it will not alter the Colors of the
Feathers, or Hair. It is received, that the Pulling off, the first Feathers of
Birds, clean, will make the new come forth white: And it is certain, that
White is a penurious Color, and where Moisture is scant. So Blew Violets, and
other Flowers, if they be starued, turn Pale and White; Birds, and Horses, by
Age, or Scarres, turn white: And the Hoare Hairs of Men, come by the same
reason, And therefore in Birds, it is very likely, that the Feathers that come
first, will be many times of diverse Colors, according to the Nature of the
Bird; For that the Skin is more porous; But when the Skin is more shut, and
close, the Feathers will come White. This is a good Experiment, not only for
the Producing of Birds, and Beasts of strange Colors; but also, for the
Disclosure of the Nature of Colors themselves; which of them require a finer
Porositie, and which a grosser.

It is a work of Providence, that has been truly observed by some; That the
Yolke of the Egg, conduces little to the Generation of the Bird; But only to
the Nourishment of the same: For if a Chicken be opened, when it is new
hatched; you shall find much of the Yolke remaining. Experiment Solitary
touching the Nourishment of Living Creatures before they be brought forth.
And it is needful, that Birds, that are shaped without the Females Egg, as
well Matter of Nourishment, as Matter of generation for the Body. For after the
Egg is laid, and severed from the Body of the Hen; It has no more Nourishment
from the Hen; But only a quickening Heat when she sits. But Beasts, and
Men need not the matter of Nourishment within themselves; Because they are
shaped within the Womb of the Female, and are Nourished continually from her
Body.

It is an Inueterate and received Opinion, that Cantharides applied to any Part
of the Body, touch the Bladder, and exulcerate it, if they stay on long.
Experiments in Co^sort touching Sympathy and Antipathy for Medicinal use.
It is likewise Received, that a kind of Stone, which they bring out of the
West Indies, has a peculiar force to move Gravel, and to dissolve the Stone;
In so much, as laid but to the wrest, it has so forcibly

Soales of the Feet have great Affinity with the Head, and the Mouth of the
Stomach: As we see, Going wet-shod, to those that use it not, affects both:
Applications of hot Powders to the Feet attenuate first, and after dry the
Rheum: And therefore a Physician, that would be Mystical, prescribes, for
the Cure of the Rheum, that a Man should walk Continually upon a Camomill
Alley; Meaning, that he should put Camomill within his Sockes. Likewise Pigeons
bleeding, applied to the Soales of the Feet, ease the Head: And Soporiferous
Medicines applied unto them, provoke Sleep.

Feet have a Sympathy with the Head; So the Wrests and Hands, have a Sympathy
with the Heart; We see the Affects and Passions of the Heart, and Spirits, are
notably disclosed by the Pulse: And it is often tried, that Iuyces of
Stock-Gilly-Flowers, Rose-Campian, Garlic, and other things; applied to the
Wrests, and renewed; have cured long Agues. And I conceive, that washing with
certain Liquours, the Palms of the Hands, does much good: And they do well
in Heats of Agues, to hold in the Hands, Eggs of Alablaster, and Balls of
Crystal.

Of these things we shall speak more, when we handle the Title of Sympathy and
Antipathy, in the proper Place.

The Knowledge of man (hitherto) has been determined by the View, or Sight;
So that whatsoever is Invisible, either in respect of the Finenesse of the Body
it self; Or the Smallness of the Parts; Or of the Subtilty of the Motion; is
little inquired. Experiment Solitary touching the Secret Processes of Nature.
And yet these be the Things that Govern Nature Principally; And without
which, you cannot make any Analysis and Indication of the Proceedings of
Nature. The Spirits or Pneumaticals, that are in all Tangible Bodies, are
searce known. Sometimes they take them for Vacuum; whereas they are the most
Active of Bodies. Sometimes they take them for Air; From which they differ
exceedingly, as much as Wine from Water; And as Wood from Earth. Sometimes they
will have them to be Natural Heat, or a Portion of the Element of Fire; Whereas
some of them are crude, and cold. And Sometimes they will have them to be the
Virtues and Qualities of the Tangible Parts, which they see; whereas they are
Things by themselves. And then, when they come to Plants and living Creatures,
they call them Souls. And such Superficial Speculations they have; Like
Prospectiues, that show things inward, when they are but Paintings. Neither is
this a Question of Words, but infinitely material in Nature. For Spirits are
nothing else but a Natural Body, rarefied to a Proportion, and included in the
Tangible Parts of Bodies, as in an Integument. And they be no less differing
one from the other, than the Dense or Tangible Parts: And they are in all
Tangible Bodies whatsoever, more or less: And they are never (almost) at rest:
And from them, and their Motions, principally proceed Arefaction, Colliquation,
Concoction, Maturation, Putrefaction, Vivification, and most of the Effects of
Nature: For, as we have figured them in our Sapientia Veterum, in the Fable of
Proserpina, you shall in the Infernal Regiment hear little Doings of Pluto,
but most of proserpina: For Tangible Parts in Bodies are Stupide things; And
the Spirits do (in effect) all. As for the differences of Tangible Parts in
Bodies, the industry of the Chemists has given some light, in discerning by
their Separations, the Oily, Crude, Pure, Impure, Fine, gross Parts of Bodies,
and the like. And the Physicians are content to acknowledge, that Herbs, and
Drugs have diverse parts; As that Opiums has a Stupefactiue Part, and a Heating
Part; The one moving Sleep, the other a Sweat following; And that Rubarb has
Purging Parts, and Astringent Parts, etc. But this whole Inquisition is weakly
and Negligently handled. And for the more subtle differences of the Minute
Parts, and the Posture of them in the Body, (which also has great Effects)
they are not at all touched: As for the Motions of the Minute Parts of Bodies,
which do so great Effects, they have not been observed at all; because they
are Invisible, and incur not to the Eye; but yet they are to be deprehended
by Experience: As Democritus said well, when they charged him to hold, that the
World was made of such little Moats, as were seen in the Sun; Atomus (says
he) necessitate Rationis and Experientia esse connincitur; Atomum enim nemo
vnquam vidit. And therefore the Tumult in the parts of Solid Bodies, when they
are compressed, which is the Cause of all Flight of Bodies through the Air, and
of other Mechanical Motions, (as has been partly touched before, and shall
be thoroughly handled in due place,) is not seen at all. But nevertheless, if
you know it not, or enquire it not attentively and diligently, you shall never
be able to discern, and much less to produce, a Number of Mechanical
Motions. Again, as to the Motions Corporal, within the Enclosures of Bodies,
whereby effects (which were mentioned before) pass between the Spirits, and
the Tangible Parts; (which are, Arefaction, Colliquation, Concoction,
Maturation, etc.) they are not at all handled. But they are put off by the
Names of Virtues, and Natures, and Actions, and Passions, and such other
Logical Words.

It is certain, that all Powers in Nature, Heat is the chief; both in the
Frame of Nature, and in the works of Art. Experiment Solitary touching the
Power of Heat.
Certain it is likewise, that the Effects of Heat, are most advanced, when it
works upon a Body, Heat is best perceived in Distillations, which are
performed in close Vessels, and Receptacles. But yet there is a higher Degree;
For howsoever Distillations do keep the Body in Cells, and Cloisters, without
Going abroad; yet they give space unto Bodies to turn into Vapor; To return
into Liquour; And to Separate one part from another. So as Nature does
Expatiate, although it has not full Liberty: whereby the true and Vltime
Operations of Heat are not attained. But if Bodies may be altered by Heat, and
yet no such Reciprocation of Rarefaction, and of Condensation, and of
Separation, admitted; then it is like that this Proteus of Matter, being held
by the Sleeves, will turn and change into many Metaworphoses. Take therefore a
Square Vessel of Iron, in form of a Cube, and let it have good thick and
strong Sides. Put into it a Cube of Wood, that may fill it as close as may be;
And let it have a Cover of Iron, as strong (at least) as the Sides; And let it
be well Luted, after the manner of the Chemists. Then place the Vessel within
burning Coals, kept quick kindled, for some few hours space. Then take the
Vessel from the Fire, and take off the Cover, and see what is become of the
Wood. I conceive that since all Inflammation, and Euaporation are utterly
prohibited, and the Body still turned upon it Self, that one of these two
Effects will follow: Either that the Body of the Wood will be turned into a
kind of Amalgama, Amalgama
(as the Chemists call it;) Or that the Finer Part will be turned into Air,
and the Grosser stick as it were baked, and incrustate upon the Sides of the
Vessel; being become of a Denser Matter, than the Wood it self, Crude. And
for another Trial, take also Water, and put it in the like Vessel, stopped as
before; But use a gentler Heat, and remove the vessel sometimes from the Fire;
And again, after some small time, when it is Cold, renew the Heating of it:
And repeat this Aloeration some few times: And if you can once bring to pass,
that the Water, which is one of the Simplest of Bodies, be changed in Color,
Odor, or Taste, after the manner of Compound Bodies, you may be sure that
there is a great Work wrought in Nature, and a Notable Entrance made into
strange Changes of Bodies, and productions: And also a Way made, to do that by
Fire, in small time, which the Sun and Age do in long time. But of the
Admirable Effects of this Distillation in Close, (for so we will call it) which
is like the Wombes and Matrices of living creatures, where nothing Expireth,
nor Separateth; We will speak fully, in the due place; Not that we Aim at the
making of Paracelsus Pigmey's; Or any such Prodigious Follies; But that we know
the Effects of Heat will be such, as will scarce fall under the Conceit of Man;
If the force of it be altogether kept in.

There is nothing more Certain in Nature, than that it is impossible for any
Body, to be utterly Annibilated; But that, as it was the work of the
Omnipotency of God, to make Somewhat of Nothing; So it requires the like
Omnipotency, to turn Somewhat into Nothing. Experiment Solitary, touching the
Impossibility of Annibilation.
And therefore it is well said, by an Obscure Writer of the Sect of the
Chemists; That Transmutations of Bodies, as to endeavor and urge by all means,
the Reducing of them to Nothing. And herein is contained also a great Secret of
Preservation of Bodies from Change; For if you can prohibit, that they neither
turn into Air, because no Air comes to them; Not go into the Bodies
Adjacent, because they are utterly Heterogeneall; Nor make a Round and
Circulation within themselves; they will never change, though they be in their
Nature never so Perishable, or Mutable. We see, how Flies, and Spiders, and the
like, get a Sepulcher in Amber, more Durable, than the Monument, and Embalming
of the Body of any King. And I conceive the like will be of Bodies put into
Quicksilver. But then they must be but thin; As a leaf, or a piece of
Paper, or Parchment; For if they have a greater Crassitude, they will alter in
their own Body, though they spend not. But of this, We shall speak more, when
we handle the Title of Conservation of Bodies.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
II. Century.
MUSIC in the Practice, has bin well pursued; And in good Variety; But in
the Theory, and especially in the Yielding of the Causes of the Practique, very
weakly; Being reduced into certain Mystical Subtilties, of no use, and not
much Truth. Experiments in Consort touching Music.
We shall therefore, after our manner, join the Contemplative and Active Part
together.

All Sounds, are either Musical Sounds, which we call Tones; Whereunto Harmony;
which Sounds are ever Equal; As Singing, the Sounds of Stringed, and
Wind-Instruments, the Ringing of Bells, etc. Or Immusicall Sounds; which are
ever Unequal; Such as are the Voice in Speaking, all Whisperings, all Voices
of Beasts, and Birds, (except they be Singing Birds;) all Percussions, of
Stones, Wood, Parchment, Skins (as in Drums;) and infinite others.

The Sounds that produce Tones, are ever from such Bodies, as are in Equal; As
well as the Sounds themselves are Equal; And such are the Percussions of
Metal, as in Bells; Of Glass, as in the Fillipping of a Drinking Glass; Of
Air, as in Men's voices whilst they Sing, in Pipes, Whistles, Organs, Stringed
Instruments, etc. And of Water; as in the Nightingale-Pipes of Regalls, or
Organs, and other Hydranlickes; which the Ancients had, and Nere did so much
esteem, but are now lost. And if any Man think, that the String of the Bow,
and the String of the Vial, are neither of them Equal Bodies; And yet produce
Tones; he is in an error. For the Sound is not created between the Bow or
Plectrum, and the String; But between the String and the Air; No more then it
is between the Finger or Quill, and the String, in other Instruments. So there
are (in effect) but three Percussions that create Tones; Percussions of
Metalls, (comprehending Glass, and the like;) Percussions of Air; and
Percussions of Water.

Diapason or Eight in Music is the sweetest Concord; Insomuch, as it is in
effect an Unison; As we see in Lutes, that are strung in the Base Strings with
two strings, one an Eight above another; Which make but as one Sound. And every
Eighth Note in Ascent, (as from Eight to Fifteen: from Fifteen to twenty two,
and so in infinitum,) are but Scales of Diapason. The Cause is dark, and has
not been rendered by any; And therefore would be better contemplated. It seems
that Air, (which is the Subject of Sounds) in Sounds that are not Tones,
(which are all unequal, as has been said) admits much Variety; As we
see in the Voices of Living Creatures; And likewise in the Voices of several
Men; (for we are capable to discern several Men by their Voices;) And in the
Conjugation of Letters, whence Articulate Sounds proceed; Which of all others
are most various. But in the Sounds which we call Tones, (that are ever Equal)
the Air is not able to cast it self into any such variety; But is forced to
recurre into one and the same Posture or Figure, only differing in Greatness
and Smalnesse. So we see Figures may be made of lines, Crooked and Straight, in
infinite Variety, where there is Inequality; But Circles, or Squares, or
Triangles Equilaterall, (which are all Figures, of Equal lines) can differ but
in Greater, or Lesser.

Number of Eight, to create the Diapason), that this Computation of Eight, is a
thing rather received, than any true Computation. For a true Computation ought
ever to be, by Distribution into equal Portions. Now there be interuenient in
the Rise of Eight (in Tones) two Beemolls, or Halfe-notes; So as if you divide
the Tones equally, the Eight is but Seven whole and equal Notes; And if you
subdiuide that into Half Notes, (as it is in the Stops of a Lute), it makes
the Number of thirteen.

Voice of Man, (not measuring the Tone by whole Notes, and half Notes, which
is the Equal Measure;) there fall out to be two Beemols (as has been said)
between the Unison and the Diapason: And this Varying is natural. For if a
Man would endeavor to raise or fall his Voice, still by HalfeNotes, like the
Stops of a Lute; or by whole Notes alone, without Halfes; as far as an Eight;
he will not be able to frame his Voice unto it. Which shows, that after every
three whole Notes Nature requires, for all Harmonicall use, one half Note to
be interposed.

Numbers, for Conducing to Concent of Notes, is rather to be ascribed to the
Ante-Number, than to the Entire Number; As namely, that the Sound retarneth
after Six, or after Twelve; So that the Seventh, or the Thirteenth, is not the
Matter, but the Sixth, or the Twelfth; And the Seventh and the Thirteenth are
but the limits and Boundaries of the return.

The Concords in Music which are Perfect, or Semiperfect, between Unison, and
the Diapason, are the Fifth, which is the most Perfect; the Third next; And the
Sixth which is more harsh: And as the Ancients esteemed, and so do my self
and some Other yet, the Fourth which they call Diatessaron. As for the Tenth,
Twelfth, Thirteenth, and so in infinitum; they be but Recurrences of the
Former; viz. of the Third, the Fifth, and the Sixth; being an Eight
respectively from them.

For Discords, the Second, and the Seventh, are of all others the most Harmony,
to the Sense; whereof the One is next above the Unison, the Other next under
the Diapason: which may show, that Harmony requires a competent distance of
Notes.

In Harmony, if there be not a Discord to the Base, it does not disturb
Harmony, though there be a Discord to the Higher Parts; So the Discord be not
of the Two that are Odious; And therefore the ordinary Concent of Four Parts
consists of an Eight, a Fifth, and a Third to the Base: But that Fifth is a
Fourth to the Treble, and the Third is a Sixth. And the Cause is, for that the
Base striking more Air, does overcome and drown the Treble. (unless the
Discord be very Odious;) And so hides a small Imperfection. For we see, that
in one of the lower Strings of a Lute, there sounds not the Sound of the
Treble, not any Mixed Sound, but only the Sound of the Base.

We have no Music of Quarter-Notes; And it may be, they are not Harmony; For
we see the Halfe-Notes themselves do but interpose sometimes. Nevertheless we
have some Slides, or Relishes, of the Voice, or Strings, as it were continued
without Notes, from one Tone to another, rising or falling, which are
delightful.

The Causes of that which is Pleasing, or Ingrate to the Hearing, may Pleasing
or Ingrate to the Sight. There be two Things Pleasing to the Sight, (leaving
Pictures, and Shapes aside, which are but Secondary Objects; And please or
displease but in Memory;) these two are, Colors, and Order. The Pleasing of
Color symbolizeth with the Pleasing of any Single Tone to the Ear; But the
Pleasing of Order does symbolize with Harmony. And therefore we see in
Garden-knots, and the Frets of Houses, and all equal and well-answering
Figures, (as Globes, Pyramides, Cones, Cylinders, etc.) how they please;
whereas Unequal Figures are but Deformities. And both these Pleasures, that of
the Eye, and that of the Ear, are but the Effects of Equality; Good
Proportion, or Correspondence: So that (out of Question,) Equality, and
Correspondence, are the Causes of Harmony. But to find the Proportion of that
Correspondence, is more abstruse; whereof notwithstanding we shall speak
somewhat, (when we handle Tones,) in the general Enquiry of Sounds.

Tones are not so apt altogether to procure Sleep, as some other Sounds; As the
Wind, the Purling of Water, Humming of Bees, a Sweet Voice of one that reads,
etc. The Cause whereof is, for that Tones, because they are Equal, and slide
not, do more strike and erect the Sense, than the other. And Overmuch
Attention hinders Sleep.

Music certain Figures, or Tropes; almost agreeing with the Figures of
Rhetoric; And with the Affections of the Mind, and other Senses. First, the
Division and Quauering, which please so much in Music, have an Agreement with
the Glittering of Light; As the MooneBeames playing upon a Wave. Again, the
Falling from a Discord to a Concord, which makes great Sweetness in Music,
has an Agreement with the Affections, which are reintegrated to the better,
after some dislikes: It agrees also with the Taste, which is soon glutted
with that which is sweet alone. The Sliding from the Close or Cadence, has an
Agreement with the Figure in Rhetoric, which they call Praeter Expectatum;
For there is a Pleasure even in Being deceined. The Reports, and Fuges, have an
Agreement with the Figures in Rhetoric, of Repetition, and Traduction. The
Tripla's, and Changing of Times, have an Agreement with the Changes of Motions;
As when Galliard Time, and Measure Time, are in the Medley of one Dance.

Sense of Hearing, and the Kinds of Music, have most Operation upon Manners;
As to Encourage Men, and make them warlike; To make them Soft and Effeminate;
To make them Grave; To make them Light; To make them Gentle and inclined to
Pity, etc. The Cause is, for that the Sense of Hearing strikes the Spirits
more immediately, than the other Senses; And more incorporeally than the
Smelling: For the Sight, Taste, and Feeling, have their Organs, not of so
present and immediate Access to the Spirits, as the Hearing has. And as for
the Smelling, (which indeed works also immediately upon the Spirits, and is
sorcible while the Object remains,) it is with a Communication of the Breath,
or Vapor of the Object Odorate: But Harmony entering easily, and Mingling not
at all, and Coming with a manifest Motion; does by Custom of often Affecting
the Spirits, and Putting them into one kind of Posture, alter not a little the
Nature of the Spirits, even when the Object is removed. And therefore we see,
that Tunes and Aires, even in their own Nature, have in themselves some
Affinity with the Affections; As there be Merry Tunes, Doleful Tunes, Solemn
Tunes; Tunes inclining Men's minds to Pity; Warlike Tunes; etc. So as it is no
Marvel, if they alter the Spirits; considering that Tunes have a
Predisposition to the Motion of the Spirits in themselves. But yet it has been
noted, that though this variety of Tunes, does dispose the Spirits to variety
of Passions, conform unto them; yet generally, Music feeds that disposition
of the Spirits which it finds. We see also that several Aires, and Tunes,
do please several Nations, and Persons, according to the Sympathy they have
with their Spirits.

Perspectiue has been with some diligence inquired; And so has the Nature of
Sounds, in some sort, as far as concerns Music. Experiments in Consort
touching Sounds; and first touching the Nullity, and Entity of Sounds.
But the Nature of Sounds in general, has been superficially observed. It is
one of the subrillest Pieces of Nature. And besides, I practice, as I do
advise; which is, after long Inquiry of Things, Immerse in Matter, to interpose
some Subject, which is Immateriate, or less Materiate; Such as this of Sounds;
To the end, that the Intellect may be Rectified, and become not Partial.

It is first to be considered, what Great Motions there are in Natute, Sound,
or Noise. The Heavens turn about, in a most rapide Motion, without Noise to us
perceived; Though in some Dreams they have been said to make an excellent
Music. So the Motions of the Comets, and Fiery Meteors (as Stella Cadens,
etc.) yield no Noise. And if it be thought, that it is the Greatness of
distance from us, whereby the Sound cannot be heard; We see that Lightnings,
and Coruscations, which are near at hand, yield no Sound neither. And yet in
all these, there is a Percussion and Division of the Air. The Winds in the
Upper Region (which move the Clouds above (which we call the Rack) and are not
perceived below) pass without Noise. The lower Winds in a Plain, except they
be strong, make no Noise; But amongst Trees, the Noise, of such Winds will be
perceived. And the Winds (generally) when they make a Noise, do ever make it
unequally, Rising and Falling, and sometimes (when they are vehement,)
Trembling at the Height of their Blast. Rain, or Hail falling, (though
vehemently,) yields no Noise, in passing through the Air, till it fall upon
the Ground, Water, Houses, or the like. Water in a River (though a swift
Stream) is not heard in the Channel, but runs in Silence, if it be of any
depth; But the very Stream upon Shallowes, of Gravel, or Pebble, will be
heard. And Waters, when they beat upon the Shore, or are straightened, (as in the
falls of Bridges;) Or are dashed against themselves, by Winds, give a Roaring
Noise. Any piece of Timber, or Hard Body, being thrust forwards by another Body
Contiguous, without knocking, gives no Noise. And so Bodies in weighing, one
upon another, though the Upper Body press the lower Body down, make no Noise.
So the Motion in the Minute Parts of any solid Body, (which is the Principal
Cause of Violent Motion, though unobserved;) passes without Sound; For that
Sound, that is heard sometimes, is produced only by the Breaking of the Air;
And not by the Impulsion of the Parts. So it is manifest; That where the
Anteriour Body gives way, as fast as the Posteriour comes on, it makes no
Noise; be the Motion never so great, or swift.

Air open, and at large, makes no Noise, except it be sharply percussed;
Sound of a String, where Air is percussed by a hard, and stiff Body; And with
a sharp loose; For if the String be not strained, it makes no Noise. But where
the Air is pent, and straightened, there Breath, or other Blowing, (which carry
but a gentle Percussion,) suffice to create Sound; As in Pipes, and
winde-Instruments. But then you must note, that in Recorders, which go with a
gentle Breath, the Concaue of the Pipe, were it not for the Fipple, that
straitneth the Air, (much more than the Simple Concaue;) would yield no Sound.
For as for other windeInstruments, they require a forcible Breath; As Trumpets,
Cornets, Hunters-hornes, etc. Which appears by the blowne-cheeks of him that
windeth them. Organs also are blown with a strong wind, by the Bellows. And
note again, that some kind of winde-Instruments, are blown at a small Hole
in the side, which straitneth the Breath at the first Entrance; The rather, in
respect of their Trauerse, and Stop above the Hole, which performs the
Fipples Part; As it is seen in Flutes, and Fifes, which will not give Sound,
by a Blast at the end, as Recorders, etc. do. Likewise in all Whistling, you
contract the Mouth; And to make it more sharp, Men sometimes use their Finger.
But in Open Air, if you throw a Stone, or a Dart, they give no Sound: No more
do Bullets, except they happen to be a little hollowed in the Casting; Which
Hollownesse penneth the Air: Not yet Arrows, except they be ruffled in their
Feathers, which likewise penneth the Air. As for Small whistles, or Shepherds
Oa^^ Pipes; they give a Sound, because of their extreme Slenderness, whereby
the Air is more pent, than in a Wider Pipe. Again, the Voices of Men, and
Living Creatures, pass through the throat, which penneth the Breath. As for
the Jews Harp, it is a sharp Percussion; And besides, has the vantage of
penning the Air in the Mouth.

Solid Bodies, if they be very softly percussed, give no Sound; As when a man
treads very softly upon Boards. So Chests or Doors in fair weather, when
they open easily, give no Sound. And Cart-wheeles squeak not, when they are
liquoured.

Flame of Tapers, or Candles, though it be a swift Motion, and breaks the
Air, yet passes without Sound. Air in Ouens, though (no doubt) it does (as
it were) boil, and dilate it self, and is repercussed; yet it is without
Noise.

Flame percussed by Air, gives a Noise; As in Blowing of the Fire by
Bellows; Greater, than if the Bellows should blow upon the Air it self. And
so likewise Flame percussing the Air strongly, (as when Flame suddenly takes,
and opens,) gives a Noise; So, Great Flames, whiles the one impelleth the
other, give a bellowing Sound.

white Powder, which will discharge a Piece without Noise; which is a dangerous
Experiment, if it should be true: For it may cause secret Murders. But it
seems to me impossible; For, if the Air pent, be driven forth, and strike
the Air open, it will certainly make a Noise. As for the white Powder (if any
such thing be, that may extinguish, or dead the Noise,) it is like to be a
Mixture of Petre, and Sulphur, without Coal. For Petre alone will not take
Fire. And if any Man think, that the Sound may be extinguished, or deaded, by
discharging the Pent Air, before it comes to the Mouth of the Piece, and to
the Open Air; That is not probable; For it will make more divided Sounds; As
if you should make a Cross Barrel hollow, through the Barrel of a Piece, it
may be, it would give several Sounds, both at the Nose, and at the Sides. But
I conceive, that if it were possible, to bring to pass, that there should be
no Air pent at the Mouth of the Piece, the Bullet might fly with small, or no
Noise, For first it is certain, there is no Noise in the Percussion of the
Flame upon the Bullet. Next the Bullet, in piercing through the Air, makes no
Noise; As has been said. And then, if there be no Pent Air that strikes
upon Open Air, there is no Cause of Noise; And yet the Flying of the Bullet
will not be stayed. For that Motion (as has been often said) is in the Parts of
the Bullet, and not in the Air. So as trial must be made by taking some small
Concaue of Metal, no more than you mean to fill with Powder; And laying the
Bullet in the Mouth of it, half out into the Open Air.

I heard it affirmed by a Man, that was a great Dealer in Secrets, but
Conspiracy (which himself hindered,) to have killed Queen Mary, Sister to
Queen Elizabeth, by BurningGlasse, when she walked in Saint James Park, from
the Leads of the House. But thus much (no doubt) is true; That if
Burning-Glasses could be brought to a great strength, (as they talk generally
of Burning-Glasses, that are able to burn a Navy,) the Percussion of the Air
alone, by such a Burning-Glasse, would make no Noise; No more than is found in
Cornscations, and Lightnings, without Thunders.

I suppose, that Impression of the Air with Sounds, asks a time to Sense; As
well as the Impression of Species visible: Or else they will not be heard. And
therefore, as the Bullet moves so swift, that it is Invisible; So the same
Swiftness of Motion makes it Inaudible: For we see, that the Apprehension of
the Eye, is quicker than that of the Ear.

All Eruptions of Air, though small and slight, give an Entity of Sound;
Crackling, Pussing, Spitting, etc. As in Bay Salt, and Bayleaues, cast into the
Fire; So in Chestnuts, when they leap forth of the Ashes; So in Green Wood
laid upon the Fire, especially Roots; So in Candles that spit Flame, if they be
wet; So in Rasping, Sneezing, etc. So in a Rose-leafe gathered together into
the fashion of a Purse, and broken upon the Forehead, or Back of the Hand, as
Children use.

The Cause given of Sound, that it should be an Elision of the Air (whereby, if
they mean any thing, they mean a Cutting, or Dividing, or else an Attenuating
of the Air) is but a Term of Ignorance: And the Motion is but a Catch of the
Wit upon a few Instances; As the Manner is in the Philosophy Received.
Experiments in Co^sort touching Production. Conservation, and Dilation of
Sounds; And the Office of the Air therein.
And it is common with Men, that if they have gotten a Pretty Expression, by a
Word of Art, that Expression, goes current; though it be empty of Matter. This
Conceit of Elision, appears most manifestly to befalse, in that the Sound of
a Bell, String, or the Percussion; But cease straight-waies, if the Bell, or
String, be touched and stayed: whereas, if it were the Elision of the Air, that
made the Sound, it could not be, that the Touch of the Bell, or String, should
extinguish so suddenly that Motion, caused by the Elision of the Air. This
appears yet more manifestly, by Chiming with a Hammer, upon the Outside of a
Bell; For the Sound will be according to the inward Concaue of the Bell;
whereas the Elision, or Attenuation of the Air, cannot be but only between
the Hammer, and the Outside of the Bell, So again, if it were an Elision, a
broad Hammer, and a Bodkin, struck upon Metal, would give a diverse Tone; As
well as a diverse Loudness: But they do not so; For though the Sound of the
one be Louder, and of the other Softer, yet the Tone is the same. Besides, in
Eccho's, (whereof some are as loud as the Original Voice, there is no new
Elision; but a Repercussion only. But that which conuinceth it most of all,
is, that Sounds are generated, where there is no Air at all. But these and the
like Conceits, when Men have cleared their understanding, by the light of
Experience, will scatter, and break up like a Mist.

Sound is not produced at the first, but with some Local Motion of the Air,
or Flame, or some other Medium; Nor yet without some Resistance, either in the
Air, or the Body Percussed. For if there be a mere Yielding, or Cession, it
produces no Sound; As has been said. And therein Sounds differ from Light,
and Colors; which pass through the Air, or other Bodies, without any Local
Motion of the Air; either at the first, or after. But you must attentively
distinguish, between the Local Motion of the Air, (which is but Vehiculum
Caussae, A Carrier of the Sounds,) and the Sounds themselves, Conueighed in the
Air. For as to the former, we see manifestly, that no Sound is produced (no
not by Air it self against other Air, as in Organs, etc.) but with a
perceptible Blast of the Air; And with some Resistance of the Air stricken.
For even all Speech, (which is one of the gentlest Motions of Air,) is with
Expulsion of a little Breath. And all Pipes have a Blast, as well as a Sound.
We see also manifestly, that Sounds are carried with Wind: And therefore Sounds
will be heard further with the Wind, than against the Wind; And likewise do
rise and fall with the Intension or Remission of the Wind. But for the
Impression of the Sound, it is quite another Thing; And is utterly without any
Local Motion of the Air, Perceptible; And in that resembles the Species
visible: For after a Man has lured, or a Bell is rung, we cannot discern any
Perceptible Motion (at all) in the Air, a long as the Sound goes; but only at
the first. Neither does the Wind (as far as it carries a Voice,) with the
Motion thereof, confound any of the Delicate, and Articulate Figurations of the
Air, in Variety of Words. And if a Man speak a good loudness, against the
Flame of a Candle, it will not make it tremble much; though most, when those
Letters are pronounced, which contract the Mouth; As F, S,V, and some others.
But Gentle Breathing, or Blowing without speaking, will move the Candle far
more. And it is the more probable, that Sound is without any Local Motion of
the Air, because as it differs from the Sight, in that it needs a Local
Motion of the Air at first; So it paralleleth in so many other things with the
Sight, and Radiation of Things visible; Which (without all question) induce no
Local Motion in the Air, as has been said.

Nevertheless it is true, that upon the Noise of Thunder, and great Ordnance;
Glass windows will shake; and Fishes are thought to be frayed with the
Motion, caused by Noise upon the water. But these Effects are from the Local
Motion of the Air, which is a Concomitant of the Sound, (as has been said;)
and not from the Sound.

It has been anciently reported, and is still received, that Extreme and
Shouting of People assembled in great Multitudes, have so rarefied, and broken
the Air, that Birds flying over, have fallen down, the Air being not able to
support them. And it is believed by some, that Great Ringing of Bells in
populous Cities, has chased away Thunder: and also dissipated Pestilent Air:
All which may be also from the Concussion of the Air, and not from the Sound.

A very great Sound, near hand, has stricken many Dease; And at Lured loud,
and shrill, had suddenly an Offense, as if somewhat had broken, or been
dislocated in my Ear; And immediately after, a loud Ringing; (Not an ordinary
Singing, or Hissing, but far louder, and differing;) so as I feared some
Deafness. But after some half Quarter of an Hour it vanished. This Effect
may be truly referred unto the Sound: For (as is commonly received) an
ouer-potent Object does destroy the Sense; And Spiritual Species, (both
Visible, and Audible,) will work upon the Sensories, though they move not any
other Body.

In Delation of Sounds, the Enclosure of them preserves them, and Ear to the
other, the Sound is heard much further, than in the Open Air; The Cause is,
for that the Sound spends, and is dissipated in the Open Air; But in such
Concaues it is conserved, and contracted. So also in a Piece of Ordnance, if
you speak in the Touchhole, and another lay his Ear to the Mouth of the
Piece, the Sound passes, and is far better heard, than in the Open Air.

It is further to be considered, how it proves and works, when Sound is not
enclosed all the Length of his Way, but passes partly through open Air; As
where you speak some distance from a Truncke; or where the Ear is some
distance from the Truncke; at the other End; Or where both Mouth and Ear are
distant from the Truncke. And it is tried, that in a long Truncke, of some
eight or ten foot, the Sound is helped, though both the Mouth, and the Ear be
a handful, or more, from the Ends of the Truncke; And somewhat more helped,
when the Ear of the Hearer is near, than when the Mouth of the Speaker. And
it is certain, that the Voice is better heard in a Chamber from abroad, than
abroad from within the Chamber.

Enclosure, that is Round about and Entire, preserves the Sound; So does a
Semi-Concaue, though in a less degree. And therefore, if you divide a Truncke,
or a Cane into two, and one speak at the one end, and you lay your Ear at the
other, it will carry the Voice further, than in the Air at large. Nay further,
if it be not a full Semi-Concaue; but if you do the like upon the Mast of a
Ship, or a long Pole, or a Piece of Ordnance (though one speak upon the
Surface of the Ordnance, and not at any of the Bores;) the Voice will be heard
further, than in the Air at large.

Voice will be carried in an Horn, which is a line Arched; Or in a Trumpet,
which is a line Retorted; Or in some Pipe that were Sinuous.

Sounds may be created without Air, though Air be the most favorable
Deferent of Sounds. Take a Vessel of Water, and knap a pair of Tongs some
depth within the Water, and you shall hear the Sound of the Tongs well, and
not much diminished; And yet there is no Air at all present.

Vessel of Silver, and another of Wood, and fill each of them full of Water,
and then knap the Tongs together, as before, about an handful from the
Bottom, and you shall find the Sound much more Resounding from the Vessel of
Silver, than from that of Wood; And yet if there be not water in the Vessel,
so that yo knap the Tongs in the Air, you shall find no difference, between
the Silver and Wooden Vessel. Whereby, beside the maine point of creating
Sound without Air, you may collect two Things: The one, that the Sound
communicates with the Bottom of the Vessel: The other, that such a
Communication passes far better, through Water, than Air.

Hard Bodies together, in the Midst of a Flame, and you shall hear the
Sound, with little difference, from the Sound in the Air.

Pneumaticall Part, which is in all Tangible Bodies, and has some Affinity
with the Air, performs, in some degree, the Parts of the Air; As when you
knock upon an Empty Barrel, the Sound is (in part) created by the Air on
the Outside; And (in part) by the Air in the Inside; For the Sound will be
greater or lesser, as the Barrel is more Empty, or more full; But yet the
Sound participateth also with the Spirit in the Wood, through which it passes,
from the Outside to the Inside: And so it comes to pass, in the Chiming of
Bells, on the Outside; where also the Sound passes to the Inside: And a number
of other like Instances, whereof we shall speak more, when we handle the
Communication of Sounds.

It were extreme Grossness to think, (as we have partly touched Sound in
Strings is made, or produced, between the Hand and the String, or the Quill
and the String, or the Bow and the String: For those are but Vehicula Motus,
Passages to the Creation of the Sound; the Sound being produced between the
String and the Air; And that not by any Impulsion of the Air from the first
Motion of the String; but by the Return or Result of the String, which was
strained by the Touch, to his former Place: which Motion of Result is quick
and sharp; Whereas the first Motion, is soft and dull. So the Bow tortureth the
String continually, and thereby holds it in a Continual Trepidation.

Take a Truncke, and let one whistle at the one End, and bold your Ear at the
other, and you shall find the Sound strike so sharp, as you can scarce endure
it. Experiments in Co^sort touching the Magnitude, and Exiluy, and Damps of
Sounds.
The Cause is, for that Sound diffuseth it self in round; And so spends it
Self; But if the Sound, which would scatter in Open Air, be made to go all
into a Canale; It must needs give greater force to the Sound. And so you may
note, that Enclosures do not Sound, but also Increase and Sharpen it.

A Hunters Horn, being greater at one end, than at the other, does Sound more,
than if the Horn were all of an equal Bore. The Cause is, for that the Air,
and Sound, being first contracted at the leffer End, and afterward having more
Room to spread at the greater End; do dilate themselves; And in Coming out
strike more Air; whereby the Sound is the Greater, and Baser. And even Hunters
Horns, which are sometimes made straight, and not Oblique, are ever greater at
the lower end. It would be tried also in Pipes, being made far larger at the
lower End: Or being made with a Belly toward the lower End, And then issuing
into a straight Concaue again.

There is in Saint James Fields, a Conduit of Brick, unto which joins low
Vault; And at the End of that, a Round House of Stone: And in the Brick
Conduit there is a Window; And in the Round House a Slit or Rift of some little
breadth: If you cry out in the Rift, it will make a fearful Roaring at the
Window. The Cause is the same with the former; For that all Concaues, that
proceed from more Narrow to more Broad, do amplify the Sound at the Coming
out.

Hawks Bells, that have Holes in the sides, give a greater Ring, than Open
Air. The Cause is the same with the first Instance of the Trancke; Namely, for
that the Sound Enclosed with the Sides of the Bell, comes forth at the Holes
unspent, and more strong.

In Drums, the Closeness round about, that preserves the Sound Noise come
forth at the Drum-Hole, far more loud, and strong, than if you should strike
upon the like Skin, extended in the Open Air. The Cause is the same with the
two precedent.

Sounds are better heard, and further off, in an Evening, or in the Night, than
at the Noone, or in the Day. The Cause is, for that in the Day, when the Air
is more Thin, (no doubt) the Sound pierces better; But when the Air is more
Thick, (as in the Night) the Sound spends and spreads abroad less: And so
it is a Degree of Enclosure. As for the Night, it is true also, that the
General Silence helps.

Reflections of Sounds; The one at Distance, which is the Echo; Wherein the
Original is heard distinctly, and the Reflection also distinctly; Of which we
shall speak hereafter: The other in Concurrence; When the Sound Reflecting
(the Reflection being near at hand) returns immediately upon the Original,
and so iterateth it not, but amplifieth it. Therefore we see, that Music upon
the water sounds more; And so likewise Music is better in Chambers
Wainscotted, than Hanged.

Strings of a Lute, or Violl, or Virginalls, do give a far greater Sound, by
reason of the Knot, and Board, and Concaue underneath, than if there were
nothing but only the Flat of a Board, without that Hollow and Knot, to let in
the Upper Air into the Lower. The Cause is, the Communication of the Upper
Air with the Lower; And Penning of both from Expense, or Dispersing.

Irish Harp has Open Air on both sides of the Strings: And it has the
Concaue or Belly, not along the Strings, but at the End of the Strings. It
makes a more Resounding Sound, than a Bandora, Orpharion, or Citterne, which
have likewise Wire-strings. I judge the Cause to be, for that Open Air on both
Sides helps, so that there be a Concaue; Which is therefore best placed at
the End.

Virginal, when the Lid is down, it makes a more exile Sound, than when the
Lid is open. The Cause is, for that all Shutting in of Air, where there is no
competent Vent, dampeth the Sound. Which maintains likewise the former
Instance; For the Belly of the Lute, or Vi^ll, does pen the Air somewhat.

Church at Gloucester, (and as I have heard the like is in some other places;)
where if you speak against a Wall, softly, another shall hear your Voice
better a good way off, than near hand. Enquire more particularly of the Frame
of that Place. I suppose there is some Vault, or Hollow, or Isle, behind the
Wall, and some Passage to it toward the further end of that Wall, against
which you speak; So as the Voice, of him that speaks, slideth along the
Wall, and then enters at some Passage, and communicates with the Air of the
Hollow; For it is preserved somewhat by the plain wall; but that is too weak
to give a Sound Audible, till it has communicated with the back Air.

Bowstring, and lay the Horn of the Bow near your Ear, and it will increase
the Sound, and make a degree of a Tone. The Cause is, for that the Sensory, by
reason of the Close Holding, is percussed before the Air disperseth. The like
is, if yo hold the Horn betwixt your Teeth. But that is a plain Delation of
the Sound; from the Teeth, to the Instrument of Hearing; For there is a great
Intercourse between those two Parts; As appears by this; That a Harsh
Grating Tune sets the Teeth on edge. The like falls out, if the Horn of
the Bow be put upon the Temples; But that is but the Slide of the Sound from
thence to the Ear.

If you take a Rod of Iron, or Brass, and hold the one end to your Sound, than
the like Stroke upon the Rod, not so made Contiguous to the Ear. By which, and
by some other Instances, that have been partly touched, it should appear;
That Sounds do not only slide upon the Surface of a Smooth Body, but do also
communicate with the Spirits, that are in the Pores of the Body.

I remember in Trinity College in Cambridge, there was an Upper which being
thought weak in the Roof of it, was supported by a Pillar of Iron, of the
bigness of ones Arm, in the midst of the Chamber; Which if you had struck,
it would make a little flat Noise in the Room where it was struck; But it
would make a great Bombe in the Chamber beneath.

The Sound which is made by Buckets in a Well, when they touch upon Water; Or
when they strike upon the side of the Well; Or when two Buckets dash the one
against the other; These Sounds are deeper, and suller, than if the like
Percussion were made in the Open Air. The Cause is, the Penning and Enclosure
of the Air, in the Concaue of the Well.

Barrells placed in a Room under the Floare of a Chamber, make all Noises in
the same Chamber, more Full and Resounding.

So that there be fine ways (in general,) of Maioration of Sounds: Enclosure
Simple; Enclosure with Dilatation; Communication; Reflection Concurrent; and
Approach to the Sensory.

For Exility of the Voice, or other Sounds: It is certain, that the Voice does
pass through Solid and Hard Bodies, if they be not too thick. And through
Water; which is likewise a very Close Body, and such an one, as lets not in
Air. But then the Voice, or other Sound, is reduced, by such passage, to a
great Weakness, or Exility. If therefore you stop the Holes of a Howkes Bell,
it will make no Ring, but a flat Noise, or Rattle. And so does the Aetites, or
Eagles Stone, which has a little Stone within it.

And as for Water, it is a certain Trial: Let a Man go into a Bath, Paile,
and turn the Bottom upward, and carry the Mouth of it, (Even,) down to the
Level of the Water; and so press it down under the Water, some handful and
an half, still keeping it even, that it may not tilt on either side, and so
the Air get out: Then let him that is in the Bath, diue with his Head so far
under Water, as he may put his Head into the Paile; and there will come as much
Air bubling forth, as will make Room for his Head. Then let him speak; and
any that shall stand without, shall hear his Voice plainly; but yet made extreme
sharp and exile, like the Voice of Puppets: But yet the Articulate Sounds of
the Words will not be confounded. Note that it may be much more handsomely
done, if the Paile be put over the Man's head above Water, and then he cowre
down, and the Paile be pressed down with him. Note that a Man must kneel or
sit, that he may be lower than the Water. A Man would think, that the Sicilian
Poet had knowledge of this Experiment; For he says; That Hercules Page Hylas
went with a Water-pot, to fill it at a pleasant Fountain, that was near the
Shore, and that the Nymphs of the Fountain fell in love with the Boy, and
pulled him under Water, keeping him alive; And that Hercules missing his Page,
called him by his Name, aloud, that all the Shore rang of it; And that Hylas
from within the Water, answered his Master; But (that which is to the present
purpose) with so small and exile a Voice, as Hercules thought he had been
three miles off, when the Fountain (indeed) was fast by.

Lutes, and Instruments of Strings, if you stop a String high, (whereby it has
less Scope to tremble) the Sound is more Treble, but yet more dead.

Sawcers, and strike the Edge of the one against the Bottom of the other,
within a Paile of Water; And you shall find, that as you put the Sawcers
lower, and lower, the Sound grows more flat; even while Part of the Sawcer is
above the Water; But that Flatnesse of Sound is joined with a Harshnesse of
Sound; which (no doubt) is caused by the Inequality of the Sound, which
comes from the Part of the Sawcer under the Water, and from the Part above.
But when the Sawcer is wholly under the Water, the Sound becomes more clear,
but far more low; And as if the Sound came from a far off.

Soft Body dampeth the Sound, much more than a Hard; As if a Bell has Cloth,
or Silk wrapped about it, it deadeth the Sound more, than if it were Wood. And
therefore in Clericalls, the Keys are lined; And in Colleges they use to line
the Tablemen.

Recorder, after these several manners. The Bottom of it was set against the
Palm of the Hand; stopped with Wax round about; set against a Damask Cushion;
Thrust into Sand; Into Ashes; Into Water, (half an Inch under the Water;)
Close to the Bottom of a Silver Basin; And still the Tone remained: But the
Bottom of it was set against a Woollen Carpet; A Lining of Plush; A Lock of
Wool, (though loosely put in;) Against Snow; And the Sound of it was quite
deaded, and but Breath.

Iron Hot produces not so full a Sound, as when it is Cold; For while it is
hot, it appears to be more Soft, and less Resounding. So likewise Warm
Water, when it falls, makes not so full a Sound, as Cold: And I conceive it
is softer, and nearer the Nature of Oil; For it is more slippery; As may be
perceived, in that it scowreth better.

Recorder made, with two Fipples at each end one; The Truncke of it of the
length of two Recorders, and the Holes answerable toward each end; And let two
play the same Lesson upon it, at an Unison; And let it be noted, whether the
Sound be confounded; or amplified; or dulled. So likewise let a Cross be made,
of two Trunckes (thorow-out) hollow; And let two speak, or sing, the one
long-waies, the other trauerse: And let two hear at the opposite Ends; And
note, whether the Sound be confounded; amplified; or dulled. Which two
Instances will also give light to the Mixture of Sounds; whereof we shall speak
hereafter.

A Bellows blown in at the Hole of a Drum, and the Drum then Sound a little
flatter, but no other apparent Alteration. The Cause is manifest; Partly for
that it hinders the Issue of the Sound; And partly for that it makes the
Air, being blown together, less moveable.

The Loudness, and Softness of Sounds, is a Thing distinct from the Magnitude
and Exility of Sounds; For a Base String, though softly stricken, gives the
greater Sound; But a Treble String, if hard stricken, will be heard much
further off. Experiments in Consort touching the Loudness or Sofinesse of
Sounds; and their Carriage at longer or shorter Distance.
And the Cause is, for that the Base String strikes more Air; And the Treble
less Air, but with a sharper Percussion.

It is therefore the Strength of the Percussion, that is a Principal Cause of
the Loudness or Softness of Sounds: As in knocking harder or softer; Strength
of this Percussion, consists, as much, or more, in the Hardness of the Body
Percussed, as in the Force of the Body Percussing: For if you strike against a
Cloth, it will give a less Sound; If against Wood, a greater; If against
Metal, yet a greater; And in Metals, if you strike against Gold, (which is the
more pliant,) it gives the flatter Sound; If against Silver, or Brass, the
more Ringing Sound. As for Air, where it is strongly pent, it matcheth a Hard
Body. And therefore we see in discharging of a Piece, what a great Noise it
makes. We see also, that the Charge with Bullet; Or with Paper wet, and hard
stopped; Or with Powder alone, rammed in hard; makes no great difference in
the Loudness of the Report.

The Sharpness or Quickness of the Percussion, is a great Cause of the
Loudness, as well as the Strength: As in a Whip, or Wand, if you strike the
Air with it; the Sharper and Quicker you strike it, the Louder Sound it
gives. And in playing upon the Lute, or Virginalls, the quick Stroke or
Touch, is a great life to the Sound. The Cause is, for that the Quick Striking
cutteth the Air speedily; whereas the Soft Striking does rather beat, than cut.

The Communication of Sounds (as in Bellies of Lutes, Empty Vessels, etc.)
has been touched obiter, in the Maioration of Sounds: But it is fit also to
make a Title of it apart. Experiments in Consort touching the Communication of
Sounds.


Experiment for greatest Demonstration of Communication of Sounds, is the
Chiming of Bells; where if you strike with a Hammer upon the Upper Part, and
then upon the Midst, and then upon the Lower, you shall find the Sound to be
more Treble, and more Base, according unto the Concaue, on the Inside; though
the Percussion be only on the Outside.

Sound is created between the Blast of the Mouth, and the Air of the Pipe, it
has nevertheless some Communication with the Matter of the Sides of the Pipe,
and the Spirits in them contained; for in a Pipe, or Trumpet, of Wood, and
Brass, the Sound will be diverse; So if the Pipe be covered with Cloth, or
Silk, it will give a diverse Sound, from that it would do of it self; So, if
the Pipe be a little wet on the Inside, it will make a differing Sound, from
the same Pipe dry.

Sound made within Water, does communicate better with a hard Body through
Water, than made in Air, it does with Air; Vide Experimentum, 134.

We have spoken before (in the Inquisition touching Music,) of Musical
Sounds, whereunto there may be a Concord or Discord in two Parts; Which Sounds
we call Tones: And likewise of Immusicall Sounds; And have given the Cause,
that the Tone proceeds of Equality, and the other of Inequality. And we have
also expressed there, what are the Equal Bodies that give Tones, and what are
the Unequal that give none. Experiments in Co^sort touching Equality, and
Inequality of Sounds.
But now we shall speak of such Inequality of Sounds, as proceeds, not from
the Nature of the Bodies themselves, but is Accidental; Either from the
Roughness, or Obliquity of the Passage; Or from the Doubling of the
Percutient; Or from the Trepidation of the Motion.

Bell, if it have a Rift in it, whereby the Sound has not a clear Passage,
gives a Hoarse and Iarring Sound; So the Voice of Man, when by Cold taken the
Wesill grows rugged, and (as we call it) furred, becomes hoarse. And in
these two Instances, the Sounds are Ingrate; because they are merely Unequal:
But, if they be Unequal in Equality, then the Sound is Grateful, but Purling.

Instruments, that have either Returns, as Trumpets; Or Flexions, as Cornets;
Or are Drawn up, and put from, as Sackbuts; have a Purling Sound; But the
Recorder, or Flute, that have none of these Inequalities, give a clear Sound.
Nevertheless, the Recorder it self, or Pipe moistened a little in the Inside,
sounds more solemnly, and with a little Purling, or Hissing. Again, a
Wreathed String, such as are in the Base Strings of Banderaes, gives also a
Purling Sound.

Lute-string, if it be merely Unequal in his Parts, gives a Harsh and
Untuneable Sound; which Strings we call False, being bigger in one Place than
in another; And therefore Wire-strings are never False. We see also, that when
we try a False Lute-string, we use to extend it hard between the fingers, and
to fillip it; And if it gives a double Species, it is True; But if it gives a
treble, or more, it is False.

Waters, in the Noise they make as they run, represent to the Ear Trembling
Noise; And in Regalls, (where they have a Pipe, they call the Nightingale-Pipe,
which contains Water) the Sound has a continual Trembling: And Children
have also little Things they call Cocks, which have Water in them; And when
they blow, or whistle in them, they yield a Trembling Noise; Which Trembling of
Water, has an assinity with the Letter L. All which Inequalities of
Trepidation, are rather pleasant, than otherwise.

Base Notes, or very Treble Notes, give an Asper Sound; For that the Base
strikes more Air, than it can well strike equally: And the Treble cutteth the
Air so sharp, as it returns too swift, to make the Sound Equal: And
therefore a Mean, or Tenor, is the sweetest Part.

We know Nothing, that can at pleasure make a Musical, or Immusicall by
voluntary Motion, but the Voice of Man, and Birds. The Cause is, (no doubt) in
the Weasill or Windpipe, (which we call Aspera Arteria,) which being well
extended, gathers Equality; As a Bladder that is wrinckled, if it be
extended, becomes smooth. The Extension is always more in Tones, than in
Speech: Therefore the Inward Voice of Whisper can never a give Tone: And in
Singing, there is (manifestly) a greater Working and Labor of the Throat, than
in Speaking; As appears in the Thrusting out, or Drawing in of the Chinne,
when we sing.

The Humming of Bees, is an Unequal Buzzing; And is conceived, by Inward
Sound, But (it may be) it is neither; But from the motion of their Wings; For
it is not heard but when they stir.

All Metalls quenched in Water, give a Sibilation or Hissing Sound; Sound be
created between the Water or Vapor, and the Air. Seething also, if there be
but small Store of Water, in a Vessel, gives a Hissing Sound; But Boiling in
a full Vessel, gives a Bubling Sound, drawing somewhat near to the Cocks
used by Children.

Trial would be made, whether the Inequality, or Interchange of the Medium,
will not produce an Inequality of Sound; As if three Bells were made one within
another, and Air betwixt Each; And then the outermost Bell were chimed with a
Hammer, how the Sound would differ from a Simple Bell. So likewise take a Plate
of Brass, and a Plancke of Wood, and join them close together, and knock upon
one of them, and see if they do not give an unequal Sound. So make two or
three Partitions or Wood in a Hogshead, with Holes or Knots in them; And mark
the difference of their Sound, from the Sound of an Hogshead, without such
Partitions.

It is evident, that the Percussion of the Greater Quantity of Air, causes
the Baser Sound; And the less Quantity, the more Treble Sound. Experiments in
Consort, touching the ^^^ treble, and the ^^^ Base Tones, or Musical Sounds.
The Percussion of the Greater Quantity of Air, is produced by the Greatness
of the Body Percussing; By the Latitude of the Concaue, by which the Sound
Longitude of the same Concaue. Therefore we see that a Base string, is greater
than a Treble; A Base Pipe has a greater Bore than a Treble; And in Pipes, and
the like, the lower the Note Holes be, and the further off from the Mouth of
the Pipe, the more Base Sound they yield; And the nearer the Mouth, the more
Treble. Nay more, if you strike an Entire Body, as an Andiron of Brass, at the
Top, it makes a more Treble Sound; And at the Bottom a Baser.

Sharper or Quicker Percussion of Air causes the more Treble Sound; And the
Slower or Heavier, the more Base Sound. So we see in Strings; the more they are
wound up, and strained; (And thereby give a more quick Start-backe;) the more
Treble is the Sound; And the slacker they are, or less wound up, the Baser is
the Sound. And therefore a Bigger String more strained, and a Lesser String,
less strained, may fall into the same Tone.

Children, Women, Eunuchs have more small and shrill Voices, than Men. The
Reason is, not for that Men have greater Heat, which may make the Voice
stronger, (for the strength of a Voice or Sound, does make a difference in the
Loudness or Softness, but not in the Tone;) But from the Dilatation of the
Organ; which (it is true) is likewise caused by Heat. But the Cause of Changing
the Voice, at the years of Puberty, is more obscure. It seems to be, for
that when much of the Moisture of the Body, which did before irrigate the
Parts, is drawn down to the Spermaticall vessels; it leaves the Body more
hot than it was; whence comes the Dilatation of the Pipes: For we see
plainly, all Effects of Heat, do then come on; As Pilosity, more Roughness of
the Skin, Hardness of the Flesh, etc.

Musician, has produced two other Means of Strayning, or Intension of
Strings, besides their Winding up. The one is the Stopping of the String with
the Finger; As in the Necks of Lutes, Viols, etc. The other is the Shortness
of the String; As in Harps, Virginalls, etc. Both these have one, and the same
reason; For they cause the String to give a quicker Start.

Straining of a String, the further it is strained, the less Superstraining
goes to a Note; For it requires good Winding of a String, before it will make
any Note at all: And in the Stops of Lutes, etc. the higher they go, the less
Distance is between the Frets.

Drinking-Glasse with Water, (especially one Sharp below, and Wide above,) and
fillip upon the Brim, or Outside; And after empty Part of the Water, and so
more and more, and still try the Tone by Fillipping; you shall find the Tone
fall, and be more Base, as the Glass is more Empty.

The Just and Measured Proportion of the Air Percussed, toward the Baseness
or Treblenesse of Tones, is one of the greatest Secrets in the Contemplation of
Sounds. Experiments in Consort touching the Proportion of Treble and Base Tones.
For it discovers the true Coincidence of Tones into Diapasons; Which is the
Return of the same Sound. And so of the Concords and Discords, between the
Unison, and Diapason; Which we have touched before, in the Experiments of
Music; but think fit to resume it here, as a principal Part of our Enquiry
touching the Nature of Sounds. It may be found out in the Proportion of the
Winding of Strings; In the Proportion of the Distance of Frets; And in the
Proportion of the Concaue of Pipes, etc. But most commodiously in the last of
these.

Try therefore the Winding of a String once about, as soon as it is Tone; And
then of twice about; And thrice about, etc. And mark the Scale or Difference
of the Rise of the Tone: Whereby you shall discover, in one, two Effects; Both
the Proportion of the Sound toward the Dimension of the Winding; And the
Proportion likewife of the Sound toward the String, as it is more or less
strained. But note that to measure this, the way will be, to take the Length in
a right Line of the String, upon any Winding about of the Pegge.

As for the Steps, you are to take the Number of Frets; And principally Length
of the Line, from the first Stop of the String, unto such a Stop as shall
produce a Diapason to the former Stop, upon the same String.

But it will best (as it is said) appear, in the Bores of Wind-Instruments:
Pipes, to be made, in length, and all things else, alike, with a single,
double, and so on to a sextuple Bore; And so mark what Fall of Tone every one
gives. But still in these three last Instances, you must diligently observe,
what length of String, or Distance of Stop, or Concaue of Air, makes what
Rise of Sound. As in the last of these (which (as we said) is that, which
gives the aptest demonstration,) you must set down what Increase of Concaue
goes to the Making of a Note higher; And what of two Notes; And what of three
Notes; And so up to the Diapason: For then the great Secret of Numbers, and
Proportions, will appear. It is not unlike, that those that make Recorders,
etc. know this already: for that they make them in Sets. And likewise
Bell-founders in fitting the tune of their Bells. So that Enquiry may save
Trial. Surely, it has been observed by one of the Ancients, that an Empty
Barrel knocked upon with the finger, gives a Diapason to the Sound of the
like Barrellfull; But how that should be, I do not well understand; For that
the knocking of a Barrellfull, or Empty, does scarce give any Tone.

Proportion of creating a Note, toward the Sound it self, which is the
Passive: And that it be not too near, but at a distance. For in a Recorder,
the three uppermost Holes, yield one Tone; which is a Note lower than the Tone
of the first three. And the like (no doubt) is required in the Winding or
Stopping of Strings.

There is another Difference of Sounds, which we will call Exterior, and
Interior. Experiments in Consort touching Exterior, and Interior Sounds.
It is not Soft, nor Loud: Nor it is not Base, nor Treble: Nor it is not
Musical, nor Immusicall: Though it be true, that there can be no Tone in an
Interior Sound: But on the other side, in an Exterior Sound, there may be
both Musical and Immusicall. We shall therefore enumerate them, rather than
precisely distinguish them; Though (to make some Adumbration of that we mean)
the Interior is rather an Impulsion or Contusion of the Air, than an Elision
or Section of the same. So as the Percussion of the one, toward the other,
differs, as a Blow differs from a Cut.

Speech of Man, the Whispering, (which they call Susurrus in Latin,) whether
it be louder or softer, is an Interior Sound; But the Speaking out, is an
Exterior Sound; And therefore you can never make a Tone, not sing in
Whispering; But in Speech you may: So Breathing, or Blowing by the Mouth,
Bellows, or Wind, (though loud) is an Interior Sound; But the Blowing through
a Pipe, or Concaue, (though soft) is an Exterior. So likewise, the greatest
Winds, if they have no Coarctation, or blow not hollow, give an Interior
Sound; The Whistling or hollow Wind yields a Singing, or Exterior Sound; The
former being pent by some other Body; The latter being pent in by his own
Density: And therefore we see, that when the Wind blows hollow, it is a Sign
of Rain. The Flame, as it moves within it self, or is blown by a Bellows,
gives a Murmur or Interior Sound.

Hard Body, but struck against another Hard Body, will yield an Exterior
Sound, greater or lesser: In so much as if the Percussion be ouer-soft, it may
induce a Nullity of Sound; But never an Interior Sound; As when one treads
so softly, that he is not heard.

Air is the Percutient, pent, or not pent, against a Hard Body, it never
gives an Exterior Sound; As if you blow strongly with a Bellows against a
Wall.

Sounds (both Exterior and Interior,) may be made, as well by Suction, as by
Emission of the Breath: As in Whistling, or Breathing.

It is evident, and it is one of the strangest Secrets in Sounds, that the
whole Sound is not in the whole Air only; But the whole Sound is also in Part
of the Air. Experiments in Consort, touching Articulation of Sounds.
So that all the curious Diversity of Articulate Sounds, of the Voice of Man,
or Birds, will enter at a small Cranny, Inconfused.

The Unequal Agitation of the Winds, and the like, though they be Sounds,
further, or less way; yet they do not confound the Articulation of them at
all, within that distance that they can be heard; Though it may be, they make
them to be heard less Way, than in a Still; as has been partly touched.

Ouer-great Distance confounds the Articulation of Sounds; As we Sound of a
Preachers voice, or the like, when you cannot distinguish what he says. And
one Articulate Sound will confound another; As when many speak at once.

In the Experiment of Speaking under Water, when the Voice is reduced
Articulate Sounds, (which are the Words,) are not confounded; as has been
said.

I conceive, that an Extreme Small, or an Extreme Great Sound, cannot
Articulate; But that Articulation requires a Mediocrity of Sound: For that the
Extreme Small Sound confounds the Articulation by Contracting; And the Great
Sound, by Dispersing: And although (as was formerly said) a Sound Articulate,
already created, will be contracted into a small Cranny; yet the first
Articulation requires more Dimension.

It has been observed, that in a Room, or in a Chapel, Vaulted below,
Subsequent Words come on, before the Precedent words vanish: And therefore the
Articulate Sounds are more confused, though the Gross of the Sound be greater.

The Motions of the Tongue, Lips, Throat, Pallat, etc. which go to the Making
of the several Alphabeticall Letters, are worthy Enquiry, and pertinent to the
present Inquisition of Sounds: But because they are subtle, and long to
describe, we will refer them over, and place them amongst the Experiments of
Speech. The Hebrews have been diligent in it, and have assigned, which
Letters are Labiall, which Dentall, which Gutturall, etc. As for the Latins,
and Grecians, they have distinguished between Semi-vowels, and Mutes; And in
Mutes, between Mute Tenues, Media, and Aspirata; Not amiss; But yet not
diligently enough. For the special Strokes, and Motions, that create those
Sounds, they have little enquired: As that the Letters, B. P. F. M. are not
expressed, but with the Contracting, or Shutting of the Mouth; That the Letters
N. and B. cannot be pronounced, but that the Letter N. will turn into M. As
Hecatonba, will be Hecatomba. That M. and T. cannot be pronounced together, but
P. will come between; as Emtus, is pronounced Emptus; And a Number of the
like. So that if you enquire to the full; you will find, that to the Making of
the whole Alphabet, there will be fewer Simple Motions required, than there are
Letters.

The Lungs are the most Spongy Part of the Body; And therefore it expels the
Air; which through the Artire, Throat, and Mouth, makes the Voice: But yet
Articulation is not made, but with the help of the Tongue, Palate, and the
rest of those they call Instruments of voice.

Sound that is made by Inanimate Bodies, or by Animate Bodies, that have no
Voice Articulate; and diverse Letters of Articulate Voices: And commonly Men
have given such Names to those Sounds, as do allude unto the Articulate
Letters. As Trembling of Water has Resemblance with the Letter L; Quenching of
Hot Mettalls, with the Letter Z; Snarling of Dogs, with the Letter R; The Noise
of Scritchowles, with the Letter Sh; Voice of Cats, with the Dypthong Eu; Voice
of Cuckoes, with the Dypthong On; Sounds of Strings, with the Letter Ng: So
that if a Man, (for Curiosity, or Strangeness sake,) would make a Puppet, or
other Dead Body, to pronounce a Word; Let him consider, on the one Part, the
Motion of the Instruments of Voice; and on the other part the like Sounds made
in Inanimate Bodies; And what Conformity there is that causes the Similitude
of Sounds; And by that he may minister light to that Effect.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
III. Century.
ALL Sounds (whatsoever) move Round; That is to all Sides; Upwards; Downwards;
Forwards; and Backwards. Experiments in Consort, touching the Motions of
Sounds, in what Lines they are Circular, Oblique, Straight; Upwards, downwards;
Forwards; Backwards.
This appears in all Instances.

Sounds do not require to be conveyed to the Sense, in a Right Line, as
Visibles do, but may be Arched; Though it be true, they move strongest in a
Right Line; Which nevertheless is not caused by the Rightnesse of the Line,
but by the Shortness of the distance; Linea recta breuissima. And therefore we
see, if a Wall be between, and you speak on the one Side, you hear it on the
other; Which is not because the Sound Passes through the Wall; but Archeth over
the Wall.

If the Sound be Stopped and Reperenssed, it comes about on the other Oblique
Line. So, if in a Coach, one side of the Boot be down, and the other up; And a
Beggar beg on the Close Side; you would think that he were on the Open Side.
So likewise, if a Bell or Clock, be (for Example) on the North-side of a
Chamber; And the Window of that Chamber be upon the South; He that is in the
Chamber, will think the Sound came from the South.

Sounds, though they spread round, (so that there is an Orb, or Sphericall of
the Sound;) yet they move strongest, and go furthest in the Fore-lines, from
the first Local Impulsion of the Air. And therefore in Preaching, you shall
hear the Preachers Voice, better, before the Pulpit, than behind it, or on
the Sides, though it stand open. So a Plarquebuz, or Ordnance, will be further
heard, forwards, from the Mouth of the Piece, than backwards, or on the Sides.

It may be doubted, that Sounds do move better, Downwards than Upwards,
Pulpits are placed high above the People. And when the Ancient Generals spoke
to their Armies, they had ever a Mount of Turfe cast up, whereupon they stood:
But this may be imputed to the Stops and Obstacles, which the voice meets
with, when one speaks upon the level. But there seems to be more in it:
For it may be, that Spiritual Species, both of Things Visible and Sounds, do
move better Downwards than Upwards. It is a strange Thing, that to Men
standing below on the Ground, those that be on the Top of Paul's, seem much
less then they are, and cannot be known; But to Men above, those below seem
nothing so much lessened, and may be known; yet it is true, that all things
to them above, seem also somewhat contracted, and better collected into
Figure: as Knots in Gardens show best from an Upper window, or Tarras.

Chamber, not much above the Ground, and speak out at the window, through a
Trunk, to one standing on the Ground, as softly as he can, the other laying
his Ear close to the Truncke: Then via versa, let the other speak below
keeping the same Proportion of Softness; And let him in the Chamber lay his
Ear to the Trunck: And this may be the aptest Means, to make a Judgment,
whether Sounds descend, or ascend, better.

After that Sound is created, (which is in a moment,) we find it continues
some small time, melting by little and little. Experiments in Co^sort touching
the Lasting and Perishing of Sounds; And touching the Time they require to
their Generation, or Delation.
In this there is a wonderful Error amongst Men, who take this to be a
Continuance of the First Sound; whereas (in truth) it is a Renouation, and not
a Continuance: For the Body percussed, has by reason of the Percussion, a
Trepidation wrought in the Minute Parts; and so renews the Percussion of the
Air. This appears manifestly, because that the Melting Sound of a Bell, or
of a String stricken, which is thought to be a Continuance, Sound cease, And
in this you must distingush, that there are two Trepidations: The one Manifest,
and Local; As of the Bell, when it is Pensile: The other Secret, of the Minute
Parts; such as is described in the 9th Instance. But it is true, that the
Local helps the Secret great'y. We see likewise that in Pipes, and other
wind Instruments, the Sound lasts no longer, than the breath blows. It is
true, that in Organs, there is a confused Murmur for a while, after you have
played; But that is but while the Bellows are in Falling.

Noise of great Ordnance, where many are shot off together, the Sound will be
carried, (at the least) twenty Miles upon the land, and much further upon the
Water. But then it will come to the Ear; Not in the Instant of the Shooting
off, but it will come an Hour, or more later. This must needs be a Continuance
of the First Sound; For there is no Trepidation which should renew it. And the
Touching of the Ordnance would not extinguish the Sound the sooner: So that in
great Sounds the Continuance is more than Momentany.

To try exactly the time wherein Sound is Delated. Let a Man stand in Time
there is, between the Light seen, and the Sound herds For it is certain
that the Delation of Light is in an Instant. This may be tried in far greater
Distances, allowing greater Lights and Sounds.

It is generally known and observed, that Light, and the Object of Sight, move
swifter than Sound; For we see the Flash of a Piece is seen sooner, than the
Noise is heard. And in Flewing wood, if one be some distance off, he shall see
the Arm lifted up for a second Stroke, before he hear the Noise of the first.
And the greater the Distance, the greater is the Prevention: As we see in
Thunder, which is far off; where the Lightning Precedeth the Crack a good
space.

Colors, when they represent themselves to the Eye, fade not, nor Sounds melt,
and vanish, by little and little. The Cause is, for that Colors participate
nothing with the Motion of the Air; but Sounds do. And it is a plain
Argument, that Sound participateth of some Local Motion, of the Air, (as a
Cause Sine quonon.) in that, it perishes so suddenly; For in every Section, or
Impulsion of the Air, the Air does suddenly restore and reunite it self;
which the Water also does, but nothing so swiftly.

In the Trialls of the Passage, or Not Passage of Sounds, you must take heed,
you mistake not the Passing By the Sides of a Body, for the Passing through a
Body: And therefore you must make the Intercepting Body very close; For Sound
will pass through a small Chincke. Experiments in Consort, touching the Passage
and Interceptions of Sounds.


Where Sound passes through a Hard, or Close Body (as through Water; Wall;
through Metal, as in Hawks Bells stopped; etc.) the Hard, or Close Body, must
be but thin and small; For else it deadeth and extinguisheth the Sound
utterly. And therefore, in the Experiment of Speaking in Air under Water, the
Voice must not be very deep within the Water: For then the Sound pierces not.
So if you speak on the further side of a Close Wall, if the Wall be very
thick, you shall not be heard: And if there were an Hogshead empty, whereof
the Sides were some two Foot thick, and the Bunghole stopped; I conceive the
Resounding Sound, by the Communication of the Outward Air, with the Air
within, would be little or none, But only you shall hear the Noise of the
Outward Knock, as if the Vessel were full.

Passage of Sounds through Hard Bodies, the Spirit of Pneumaticall Part of the
Hard body it self, does cooperate; But much better, when the Sides of that
Hard Body are struck, than when the Percussion is only within, without: Touch
of the Sides: Take therefore a Hawks Bell, the holes; stopped up, and hang it
by a thread, within a Bottle Glass; And stop the Mouth of the Glass, very
close with Wax; And then shake the Glass, and see whether the Bell give any
Sound at all, or how weak? But note, that you must in stead of the Thread,
take a Wire; Or else let the Glass have a great Belly; lest when you shake the
Bell, it dash upon the Sides of the Glass.

Long, and Downright Arch, for the Sound to pass, will extinguish the Sound
quite; So that that Sound, which would be heard over a wall, will not be heard
over a Church; Nor that Sound, which will be heard, if you stand some distance
from the wall, will be heard if you stand close under the Wall.

Soft and Foraminous Bodies, in the first Creation of the Sound, will dead it;
For the Striking against Cloth, or Furre, will make little Sound; As has been
said: But in the Passage of the Sound, they will admit it better than Harder
Bodies; As we see, that Curtains, and Hangings, will not stay the Sound much;
But Glasse-windowes, if they be very Close, will check a Sound more, than the
like Thickness of Cloth. We see also, in the Rumbling of the Belly, how
easily the Sound passes through the Guts, and Skin.

Great Sounds, (As of Ordnance, or Bells,) become not more Weak, and Exile,
when they pass through Small Crannies. For the Subtilties of Articulate Sounds,
(it may be,) may pass through Small Crannies, not confused; But the Magnitude
of the Sound (perhaps,) not so well.

The Mediums of Sounds are Air; Soft and Porous Bodies; Also Water.
Experiments in Co^sort touching the Medium of Sounds.
And Hard Bodies refuse not altogether to be Mediums of Sounds. But all of them
are dull and unapt Deferents, except the Air.

Air, the Thinner or Drier Air, carries not the Sound so well, as Night
Sounds; And Evening Sounds; And Sounds in moist Weather, and Southern Winds.
The reason is already mentioned in the Title of Maioration of Sounds; Being for
that Thin Air is better pierced; but Thick Air preserves the Sound better
from Wast; Let further Trial be made by Hollowing in Mists, and Gentle
Showers: For (it may be) that will somewhat dead the Sound.

Flame may be a Medium of Sounds, (especially of such Sounds as are created by
Air, and not betwixt Hard Bodies) let it be tried, in Speaking where a Bonsire
is between; But then you must allow, for some disturbance, the Noise that the
Flame it self makes.

Liquours, being made Mediums, cause a Diversity of Sound from Water, it may be
tried: As by the Knapping of the Tongs; Or Striking of the Bottom of a
vessel, filled either with Milk, or with Oil; which though they be more
light, yet are they more unequal Bodies than Air.

Of the Natures of the Mediums, we have now spoken; As for the Disposition of
the said Mediums, it does consist in the Penning, or not Penning of the Air;
Of which we have spoken before, in the Title of Delation of Sounds: It
consists also in the Figure of the Concaue, through which it passes; Of
which we will speak next.

How the Figures of Pipes, or Concaues, through which Sounds pass; Or of other
Bodies deferent; conduce to the Variety and Alteration of the Sounds; Either
in respect of the Greater Quantity, or less Quantity of Air, which the
Concaues receive; Or in respect of the Carrying of Sounds longer or shorter
way; Or in respect of many other Circumstances; they have been touched, as
falling into other Titles. Experiments in Consort, what the Figures of the
Pipes, or Concanes, or the Bodies Diferent conduce to the Sounds.
But those Figures, which we now are to speak of, we intend to be, as they
concern the Lines, through which Sound passes; As Straight; Crooked; Angular;
Circular; etc.

The Figure of a Bell pertaketh of the Pyramid, but yet coming off, Figure of
a Hunters Horn, and Cornet, is oblique; yet they have likewise Straight
Heroes; which if they be of the same Bore with the Oblique, differ little in
Sound; Save that the Straight require somewhat a stronger Blast. The Figures of
Recorders, and Flates, and Pipes are straight; But the Recorder has a less
Bore, and a greater; Above, and below. The Trumpts has the Figure of the
Letter S: which makes that Purling Sound, etc. Generally, the Straight Like
has the cleanest and roundest Sound, And the Crooked the more Hoarse, and
larring.

Of a Sinnous Pipe, that may have some four Flexions, Trial would Pipe, made
like a Cross, open in the midst. And so likewise of an Angular Pipe: And see
what will be the Effects of these several Sounds. And so again of a Circular
Pipe; As if you take a Pipe perfect Round, and make a Hole whereinto you shall
blow; And another Hole not far from that; But with a Trauerse or Stope
between them; So that your Breath may go the Round of the Circle, and come
forth at the second Hole. You may try likewise Per^^ssions of Solid Bodies of
several Figures; As Globes, Flare, Cobes, Croffes, Triangles, etc. And their
Combinasions; As Flat against Flat; And Co^^^ex against Con^^^; And Conn^^^
against Flat, etc. And marks well the diversities of the Sounds. Tri^^^^ the
difference in Sound of several Crasitudre of Hard Bodies percussed; And take
knowledge of the ^^^ of the Sounds. I my self have tried, that a Bell of Gold
yields an excellent Sound, not infariour to that of Silver, or Brass, but
rather better: yet we see that a piece of Money of Gold sounds far more
flat than a piece of Money of Silver.

Harp has the Concaue, not along the Strings, but acrosse the Strings; And no
Instrument has the Sound so Melting, and Prolonged, as the Irish Harp. So as
I suppose, that if a Virginal were made with a double Concaue; the one all the
length as the Virginal has; the other at the End of the Strings, as the Harp
has; It must needs make the Sound perfecter, and not so Shallow, and Iarring.
You may try it, without any Sound-Board along, but only Harpe-wise, at one End
of the Strings: Or lastly with a double Concaue, at Each end of the Strings one.

There is an apparent Diversity between the Species Visible, and Audible, in
this; That the Visible does not mingle in the Medium, but the Audible does.
Experiments in Consort touching the Mixture of Sounds.
For if we look abroad, we see Heaven, a number of Stars, Trees, Hills, Men,
Beasts, at once. And the Species of the one does not Sounds came from several
Parts, one of them would utterly confound the other. So we see, that Voices or
Consorts of Music do make an Harmony by Mixture, which Colors do not. It
is true nevertheless, that a great Light drowneth a smaller, that it cannot be
seen; As the Sun that of a Gloworme; as well as a Great Sound drowneth a
lesser. And I suppose likewise, that if there were two Lanthornes of Glass,
the one a Grimsin, and the other an Azure, and a Candle within either of them,
those Colored Lights would mingle and cast upon a White Paper ^ Purple Color.
And even in Colors, they yield a faint and weak Mixture: For white walls make
Rooms more lightsome than black, etc. But the Cause of the Confusion in
Sounds, and the Inconfusion in Species Visible, is, For that the Sight works
in Right Lines, and makes several Cones; And so there can be no Coincidence
in the Eye, or Visuall Point: But Sounds, that move in Oblique and Arcuate
Lines, must needs encounter, and disturb the one the other.

Harmony is, when every Part, or Instrument, is not heard by it self, but a
Conflation of them all; Which requires to stand some distance off. Even as it
is in the Mixture of Perfumes; Or the Taking of the Smells of several Flowers
in the Air.

Disposition of the Air, in other Qualities, except it be joined with Sound,
has no great Operation upon Sounds: For whether the Air be lightsome or
dark, hot or cold, quiet or stirring, (except it be with Noise)
sweet smelling, or stinking, or the like: it imports not much: Some petty
Alteration or difference it may make.

Sounds do disturb and alter the one the other: Sometimes the one drowning
the other, and making it not heard; Sometimes the one larring and discording
with the other, and making a Confusion; Sometimes the one Mingling and
Compounding with the other; and making an Harmony.

Voices of like lowdnesse, will not be heard, twice as far, as one of them
alone; And two Candles of like light, will not make Things seen twice as far
off, as one. The Cause is profound. But it seems that the Impressions from
the Objects of the Senses, do mingle respectiu^ly, every one with his kind;
But not in proportion, as is before demonstrated: And the reason may be,
because the first Impression, which is from Privative to Active, (As from
Silence to Noise, or from Darkness to Light,) is a greater Degree, than from
Less Noise, to More Noise, or from Less Light, to More Light. And the Reason
of that again may be; For that the Air, after it has received a Charge, does
not receive a Surcharge, or greater Charge, with like Appetite, as it does the
first Charge. As for the Increase of Virtue, generally, what Proportion it
bears to the Increase of the Matter, it is a large Field, and to be handled
by it self.

All Reflections Concurrent do make Sounds Greater; But if the Body that
creates, either, the Original Sound, or the Reflection, be clean and smooth,
it makes them Sweeter. Experiments in Consort touching Melioration of Sounds.
Trial may be made of a Lute, or Violl, with the Belly of polished Brass, in
stead of Wood. We see that even in the Open Air, the Wire String is sweeter,
than the String of Guts. And we see that for Reflection, Water excels; As in
Music near the Water; Or in Eccho's.

It has been tried, that a Pipe a little moistened on the inside, but yet
Sound, than if the Pipe were dry: But yet with a sweet Degree of Sibilation, or
Purling. As we touched it before in the title of Equality. The Cause is, for
that all Things Porous, being superficially wet, and (as it were) between dry
and wet, become a little more Even and Smooth; But the Purling, (which must
needs proceed of Inequality,) I take to be bred between the Smoothness of the
in ward Surface of the Pipe, which is wet; And the Rest of the Wood of the
Pipe, unto which the Wet comes nor, but it remains dry.

In Frosty weather, Mosicke within doors sounds better. Which Air, but of
the Wood or String of the Instrument; which is made more Crispe, and so more
porous and hollow: And we see that Old Lutes sound better than New, for the
same reason. And so do Lute Strings that have been kept long.

Sound is likewise Meliorated by the Mingling of open Air with Pent Therefore
Trial may be made, of a Lute or Violl with a double Belly; Making another
Belly with a Knot oliet the Strings; yet so, as there be Room enough for the
Strings, and Room enough to play below that Belly. Trial may be made also of
an Irish Harp, with a Concaue on both Sides; Whereas ^^seth to have it but on
one Side. The doubt may be, lest it should make too much Resounding; whereby one
Note would overtake anot^^^

If you sing into the Hole of a Drum, it makes the Singing more sweet. And so
I conceive it would, if it were a Song in Parts, sung into several Drums; And
for handsomnesse and strangeness sake, it would not be amiss to have a
Curtain between the Place where the Drums are, and the Hearers.

Sound is created in a Wind-Instrument, between the Breath and the Air, yet
if the Sound be communicate with a more equal Body of the Pipe, it meliorateth
the Sound. For (no doubt) there would be a differing Sound in a Trumpet, or
Pipe of Wood; And again in a Trumpet or Pipe of Brass. It were good to try
Recorders and Hunters Horns of Brass, what the Sound would be.

Sounds are meliorated by the Intension of the Sense; where the Common Sense is
collected most, to the particular Sense of Hearing, and the Sight suspended:
And therefore, Sounds are sweeter, (as well as greater,) in the Night, than in
the Day; And I suppose, they are sweeter to blind Men, than to Others: And it
is manifest, that between Sleeping and Waking, (when all the Senses are bound
and suspended) Music is far sweeter, than when one is fully Waking.

It is Thing strange in Nature, when it is attentively considered; How
Children, and some Birds, learn to imitate Speech. Experiments in Co^sort
touching the Imitation of Sounds.
They take no Mark (at all) of the Motion of the Mouth of Him that speaks;
For Birds are as well taught in Dark, as by Light. The Sounds of Speech are
very Curious and Exquisite: So one would think it were a Lesson hard to
learn. It is true, that it is done with time, and by little and little, and
with many Essays and Proffers: But all this discharges not the Wonder. It
would make a Man think (though this which we shall say may seem exceeding
strange) that there is some Transmission of Spirits; and that the Spirits of
the Teacher put in Motion, should work with the Spirits of the Learner, a
Pre-disposition to offer to Imitate; And so to perfect the Imitation by
degrees. But touching Operations by Transmissions of Spirits, (which is one of
the highest Secrets in Nature,) we shall speak in due place; Chiefly when we
come to enquire of Imagination. But as for Imitation, it is certain, that
there is in Men, and other Creatures, a predisposition to Imitate We see how
ready Apes and Monkies are, to imitate all Motions of Man: And in the Catching
of Dottrells, we see, how the Foolish Bird plays the Ape in Gestures: And no
Man (in effect) does accompany with others, but he learneth, (ere he is aware,)
some Gesture, or Voice, or Fashion of the other.

Imitation of Sounds, that Man should be the Teacher, is no Part of the Matter;
For Birds will learn one of another; And there is no Reward, by feeding, or
the like, given them for the Imitation; And besides, you shall have Parrots,
that will not only Iimitate Voices, but Laughing, Knocking, Squeaking of a
Door upon the Hinges, or of a Cart-wheele; And (in effect) any other Noise
they hear.

Beast can imitate the Speech of Men, but Birds only; For the Ape it self
that is so ready to imitate otherwise, attaineth not any degree of Imitation of
Speech. It is true, that I have known a Dog, that if one how led in his Ear,
he would fall a how ling a great while. What should be the Aptness of Birds,
in comparison of Beasts, to imitate the Speech of Man, may be further enquired.
We see that Beasts have those Parts, which they count the Instruments of
Speech, (as Lips, Teeth, etc.) liker unto Man, than Birds. As for the Neck, by
which the Throat passes; we see many Beasts have it, for the Length, as much
as Birds. What better Gorge, or Attire, Birds have, may be further enquired.
The Birds that are known to be Speakers, are, Parrots, Pyes, lays, Dawes, and
Ravens. Of which Parrots have an adunque Bill, but the rest not.

But I conceive, that the Apinesse of Birds, is not so much in the Conformity
Organs of Speech, as in their Attention. For Speech must come by Hearing, and
Learning; And Birds give more heed, and mark Sounds, more than Beasts; Because
naturally they are more delighted with them, and practice them more; As
appears in their Singing. We see also, that those that teach Birds to sing,
do keep them Waking, to increase their Attention. We see also, that
Cock-Birds, amongst SingingBirds, are ever the better Singers; which may be,
because they are more lively, and listen more.

Labor, and Intention to imitate voices, does conduce much to Imitation:
Players of Enterludes, so to life, as if you see them not, you would think
they were those Players themselves; and so the Voices of other Men that they
hear.

There have been some, that could counterfeit the Distance of Voices,
Secondary Object of Hearing,) in such sort; As when they stand fast by you, you
would think the Speech came from a far off, in a fearful manner. How this
is done, may be further enquired. But I see no great use of it, but for
Imposture, in counterseiting Ghosts or Spirits.

There be three Kinds of Reflections of Sounds, A Reflection Concurrent; A
Reflection Iterant, which we call Echo; And a Super-reflexion, or an Echo of
an Echo, whereof the first has been handled in the Title of Magnitude of
Sounds: The Latter two we will now speak of. Experiments in Consort, touching
the Reflection of Sounds.


The Reflection of Species Visible, Mirrours, you may command; Because Reflection
of Sounds is hard to master; Because the Sound filling great Spaces in Arched
Lines, cannot be so guided: and therefore we see there has not been practiced,
any Means to make Artificial Eccho's. And no Echo already known returns
in a very narrow Room.

The Natural Eccho's are made upon Walls, Woods, Rocks, Hills, and Banckes;
As for Waters, being near, they make a Concurrent Echo; But being further
off, (as upon a large River) they make an Iterant Echo: For there is no
difference between the Concurrent Echo, and the Iterant, but the Quickness,
or Slownesse of the Return. But there is no doubt, but Water does help the
Delation of Echo; as well as it helps the Delution of Original Sounds.

Truncke, stopped at the further end, you shall find a Blast return upon your
Mouth, but no Sound at all. The Cause is, for that the Closeness, which
preferueth the Original, is not able to preserve the Reflected Sound: Besides
that Eccho's are seldom created, but by loud Sounds. And therefore there is
less hope of Artificial Eccho's in Air, pent in a narrow Concaue.
Nevertheless it has been tried, that One leaning over a Well, of 25. Fathom
deep, and speaking, though but softly, (yet not so soft as a whisper,) the
Water returned a good Audible Echo. It would be tried, whether Speaking in
Caves, where there is no Issue, faue where you speak, will not yield Eccho's,
as Wells do.

Echo comes as the Original Sound does, in a Round Orb of Air: It were
good to try the Creating of the Echo, where the Body Repercussing makes an
Angle: As against the Return of a Wall, etc. Also we see that in Mirrours,
there is the like Angle of Incidence, from the Object to the Glass, and from
the Glass to the Eye. And if you strike a Ball side-long, nor full upon the
Surface, the Rebound will be as much the contrary way; Whether there be any
such Re^ilience in Eccho's, (that is, whether a Man shall hear better, if he
stand aside the Body Repercussing, than if he stand where he speaks, or any
where in a right Line between;) may be tried. Trial likewise would be made,
by Standing nearer the Place of Repercussing, than he that speaks; And again
by Standing further off, than he that speaks; And so Knowledge would be
taken, whether Eccho's, as well as Original Sounds, be not strongest near
hand.

Eccho's, one after another: And it is, when there is Variety of Hills, or
Woods, some nearer, some further off: So that the Return from the further,
being last created, will be likewise last heard.

Voice goes round, as well toward the Back, as toward the Front of him that
speaks; So likewise does the Echo; For you have many Back- Eccho's to the
Place where you stand.

Echo, that will report, three, or four, or five Words, distinctly, it is
requisite, that the Body Repercussing, be a good distance off: For if it be
near, and yet not so near, as to make a Concurrent Echo, it choppeth with
you upon the sudden. It is requisite likewise, that the Air be not much pent.
For Air, at a great distance, pent, works the same effect with Air, at
large, in a small distance. And therefore in the Trial of Speaking in the
Well, though the Well was deep, the Voice came back, suddenly; And would
bear the Report but of two Words.

For Eccho's upon Eccho's, there is a rare Instance thereof in a Place, Paris,
near a Town called Pont-charenton; And some Bird-bolt shot, or more, from the
River of Seane. The Room is a Chapel, or small Church. The Walls all
standing, both at the Sides, and at the Ends. Two Rows of Pillars, after the
manner of Isles of Churches, also standing; The Roof all open, not so much as
any Embowment near any of the walls left. There was against every Pillar, a
Stacke of Billets, above a Man's Height; which the Watermen, that bring Wood
down the Seane, in Stacks, and not in Boats, laid there (as it seems) for
their ease. Speaking at the one End, I did hear it return the Voice thirteen
several times; And I have heard of others, that it would return sixteen
times: For I was there about three of the Clock in the Afternoon: And it is
best, (as all other Eccho's are) in the Evening. It is manifest, that it is not
Eccho's from several places, but a Tossing of the Voice, as a Ball, to and
fro; Like to Reflections in Looking-glasses; where if you place one Glass
before, and another behind, you shall see the Glass behind with the Image,
within the Glass before; And again, the Glass before in that; and diverse
such Super-Reflexions, till the species speciei at last die. For it is every
Return weaker, and more shady. In like manner, the Voice in that Chapel,
creates speciem, speciei, and makes succeeding Super-Reflexions; For it
melts by degrees, and every Reflection is weaker than the former: So that, if
you speak three Words, it will (perhaps) some three times report you the whole
three Words; And then the two latter Words for some times; And then the last
Word alone for some times; Still fading, and growing weaker. And whereas in
Eccho's of one Return, it is much to hear four or five Words; In this Echo
of so many Returns, upon the matter, you hear above twenty Words, for three.

The like Echo upon Echo, but only with two Reports, has been House, and a
Hill, and lure toward the Hill. For the House will give a Backe-Eccho; One
taking it from the other, and the latter the weaker.

There are certain Letters, that an Echo will hardly express; As S, Echo at
Pont-Charenton, there was an Old Parisian, that took it to be the Work of
Spirits, and of good Spirits. For, (said he) call Saten, and the Echo will not
deliver back the Devils name; But will say, Va^'on; Which is as much in
French, as Apage, or A^oid. And thereby I did hap to find, that an Echo would
not return S, being but a Hissing and an Interior Sound.

Eccho's are some more sudden, and chop again, as soon as the Voice Voice,
and the Echo; which is caused by the local Nearenesse, or Distance: Some will
report a longer Train of Words; And some a shorter: Some more loud (full as
loud as the Original, and sometimes more loud;) And some weaker and fainter.

Eccho's come from several Parts, at the same distance, they must needs make
(as it were) a Quire of Eccho's, and so make the Report greater, and even a
Continued Echo; which you shall find in some Hills, that stand encompassed,
Theater-like.

Refraction in Sounds, as well as in Species Visible. For I do not think,
that if a Sound should pass through diverse Mediums, (as Air, Cloth, Wood) it
would deliver the Sound, in a differing Place, from that unto which it is
deferred; which is the Proper Effect of Refraction. But Maioration, which is
also the Work of Refraction, appears plainly in Sounds, (as has been
handled at full;) But it is not by Diversity of Mediums.

We have obiter, for Demonstrations sake, used in diverse Instances, the
Examples of the Sight, and Things Visible, to illustrate the Nature of Sounds.
Experiments in Co^sort touching the Consent and Dissint between Visibles and
Audibles,
But we think good now to prosecute that Comparison more fully.

CONSENT OF VISIBLES, and Audibles.
BOth of them spread themselves in Round, and fill a whole Floare or Orb, unto
certain Limits: And are carried a great way: And do languish and lessen by
degrees, according to the Distance of the Objects from the Sensories.

Both of them have the whole Species in every small Portion of the Air, or
Medium; So as the Species do pass through small Crannies, without Confusion:
As we see ordinarily in Leuels, as to the Eye; And in Crannies, or Chinks, as
to the Sound.

Both of them are of a sudden and easy Generation and Delation; And likewise
perish swiftly, and suddenly; As if you remove the Light; Or touch the Bodies
that give the Sound.

Both of them do receive and carry exquisite and accurate Differences; As of
Colors, Figures, Motions, Distances, in Visibles; And of Articulate Voices,
Tones, Songs, and Quauerings, in Audibles.

Both of them in their Virtue and Working, do not appear to emit any
Corporal Substance into their Mediums, or the Orb of their Virtue; Neither
again to raise or stir any evident local Motion in their Mediums, as they
pass; But only to carrry certain Spiritual Species; The Perfect Knowledge of
the Cause whereof, being hitherto scarcely attained, we shall search and
handle in due place.

Both of them seem not to generate or produce any other Effect in Nature, but
such as appertains to their proper Objects, and Senses, and are otherwise
Barren.

But Both of them in their own proper Action, do work three manifest
Effects. The First, in that the Stronger Species drawneth the E^sser; As the
Light of the Sun, the light of a Glow-worme; The Report of an Ordnance, the
Voice; The Second, in that an Object of Surcharge or Excess destroys the
Sense; As the Light of the Sun the Eye, a violent Sound (near the Ear) the
Hearing: The Third, in that both of them will be reuerberate; As in Mirrours;
And in Eccho's.

Neither of them does destroy or hinder the Species of the other, although
encounter in the same Medium; As Light or Color hinder not Sound; Nor ^contr^.

Both of them affect the Sense in Living Creatures, and yield Objects of Yet
nevertheless, the Objects of them do also (if it be well observed) affect and
work upon dead Things; Namely, such as have some Conformity with the Organs of
the two Senses; As Visibles work upon a Looking-glass, which is like the
Pupil of the Eye; And Audibles upon the Places of Echo, which resemble, in
some sort, the Cauerne and structure of the Ear.

Both of them do diversely work, as they have their Medium diversely disposed.
Medium (as Smoke) makes the Object seem to tremble; and a Rising or Falling
Medium (as Winds) makes the Sounds to rise, or fall.

To Both, the Medium, which it the most Prop^out^ and Conducible, Air; For
Glass or Water, etc. are not comparable.

In Both of them, where the Object is Fine and Accurate, it conduces Sense
Intentive, and Erect; In so much as you contract your Eye, when you would see
sharply; And erect your Ear, when you would hear attentively; which in Beasts
that have Ears moveable, is most manifest.

The Beams of Light, when they are multiplied, and conglomerate, generate
Heat; which is a different Action, from the Action of Sight: And the
Multiplication and Conglomeration of Sounds does generate an extreme
Rarefaction of the Air; which is an Action materiate, differing from the
Action of Sound; If it be true (which is anciently reported) that Birds, with
great shouts, have fallen down.

DISSENTS OF VISIBLES, and Audibles.
Species of Visibles soeme to be Emissions of Beams from the Object seen;
Almost like Odours; save that they are more Incorporecall: But the Species of
Audibles seem to Participate more with Local Motion, like Percussions or
Impressions made upon the Air. So that whereas all Bodies do seem to work
in two manners; Either by the Communication of their Natures; Or by the
Impressions and Signatures of their Motions; The Diffusion of Species Visible
seems to participate more of the former Operation; and the Species Audible of
the latter.

Species of Audibles seem to be carried more manifestly through the Air, than
the Species of Visibles: For (I conceive) that a Contrary strong Wind will not
much hinder the Sight of Visibles, as it will do the Hearing of Sounds.

Difference, above all others, between Visibles and Audibles, that is the most
remarkable; As that whereupon many smaller Differences do depend: Namely, that
Visibles, (except Lights,) are carried in Right Lines; and Audibles in Ar^^^
Lines. Heriee it comes to pass, that Visibles do not intermingle; and
confound one another, as has been said before; But Sounds do. Hence it
comes, that the Solidity of Bodies does not much hinder the Sight, so that
the Bodies be clear. and the Pores in a Right Line as in Glass, Crystal,
Diamonds, Water, etc. But a thin Scarce, or Handkerchiefe, though they be
Bodies nothing so solid, hinder the Sight: Whereas (contrariwise) these Porous
Bodies do not much hinder the Hearing, but solid Bodies do almost stop it,
or at the least attenuate it. Hence also it comes, that to the Reflection of
Visibles, small Glasses suffice; but to the Reuerberation of Audibles, are
required greater Spaces, as has likewise been said before.

Visibles are seen further off, than Sounds are heard; Allowing nevertheless
the Rate of their Bigness; For otherwise a great Sound will be heard further
off, than a Small Body seen.

Visibles require (generally) some Distance between the Object, and the Eye,
to be better seen; Whereas in Audibles, the nearer the Approach of the Sound
is to the Sense, the better. But in this there may be a double Error. The one,
because to Seeing, there is required Light; And any thing that touches the
Pupil of the Eye (all over,) excludes the Light. For I have heard of a Person
very credible, (who himself was cured of a Cataract in one of his Eyes,) that
while the Silver Needle did work upon the Sight of his Eye, to remove the
Filme of the Cataract, he never saw any thing more clear or perfect, than that
white Needle: Which (no doubt,) was, because the Needle was lesser than the
Pupil of the Eye; and so Cook not the Light from it. The other Error may be,
for that the Object of Sight does strike upon the Pupil of the Eye, directly
without any interception; whereas the Cave of the Ear does hold off the Sound a
little from the Organ: And so nevertheless there is some Distance required in
both.

Visibles are s^if^lior carried to the Sense, than Audibles; As appears Title.

I conceive also, that the Species of Audibles do hang longer in the Visibles:
For although even those of Visibles, do hang some time, as we see in Rings
turned, that show like Spheres; In Lute-strings fillipped, A Firebrand carried
along, which leaves a Train of Light behind it; and in the Twilight; And the
like: Yet I conceive that Sounds stay longer, because they are carried up and
down with the Wind: And because of the Distance of the Time, in Ordnance a
discharged, and heard twenty Miles off.

In Visibles, there are not sound Objects so odious and in grate to the Sense,
as in Audibles. For foul Sights do rather displease, in that they exci^e the
Memory of foul Things, than in the immediate Objects. And therefore in ^^^^
^^^ those foul Sights do not much offend; But in Audibles, the Grating of a
Saw, when it is sharpened, does offend so much, as it Fen ^^^ the Teeth on Edge.
And any of the harsh Discords in Music, the Ear does straight-waies refuse.

In Visibles, after great Light, if you come suddenly into the Dark; Dark
into a Glaring light, the Eye is dazzled for a time; and the Sight confused; not
whether any such Effect be after great Sounds, or after a deep Silence, may be
better enquired. It is an old Tradiribit, th^^ those that dwell hear the
C^^^n^^^ of Nil^^, are stricken deaf, But we find no such effect, in
Canno^^ers, not Millers, not those that dwell upon Bridges.

It seems that the Impression of Color is so weak, as it works not
Beams, or Right Lines; whereof the Basis is in the Object, and the Vertical
Point in the Eye; So as there is a Corra^iation and Co^^^un ^^^^^ of Beams;
And those Beams so sent forth, yet are not of any force to bege^ the like
borrowed or second Beams, except it be by Reflection, whereof we speak not. For
the Beams pass, and give little Ta^^^^^^ to that ^^te, which is Adjacent;
which if they did, we should see Colors out of a Right line. But as this is in
Colors, so otherwise it is in the Body of Light. For when there is a Skreene
between the Candle and the Eye, yet the Light passes to the Paper whereon One
writes; So that the Light is seen, where the Body of the Flame is not seen;
And where any Color (if it were placed where the Body of the Blame is) would
not be seen. I judge that Sound is of this Latter Nature: For when two are
placed on both sides of a Wall, and the Voice is heard, I judge it is not only
the Original Sound, which passes in an Arebed Line; But the Sound, which
passes above the Wall in a Right Line, begets the like Motion round about
it, as the first did, though more weak.

All Concords and Discords of Music, are, (no doubt,) Sympathies, and
Antipathies of Sounds. Experiments in Consort, touching the Sympathy or
Antipathy of sounds, one with another.
And so (likewise) in that Music, which we call Broken Music, or Consort
Music; Some Consorts of Instruments are sweeter than others; (A Thing not
suffciently yet observed:) As the Irish Harp, and Base Vial agree well: The
Recorder and Stringed Music Organs and the Voice agree well; etc. But the
Virginalls and the Lute; Or the Welch-Harpe, and, Irish-Harpe; Or the Voice and
Pipes alone, agree not so well; But for the Melieration of Music, there is
yet much lest (in this Point of Exquisite Consorts) to try and ehquire.

Lute, or Vial, be laid upon the Back, with a small Straw upon one of the
Strings; And another Lute or Vial be laid by it; And in the other Lute or
Vial, the Unison to that String be stricken; it will make the String, move;
Which will appear both to the Eye, and by the Strawes Falling off. The like
will be, if the Diapason or Eight to that String be stricken, either in the
same Lute, or Vial, or in others lying by; But in one of these there is any
Report of Sound, that can be discerned, but only Motion.

Vial should have a Lay of Wire Strings below, as close to the Belly, as a
Lute; And then the Strings of Guts mounted upon a Bridge, as in Ordinary
Vialls; To the end, that by this means, the upper Strings stricken, should make
the lower resound by Sympathy, and so make the Music the better; Which, if it
be to purpose, then Sympathy works, as well by Report of Sound, as by Motion.
But this device I conceive to be of no use; because the upper Strings, which
are stopped in great variety, cannot maintain a Diapason or Unison, with the
Lower, which are never stopped, But if it should be of use at all; it must be
in Instruments which have no Stops; as Virginalls, and Harpes; wherein trial
may be made of two Rows of Strings, distant the one from the other.

Experiment of Sympathy may be transferred (perhaps) from Instruments of
Strings, to other Instruments of Sound. As to try if there were in one Steeple,
two Bells of Unison, whether the striking of the one would move the other, more
than if it were another Accord: And so in pipes, (if they be of equal Bore,
and Sound,) whether a little Straw or Feather would move in the one Pipe, when
the other is blown at an Unison.

Ear, and Eye, the Instrument of Sense has a Sympathy or Similitude with that
which gives the Reflection; (As has been touched before.) For as the Sight of
the Eye is like a Crystal, or Glass, or Water; So is the Ear a sinuous Cave,
with a hard Bone, to stop and reuerberate the Sound; Which is like to the
Places that report Eccho's.

When a Man Yawneth, he cannot Hear so well. Experiments in Consort, touching
the Hindering or Helping of the Hearing.
The Cause is, for that the Membrane of the Ear is extended; And so rather
casts off the Sound, than draws it to.

We Hear better when we hold our Breath, than contrary; In so much as in all
Listening to attain a Sound a far off, Men hold their Breath. The Cause is,
For that in all Expiration, the Motion is Outward; Labor to do things with
any strength, we hold the Breath: And listening after any Sound, that is heard
with difficulty, is a kind of Labor.

Let it be tried, for the Help of the Hearing, (and I conceive it likely
Instrument like a Tunnell; The narrow Part whereof may be of the Bigness of
the Hole of the Ear; And the Broader End much larger, like a Bell at the
Skirts; And the length half a foot, or more. And let the narrow End of it be
set close to the Ear: And mark whether any Sound, abroad in the open Air,
will not be heard distinctly, from further distance; than without that
Instrument; being (as it were) an Eare-Spectacle. And I have heard there is in
Spain, an Instrument in use to be set to the Ear, that helps somewhat those
that are Thick of Hearing.

If the Mouth be shut close, nevertheless there is yielded by the Nostrills be
likewise stopped, on such Murmur can be made; Except it be in the Bottom of
the Palate toward the Throat. Whereby it appears manifestly, that a Sound
in the Mouth, except such as aforesaid, if the Mouth be stopped, passes from
the Palate, through the Nostrills.

The Repercussion of Sounds, (which we call Echo,) is a great Argument of the
Spiritual Essence of Sounds. Experiments in Consort touching the Spiritual
and Fine Nature of Sounds.
For if it were Corporeal,) the Repercussion should be created in the same
manner, and by like Instruments, with the Original Sound^. But we see what a
Number of Exquisite Instruments must concur in Speaking of Words, where of
there is no such Matter in the Returning of them; But only a plain Stop, and
Repercussion.

The Exquisite Differences of Articulate Sounds, carried along in the Air,
show that they cannot be Signalures or Impressions in the Air, as has been
well refuted by the Ancients. For it is true, that Seals make excellent
Impressions: And so it may be thought of Sounds in their first Generation: But
then the Delation and Continuance of them without any new Sealing, show
apparently they cannot be Impressions.

All Sounds are suddenly made, and do suddenly perish; But neither Exquisite
Differences of them, is Matter of so great Admiration: For the ^^^^e^^^gs, and
Warblings to Lutes, and Pipes, are as swift; And the Tongue, (which is no very
fine Instrument,) does in Speech, make no fewer Motions, than there be Letters
in all the Words, which are uttered. But that Sounds should not only be so
speedily generated, but carried so far every way, in such a momentany time,
deserves more Admiration. As for Example; If a Man stand in the middle of a
Field, and speak aloud, he shall be heard a Furlong in round; And that shall
be in Articulate Sounds; And those shall be Entire in every little Portion of
the Air; And this shall be done in the Space of less than a Minute.

Sudden Generation and Perishing of Sounds, must be one of these two Ways.
Either that the Air suffers some Force by Sound, and then restores it
self; As Water does; Which being divided, makes manny Circles, till it
restore it self to the natural Consistence: Or otherwise, that the Air does
willingly imbibe the Sound as grateful, but cannot maintain it; For that the
Air has (as it should seem) a secret and hidden Appetite of Receiving the
Sound at the first; But then other Gross and more Materiate Qualities of the
Air straightwaies suffocate it; Like unto Flame, which is generated with
Alacrity, but straight quenched by the Enmity of the Air, or other Ambient
Bodies.

There be these Differences (in general) by which Sounds are divided; 1.
Musical, Immusicall; 2. Treble, Base; 3. Flat, Sharp; 4. Soft, Loud; 5.
Exterior, Interior, 6. Clean, Harsb or Purling; 7. Articulate, Inarticulate.

We have labored (as may appear,) in this Inquisition of Sounds, diligently;
Both because Sound is one of the most Hidden Portions of Nature, (as we said in
the beginning:) And because it is a Virtue which may be called Incorporeall,
and Immateriate; whereof there be in Nature but few. Besides, we were willing,
(now in these our first Centuries,) to make a Pattern or President of an Exact
Inquisition; And we shall do the like hereafter in some other Subjects which
require it. For we desire that Men should learn and perceive, how severe a
Thing the true Inquisition of Nature is; And should accustom themselves, by
the light of Particulars, to enlarge their Minds, to the Amplitude of the
World; And not reduce the World to the Narrowness of their Minds.

Metalls give Orlens and Fine Colors in Dissolutions; As Gold gives an
excellent Yellow; Quicksilver an excellent Green; Tin gives an excellent
Azure: Likewise in their Putrefactions, or Rusts; As Vermilion, Verdegrease,
Bise, Cirrus, etc. Experiment Solitary touching the Orient Colors, in
dissolution of Metalls.
And likewise in their vitrifications. The Cause is, for that by their Strength
of Body, they are able Colors lightsome.

It conduces unto Long Life, and to the more Placide Motion of the Spirits,
which thereby do less prey and consume the Juice of the Body; Either that
Men's Actions be free and voluntary; That nothing be done Inuita Minerua, but
Secundum Genium: Or on the Actions of Men be full of Regulation, and Commands
within themselves: For then the Victory and Performing of the Command, gives a
good Disposition to the Spirits; Especially if there be a Proceeding from
Degree to Degree; For then the Sense of Victory is the greater. Experiment
Solitary touching Prolongation of Life.
An example of the former of these, is in a Country life; And of the latter,
in Monks and Philosophers, and such as do continually enjoin themselves.

It is certain, that in all Bodies, there is an Appetite of Union, and
Euitation of Solution of Continuity: And of this Appetite there be many
Degrees; But the most Remarkable, and fit to be distinguished, are three.
Experiment Solitary touching Appetite of Union in Bodies.
The first in Liquours; The second in Hard Bodies: And the third in Bodies
Cleaning or Tenacious. In Liquours, Appetite is weak: We see in Liquours, the
Thredding of them in Stillicides, (as has been said;) The Falling of them in
Round Drops, (which is the form of Union;) And the Staying of them, for a
little time, in Bubbles and Froth. In the second Degree or Kind, this Appetite
is strong; As in Iron, in Stone, in Wood, etc. In the third, this Appetite is
in a Medium between the other two: For such Bodies do partly follow the Touch
of another Body; And partly stick and continue to themselves; And therefore
they roape, and draw themselves in Threads; As we see in Pitch, Glue, Birdlime,
etc. But note, that all Solid Bodies are Cleaning, more or less: And that
they love better the Touch of somewhat that is Tangible, than of Air, For
Water, in small quantity, cleaves to any Thing that is Solid; And so would
Metal too, if the weight drew it not off. And therefore Gold Foliate, or any
Metal Foliate, cleaves: But those Bodies which are noted to be Clammy, and
Cleaving, are such, as have a more indifferent Appetite (at once,) to follow
another Body; And to hold to Themselves. And therefore they are commonly Bodies
ill mixed; And which take more pleasure in a Foreign Body, than in preserving
their own Consistence; And which have little predominance in Drought, or
Moisture.

Time, and Heat, are Fellows in many Effects. Experiment Solitary touching the
like O^^^^^^ons of Heat and Time.
Heat dries Bodies, that do easily expire; As Parchment, Leaves, Roots, Clay,
etc. And, so does Time or Age arefie; As in the same Bodies, etc. Heat
dissolueth and melts Bodies, that keep in their Spirits; As Liquefactions;
And so does Time, in some Bodies of a softer Consistence: As a manifest in
Honey, which by Age waxes more liquid: And the like in Sugar; And so in old
Oil, which is ever more clear, and more hot in Medicinable use. Heat causes
the Spirits to search some Issue out of the Body; As in the Volatility of
Metalls; And so does Time; As in the Rust of Metalls. But generally Heat
doththat in small time, which Age does in long.

Some Things which pass the Fire are softest at first, and by Time grow hard;
As the Crumme of Bread. Experiment Solitary touching the differing Operations
of Fire, and Time.
Some are harder when they come from the Fire, and afterward give again, and
grow soft, as the Crust of Bread, Biscuit, Sweet Meats, Salt, etc. The Cause is,
for that in those things which wax Hard with Time, the Fire is a Kind of
Melting: And in those that wax Soft with Time, (contrariwise,) the woke of the
Fire is a Kind of Baking; And whatsoever the Fire baketh, Time does in some
degree dissolve.

Motions pass from one Man to another, not so much by Exciting Imagination; as
by Inuitation; Especially if there be an Aptness or Inclination before.
Experiment Solitary touching Motions by Inuitation.
Therefore Gaping, or Yawning, and Stretching Gaping and Stretching is, when
the Spirits are a little Heavy, by any Vapor, or the like. For then they
strive, (as it were,) to wring out, and expel that which loadeth them. So Men
drowzy, and desirous to sleep; Or before the Fit of an Ague; do use to Yawne
and Stretch; And do likewise yield a Voice or Sound, which is an Interiection
of Expulsion: So that if another be apt and prepared to do the like, he
follows by the Sight of another. So the Laughing of another makes to Laugh.

There be some known Diseases that are Infectious; And Others that are not.
Experiment Solitary, touching Infectious Disease.
Those that are Infectious, are; First, such as are chiefly in the Spirits, and
not so much in the Humors; And therefore pass Pestilences, Lippitudes; and
such like. Secondly, such as Taint the Breath; Which we see passes manifestly
from Man to Man; And not inuisibly, as the Affects of the Spirits do: Such are
Consumptions of the Lungs, etc. Thirdly such as come forth to the Skin; And
therefore taint the Air, or the Body Adjacent; Especially if they consist in
an Unctuous Substance, no apt to dissipate; Such are Scabs, and Lepronsie.
Fourthly, such as are merely in the Humors, and not in the Spirits, Breath,
or Exhalations: And therefore they never infect, but by Touch only; and such a
Touch also, as comes within the Epidermis; As the Venom of the French Pox,
And the Biting of a Mad Dog.

Most Powders grow, more Close and Coherent by Mixture of Water, than by
Mixture of Oil, though Oil be the thicker Body; As Meal; etc. Experiment
Solitary touching the incorporation of Powders and Liquours
The Reason is the Congruity of Bodies; which if it be more, makes a Perfecter
Imbibition, and Incorporation; Which in most Powders is more between Them and
Water, than between Them Oil: But Printers Colors ground, and Ashes, do
better incorporate with Oil.

Much Motion and Exercise is good for some Bodies; And Sitting, and less
Motion for Others. Experiment Solitary, touching Exercise of the Body.
If the Body be Hot, and Void of Superflous Moistures, too much Motion hurts:
And it is an Error in Physicians, to call too much upon Exercise. Likewise Men
ought to beware, that they Exercise, and a Spare Diet both: But if much
Exercise, then a Plentiful Diet, And if Sp^ring Diet, then little Exercise.
The Benefits that come of Exercise are, First, that it sends Nourishment into
the Parts more forcibly. Secondly, that it helps to Exceme by Sweat, and so
makes the Parts assimilate the more perfectly. Thirdly, that it makes the
Substance of the Body more Solid and Compact; And so less apt to be Consumed
and Depredated by the Spirits. The Evils that come of Exercise, are: First,
that it makes the Spirits more Hot and Predatory. Secondly, that it does
absorbe likewise, and attenuate too much the Moisture of the Body. Thirdly,
that it makes too great ^^^^^sion, (especially if it be violent,) of the
Inward Parts; which delight more in Rest. But generally Exercise, if it be
much, is no Friend to Prolongation of Life; Which is one Cause, why Women live
longer than Men, because they stir less.

Some Food we may use long, and much, without Glatting; As Bread, Flesh that is
not fat, or rank, etc. Experiment Solitary, touching Meats, that induce
Society.
Some other, (though pleasant,) Glutteth sooner; As Sweet Meats, Fat Meats,
etc. The Cause is, for that Appetite consists in the Emptiness of Mouth of
the Stomach; Sweet and Fat, are more Filling: And do swim and hang more
about the Mouth of the Stomach; And go not down so speedily: And again
turn sooner to Choler, which is hot, and ever abateth the Appetite. We see
also, that another Cause of Society, is an Ouer-custome; and of Appetite is
Nouelty: And therefore Meats, if the same be continually taken, induce
Loathing. To give the Reason of the Distaste of Society, and of the Pleasure in
Nouelty; and to distinguish not only in Meats and Drinks, but also in
Motions, Loves, Company, Delights, Studies, what they be that Custom makes
more grateful; And what more tedious; were a large Field. But for Meats, the
Cause is Attraction, which is quicker, and more excited toward that which is
new, than toward that whereof there remains a Relish by former use. And
(generally) it is a Rule, that whatsoever is somewhat Ingrate at first, is made
Grateful by Custom; But whatsoever is too Pleasing at first, grows quickly
to satiate.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
IV. Century.
ACCELERATION of Time, in Works of Nature, may well be esteemed Inter Magnalia
Naturae. Experiments in Consort touching the Clarification of Liquours, and the
Accelerating thereof.
And even in Divine Miracles, Accelerating of the Time, is next to the Creating
of the Matter. We will now therefore proceed to the Enquiry of it: And for
Acceleration of Germination, we will refer it over, unto to the place, where
we shall handle the Subject of Plants, generally; And will now begin with other
Accelerations.

Liquours are (many of them,) at the first, thick and troubled; As Must, Wort,
Iuyces of Fruits, or Herbs expressed, etc. And by Time they settle, and
Clarify. But to make them clear, before the Time, is a great Work; For it is
a Spur to Nature, and puts her out of her pace; And besides it is of good
use, for making Drinks, and Sances, Potable, and Serviceable, speedily; But to
know the ^^^^^^ of Accelerating Clarification, we must first know the Causes of
Clarification. The first Cause is, by the Separation of the Gresser Parts of
the Liquour^, from the Finer. The second, by the Equal Distribution of the
Spirits of the Liquour, with the ^ Parts; For that ^^^^^ represents Bodies
Clear and Untroubled. The third, by the Resining the Spirit it self, which
thereby gives to the Liquour more Splendor, and more Luster.

Separation; It is wrought by Weight; As in the ordinary Residence or
Settlement of Liquours: By Heat: By Motion: By Precipitation, or Sublimation;
(That is, a Calling of the several Parts, either up, or down, which is a
kind of Attraction:) By Adhesion; As when a Body more Viscous is mingled and
agitated with the Liquour: which Viscous Body (afterward severed) draws with
it the grosser Parts of the Liquour; And Lastly, By Percolation or Passage.

Even Distribution of the Spirits; It is wrought By Gentle Heat; And By
Agitation or Motion; (For of Time we speak not, because it is that, we would
anticipate and represent:) And it is wrought also, By Mixture of some other
Body, which has a virtue to open the Liquour, and to make the Spirits the
better pass through.

Refining of the Spirit, it is wrought likewise By Heat; By Motion; And by
Mixture of some Body which has Virtue to attenuate. So therefore (having
shown the Causes) for the Accelerating of Clarification, in general, and the
Enducing of it; take these Instances, and Trialls.

Wine, or Beer, from the Lees, (which we call Racking;) whereby it will
Clarify much the sooner: For the Lees, though they keep the Drink in Heart,
and make it lasting; yet withal they cast up some Spissitude: And this
Instance is to be referred to Separation.

Liquour more Lees than his own will work; For thought the Lees do make the
Liquour turbide, yet they refine the Spirits. Take therefore a Vessel of New
Beer; And take another Vessel of New Beer, and Rack the one Vessel from the
Lees, and power the Lees of the Racked Vessel into the vnracked Vessel, and
see the Effect: This Instance is referred to the Refining of the Spirits.

New Beer, and put in some Quantity of Stale Beer into it, and see whether
it will not accelerate the Clarification, by Opening the Body of the Beer, and
Cutting the Grosser Parts, whereby they may fall down into Lees. And this
Instance again is referred to Separation.

Malt, or Herbs, or the like, are Infused in Liquour, the more thick and
troubled the Liquour is; But the longer they be decocted in the Liquour, the
clearer it is. The Reason is plain, because in infusion, the longer it is, the
greater is the Part of the Gross Body, that goes into the Liquour: But in
Decoction, though more goes forth, yet it either purges at the Top, or
fettleth at the Bottom. And therefore the most Exact Way to Clarify is; First
to Infuse, and then to take off the Liquour, and Decoct it; as they do in
Beer, which has Malt first Infused in the Liquour, and is afterward boiled
with the Hop. This also is referred to Separation.

Hot Embers, and put them about a Bottle filled with New Beer, almost to the
very Neck: Let the Bottle be well stopped, lest it fly out: And continue it,
renewing the Embers every day, by the space of Ten Days; and then compare it
with another Bottle of the same Beer set-by. Take also Lime both Quenched, and
Unquenched, and set the Bottles in them, vt Supra. This Instance is referred,
both to the Even Distribution, and also to the Refining of the Spirits by Heat.

Take Bottles, and Swing them; Or Carry them in a Wheels-Barrow, upon Rough
Ground; twice in a day: But then you may not fill the Bottles full, but leave
some Air; For if the Liquour come close to the Stopple, it cannot play, nor
flower: And when you have shaken them well, either way, pour the Drink into
another Bottle, stopped close, after the usual manner; For if it stay with
much Air in it, the Drink will pall; neither will it settle so perfectly in
all the Parts. Let it stand sorce 24. hours: Then take it, and put it again
into a Bottle with Air, vt supra: And thence into a Bottle Stopped, vt supra:
And so repeat the same Operation for seven days. Note that in the Emptying of
one Bottle into another, you must do it swiftly, lest the Drink pall. It were
good also, to try it in a Bottle with a little Air below the Neck, without
Emptying. This Instance is referred to the Even Distribution and Refining of
the Spirits by Motion.

As for Percolation, Inward, and Outward, (which belongs to Separation,)
Clarifying by Adhesion, with Milks put into New Beer, and stirred with it: For
it may be that the Grossar Part of the Beer will cleave to the Milk: The
Doubt is, whether the Milk will fever ^ ell again; Which is soon tried. And
it is usual in Clarifying Ippoerasse to put in Milk; Which after seuereth and
carries with it the Grosser Parts of the Ippoerasse, as has been said
elsewhere. Also for the better Clarification by Persolation, when they run New
Beer, they use to let it pass through a Strainer; And it is like the finer
the Strainer is, the clearer it will be.

The Accelerating of Maturation We will now enquire of. Experiments in Consort
touching Maturation, and the Accelerating thereof. And ^^^ft touching the
Maturation and Quickening or Drinks. And next touching the Maturation of Fruits.
And of Maturation it self. It is of three Natures. The Maturation of Fruits.
The Maturation of Drinks: And the Maturation of Impostumes, and Ulcers. This
last we refer to another Place, where we shall handle Experiments
Medicinal. There be also other Maturations, as of Metalls, etc. whereof we
will speak as Occasion serves. But we will begin with that of Drinks,
because it has such a Affinity with the Clarification of Liquours.

For the Maturation of Drinks, it is wrought by the congregation of the
Spirits together, whereby they digest more perfectly the Grosser Parts: And it
is effected partly, by the same means, that Clarification is, (whereof we
spoke before;) But then more, that an Extreme Clarification does spread the
Spirits so Smooth, as they become Dull, and the Drink dead, which ought to
have a little Flouring. And therefore all your Clear Amber Drink is flat.

Degrees of Maturation of Drinks; In Must; In Wine, as it is drunk; And in
Vinegar. Whereof Must has not the Spirits well Congregated; Wine has them
well united; so as they make the Parts somewhat more Oily: Vinegar has them
Congregated, but more Ieiune, and in smaller Quantity; The greatest and finest
Spirit and Part being exhaled: For we see Vinegar is made by setting the
Vessel of Wine against the hot Sun: And therefore Vinegar will not burn; For
that much of the Finer Parts is Exhaled.

Refreshing and Quickening of Drink Palled, or Dead, is by Enforcing the Motion
of the Spirit: So we see that Open Weather relaxeth the Spirit, and makes it
more lively in Motion. We see also Bottelling of Beer, or Ale, while it is
New, and full of Spirit, (so that it spirteth when the Stopple is taken forth)
makes the Drink more quick and windy. A Pan of Coals in the Cellar does
likewise good, and makes the Drink work again. New Drink, put to Drink
that is Dead, provoke it to work again; Nay, which is more, (as some
affirm,) A Brewing of New Beer, set by Old Beer, makes it work again. It
were good also to Enforce the Spirits by some Mixtures, that may excite and
quicken them; As by Putting into the Bottles, Nitre, Chalk, Lime, etc. We see
Cream is Matured, and made to rise more speedily, by Putting in Cold Water;
which, as it seems, gets down the Whey.

Burying of Bottles of Drink well stopped, either in dry Earth, a good depth;
Or in the Bottom of a Well within Water; And best of all the Hanging of them
in a deep Well somewhat above the Water, for some forthnights space, is an
Excellent Means of making Drink fresh, and quick: for the Cold does not cause
my Exhaling of the Spirits at all; As Heat does, though it rarifieth the rest
that remain: But Cold makes the Spirits vigorous, and irritateth them,
whereby they Incorporate the Parts of the Liquour perfectly.

Maturation of Fruits; It is wrought by the Calling forth of the Spirits of the
Body outward, and so Spreading them more Smoothly: And likewise by Digesting,
in some degree, the Grosser Parts: And this is Effected, by Heat; Motion;
Attraction; And by a Rudiment of Putrefaction: For the Inception of
Putrefaction has in it a Maturation.

Apples, and laid in Straw; In Hay; In Flower; In Chalk; In Lime; Covered over
with Onions; Covered over with Crabs; Closed up in Wax; Shut in a Box; etc.
There was also an Apple hanged up in Smoke: Of all which the Experiments
sorted in this Manner.

Apple Enclosed in Wax, was as Green and Fresh as at the first Putting in, and
the Kernells continued White. The Cause is, for that all Exclusion of Open
Air, (which is ever Predatory) maintains the Body in his first Freshness,
and Moisture: But the Inconvenience is, that it tastes a little of the Wax:
Which, I suppose, in a Pomgranate, or some such thick-coated Fruit, it would
not do.

The Apple Hanged in the Smoke, turned like an Old Mellow Apple, Cause is, for
that such a degree of Heat, which does neither Melt, nor Scorch, (For we see
that in a greater Heat, a Roast Apple Softneth and Melts; And Pigs feet, made
of Quarters of Wardens, scorch and have a Skin of Cole) does Mellow, and not
Adure: The Smoke also makes the Apple (as it were) sprinkled with Soot, which
helps to Mature. We see than in Drying of Pears, and Prunes, in the Oven,
and Removing of them often as they begin to Sweat, there is a like Operation;
But that is with a far more Intense degree of Heat.

The Apples covered in the Lime and Ashes, were well Matured; As appeared Cause
is, for that that Degree of Heat which is in Lime, and Ashes, (being a
Smoothering Heat) is of all the rest most Proper; for it does neither Liquefie,
nor Atefie; And that is true Maturation, N^^ that the Taste of those Apples was
good; And therefore it is the Experiment fittest for Use.

The Apples, Conered with Crabs, and Onions, were likewise well Matured. Heat;
But for that the Crab and the Onions draw forth the ^^^^ of the Apple, and
spread them equally through out the ^^^, which ^^^ away Hatdnesse ^^^^^^ see f^^
one Apple ^^^ath against another. And therefore in making of Cider, they turn
the Apples first upon a heap. So one Cluster of Grapes, that touches another
^^^^ it grows ripeneth faster; ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^

The Apple^ ^^^^ ^^^^ and the S^^^^ ^^^^^ apparently, though ^^^ ^^ Cause is,
for that the Hay and Straw have a very low degree of Heat, but yet Close and
Smoothering, and which dries nor.

The Apple in the Close Box, was ripened also: The Cause is, for that all
Warmth. As we see in W^^^ ^^^^ Plus^, etc.

Note that all these were Compared with another Apple, of the same kinds, that
lay of it Self: And in Comparison of that, were more Sweet, and more Yellow,
and so appeared to be most Ripe.

Taken Apple, or P^^^, or other like Fruit and Row^^ it upon a Table Fruit
presently* Which is Nothing but the S^^^^^ ^^^^^ of the Spirits into the Parts;
For the ^^^ ^^ D^^^^^ of the Spirits makes the Ha^^ishnesse: But this Hard
Row^^^ is between Concoction, and a Simple Maturation; Therefore, if you
should Roll them but gently, perhaps twice a day; And (...) some seven days*
it is like they would mature more finely, and like unto the Natural
Maturation.

Take an Apple, and cut out a Piece of the Top, and cover it, to see Solution
of Continuitie will not hasten a Maturation* We see that where a Waspe, or a
Fly, or a Worm has bitten, in a Grape, or any Fruit, it will sweeten hastily.

Apple, etc. and prick it with a Prinne full of Holes, not deep, and smeare
it a little with Sack, or Cinnamon Water, or Spirit of Wine, every day for ten
days, to see if the Virtuall Heat of the Wine, or Strong Waters, will not
Mature it.

In these Trialls also, as was used in the first, set another of the same
Fruits by, to Compare them: And try them, by their Yellowness, and by their
Sweetness.

The World has been much abused by the Opinion of Making of Gold: Experiment
Solitary, touching the Making of Gold.
The Work it self I judge to be possible; But the Means (hitherto
propounded) to effect it, are, in the Practice, full of Error and Imposture;
And in the Theory, full of unsound Imaginations. For to say, that Nature has
an Intention to make all Metals Gold; And that, if she were delivered from
Impediments, she would perform her own Work; And that, if the Crudities,
Impurities, and Leprosities of Metals were cured, they would become Gold; And
that a little Quantity of the Medicine, in the Work of Proiection, will turn
a Sea of the Baser Metal into Gold, by Multiplying: All these are but dreams:
And so are many other Grounds of Alchymy. And to help the Matter, the
Alchymists call in likewise many Vanities, out of Astrology; Natural Magic;
Superstitious Interpretations of Scriptures; Auricular Traditions; Feigned
Testimonies of Ancient Authors; And the like. It is true, on the other side,
they have brought to light not a few profitable Experiments, and thereby made
the World some amends. But we, when we shall come to handle the Version and
Transmutation of Bodies; And the Experiments concerning Metalls, and Mineralls;
will lay open the true Ways and Passages of Nature, which may lead to this
great Effect. And we commend the wit of the Chinese, who despair of Making
of Gold, but are Mad upon the Making of Silver: For certain it is, that it is
more difficult to make Gold, (which is the most Ponderous and Materiate amongst
Metalls) of other Metalls, less Ponderous, and less Materiate; than ( via
versa) to make Silver of Lead, or Quicksilver; Both which are more Ponderous
than Silver; So that they need rather a further Degree of Fixation, than any
Condensation. In the meanetime, by Occasion of Handling the Axioms touching
Maturation, we will direct a Trial touching the Maturing of Metalls, and
thereby Turning some of them into Gold; For we conceive indeed, that a perfect
good Concoction, or Disgestion, or Maturation of some Metalls, will produce
Gold. And here we call to mind, that we knew a Dutchman, that had wrought
himself into the beleese of a great Person, by undertaking that he could make
Gold: Whose discourse was, that Gold might be made; But that the Alchymists
Ouer-fired the Work: For (he said) the Making of Gold did require a very
temperate Heat, as being in Nature a Subterrany work, where little Heat
comes; But yet more to the Making of Gold, than of any other Metal; And
therefore, that he would do it with a great Lamp, that should carry a
Temperate and Equal Heat: And that it was the Work of many Months. The
Device of the Lamp was folly; But the Ouer-firing now used; And the Equal
Heat to be required; And the Making it a Work of some good Time; are no ill
Discourses.

We resort therefore to our Axioms of Maturation, in Effect touched before.
The First is, that there be used a Temporate Heat; For they are ever Temperate
Heats that Digest, and Mature: Wherein we mean Temperate, according to the
Nature of the Subject; For that may be Temperate to Fruits, and Liquours, which
will not work at all upon Metalls. The Second is, that the Spirit of the
Metal be quickened, and the Tangible Parts opened: For without those two
Operations, the Spirit of the Metal, wrought upon, will not be able to digest
the Parts. The Third is, that the Spirits do spread themselves Even, and move
not Subsultorily; For that will make the Parts Close, and Pliant. And this
requires a Heat, that does not rise and fall, but continue as Equal as may
be. The Fourth is, that no Part of the Spirit be emitted, but detained: For if
there be Emission of Spirit, the Body of the Metal will be Hard, and Churlish.
And this will be performed, partly by the Temper of the Fire; And partly by the
closeness of the Vessel. The Fifth is, that there be Choice made of the
likeliest and best Prepared Metal, for the Version: For that will facilitate
the Work. The Sixth is, that you give Time enough for the Work: Not to
prolong Hopes (as the Alchymists do;) but indeed to give Nature a convenient
Space to work in. These Principles are most certain, and true; We will now
derive a direction of Trial out of them; Which may (perhaps) by further
Meditation, be improued.

Small Furnace made, of a Temperate Heat; Let the Heat be such, as may keep
the Metal perpetually Moulten, and no more; For that above all imports to
the Work. For the Material, take Silver, which is the Metal that in Nature
Symbolizeth most with Gold; Put in also, with the Silver, a Tenth Part of
Quicksilver, and a Twelfth Part of Nitre, by weight; Both these to quicken and
open the Body of the Metal: And so let the Work be continued by the Space of
Six Months, at the least. I wish also, that there be, at some times, an
Iniection of some Oyled Substance; Such as they use in the Recovering of Gold,
which by Vexing with Separations has been made Churlish: And this is, to lay
the Parts more Close and Smooth, which is the Maine Work. For Gold (as we see)
is the Closest (and therefore the Heauiest) of Metalls: And is likewise the
most Flexible, and Tensible. Note, that to think to make Gold of Quicksilver,
because it is the heauiest, is a Thing not to be hoped; For Quicksilver will
not endure the Manage of the Fire. Next to Silver, I think Copper were
fittest to be the Material.

Gold has these Natures: Greatness of Weight; Closeness of Parts; Fixation;
pliant^esse, or Softness; Immunity from Rust; Color or Tincture of Yellow.
Experiment Solitary touching the Nature of Gold.
Therefore the Sure Way, (though most about,) to make Gold, is to know the
Causes of the Several Natures before rehearsed, and the Axioms concerning the
same. For if a Man can make a Metal, that has all these Properties, Let Men
dispute, whether it be Gold, or no?

The Enducing and Accelerating of Putrefaction, is a Subject of a very
Universal Enquiry: For Corruption is a Reciprocal to Generation. Experiments
in Consort touching the Enducing and Accelerating of Putrefaction.
And they Two, are as Natures two Terms or Bundaries; And the Guides to Life
and Death, Putrefaction is the Work of the Spirits of Bodies, which ever are
Unquiet to Get forth, and Congregate with the Air, and to onioy the Sunbeames:
The Getting forth, or Spreading of the Spirits, (which is a Degree of Getting
forth,) has fine Differing Operations. If the Spirits be detained within the
Body, and move more violently, there follows Colliquation; As in Metalls,
etc. If more Mildely, there follows Disgestion, or Maturation, As in Drinks,
and Fruits. If the Spirits be not merely Detained, but Protrude a little, and
that Motion be Confused, and Inordinate, there follows Putrefaction; Which
ever dissolueth the Consistence of the Body into much Inequality; As in Flesh,
Rotten Fruits, Shining Wood, etc. And also in the Rust of Metalls. But if that
Motion be in a certain Order, there follows Vivification, and Figuration; As
both in Living Creatures bred of Putrefaction, and in Living Creatures Perfect.
But if the Spirits issue out of the Body, there follows Deficcation,
Induration, Consumption, etc. As in Brick, Euaporation of Bodies Liquid, etc.

The Means to Enduce and Accelerate Putrefaction, are; First by Adding As in
Wetting of any Flesh, Fruit, Wood, with Water, etc. For contrariwise Unctuous
and Oily Substances preserve.

The Second is by Inuitation or Excitation; As when a Rotten Apple Apple that
is Sound; Or when Dung (which is a substance, already Putrified) is added to
other Bodies. And this is also notably seen in Churchyards, where they bury
much; Where the Earth will consume the Corpse, in far shorter time, than other
Earth will.

The Third is, by Closeness, and Stopping, which detaineth the Spirits, more
than they would; And thereby irritateth them to seek Issue; As in Corn, and
Clothes, which wax Musty; and therefore Open Air (which they call Aer
perstabilis) does preserve: And this does appear more Evidently in Agnes,
which come (most of them,) of Obstructions, and Penning the Humors, which
thereupon Putrisie.

The Fourth is, by Solution of Continuity; As we see an Apple will rot

The Fifth is, either by the Exhaling, or by the Driving back of the Principal
Spirits, which preserve the Consistence of the Body; So that when their
Government is Dissolved, every Part returns to his Nature, or Homogeny. And
this appears in Urine, and Blond, when they cool, and thereby break; It
appears also in the Gangrene, or Mortification of Flesh, either by Opiates,
or by Intense Colds. I conceive also the same Effect is in Pestilences, for
that the Malignity of the Infecting Vapor, daunceth the Principal Spirits,
and makes them fly, and leave their Regiment; And then the Humors, Flesh, and
Secondary Spirits, do dissolve, and break, as in an Anarchy.

Foreign Spirit, Stronger and more Eager than the Spirit of the Body, enters
the Body; As in the Stinging of Serpents. And this is the Cause (generally)
that upon all Poisons follows Swelling: And we see Swelling follows also,
when the Spirits of the Body it self, Congregate too much; As upon Blows, and
Bruises; Or when they are Pent in too much, as in Swelling upon Cold. And we
see also, that the Spirits coming of Putrefaction of Humors in Agues, etc.
Which may be counted as Foreign Spirits, though they be bred within the Body,
do Extinguish and Suffocate the Natural Spirits, and Heat.

Weak Degree of Heat, as sets the Spirits in a little Motion, but is not
able, either to digest the Parts, or to Issue the Spirits; As is seen in
Flesh kept in a Room that is not Cool; Whereas in a Cool and Wet Larder it
will keep longer. And we see, that Viuisication (whereof Putrefaction is the
Bastard Brother,) is effected by such Soft Heats; As the Hatching of Eggs; The
Heat of the Womb, etc.

Releasing of the Spirits; which before were close kept by the Solidnesse of
their Couerture, and thereby their Appetite of Issuing checked; As in the
Artificial Rusts induced by strong Waters, in Iron, Lead, etc. And therefore
Wetting hasteneth Rust, or Putrefaction of any thing, because it softeneth the
Crust, for the Spirits to come forth.

Enterchange of Heat and Cold, or Wet and dry; As we see in the Moulding of
Earth in Frosts, and Sun; And in the more hasty Rotting of Wood, that is
sometimes wet, sometimes dry.

Time, and the Work Procedure of the Spirits themselves, which cannot keep
their Station; Especially if they be lost to themselves; And there be not
Agitation or Local Motion. As we see in Corn not stirred; And Men's Bodies
not exercised.

Moulds are Inceptions of Putrefaction; As the Moulds of Pyes, and Flesh; the
Moulds of Orenges, and Limons; which Moulds afterward turn into Worms, or
more odious Putrefactions: And therefore (commonly) prove to be ill Odor. And
if the Body be Liquid, and not apt to Putrify totally, it will cast up a
Mother in the Top; As the Mothers of Distilled Waters.

Moss is a kind of Mould, of the Earth, and Trees. But it may be better
sorted as a Rudiment of Germination; To which we refer it.

It is an Enquiry of Excellent use, to Enquire of the Means of Preventing or
Staying Putrefaction, For therein consists the Means of Conservation of
Bodies; For Bodies have two Kinds of Dissolutions; The one by Consumption, and
Deficcation; The other by Putrefaction. Experiments in Consort, touching
Pro^^^^^^ and Preventing Putrefaction.
But as for the Putrefactions of the Bodies of Men, and Living Creatures, (as
in Agues, Worms, Consumptions of the Lungs, Impostumes, and Ulcers both
Inwards and Outward,) they are a great Part of Physic, and Surgery: And
therefore we will reserve the Enquiry of them to the proper Place, where we
shall handle Medicinal Experiments of all Sorts. Of the rest we will now Enter
into an Enquiry: wherein much light may be taken, form that which has been
said, of the Means to Enduce or Accelerate Putrefaction; For the Removing
that, which caused Putrefaction, does Prevent and Avoid Putrefaction.

The First Means of Prohibiting or Checking Putrefaction, is Cold: Detention
of the Spirits, and Constipation of the Tangible Parts.

The Second is Astriction: For Astriction prohibiteth Dissolution: As
Medicines, whereof such as are Astringents do inhibite Putrefaction; And by
the same reason of Astringency, some small Quantity of Oil of Vitrioll, will
keep Fresh Water long from Putrefying. And this Astriction is in a substance
that has a Virtuall Cold; And it works (partly) by the fame Means that Cold
does.

The Third is, the Excluding of the Air; And again, the Exposing to the Air;
For these Contraries, (as it comes often to pass;) work the same Effect,
according to the Nature of the Subject Matter. So we see, that Beer, or Wine,
in Bottles close stopped, last long; That the Garners under Ground keep Come
longer than those above Ground; and that Fruit closed in Wax keeps fresh:
And likewise Bodies put in Honey, and Flower, keep more fresh; And Liquours,
Drinks, and Juices, with a little Oil cast on the Top keep fresh.
Contratiwise, we see that Cloth and Apparel, not Aired, do breed Moathes, and
Mould; And the Diversity is, that in Bodies that need Detenties of Spirits, the
Excluston of the Air does good; As in Drinks, and C^^^^: But in Bodies that
need Emission of Spirits, to discharge some of the Superfluous Moisture, it
does hurt, for they require Atring.

The fourth is Motion, and Stirring; For Putrefaction asks Rest; For Motion,
which Putrefaction requires, is disturbed by any Agitation; And all Local
Motion keeps Bodies Integrall, and their Parts together; As we see that
Turning over of Corn in a Garner; Or Letting it run like an Houre-glasse,
from an upper Room into a Lower, does keep it Sweet; And Running Waters
putrefie not; And in Men's Bodles. Exercise hinders Putrefaction; And
contrariwise Rest, and Want of Motion, or Stoppings, (whereby the Run of
Humors, or the Motion of Perspiration, is stayed,) further Putrefaction; As we
part partly touched a little before.

Breathing forth of the Aduentitious Moisture in Bodies; For as Wetting does
hasten Putrefaction; So Connenient Drying. (whereby the more Radical Moisture
is only kept in,) puts back Putrefaction: So we see that Herbs, and
Flowers, if they be dried in the Shade; Or dried in the hot Sun, for a small
time, keep best. For the Emission of the Loose and Aduentitious Moisture, does
betray the Radical Moisture; And carries it out for Company.

Strengthening of the Spirits of Bodies; For as a Great Heat keeps Bodies from
Putrefaction; But a Tepide Heat enclineth them to Putrefaction: So a Strong
Spirit likewise preserves, and a Weak or Faint Spirit disposes to
Corruption. So we find that Salt Water corrupts not so soon as Fresh: And
Salting of Oisters, and Powdring of Meat, keeps them from Putrefaction, It
would be tried also, whether Chalk put into Water, or Drink does not preserve
it from Putrefying, or speedy Souring. So we see that Strong Beer, will last
longer than Small; And all Things, that are hot and Aromaticall, do help to
preserve Liquours, or Powders, etc. Which they do, as well by Strengthening the
Spirits, as by Soaking out the loose Moisture;

Separation of the Cruder Parts, and thereby making the Body more Equal; for
all imperfect Mixture is apt to Putrefie; And Watery Substances are more apt to
Putrefie, than Oily. So we see Distilled Waters will last longer than Raw
waters; And Things that have passed the Fire, do last longer, than those that
have not passed the Fire; As Dried Pears, etc.

Drawing forth continually of that part, where the Putrefaction begins:
Which is (commonly) the Loose and watery Moisture; Not only for the Reason
before given, that it provoke the Radical Moisture to come forth with it;
But because being detained in the Body, the Putrefaction taking hold of it,
insecteth the rest: As we see in the Embalming dead Bodies; And the same Reason
is of Preserving Herbs, or Fruits, or Flowers, in Branne, or Meal.

Commixiture of any Thing that is more Oily, or Sweet: For such Bodies are
least apt to Putrefie, the Air working little upon them; And they not
putrefying preserve the rest. And therefore we see Syrrups, and Ointments, will
last longer, than Iuyces.

Commixture of somewhat that is Dry; For Putrefaction begins first from the
Spirits; And then from the Moisture; And that that is dry is unapt to
puttrefie: And therefore Smoke preserves Flesh; As we see in Bacon, and
Neats-Tongues, and Martlemas Beese, etc.

Ancients, that Blown Aires do preserve Bodies, longer than other Aires,
seems to Me Probable; For that the Blown Aires, being Ouer-charged and
Compressed, will hardly receive the Exhaling of any Thing, but rather repulse
it. It was tried in a Blown Bladder, whereinto Flesh was put, and likewise a
Flower, and it sorted not; For Dry Bladders will not Blow: And New Bladders
rather further Putrefaction: The way were therefore, blow strongly, with a Pair
of Bellows, into a Hogshead, putting into the Hogshead (before) that which you
would have preserved; And in the instant that you withdraw the Bellows, stop
the Hole close.

The Experiments of Wood that Shines in the Dark, we have diligently driven,
and pursued. Experiment Solitary, touching Wood Shining in the Dark.
The rather, for that of all Things, that give Light here below, it is the most
Durable. And has least Apparent Motion, Fire and Flame are in continual
Expense; Sugar shines only while it is in Scraping; And Salt Water while it
is in Dashing; Glowing Scales of Fishes (Putrified) seem to be of the same
Nature with Shining Wood; And it is true, that all Putrefaction has with it an
Inward Motion, as well as Fire, or Light. The Trial sorted thus. 1. The
Shining is in some Pieces more Bright, in some more Di^^^; but the most Bright
of all does not attain to the Light of a Glow-w^^^^. 2. The Woods that have
been tried to shine, are chiefly Sallow, and Willow; Also the A^^, and Husle;
It may be, it holds in others. 3. Both Roots, and Bodies do shine, but the
Roots better. 4. The Color of the Shining Part, by Daylight, is in some Pieces
White, in some Pieces inclining to Red; Which in the Country they call the
White, and Red Garret. 5. The Part that Shines, is, (for the most part)
somewhat Safe, and Moist to feel to; But some was sound to be Firm and Hard;
So as it might be figured into a Cross, or into Beads, etc. But you must not
look to have an Image, or the like, in any Thing that is Lightsome; For even a
face in Iron red Hot will not be seen, the Light confounding the small
differences of Lightsome and Darksome, which show the figure. 6. There was the
Shining Part pared off, till you came to that, that did not Shine; But within
two Days the Part Contiguous began also to Shine, being laid abroad in the
Dew; So as it seems the Putrefaction spreads. 7. There was other dead Wood
of like kind, that was Laid abroad, which Shined not at the first; But after a
Nights lying abroad began to Shine. 8. There was other Wood, that did First
Shine; And being laid dry in the House, within five or six days, Lost the
Shining; And laid abroad again, Recovered the Shining: 9. Shining woods, being
laid in a Dry Room, within a Seven night, lose their Shining; But being laid
in a Cellar, or Dark Room, kept the Shining. 10. The Boring of Holes, in that
kind of Wood, and then laying it abroad, seems to conduce to make it Shine:
The Cause is, for that all Solution of Continuity does help on Putrefaction,
as was touched before. 11. No Wood has been yet tried to Shine, that was cut
down alive, but such as was Rotted, both in Stock, and Root, while it grew.
12. Part of the Wood that Shined, was Steeped in Oil, and retained the Shining
a Forthnight. 13. The like succeeded in some Steeped in Water, and much better.
14. How long the Shining will continue, if the Wood be laid abroad every Night,
and taken in and Sprinkled with Water in the Day, is not yet tried. 15. Trial
was made of laying it abroad in Frostie weather, which hurt it not. 16. There
was a great Piece of a Root which did shine, and the Shining Part was Cut off,
till no more Shined; Yet after two Nights, though it were kept in a dry Room,
it got a Shining.

The Bringing, forth of living Creatures may be accelerated in two Respects:
The one, if the Embryon ripeneth and perfecteth sooner: The other if there be
some Cause from the Mothers Body, of Expulsion or Putting Experiment Solitary
touching the Acceleration of Birth
And therefore the Ancient Observation is true, that the Child borne in the
Seventh Mo^^^th, does commonly well; But Borne in the Eighth Month, does (for
the most part) die. But the Cause assigned is Fabulous; Which is, that in the
Eighth Month, should be the Return of the Reign, of the Planet Saturn:
which (as they say) is a Planet Malign; whereas in the Seventh is the Reign
of the Moon, which is a Planet Propitious. But the true Cause is, for that
where there is so great a Prevention of the Ordinary time, it is the lustiness
of the Child; But when it is less, it is some Indisposition of the Mother.

To Accelerate Growth or Stature, it must proceed; Either from the Plenty of
the Nourishment; Or from the Nature of the Nourishment; Or from the Quickening
and Exciting of the Natural Heat. Experiment Solitary touching the
Acceleration of growth and Stature.
For the first, Excess of Nourishment is hurtful; For it makes the Child
Corpulent; And Growing in Breadth, rather than in Height. And you may take
Plants, which, if they spread much, are seldom tall. As for the Nature of the
Nourishment; First, it may not be too Dry; And therefore Children in Dayrie
Countries do wax more tall, than where they feed more upon Bread, and Flesh.
There is also a received Tale; That Boiling of Dasie Roots in Milk (which it
is certain are great Driers) will make Dogs little. But so much is true, that
an Ouer-drie Nourishment in Childhood puts back Stature. Secondly, the
Nourishment must be of an Opening Nature; For that Attenuateth the Juice, and
furthereth the Motion of the Spirits, upwards. Neither is it without cause,
that Xenophon, in the Nouriture of the Persian Children, does so much commend
their Feeding upon Cardamon; which (he says) made them grow better, and be of
a more Active Habit. Cardamon is in Latin Nasturtium; And with us
Watercresses; Which, it is certain, is an Herb, that whilst it is young, is
Friendly to Life. As for the Quickening of Natural Heat, it must be done
chiefly with Exercise; And therefore (no doubt) much Going to School, where
they sit so much, hinders the Growth of Children; whereas Country People,
that go not to School, are commonly of better Stature. And again Men must
beware, how they give Children, any thing that is Cold in Operation; For even
Long Sucking does hinder both Wit, and Stature. This has been tried, that a
Whelpe, that has been fed with Nitre in Milk, has become very little, but
extreme lively: For the Spirit of Nitre is Cold. And though it be an Excellent.
Medicine, in Strength of years, for Prolongation of Life; yet it is, in
Children and young Creatures, an Enemy to Growth: And all for the same Reason,
For Heat is requisite to Growth: But after a Man is come to his Middle Age,
Heat consumes the Spirits; which the Coldness of the Spirit of Nitre does
help to condense, and correct.

There be two Great Families of Things; You may term them by several Names;
Sulphurous and Mercuriall, which are the Chemists Words: (For as for their
Sal, which is their Third Principle, it is a Compound of the other two;)
Inflammable and Not Inflammable; Mature and Crude; Oily and Watery. Experiments
in Consort touching Sulphur and Mercury, two of Paracel^es Principles.
For we see that in Subterranies there are, as the Fathers of their Tribes,
Brimstone and Mercury: In Vegetables, and Living Creatures there is Water and
Oil: In the Inferior Order of Pneumaticalls there is Air and Flame: And in
the Superior, there is the Body of the Star, and the Pure Sky. And these
Paires, though they be unlike in the Primitive Differences of Matter, yet they
seem to have many Consents: For Mercury and Sulphur are principal Materials
of Metalls; Water and Oil, are principal Materials of Vegetables, and
Animals; And seem to differ but in Maturation, or Concoction: Flame (in Vulgar
Opinion) is but Air Incensed; And they both have Quickness of Motion, and
Facility of Cession, much alike: And the Interstellar Sky, (though the Opinion
be vain, that the Star is the Denser Part of his Orb,) has notwithstanding
so much Affinity with the Star, that there is a Rotation of that, as well as
of the Star. Therefore, it is one of the greatest Magnalia Naturae, to turn
Water, or Watery Juice, into Oil or Oily Juice: Greater in Nature, than to
turn Silver, or Quicksilver, into Gold.

The Instances we have, wherein Crude and Watery Substance turns Fat and Oily,
are of four kinds. First in the Mixture of Earth and Water; which mingled by
the help of the Sun, gather a Nitrous Fatness, more than either of them
have severally; As we see, in that they put forth Plants, which need both
Iuyces.

The Second is in the Assimilation of Nourishment, made in the Bodies Plants,
and Living Creatures; Where of Plants turn the Juice of mere Water and Earth,
into a great deal of Oily Matter: Living Creatures, though much of their Fat,
and Flesh, are out of Oily Aliments, (as Meat, and Bread,) yet they Assimilate
also in a Measure their Drink of Water, etc. But these two Ways of Version
of Water into Oil, (namely by Mixture, and by Assimilation) are by many
Passages, and Percolations, and by long Continuance of soft Heats, and by
Circuits of Time.

Inception of Putrefaction; As in Water Corrupted; And the Mothers of Waters
Distilled; Both which have a kind of Fatness, or Oil.

Dulcoration of some Metalls; As Saccharum Saturni, etc.

Version of Water into a more Oily Substance, is by Disgestion; For Oil is
almost Nothing else but Water disgested; And this Disgestion; is principally by
Heats Which Heat must be either Outward, or Inward: Again, it may be by
Provocation, or Excitation; Which is caused by the Mingling of Bodies already
Oily, or Disgested; For they will somewhat Communicate their Nature with the
rest. Disgestion also is strongly effected by direct Assimilation, of Bodies
Crude into Bodies Disgested; As in Plants, and Living Creatures, whose
Nourishment is far more Crude than their Bodies: But this Disgestion is by a
great Compass, as has been said. As for the more full Handling of these two
Principles, whereof this is but a Taste; (the Enquiry of which is one of the
Profoundest Enquiries of Nature,) We leave it to the Title of Version of
Bodies; And likewise to the Title of the First Congregations of Matter; Which
like a General Assembly of Estates, does give Law to all Bodies.

A Chameleon is a Creature about the Bigness of an Ordinary Lizard: His Head
vnproportionably big; His Eyes great: He moves his Head without the writhing
of his Neck, (which is inflexible,) as a Hog does: His Back crooked; His
Skin Spotted with little Tumors, less Eminent nearer the Belly; His Tail
slender, and long: On each Foot he has five Fingers; three on the Outside, and
two on the Inside; His Tongue of a marvelous Length in respect of his Body,
and hollow at the end; Which he will launch out to prey upon Flses. Experiment
Solitary touching Chameleons.
Of Color Green, and of a dusky Yellow, brighter and whiter toward the
Belly; Yet spotted with Blew, White, and Red. If he be laid upon Green, the
Green predominateth; If upon Yellow, the Yellow; Not so if he be laid upon
Blew, or Red, or White; Only the Green Spots receive a more Orient Luster:
Laid upon Black, he looks all Black, though not without a Mixture of
Green. He feeds not only upon Air, (though that be his principal
Sustenance;) For sometimes he takes Flies, as was said; yet some that have
kept Chameleons a whole year together, could never perceive that ever they fed
upon any Thing else but Air; And might observe their Bellies to swell after
they had exhausted the Air, and closed their Jaws; Which they open commonly
against the Rays of the Sun. They have a foolish Tradition in Magic, that
if a Chameleon be burnt upon the Top of a House, it will raise a Tempest;
Supposing (according to their vain Dreams of Sympathies) because he
nourishes with Air, his Body should have great virtue to make Impression upon
the Air.

It is reported by one of the Ancients, that in Part of Media, there are
Eruptions of Flames out of Plains; And that those Flames are clear, and cast
not forth such Smoke, and Ashes, and Pummice, as Mountain Flames do.
Experiment Solitary, touching Subterrany Fires.
The Reason (no doubt) is, because the Flame is not pent, as it is in
Mountains, and Earthquakes which cast Flame. There be also Blind Fires,
under Stone, which flame not out, but Oil being powered upon them, they flame
out. The Cause whereof is, for that it seems, the Fire is so choked, as not
able to remove the Stone, it is Heat, rather than Flame; Which nevertheless is
sufficient to Inflame the Oil.

It is reported, that in some Lakes, the Water is so Nitrous, as if Foul
Clothes be put into it, it scoureth them of it self: And if they stay any whit
long, they moulder away. Experiment Solitary, touching Nitre.
And the Scouring Virtue of Nitre is Body Cold; And we see Warm Water scoureth
better than Cold. But the Cause is, for that it has a Subtle Spirit, which
seuereth and divides any thing that is soul, and Viscous, and sticks upon a
Body.

Take a Bladder, the greatest you can get; Fill it full of Wind, and tie it
about the Neck with a Silk thread waxed; And upon that put likewise Wax very
close; So that when the Neck of the Bladder dries, no Air may possibly get
in, nor out. Experiment Solitary touching Congealing of Air.
Then bury it three or four foot Earth, in a Vault, or in a Conferuatory of
Snow, the Snow being made hollow about the Bladder; And after some Forthnights
distance, see whether the Bladder be shruncke: For if it be, then it is plain,
that the Coldness of the Earth, or Snow, has Condensed the Air, and brought
it a Degree nearer to Water: Which is an Experiment of great Consequence.

It is a Report of some good credit, that in Deep Caves, there are Pensile
Crystal, and Degrees of Crystal that drop from above; And in some other,
(though more rarely) that rise from below. Experiment Solitary touching
Congealing of Water into Crystal.
Which though it be chiefly the Work of Cold, yet it may be, that Water, that
passes through the Earth, gathers a Nature more clammy, and fitter to and
less apt to dissolve, than ordinarily. I suppose also, that if you make the
Earth narrower at the bottom, than at the Top, in fashion of a Sugar Loaf
Reuersed, it will help the Experiment. For it will make the Ice, where it
Issues, less in Bulk; And evermore Smalnesse of Quantity is a Help to
Version.

Take Damask Roses, and pull them; Then dry them upon the Top of an House,
upon a Lead or Tarras, in the hot Sun, in a clear day, between the Hours
(only) of twelve and two; or there abouts. Experiment Solitary touching
Preserving of Roseleaues, both in Color, and Smell.
Then put them into a Sweet Dry Earthen Bottle, or a Glass, with narrow
Mouths, stuffing them close together, but without Bruising: Stop the Bottle,
or Glass, close, and these Roses will retain, not only their Smell Perfect,
but their Color fresh, for a year at least. Note, that Nothing does so much
destroy any Plant, or other Body, either by Putrefaction, or Arefaction, as the
Aduentitious Moisture, which hangs loose in the Body, if it be not drawn
out. For it betrayeth and tolleth forth the Innate and Radical Moisture, along
with it, when it self goes forth. And therefore in Living Creatures, Moderate
Sweat does preserve the Juice of the Body. Note that these Roses, when you take
them from the Drying, have little or no Smell; So that the Smell is a Second
Smell, that issues out of the Flower afterward.

The Continuance of Flame, according unto the diversity of the Body Enflamed,
and other Circumstances, is worthy the Enquiry; Chiefly, for that though Flame
be (almost) of a Momentany Lasting, yet it receives the More, and the Less:
we will first therefore speak (at large) of Bodies Enflamed, wholly, and
Immediately, without any Wieke to help the Inflammations. Experiments in
Consort, touching the Continuance of Flame.
A Spoonefull of Spirit of Wine, a little heated, was taken, and it burnt as
long as came to 116. Pulses. The same Quantity of Spirit of Wine, Mixed with
the Sixth Part of a Spoonefull of Nitre, burnt but to the space of 94. Pulses.
Mixed with the like Quantity of Bay Salt, 83. Pulses. Mixed with the like
Quantity of Gunpowder, which dissolved into a Black water, 110. Pulses. A
Cube, or Pellet of Yellow Wax, was taken, as much as half the Spirit of Wine,
and set in the Midst, and it burnt only to the space of 87. Pulses. Mixed
with the Sixth Part of a spoonefull of Milk, it burnt to the space of 100.
Pulses; And the Milk was crudled. Mixed with the Sixth Part of a spoonefull of
Water, it burnt to the space of 86. Pulses; With an Equal Quantity of Water,
only to the space of 4. Pulses. A small Pebble was laid in the Midst; and
the Spirit of Wine burnt to the space of 94. Pulses. A Piece of Wood, of the
Bigness of an Arrow, and about a Fingers length, was set up in the Midst,
and the Spirit of Wine burnt to the space of 94. Pulses. So that the Spirit of
Wine Simple, endured the longest; And the Spirit of Wine with the Bay Salt, and
the Equal Quantity of Water, were the shortest.

Going forth of the flame, becaused, by the Greater Vigor of the Flame in
Burning; Or by the Resistance of the Body mixed, and the Auersion thereof to
take Flame: Which will appear by the Quantity of the Spirit of Wine, that
remains after the Going out of the Flame. And it seems clearly to be the
latter; For that the Mixture of Things least apt to burn, is the Speediest in
going out. And note, by the way, that Spirit of Wine burned, till it go out of
it self, will burn no more; And tastes nothing so hot in the Mouth, as it
did; No nor yet sour, (as if it were a degree toward Vinegar,) which Burnt
Wine does; but flat and dead.

Note, that in the Experiment of Wax aforesaid, the Wax dissolved in Spirit of
Wine, to produce one Flame; but wheresoever the Wax floated, the Flame forsook
it, till at last it spread all over, and put the Flame quite out.

The Experiments of the Mixtures of the Spirit of Wine enflamed, are
Continuance of Flames, such as are used for Candles, Lamps, or Tapers;
consisting of Inflammable Matters, and of a Wieke that provoke Inflammation.
And this imports not only Discovery, but also Use and Profit; For it is a
great Saving, in all such Lights, if they can be made as fair and bright as
others, and yet last longer. Wax Pure made into a Candle, and Wax Mixed
severally into Candle-stuffe, with the Particulars that follow; (viz Water,
Aqua-vitae, Milk, Bay Salt, Oil, Butter, Nitre, Brimstone, Saw-dust,) Every
of these bearing a Sixth Part to the Wax; And every of these Candles mixed,
being of the same Weight and Wieke with the Wax Pure, proved thus in the
Burning, and Lasting. The Swiftest in Consuming was that with Saw-dust; Which
first burned fair, till some part of the Candle was consumed; and the Dust
gathered about the Snaste; But then it made the Snaste big, and long, and to
burn duskishly, and the Candle wasted in half the time of the Wax Pure. The
next in Swiftness, were the Oil, and Butter, which consumed, by a Fifth part,
swifter than the Pure Wax. Then followed in Swiftness the Clear Wax it self.
Then the Bay Salt, which lasted about an Eighth part longer than the Clear
Wax. Then followed the Aqua-vita, which lasted about a Fifth part longer than
the Clear Wax. Then followed the Milk, and Water, with little difference from
the Aqua-vita, but the Water slowest. And in these four last, the Wieke would
spit forth little Sparks. For the Nitre, it would not hold lighted above some
Twelve Pulses; But all the while it would spit out Portions of Flame, which
afterward would go out into a vapor. For the Brimstone, it would hold
lighted, much about the same time with the Nitre; But then after a little
while, it would harden and cake about the Snaste; So that the Mixture of
Bay Salt with Wax, will win an Eighth part of the time of lasting, and the
Water a Fifth.

After the Several Materials were tried, Trial was likewise made of Wickes;
As of Ordinary Cotton; Sowing Thread; Rush; Silk; Straw; and Wood. The Silk,
Straw, and Wood, would flame a little, till they came to the Wax, and then go
out: of the Other Three, the Thread consumed faster than the Cotton, by a Sixth
part of Time: The Cotton next: Then the Rush consumed flower than the Cotton,
by at least a third part of time. For the Bigness of the Flame, the Cotton,
and Thread, cast a Flame much alike; and the Rush much less, and dimmer. Quare,
whether Wood, and Wiekes both, as in Torches, consume faster, than the Wiekes
Simple?

Materials, and the Several Wiekes: But to the lasting of the Flame, it
imports also; Not only what the Material is, but in the same Material,
whether it be Hard, Soft, Old, New, etc. Good Housewines, to make their Candles
burn the longer, use to lay them (one by one) in Bran, or Flower, which make
them harder, and so they Consume the flower: Insomuch, as by this means, they
will out-last other Candles, of the same Stuff, almost Half in Half. For
Bran and Flower have a Virtue to Harden: So that both Age, and lying in the
Bran, does help to the Lasting. And we see that Wax Candles last longer than
Tallow Candles, because Wax is more firm, and hard.

Lasting of Flame also depends upon the easy Drawing of the Nourishment; As
we see in the Court of England, there is a Service which they call All-night;
which is (as it were) a great Cake of Wax, with the Wieke in the Midst;
whereby it comes to pass, that the Wieke fetches the Nourishment further
off. We see also that Lamps last longer, because the Vessel is far broader,
than the Breadth of a Taper, or Candle.

Turretted Lamp of Tin, made in the form of a Squire; The Height of the
Turret being thrice as much, as the length of the lower part, whereupon the
Lamp stands: Make only one Hole in it, at the End of the Return furthest
from the Turret. Reuerse it, and fill it full of Oil, by that Hole; And then
set it upright again; And put a Wieke in at the Hole; And lighten it: You
shall find, that it will burn flow, and a long time. Which is caused, (as was
said last before,) for that the Flame fetches the Nourishment a Far off. You
shall find also, that as the Oil wastes, and descends, so the Top of the
Turret, by little and little, fills with Air; which is caused by the
Rarefaction of the Oil by the Heat. It were worthy the Observation, to make a
Hole, in the Top of the Turret, and to try, when the Oil is almost consumed,
whether the Air made of the Oil, if you put to it a Flame of a Candle, in the
letting of it forth, will Inflame. It were good also to have the Lamp made,
not of Tin, but of Glass, that you may see how the Vapor, or Air
gathers, by degrees, in the Top.

lasting of the Flame, is the Closeness of the Air, wherein the Flame
burns. We see, that if Wind blows upon a Candle, it wastes apace. We see
also, it lasts longer in a Lantern, than at large. And there are Traditions
of Lamps, and Candles, that have burnt a very long time, in Caves, and Tombs.

Lasting of the Flame, is the Nature of the Air, where the Flame burns;
whether it be Hot or Cold; Moist or Dry. The Air, if it be very Cold,
irritateth the Flame, and makes it burn more fiercely; (As Fire scorcheth in
Frostie weather;) And so furthereth the Consumption. The Air once heated, (I
conceive) makes the Flame burn more mildly, and so helps the Continuance.
The Air, if it be Dry, is indifferent: The Air, if it be Moist, does in a
Degree quench the Flame: (As we see Lights will go out in the Dumps of
Mines:) And howsoever makes it burn more dully: And so helps the
Continuance.

Burialls in Earth serve for Preservation; And for Condensation; And for
Induration of Bodies. Experiments in Consort touching Burialls or Insusions of
diverse Bodies in Earth.
And if you intend Condensation, or Induration you may bury the Bodies so, as
Earth may touch them: As if you will make Artificial Porcellane, etc. And the
like you may do for Conservation, if the Bodies be Hard, and Solid; As Clay,
Wood, etc. But if you Preservation of Bodies, more Soft and Tender, then you
must do one of these two: Either you must put them in Cases, whereby they may
not touch the Earth; Or else you must vault the Earth, whereby it may hang over
them, and not touch them; For if the Earth touch them, it will do more hurt,
by the Moisture, causing them to putrify, than good by the virtuall Cold, to
conserve them; Except the Earth be very Dry, and Sandy.

An Orange, Limon, and Apple, wrapped in a Linen Cloth, being buried Burial of
a Forthnight more they became Putrified.

A Bottle of Beer, buried in like manner, as before, became more Bottle of
Wine in like manner. A Bottle of Vinegar, so buried, came forth more lively,
and more Odoriferous, smelling almost like a Violet. And after the whole
Months Burial, all the Three came forth, as fresh and lively, if not better,
than before.

It were a profitable Experiment, to presrue Orenges, Limons, and Pomgranates,
Moisture of the Earth come not at them; Or else by putting them in a
Conseruatorie of Snow. And generally, whosoever will make Experiments of Cold,
let him be provided of three Things; A Conseruatorie of Snow; A good large
Vault, twenty foot at least under the Ground; And a Deep Well;

There has been a Tradition, that Pearl, and Cora^, and TurchoisStone,
Burying in the Earth: Which is a thing of great profit, if it would sort: But
upon Trial of Six Weeks Burial, there followed no Effect. It were good to
try it, in a Deep Well; Or in a Conseruatory of Snow, where the Cold may be
more Constringent; And so make the Body more united, and thereby more
Resplendent.

Men's Bodier are heavier, and less disposed to Motion, when S^^ther ^^ Winds
blow, than when Northern. Experiment Solitary, touching the ^^^^^ in M^^^ ^^^
from se^^^ winds.
The Cause is, for that when the Southern Winds blow, the Humors do (in some
Degree) melt, and wax fluide, and so flow into the Parts; As it is seen in
Wood, and Bodies, which, when the Southern Winds blow, do swell. Besides, the
Motion and Actiuity of the Body consists chiefly in the Sinews, which, when
the Southern Wind blows, are more relaxe.

It is commonly seen, that more are Sick in the Summer, and more Dye in the
Winter; Except it be in Peslilent Diseases, which commonly reign in Summer, or
Autumn. Experiment Solitary touching Winter and Summer ^^^^^^
The Reason is, because Diseases are bred (indeed) chiefly by Heat; But then
they are Cured most by Sweat, and Purge; which in the Summer comes on, or is
provoked, more Easily: As for Pestilent Diseases, the Reason why most Dye of
them in Summer, is because they are bred most in the Summer; For otherwise
those that are touched are in most Danger in the Winter.

The General Opinion is, that Years Hot and Moist, are most Pestilent; Upon
the Superficial Ground, that Heat and Moisture cause Putrefaction. Experiment
Solitary touching Pesil^^^all Seasons.
In England it is found not true; For, many times, there have Plagues in Dry
Years. Whereof the Cause may be, for that Drought in the Bodies of Islanders,
habituate to Moist Aires, does Exasperate the Humors, and makes them more apt
to Putrify, or Inflame: Besides, it tainteth the Waters (commonly,) and makes
them less wholesome. And again in Barbary, the Plagues break up in the
Summer-moneths, when the Weather is Hot and Dry.

Many Diseases, (both Epidemicall, and others,) break forth at Particular
times. Experiment Solitary, touching an Enour^ about ^ Diseases.
And the Cause is falsely imputed to the Constitution of the Air, at that
time, when they break forth, or reign; whereas it proc^edeth (indeed) from a
Precedent Sequence, and Series of the Seasons of the Year: And therefore
Hippocrates, in his Prognostics, does make good Diseases, that ensue upon the
Nature, of the Precedent four Seasons of the Year.

Trial has been made, with Earthen Bottles well stopped, hanged in a Well of
Twenty Fathom deep, at the least; And some of the Bettles have been let
down into the Water, some others have hanged above, within about a fathom of
the Water; And the Liquours so tried have been, Beer, (not New, but Ready for
drinking,) and Wine, and Milk. Experiment Solitary, touching the A^^^^^^^^^ or
Preservation of Liquours in Wells, or deep Vaults.
The Proof has been, that both the Beer, and the Wine, (as well within
Water, as above,) have not been palled or deaded at all; But as good, or
somewhat better, than Bottles of the same Drinks, and Stalenesse, kept in a
Celler. But those which did hang above Water, were apparently the best; And
that Beer did flower a little; whereas that under Water did not, though it
were Fresh. The Milk sowred, and began to Purrifie. Neuerthelosse it is true,
that there is a Village near Blois, where in Deep Canes they do thicken
Milk; In such sort, that it becomes very pleasant; Which was some Cause of
this Trial of Hanging Milk in the Well: But our proof was naught; Neither
do I know, whether that Milk in those Caves, be first boysed; It were good
therefore to try it with Milk Sodden, and with Cream; For that Milk of it
self is such a Compound Body, of Cream, Curds, and Whey, as it is eas^ly
Turned, and Dissolved. It were good also to try the Beer, when it is in Wort,
that it may be seen, whether the Hanging in the Well, will Accelerate the
Ripening and Clarifying of it.

Diverse, we see, do Stut. Experiment Solitary, touching Stutting
The Cause may be, (in most,) the Refrigeration of the Tongue; Whereby it is
less apt to move. And therefore we see, that Naturalls do generally Stut: And
we see that in those that Stut, if they drink Wine moderately, they Stut
less, because it heateth: And so we see, that they that Stut, do Stut more in
the first Offer to speak, than in Continuance; Because the Tongue is, by
Motion, somewhat heated. In some also, it may be, (though rarely,) the Dryness
of the Tongue; which likewise makes it less apt to move, as well as Cold; For
it is an Affect that comes to some Wise and Great Men; As it did unto Moses,
who was Ling^epr apedita; And many Stutters (we find) are very Choleric Men;
Choler Enducing a Dryness in the Tongue.

Smells, and other Odours, are Sweeter in the Air, at some Distance, than
near the Nose; As has been partly touched heretofore. Experiments in
Consort, touching Smells.
The Cause is double: First the finer Mixture, or Incorporation of the Smell:
For we see that in Sounds likewise, they are Sweetest, when we cannot Reason
is, for that all Sweet Smells have joined with them, some Earthy or Crude
Odours; And at some distance the Sweet, which is the more Spiritual, is
Perceived; And the Earthy reaches not so far.

Sweet Smells are most forcible, in Dry Substances, when they are Broken; And
so likewise in Orenges, or Limons, the Nipping of their Rind, gives out their
Smell more: And generally, when Bodies are Moved or Stirred, though not Broken,
they Smell more; As a SweetBagge waued. The Cause is double: The one, for that
there is a Greater Emission of the Spirit, when Way is made: And this holds
in the Breaking, Nipping, or Crushing; It holds also, (in some Degree) in the
Moving: But in this last, there is a Con^urrence of the Second Cause; Which is
the Impulsion of the Air, that brings the Sent faster upon us.

The daintiest Smells of Flowers, are out of those Plants, whose Leaves smell
not; As Violets, Roses, Wall-flowers, Gilly-flowers, Pinckes, Woodbines,
Vine-flowers, Apple-Bloomes, Lime-Tree Bloomes, Beane-Bloomes, etc. The Cause
is, for that where there is Heat and strength enough in the Plant, to make the
Leaves Odorate, there the Smell of the Flower is rather Euanide and Weaker,
than that of the Leaves; As it is in Rose-Mary-Flowers, Lauender-Flowers, and
Sweet-Briar-Roses. But where there is less Heat, there the Spirit of the
Plant, is disgested and refined, and feuered from the Grosser Juice, in the
Esstorescence, and not before.

Odours Smell best, Broken or Crushed, as has been said; But Flowers Pressed
or Beaten, do leese the Freshness and Sweetness of their Odor. The Cause
is, for that when they are Crushed, the Grosser and more Earthy Spirit comes
out with the Finer, and troubles it; Whereas in stronger Odours there are no
such Degrees of the Issue of the Smell.

It is a Thing of very good Use, to Discover the Goodness of Waters,
Experiments in Consort touching the Goodness and Choice of Water.
The Taste, to those that Drink Water only, does somewhat: But other
Experiments are more sure. First, try Waters by Weight; Wherein you may find
some difference, though not much: And the Lighter you

Boiling upon an Equal Fire: And that which consumes away fastest, you may
account the Best.

Several Bottles, or Open Vessels, Matches in every Thing else, and see which
of them Last Longest, without Stench, or Corruption. And that which holds
Vnputrified longest, you may likewise account the Best.

Making Drinks Stronger, or Smaller, with the same Quantity of Malt; And you
may conclude, that that Water, which makes the Stronger Drink, is the more
Concocted, and Nou-rishing; though perhaps it be not so good for Medicinal
use. And such Water (commonly) is the Water of Large and Nanigable Rivers: And
likewise in Large and Clean Ponds of Standing Water: For upon both them, the
Sun has more power, than upon Fountains, or Small Rivers. And I concelue
that Chalke-water is next them the best, for going furthest in Drink: For that
also helps Concoction; So it be out of a Deep Well; For then it Cures the
Rawnesse of the Water; But Chalkie Water, toward the Top of the Earth, is too
fretting; As it appears in Laundry of Clothes, which wear out apace, if you
use such Waters.

Waters, for the Bearing, or Not Bearing of Soape: And it is likely that the
more Fat Water will bear Soape best; For the Hungry Water does kill the
Unctuous Nature of the Soape.

Waters, according to the Place, whence they Spring, or Come: The Rainwater
is, by the Physicians, esteemed the Finest, and the best; But yet it is said to
putrify soonest; which is likely, because of the Finenesse of the Spirit: And
in Conseruatories of Raine-water, (such as they have in Venice, etc.) they are
and not so Choice waters; The worse, (perhaps,) because they are Covered aloft,
and kept from the Sun. Snow-water is held unwholesome; In so much as the
People, that dwell at the Foot of the SnowMountaines, or otherwise upon the
Ascent, (especially the Women,) by drinking of Snow-water, have great Bags
hanging under their Throats. Well-water, except it be upon Chalk, or a very
plentiful Spring, makes Meat Red; which is an ill Sign. Springs on the Tops
of High-Hills are the best: For both they seem to have a Lightness, and
Appetite of Mounting; And besides they are most pure and Unmingled; And again
are more Percolated through a great Space of Earth. For Waters in Valleys,
join in effect under Ground with all Waters of the same Level; Whereas
Springs, on the Tops of Hills, pass through a great deal of Pure Earth, with
less Mixture of other Waters.

Seventhly, Judgment may be made of Waters by the Soil whereupon As Pebble is
the Cleanest, and best tasted; And next to that Clay-water; And Thirdly, Water
upon Chalk; Fourthly that upon Sand; And Worst of all upon Mudde. Neither may
you trust Waters that Taste Sweet, For they are commonly found in Rising
Grounds of great Cities; which must needs take in a great deal of Filth.

In Peru, and diverse Parts of the West Indies, though under the Line, the Heats
are not so Intolerable, as they be in Barbary, and the Skirts of the Torrid
Zone. Experiment Solitary, touching the Temperate Heat under the AEquinoctiall.
The Causes are, First the Great Brizes, which the Motion of the Air in great
Circles, (such as are under the Girdle of the World,) produces; Which do
refrigerate; And therefore Brizes are great, as about Nine or Ten of the Clock
in the Fore-Noone. Another Cause is, for that the Length of the Night, and the
Dewes thereof, do compense the Heat of the Day. A third Cause is the Stay of
the Sun; Not in Respect of Day and Night, (for that we spoke of before,) but
in Respect of the Season; For under the Line, the Sun crosses the Line, and
makes two Summers, and two Winters; But in the Skirts of the Torrid Zone, it
doubleth, and goes back again, and so makes one Long Summer.

The Heat of the Sun makes Men Black in some Countries, as in AEthiopia,
and Ginny, etc. Experiment Solitary, touching the Coloration of Black and
Tawney Moors.
Fire does it not, as we see in GlasseMen, that are continually about the
Fire. The Reason may be, because Fire does lick up the Spirits, and Blood of
the Body, so as they Exhale; So that it ever makes Men look Pale, and Sallow;
But the Sun, which is a Gentler Heat, does but draw the Blood to the Outward
Parts; And rather Concooteth it, than Soaketh it; And therefore we see that
all AEthiapes are Fleshy, and Plumpe, and have great Lips; All which betoken
Moisture retained, and not drawn out. We see also, that the Negroes are bred
in Countries that have Plenty of Water, by Rivers, or otherwise: For Meroe,
which was the Metropolis of AEthiopia, was upon a great Lake: And Congo, where
the Negroes are, is full of Rivers. And the Confines of the River Niger, where
the Negroes also are, are well watered: And the Region about Capo Verde, is
likewise Moist, in so much as it is pestilent through Moisture: But the
Countries of the Abyssenes, and Barbary, and Peru. where they are Tawney, and
Oliuaster, and Pale, are generally more Sandy, and Dry. As for the AEthiopes,
as they are Plumpe, and Fleshy; So (it may be) they are Sanguine, and ruddy
Colored, if their black Skin would suffer it to be seen.

Some Creatures do move a good while after their Head is off; As Birds; Some a
very little time; As Men, and all beasts; Some move, though cut in feuerall
Pieces; As Snakes, Eeles, Worms, Flies, etc. Experiment Solitary touching
Motion after the Inflant of Death.
First therefore it is certain, that the Immediate Cause Death, is the
Resolution or Extinguishment of the Spirits; And that the Destruction or
Corruption of the Organs, is but the Mediate Cause. But some Organs are so
peremptorily necessary, that the Extinguishment of the Spirits does speedily
follow; But yet so, as there is an Interim of a Small Time. It is reported by
one of the Ancients, of credit, that a Sacrificed Beast has lowed, after the
Heart has been feuered; And it is a Report also of Credit, that the Head of a
Pigge has been opened, and the Brain put into the Palm of a Man's hand,
trembling, without breaking any part of it, or feuering it from the Marrow of
the Backbone; During which time the Pigge has been, in all appearance,
stark dead, and without Motion; And after a small Time the Brain has been
replaced, and the Skull of the Pigge closed, and the Pigge has a little after
gone about. And certain it is, that an Eye upon Revenge has been thrust
forth, so as it hanged a pretty distance by the Visuall Nerve; And during that
time the Eye has been without any Power of Sight; And yet after (being
replaced) recovered Sight. Now the Spirits are chiefly in the Head, and Cells
of the Brain which in Men, and Beasts are Large; And therefore, when the Head
is off, they move little or Nothing. But Birds have small Heads, and therefore
the Spirits are a little more dispersed in the Sinews, whereby Motion
remains in them a little longer; In so much as it is Extant in Story, that an
Emperor of Rome, to show the Certainty of his Hand, did Shoot a great Forked
Arrow at an Estrich, as she ran swiftly upon the Stage, and struck off her
Head; And yet she continued the Race, a little way, with the Head off. As for
Worms, and Flies, and Eeles, the Spirits are diffused almost all over; And
therefore they move in their Several Pieces.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
V. Century.
WE will now enquire of Plants or Vegetables: And we shall do it with
diligence. Experiments in Consort, touching the Acceleration of Germination.
They are the principal Part of the Third Days Work. They are the first
Producat, which is the Word of Animation: For the other Words are but the Words
of Essence; And they are of excellent and general Use, for Food, Medicine, and
a Number of Mechanical Arts.

There were sown in a Bed, Turnip-Seed, Radish-Seed, Wheat, Cucumber-Seed,
Pease. The Bed we call a Hot-Bed, and the Manner of it is this. There was taken
Horse-dung, old, and well rotted; This was laid upon a Bank, half a foot
high, and supported round about with Planks; And upon the Top was cast Sifted
Earth, some two Fingers deep; And then the Seed Sprinkled upon it, having
been steeped all night in Water Mixed with Cow dung. The Turnip-Seed, and the
Wheat came up half an Inch above Ground, within two days after, without any
Watring. The Rest the third day. The Experiment was made in October; And (it
may be) in the Spring, the Accelerating would have been the speedier. This is
a Noble Experiment; For without this help, they would have been four times
as long in coming up. But there does not occur to me, at this present, any
use thereof, for profit; Except it should be for Sowing of Pease; which have
their Price very much increased, by the early Coming. It may be tried also
with Cherries, Strawberries, and other Fruit, which are dearest, when they come
early.

Wheat, steeped in Water mixed with Cow Dung; Other in Water mixed with
Horse-Dung; Other in Water mixed with Pigeon-Dung; Other in Urine of Man; Other
in Water mixed with Chalk powdered; Other in Water mixed with Soot; Other in
Water mixed with Ashes; Other in Water mixed with Bay Salt; Other in Claret
Wine; Other in Malmsey; Other in Spirit of Wine. The Proportion of the Mixture
was, a fourth Part of the Ingredients to the Water; Save that there was not of
the Salt above an eighth Part. The Urine, and Wines, and Spirit of Wine, were
Simple without Mixture of Water. The Time of the Steeping was twelve hours.
The Time of the Year October. There was also other Wheat sown vnsteeped, but
watered twice a day with Warm water. There was also other Wheat sown Simple to
compare it with the rest. The Event was; That those that were in the Mixture of
Dung, and Urine, and Soot, Chalk, Ashes, and Salt, came up within fix days:
And those that afterward proved the Highest, Thickest, and most Lusty, were;
First the Urine; And then the Dungs, Next the Chalk; Next the Soot; Next the
Ashes; Next the Salt; Next the Wheat Simple of it self, vnsteeped, and
vnwatered; Next the Watered twice a day with warm water; Next the Claret Wine.
So that these three last were slower than the ordinary Wheat of it self; And
this Culture did rather retard, than advance. As for those that were steeped in
Malmsey, and Spirit of Wine, they came not up at all. This is a Rich Experiment
for Profit; For the most of the Steel pings are Cheap Things; And the
Goodness of the Crop is a great Matter of Gain; If the Goodness of the Crop
answer the Earliness of the Coming up: As it is like it will; Both being from
the vigor of the Seed; Which also partly appeared in the Former Experiments,
as has been said. This Experiment would be tried in other Grains, Seeds, and
Kernells: For it may be some Steeping will agree best with some Seeds. It would
be tried also with Roots steeped as before, but for longer time. It would be
tried also in Several Seasons of the year, especially the Spring.

Strawberries watered now and then, (as once in three days,) with Water,
wherein has been steeped Sheepes-dung, or Pigeons-dong, will prevent and come
early. And it is like, the same Effect would follow in other Berries, Herbs,
Flowers, Grains, or Trees. And therefore it is an Experiment, though vulgar in
Strawberries, yet not brought into use generally: For it is usual to help the
Ground with Mucke; And likewise to Recomfort it sometimes with Mucke put to the
Roots; But to water it with Mucke water, which is like to be more Forcible, is
not practiced.

Dung, or Chalk, or Blood, applied in Substance, (seasonably,) to the Roots of
Trees, does set them forwards. But to do it unto Herbs, without Mixture of
Water or Earth, it may be these Helps are too Hot.

The former Means of Helping Germination, are either by the Goodness Strength
of the Nourishment; Or by the Comforting, and Exciting the Spirits in the
Plant, to draw the Nourishment better. And of this latter kind, concerning the
Comforting of the Spirits of the Plant, arealso the experiments that follow;
Though they be not Applications to the Root, or Seed. The Planting of Trees
warm upon a Wall, against the South, or South-East Sun, does hasten their
Coming on, and Ripening; And the South-East is found to be better than the
SouthWest, though the South-West be the Hotter Coast. But the cause is chiefly,
for that the Heat of the Morning succeeds the Cold of the Night: and partly,
because (many times) the South-west Sun is too Parching. So likewise the
Planting of them upon the Back of a Chimney, where a Fire is kept, does hasten
their Coming on, and Ripening: Nay more, the Drawing of the Boughs into the
Inside of a Room, where a Fire is continually kept, works the same Effect;
Which has been tried with Grapes; In so much as they will come a Month
earlier, than the Grapes abroad.

Besides the two Means of Accelerating Germination, formerly described;
Mending of the Nourishment; and Comforting of the Spirit of the Plant; there is
a Third; Which is the Making way for the Easy Coming to the Nourishment, and
Drawing it. And therefore Gentle Digging and Loosening of the Earth about the
Roots of Trees; And the Remening Herbs and Flowers into new Earth, once in two
years, (which is the same thing, For the new Earth is ever looser,) does
greatly further the Prospering, and Earliness of Plants.

But the most admirable Acceleration by Facilitating the Nourishment, Water.
For a Standard of a Damask Rose with the Root on, was set in a Chamber, where
no Fire was, upright in an Earthen Pan, full of Fair Water, without any
Mixture, half a foot under the Water, the Standard being more then two foot
high above the Water: Within the Space of ten days, the Standard did put forth
a fair Green lease, and some other little Buds, which stood at a stay,
without any Show of decay or withering, more then seven Days. But afterward
that Leaf faded, but the young Buds did sprout on; which afterward opened into
fair Leaves, in the space of three Months; And continued so a while after,
till upon Remouall we left the Trial. But note that the Leaves were somewhat
paler, and lighter-coloured, than the Leaves use to be abroad. Note that the
first Buds were in the End of October; And it is likely that if it had been in
the Spring time, it would have put forth with greater strength, and (it may be)
to have grown on to bear Flowers. By this Means, you may have, (as it
seems,) Roses set in the midst of a Poole, being supported with some stay;
Which is Matter of Rareness and Pleasure, though of small Use. This is the
more strange, for that the like Rose-Standard was put, at the same time, into
Water, mixed with Horse-dung, the Horse-dung about the fourth Part to the
Water, and in four Months space (while it was observed) put not forth any
Leaf, though diverse Buds at the first, as the other.

Dutch Flower, that had a Bulbous Root, was likewise put, at the same time, all
under Water, some two or three Fingers deep; And within seven days sprouted,
and continued long after, further Growing. There were also put in, a Beet-Root,
a Borrage-Root, and a RaddishRoot, which had al their Leaves cut almost close
to the Roots; And within six weeks had fair Leaves; And so continued, till
the end of November.

Roots, or Pease, or Flowers, may be Accelerated in their Coming and Ripening,
there is a double Profit; The one in the high Price that those Things bear
when they come early: The other in the Swiftness of their Returns: For in
some Grounds which are strong, you shall have a Raddish, etc. come in a Month;
That in other Grounds will not come in two; And so make double Returns.

Wheat also was put into the Water, and came not forth at all; So as it seems
there must be some Strength and Bulk in the Body, put into the Water, as it is
in Roots; For Grains, or Seeds, the Cold of the Water will mortify. But
casually some Wheat lay under the Pan, which was somewhat moistened by the Suing
of the Pan; which in six weeks (as aforesaid) looked moldy to the Eye, but it
was sprouted forth half a Fingers length.

Instances of Water, that for Nourishment, the Water is almost all in all, and
that the Earth does but keep the Plant upright, and save it from Ouer-heat,
and Ouer-cold; And therefore is a Comfortable Experiment for good Drinkers. It
proves also that our former Opinion; That Drink incorporate with Flesh, or
Roots, (as in Capon-Baere, etc.) will nourish more easily, than Meat and Drink
taken severally.

Nousing of Plants (I conceive) will both Accelerate Germination, and bring
forth Flowers and Plants in the Colder Seasons: And as we House Hot-Countrey
Plants, as Limons, Orenges, Myrtles, to save them; So we may House our own
Country Plants, to forward them, and make them come in the Cold Seasons; In
such sort, that you may have Violets, Strawberries, Pease, all Winter: So that
you sow, or remove them at fit times. This Experiment is to be referred unto
the Comforting of the Spirit of the Plant, by Warmth, as well as Housing their
Boughs, etc. So then the Means, to Accelerate Germination, are in Particular
eight, in General three.

To make Roses, or other Flowers come late, it is an Experiment of Pleasure.
Experiments in Consort, touching the Putting back or Retardation of
Germination.
For the Ancients esteemed much of Rosa Sera. And indeed the Nouember-Rose is
the sweetest, having been less exhaled by the Sun. The Means are these.
First, the Cutting off their Tops, immediately the same year about November:
But they will not come just on the Tops, where they were cut, but out of those
Shoots, which were as it were,) Water-Boughes. The Cause is, for that the Sap,
which otherwise would have fed the Top, (though after Bearing,) will, by the
discharge of that, divert unto the Side-Sprouts; And they will come to bear,
but later.

The Second is the Pulling off the Buds of the Rose, when they are Newly
knotted; For then the Side-Branches will bear. The Cause is the same with the
former: For Cutting off the Tops, and Pulling off the Buds, work the same
Effect, in Retention of the Sap for a time, and Diuersion of it to the Sprouts,
that were not so forward.

The Third is the Cutting off some few of the Top-Roughes in the Springtime,
but suffering the lower Boughs to grow on. The Cause is, for that the Boughs
do help to draw up the Sap more strongly; And we see that in Powling of
Trees, many do use to leave a Bough or two on the Top, to help to draw up the
Sap. And it is coparated also, that if you graft upon the Bough of a Tree, and
cut off some of the old Boughs, the new Cions will perish.

The Fourth is by Laying the Roots bare about christmus, some days. Cause is
plain, for that it does ^^^^^ the Sap, from going upwards, for a time; Which
Arrest is after wards released by the Covering of the Root a gain with Earth;
And then the Sap gets up, but later.

The Fifth is the Re^^^^^ of the Tree, some Month before it Buddes. for that
some time will be required after the Re^^^e, for the Reselting; before it can
draw the Iuycs: And that time being lost, the Blossom u^^^ needs some forth
later.

The Sixth is the Grasting of Kaser in May, which commonly Gardiners Inly; And
then they bear not till the Next Year; But if you graft them in May, they
will bear the same year, but late.

The Seventh is, the Girding of the Body of the Tree about with some

The Eighth in, the Planting of them ^^ Shade, or in a Hedge; The Cause is,
partly the Keeping out of the Sun, which hasteneth the Sap to rise; And
partly the Robbing of them of Nourishment, by the S^uffe in the Hedge. These
Means may be practiced upon other, both Trees, and Flowers, M^

Men have entertained a Conceit that shows prettily; Namely, Late Coming
Fruit, upon a Stock of a Fruit-tree that ^^^^^^ early, the Graft will bear
Fruit Early. At a Peach upon a Cherry; And contrariwise, if an Early-Comming
Fruit upon a Stock of a Fruit-Tree that Comes late, the Grafe will bear
Fruit late; As a Cherry upon a Peach. But these are but Imaginations, and
untrue. The Cause is, for that the Cions ouerroleth the Stock quite; And the
Stock is but Passue only, and gives Aliment, but no Motion to the Graft.

We will speak now, how to make Fruits, Flowers, and Ro^ larger; in more
plenty; and sweeter; than they use to be; And how to make the Trees themselves,
more Tall; more Spread; and more Hasty and Sudden; than they use to be.
Experiments in Consort touching the Melioration of Fruits, Trees, and Plants.
Wherein there is no doubt, but the former Experiments of Acceleration, will
serve much to these Purposes. And again, that these Experiments, which we
shall now set down, do serve also for Acceleration; because both Effects
proceed from the Increase of vigor in the Tree, But yet to avoid Confusion;
And because some of the Means are more proper for the one Effect, and some for
the other, we will handle them apart.

Heap of flint, or Stone, laid about the Bottom of a Wilde-Tree, (as an Oak,
Elm, Ash, etc.) upon the first Planting, does make it prosper double as much,
as without it. The Cause is, for that it retains the Moisture, which falls
at any time upon the Tree, and suffers it not to be exhaled by the Sun.
Again, it keeps the Tree warm, from Cold Blasts and Frosts, as it were in
an House. It may be also, there is somewhat in the Keeping of it steady at the
first. Quare, if Laying of Straw some Height about the Body of a Tree, will not
make the Tree forwards. For though the Root gives the Sap, yet it is the Body
that draws it. But you must note, that if you lay Stones about the stalk of
Lettuce, or other Plants, that are more soft, it will ouer-moisten the Roots,
so as the Worms will eat them.

Tree, at the first Setting, should not be Shaken, until it has taken Root
fully: And therefore some have, put two little Forkes about the Bottom of
their Trees, to keep them upright; But after a years Rooting, then Shaking
does the Tree good, by Loosening of the Earth, and (perhaps) by Exercising (as
it were) and Stirring the Sap of the Tree.

Cutting away of Boughs and Suckers at the Root and Body, does make Trees grow
high; And contrariwise, the Powling and Cutting of the Top, makes them grow
spread, and bushy. As we see in Pollards, etc.

hasty Growing Coppice-Woods, the way is, to take Willow, Sallow, Poplar,
Alder, of some seven years growth; And to set them, not upright, but a-slope,
a reasonable depth under the Ground; And then, instead of one Root, they will
put forth many, and so carry more Shoots upon a Stem.

many new Roots of Fruit Trees, take a Low Tree, and bow it, and lay all his
Branches a-flat upon the Ground, and cast Earth upon them; And every Twigge
will take Root. And this is a very profitable Experiment for Costly Trees; (for
the Boughtes will make Stocks without charge;) Such as are Apricots, Peaches,
Almonds, Cornelians, Mulberries, Figs, etc. The like is continually practiced
with Vines, Roses, Muske-Roses, etc.

From May to July you may take off the Bark of any Bough, being of
Alhollontide in the bare place, and set it in the Ground; And it will grow to
be a fair Tree in one Year. The Cause may be, for that the Baring from the
Bark keeps the Sap from descending toward Winter, and so holds it in the
Bough; And it may be also that the Loame and Horse-Dung applied to the bare
place, do moisten it, and cherish it, and make it more apt to put forth the
Root. Note, that this may be a general Means for keeping up the Sap of Trees
in their Boughs; Which may serve to other Effects.

It has been practiced in Trees, that show fair, and bear not, to Bore a
Hole through the Heart of the Tree, and thereupon it will bear. Which may be
for that the Tree before had too much Repletion, and was oppressed with his
own Sap; For Repletion is an Enemy to Generation.

It has been practiced in Trees, that do not bear, to cleave two Cause may
be, for that a Root of a Tree may be (as it were,) Hide-bound, no less than
the Body of the Tree; But it will not keep open without somewhat put into it.

It is usually practiced, to set Trees that require much Sun, upon Walls
against the South; As Apricots, Peaches, Plums, Vines, Figs, and the like. It
has a double Commodity; The one, the Heat of the Wall by Reflection; The other,
the Taking away of the Shade; For when a Tree grows round, the upper Boughs
ouer-shadow the lower; But when it is spread upon a Wall, the Sun comes
alike, upon the upper, and lower Branches.

It has also been practiced (by some) to pull off some Leanes from Trees so
spread, that the Sun may come upon the Bough and Fruit the better. There has
been practiced also a Curiosity, to set a Tree upon the North-Side of a Wall,
and at a little height, to draw him through the Wall, and spread him upon the
South Side: Conceiving that the Root and lower Part of the Stock should enjoy
the Freshness of the Shade; And the Upper Boughs, and Fruit, the Comsort of
the Sun. But it sorted not; The Cause is, for that the Root requires some
Comsort from the Sun, though under Earth, as well as the Body: And the Lower
Part of the Body more than the Upper, as we see in Compassing a Tree below
with Straw.

The Lowness of the Bough, where the Fruit comes, makes the Fruit greater,
and to ripen better; For you shall ever see in Apricots, Peaches, or
Melo-Cotones, upon a wall, the greatest Fruits toward the Bottom. And in
France the Grapes that make the Wine, grow upon low Vines, bound to small
Stakes. And the raised Vines in Arbours make but Veriuyce. It is true, that in
Italy, and other Countries, where they have hotter Sun, they raise them upon
Elmes, and Trees; But I conceive, that if the French Manner of Planting low,
were brought in use there, their Wines would be stronger and sweeter. But it is
more chargeable in respect of the Props. It were good to try whether a Tree
grafted somewhat near the Ground, and the lower boughs only maintained, and
the higher continually proined off, would not make a larger Fruit.

Fruit in Greater Plenty, the way is, to graft, not only upon young Stocks,
but upon diverse Boughs of an old Tree; for they will bear great Numbers of
Fruit; Whereas if you graft but upon one Stock, the Tree can bear but few.

Digging yearly about the Roots of Trees, which is a great means, both to the
Acceleration and Melioration of Fruits, is practiced in nothing but in Vines;
Which if it were transferred unto other Trees, and Shrubs, (as Roses, etc.) I
conceive would advance them likewise.

Fruit-Tree has been blown up (almost) by the Roots, and set up again, and
the next year bare exceedingly. The Cause of this, was nothing but the
Looseming of the Earth, which comfort any Tree, and is fit to be practiced,
more than it is, in Fruit Trees: For Trees cannot be so fitly removed into New
Grounds, as Flowers and Herbs may.

Old Tree, the Digging of it about the Roots, and Applying new Mould to the
Roots, is the way. We see also that DraughtOxen, put into fresh Pasture, gather
new and tender Flesh; And in all Things, better Nourishment than has been
used, does help to renew; Especially, if it be not only better, but changed,
and differing from the former.

Herb be cut off from the Roots, in the beginning of Winter, and then the
Earth be trodden and beaten down hard, with the Foot and Spade, the Roots will
become of very great Magnitude in Summer. The Reason is, for that the Moisture
being forbidden to come up in the Plant, stays longer in the Root, and so
dilateth it. And Gardiners use to tread down any loose Ground, after they have
sown Onions, or Turnips, etc.

Panicum be laid below, and about the Bottom of a Root, it will cause the Root
to grow to an Excessive Bigness. The Cause is, for that being it self of a
Spungy Substance, it draws the Moisture of the Earth to it, and so feeds
the Root. This is of greatest use for Onions, Turnips, Parsnips, and Carrets.

Shifting of Ground is a Means to better the Tree, and Fruit; But with this
Caution; That all Things do prosper best, when they are advanced to the
better: Your Nursery of Stocks ought to be in a more Barren Ground, than the
Ground is whereunto you remove them. So all Grasiers prefer their Cattle
from meaner Pastures to better. We see also, that Hardness in Youth lengthneth
Life, because it leaves a Cherishing to the better, of the Body, in Age: Nay
in Exercises, it is good to begin with the hardest, as Dancing in Thick
Shoes, etc.

It has been observed, that Hacking of Trees in their Bark, both Trees; And
especially delivers them from being Hide-bound, and kills their Moss.

Shade to some Plants conduces to make them large, and prosperous, Sun; As in
Strawberries, and Bays, etc. Therefore amongst Strawberries, sow here and
there some Barrage-Seed; And you shall find the Strawberries under those
Leaves farro more large than their Fellows. And Bays you must plant to the
North; Or defond them from the Sun by a Hedge-Row; And when you sow the
Berries, weed not the Borders, for the first half year; For the Weed gives
them Shade.

To increase the Crops of Ph^^^, there would be considered, not only Increasing
the Lust of the Earth, or of the Plant, but the Saving also of that which is
spilt. So they have lately made a Trial, to Set Wheat; which nevertheless
has been left off, because of the trouble and pains; Yet so much is true,
that there is much saved by the Setting, in comparison of that which is Sewen;
Both by keeping it from being picked up by Birds; And by Avoiding the Shallow
lying of it, whereby much that is sown takes no Root.

It is prescribed by some of the Ancients, that you take Small Trees, Fruit
grow, being yet unripe, and cover the Trees in the Middle of Autamne with dung,
until the Spring; And then take them up in a warm day, and replant them in
good Ground; And by that means, the former years Tree will be ripe, as by a
new Birth; when other Trees of the fame kind, do but blossom. But this
seems to have no great Probability.

It is reported, that if you take Nitre, and mingle it with Water, to the
Honey, and therewith anoint the Bud, after the Vine is cut, it will sprout
forth within eight days. The Cause is like to be, (if the Experiment be true,)
the Opening of the Bud, and of the Parts Contiguous, by the Spirit of the
Nitre; For Nitre is (as it were) the Life of Vegetables.

Take Seed, or Kernells of Apples, Pears, Orenges; Or a Peach, or a Plum
Stone, etc. And put them into a Squill, (which is like a great Onion,) and they
will come up much earlier than in the Earth it self. This I conceive no be as
a Kind of Grafting in the Root; For as the Stock of a Graft yields better
prepared Nourishment to the Graft, than the Crude Earth; So the Squill does the
like to the Seed. And I suppose the same would be done, by Putting Kernells
into a Turnip, or the like; Save that the Squill is more Vigorous, and Hot. It
may be tried also, with putting Onion-Seed into an Onion-Head, which thereby
(perhaps) will bring forth a larger, and earlier Onion.

Pricking of a Fruit in several places, when it is almost at his Bigness, and
before it ripeneth, has been practiced with success, to ripen the Fruit more
suddenly. We see the Example of the Biting of Waspes, or Worms, upon Fruit,
whereby it (manifestly) ripeneth the sooner.

Alga Marina ( Sea-weed) put under the Roots of Coleworts, and (perhaps) of
other Plants, will further their Growth. The virtue (no doubt) has Relation to
Salt, which is a great Help to Fertility.

Cucumbers, immediately after their Bearing, close by the Earth; And then to
cast a pretty Quantity of Earth upon the Plant that remains; and they will
bear the next year Fruit, long before the ordinary time. The Cause may be,
for that the Sap goes down the sooner, and is not spent in the Stalk or
Lease, which remains after the Fruit. Where note, that the Dying, in the
winter, of the Roots of Plants, that are Annual, seems to be partly caused
by the Ouer-Expence of the Sap into Stalk, and Leaves; which being prevented,
they will super-annate, if they stand warm.

Pulling off many of the Blossoms from a Fruit-Tree, does make the Fruit
fairer. The Cause is manifest; For that the Sap has the less to nourish. And
it is a Common Experience, that if you do not pull off some Blossoms, the
first time a Tree bloometh, it will blossom it self to death.

Blossoms were pulled from a Fruit-Tree; Or the Acornes and Chesnut-buds, etc.
from a Wild Tree, for two years together. I suppose that the Tree will either
put forth, the third year, bigger, and more plentiful Fruit; Or else, the
same years, larger Leaves, because of the Sap stored up.

Plant Watered with Warm Water, will come up sooner and better, than with Cold
Water, or with Showers. But our Experiment of Watering Wheat with Warm Water
(as has been said) succeeded not; which may be, because the Trial was too
late in the Year, vix. in the End of October. For the Cold then coming upon
the Seed, after it was made more tender by the Warm Water, might check it.

Grafting (for the most Part) does meliorate the Fruit. The Cause is manifest;
For that the Nourishment is better prepared in the Stock, than in the Crude
Earth: But yet note well, that there be some Trees, that are said to come up
more happily from the Kernel, than from the Graft; As the Peach, and
Melocotone. The Cause I suppose to he, for that those Plants require a
Nourishment of great Moisture; And though the Nourishment of the Stock be
finer, and better prepared, yet it is not so moist, and plentiful, as the
Nourishment of the Earth. And indeed we see those Fruits are very Cold Fruits
in their Nature.

It has been received, that a Smaller Pear, grafted upon a Stock Pear,
will become Great. But I think it is as true, as that of the Prime-Fruit upon
the Late Stock; And e conuerso; which we rejected before: For the Cions will
govern. Nevertheless it is probable enough, that if you can get a Cions to
grow upon a Stock of another kind, that is much moister than his own Stock,
it may make the Fruit Greater, because it will yield more plentiful
nourishment; Though it is like it will make the Fruit Baser. But generally, the
Grafting is upon a dryer Stock; As the Apple upon a Crab; The Pear upon a
Thorn; etc. Yet it is reported, that in the Low-Conntries they will graft an
Apple-Cions upon the Stock of a Colewort, and it will bear a great flaggy
Apple: The Kernel of which, if it be set, will be a Colewort, and not an
Apple. It were good to try, whether an Apple-Cions will prosper, if it be
grafted upon a Sallow, or upon a Poplar, or upon an Alder, or upon an Elm, or
upon an Horse-Plumme, which are the moistest of Trees. I have heard that it
has been tried upon an Elm, and succeeded.

It is manifest by Experience, that Flowers Removed wax greater, because Fruit
greater; As if you take a Cions, and graft it upon a Stock the first year;
And then cut it off, and graft it upon another Stock the second year; and so
for a third; Or fourth year; And then let it rest, it will yield afterward,
when it bears, the greater Fruit.

Of Grafting there are many Experiments worth the Noting, but those we reserve
to a proper Place.

It makes Figs better, if a Fig Tree, when it begins to put forth Cause is
plain, for that the Sap has the less to seed, and the less way to mount:
But it may be, the Fig will come somewhat later, as was formerly touched. The
same may be tried likewise in other Trees.

It is reported, that Mulberries will be fairer, and the Trees more Truncke of
the Tree through, in several places, and thrust into the Places bored, Wedges
of some Hot Trees, as Turpentine, Mastick-Tree, Guaiacum, Inniper, etc. The
Cause may be, for that Aduentiue Heat does cheer up the Native Juice of the
Tree.

It is reported, that Trees will grow greater, and bear better Fruit, Salt, or
Lees of Wine, or Blood to the Root. The Cause may be the Increasing the Lust or
Spirit of the Root; These Things being more forcible, than ordinary Composts.

It is reported by one of the Ancients, that Artichoakes will be less Seeds
have their Tops dulled, or grated off upon a Stone.

Herbs will be tenderer, and fairer; if you take them out of Beds, when they
are newly come up, and remove them into Pots, with better Earth. The Remove
from Bed to Bed was spoken of before; But that was in several years; This is
upon the sudden. The Cause is the same with other Remoues, formerly mentioned.

Coleworts are reported by one of the Ancients, to prosper exceedingly, and to
be better tasted, if they be sometimes watered with Salt Water; And much more
with Water mixed with Nitre; The Spirit of which is less Adurent than Salt.

Cucumbers will prove more Tender, and Dainty, if their Seeds be Steeped (a
little) in Milk; The Cause may be, for that the Seed being mollified with the
Milk, will be too weak to draw the grosser Juice of the Earth, but only the
finer. The same Experiment may be made in Artichoakes, and other Seeds, when
you would take away, either their Flashinesse, or Bitterness. They speak
also, that the like Effect follows, of Steeping in Water mixed with Honey;
But that seems to me not so probable, because Honey has too quick a Spirit.

Cucumbers will be less Watery, and more Melonlike, it in the Pit where you set
them, you fill it (half way up) with Chafe, or small Sticks, and then power
Earth upon them; For Cucumbers, as it seems, do extremely affect Moisture;
And ouer-drinke themselves; Which this Chafe, or Chips, forbids. Nay it is
further reported, that if when a Cucumber is grown, you fet a Pot of water
about five or six inches distance from it, it will, in 24, hours, shoot so
much out, as to touch the Pot; Which if it be true, it is an Experiment of an
higher Nature than belongs to this Title: For it discovers Perception in
Plants, to move toward that which should help and comfort them, though it be
at a distance. The ancient Tradition of the Vine is far more strange: It is,
that if you set a Stake, or Prop, some distance from it, it will grow that way;
Which is far stranger (as is said) than the other; For that Water may work
by a Sympathy of Attraction: But this of the Stake seems to be a Reasonable
Discourse.

Terebration of Trees does make them prosper better. But it is found also, that
it makes the Fruit sweeter, and better. The Cause is, for that notwithstanding
the Terebration, they may receive Aliment sufficient; And yet no more than they
can well turn, and digest; And withal do sweat out the coursest and
vnprofitablest Juice; Even as it is in Lining Creatures, which by Moderate
Feeding, and Exercise, and Sweat, attain the soundest Habit of Body.

Terebration does Meliorate Fruit, so, upon the like reason, does Letting of
Plants Blond; As Pricking Vines, or other Trees, after they be of some Growth;
And thereby letting forth Gum, or Tears; Though this be not to continue, as
it is in Terebration, but at some Seasons. And it is reported, that by this
Artifice, Bitter Almonds have been turned into Sweet.

The Ancients for the Dulcorating of Fruit, do commend SwinesDung Dung; Which
may be, because of the Moisture of that Beast, whereby the Excrement has less
Acrimony; For we see Swines and Pigges Flesh is the Moistest of Fleshes.

It is observed by some, that all Herbs wax sweeter, both in Smell Cause may
be, for that the longer the Juice stays in the Root, and Stalk, the better
it concocteth. For one of the Chief Causes, why Grains, Seeds, and Fruits,
are more Nourishing than Leanes, is the Length of time, in which they grow to
Maturation. It were not amiss to keep back the Sap of Herbs, or the like, by
some fit means, till the end of Summer; whereby (it may be) they will be more
Nourishing.

As Grafting does generally advance and Meliorate Fruits, above that Kernells,
or Stones, in regard the Nourishment is better concocted; So (no doubt) even in
Grafting, for the same cause, the Choice of the Stock does much; Always
provided, that it be somewhat inferior to the Cions: For otherwise it dulleth
it. They commend much the Grafting of Pears, or Apples, upon a Quince.

Besides the Means of Melioration of Fruits, before mentioned, it is Mixture
of Bran, and Swines-Dung; Or Chafe and Swines-Dung; (especially laid up
together for a Month to rot,) is a very great Nourisher, and Comforter to a
Fruit-Tree.

It is delivered, that Onions wax greater, if they be taken out of the

It is delivered by some, that if one take the Bough of a Low Fruittree,
Earthen Pot perforate at the bottom to let in the Plant, and then Cover the
Pot with Earth, it will yield a very large Fruit, within the Ground. Which
Experiment is Nothing but Potting of Plants, without Removing, and Leaving the
Fruit in the Earth. The like, (they say,) will be effected, by an Empty Pot
without Earth in it, put over a Fruit, being propped up with a Stake, as it
hangs upon the Tree; And the better, if some few Pertusions be made in the
Pot. Wherein, besides the Defending of the Fruit, from Extremity of Sun or
Weather, some give a reason, that the Fruit, Loving and Coveting the open Air
and Sun, is invited by those Pertusions, to spread and approach, as near the
open Air, as it can; And so enlarges in Magnitude.

All Trees, in High and Sandy Grounds, are to be set deep; And in Watery more
shallow. And in all Trees, when they be removed (especially Fruit Trees) care
ought to be taken, that the Sides of the Trees be coasted, ( North and South,
etc.) as they stood before. The same is said also of Stone out of the Quarry,
to make it more durable; Though that seems to have less reason; Because the
Stone lies not so near the Sun, as the Tree grows.

Timber Trees in a Coppice Wood, do grow better, than in an Open Field; Both
because, they offer not to spread so much, but shoot up still in Height; And
chiefly because they are defended from too much Sun and Wind, which do check
the Growth of all Fruit; And so (no doubt) Fruit Trees, or Vines, set upon a
Wall, against the Sun, between Elbowes or Buttresses of Stone, ripen more,
than upon a Plain Wall.

Potado Roots, be set in a Pot filled with Earth, and then the Pot with Earth
be set likewise within the Ground, some two or three Inches, the Roots will
grow greater, than Ordinary. The Cause may be, for that Having Earth enough
within the Pot to nourish them; And then being stopped by the Bottom of the Pot
from putting Strings downward, they must needs grow greater in Breadth, and
Thickness. And it may be, that all Seeds or Roots, Potted, and so set into the
Earth, will prosper the better.

Cutting off the Leaves of Radish, or other Roots, in the beginning of Winter,
before they wither; And Covering again the Root, something high with Earth;
Will preserve the Root all Winter, and make it bigger, in the Spring following,
as has been partly touched before. So that there is a double Use of this
Cutting off the Leaves: For in Plants, where the Root is the Esculent, as
Radish, and Parsnips, it will make the Root the greater: And so it will do to
the Heads of Onions. And where the Fruit is the Esculent, by Strengthening the
Root, it will make the Fruit also the greater.

Experiment of great pleasure, to make the Leaves of Shady Trees, larger than
ordinary. It has been tried (for certain) that a Cions of a Weech-Elme,
grafted upon the Stock of an Ordinary Elm, will put forth Leaves, almost as
broad as the Brimme of ones Hat. And it is very likely, that as in Fruit Trees,
the Graft makes a greater Fruit; So in Trees that bear no Fruit, it will make
the greater Leaves. It would be tried therefore in Trees of that kind chiefly;
As Birch, Asp, Willow; And especially the Shining Willow, which they call
Swallow-Taile, because of the pleasure of the Leaf.

Barrenness of Trees, by Accident, (besides the Weakness of the Soil, Seed,
or Root; And the Injury of the Weather) comes either of their Ouer-growing
with Moss, Or their being Hide-bound; Or their Planting too deep; Or by
Issuing of the Sap too much into the Leaves. For all these there are Remedies
mentioned before.

We see that in Living Creatures, that have Male and Female, there is
Copulation of several Kinds; And so Compound Creatures; As the Mule, that is
generated betwixt the Horse and the Ass; And some other Compounds, which we
call Monsters, though more rare: And it is held, that that Proverb, Africa
semper aliquid Monstri parit; comes, for that the Fountains of Waters there,
being rare, diverse Sorts of Beasts come from several Parts to drink; And so
being refreshed, fall to couple, and many times with several Kinds.
Experiments in Consort touching Compound Fruits and Flowers.
The Compounding or Mixture of Kinds in Plants is not found out; Which
nevertheless, if it be possible, is more at command, than that of living
Creatures; For that their Lust requires a voluntary Motion: wherefore it were
One of the most Noble Experiments touching Plants, to find it out: For so you
may have great Variety of New Fruits, and Flowers yet unknown. Grafting does
it not: That mendeth the Fruit, or doubleth the Flowers, etc. But it has not
the Power to make a New Kind. For the Cions ever ouer-ruleth the Stock.

It has been set down by one of the Ancients, that if you take two Twigs of
several Fruit Trees, and flat them on the Sides, and then bind them close
together, and set them in the ground, they will come up in one Stock; But yet
they will put forth their several Fruits, without any Commixture in the Fruit.
Wherein note (by the way) that Unity of Continuance, is easier to procure,
than Unity of Species. It is reported also, that Vines of Red and White
Grapes, being set in the Ground, and the upper Parts being flatted, and bound
close together, will put forth Grapes of the several Colors, upon the same
Branch; And Grape-Stones of several Colors within the same Grape: But the
more, after a year or two; The Unity (as it seems) growing more Perfect.
And this will likewise help, if from the first Uniting, they be often Watered;
For all Moisture helps to Union. And it is prescribed also, to bind the Bud,
as soon as it comes forth, as well as the Stock; At the least for a time.

They report, that diverse Seeds, put into a Clout, and laid in Earth Plants
Contiguous; Which (afterward) being bound in, their Shoots will Incorporate.
The like is said of Kernels, put into a Bottle, with a Narrow Mouth, filled
with Earth.

It is reported, that young Trees of several kinds, set contiguous, Fruitful
Ground, with the very Luxury of the Trees will incorporate, and grow together.
Which seems to me the likeliest Means, that has been propounded; For that
the Binding does hinder the Natural Swelling of the Tree; which, while it is
in Motion, does better unite.

There are many Ancient and Received Traditions and Observations, touching the
Sympathy and Antipathy of Plants: For that some will thrive best growing near
others; which they impute to Sympathy: And some worse; which they impute to
Antipathy. Experiments in Consort touching the Sympathy and Antipathy of Plants.
But these are Idle and Ignorant Conceits; And forsake the true Indication of
the Causes; As the most Part of Experiments, that concern Sympathies and
Antipathies do. For as to Plants, neither is there any such Secret Friendship,
or Hatred, as they imagine; And if we should be content to call it Sympathy,
and Antipathy, it is utterly mistaken; For their Sympathy is an Antipathy, and
their Antipathy is a Sympathy: For it is thus; Wheresoever one Plant draws
such a particular Juice out of the Earth; as it qualifieth the Earth; So as
that Juice which remains is fit for the other Plant, there the Neighborhood
does good; Because the Nourishments are contrary, or several: But where two
Plants draw (much) the same Juice, there the Neighborhood hurts; For the one
deceives the other.

Plants that do draw much Nourishment from the Earth, and so soake the Earth,
and exhaust it; hurt all Things that grow by them; As Great Trees, (especially
Ashes,) and such Trees, as spread their Roots, near the Top of the Ground. So
the Colewort is not an Enemy (though that were anciently received) to the Vine
only; But it is an Enemy to any other Plant; Because it draws strongly the
fattest Juice of the Earth. And if it be true, that the Vine, when it creeps
near the Colewort, will turneaway; This may be, because there it finds worse
Nourishment; For though the Root be where it was, yet (I doubt) the Plant will
bend as it nourishes.

Plants are of several Natures, and draw several Iuyces out of the Earth,
there (as has been said) the One set by the other helps: As it is set down
by diverse of the Ancients, that Rue does prosper much, and becomes stronger,
if it be set by a Fig Tree: which (we conceive) is caused, Not by Reason of
Friendship, but by Extraction of a Contrary Juice: The one Drawing Juice fit to
result Sweet, the other bitter. So they have set down likewise, that a Rose
set by Garlic is sweeter: Which likewise may be, because the more Fetide
Juice of the Earth goes into the Garlic; And the more Odorate into the Rose.

Corne-Flowers, which come seldom or never in other places, unless they be
set; But only amongst Corn: As the Blew-Bottle, a kind of Yellow Mary Gold,
Wild Poppy, and Fumitorie. Neither can this be, by Reason of the Culture of
the Ground, by Plowing, or Furrowing; As some Herbs, and Flowers, will grow but
in Ditches new Cast; for if the Ground lie sallow, and unsown, they will not
come: So as it should seem to be the Corn, that qualifieth the Earth, and
prepares it for their Growth.

This Observation, if it holds, (as it is very probable,) is of great
Meliorating of Taste in Fruits, and Esculent Herbs; And of the Sent of Flowers.
For I do not doubt, but if the Fig Tree do make the Rue more strong, and
bitter, (as the Ancients have noted,) good store of Rue planted about the
Fig Tree, will make the Fig more sweet. Now the Tastes that do most offend
in Fruits, and Herbs, and Roots, are Bitter; Harrish; Sour; And Watrish, or
Flashy. It were good therefore to make the Trials following.

Take Wormwood, or Rue, and set it near Lettuce, or Goleflory, or Arti^hoake;
And see whether the Lettuce, or the Coleflory, etc. become not the sweeter.

Take a Seruice-Tree, or a Cornelian-Tree, or an Elder-Tree, which we Fruits
of harsh and binding Juice, and set them near a Vine, or Fig Tree, and see
whether the Grapes, or Figs, will be the sweeter.

Take Cucumbers, or Pumpions, and set them (here and there) amongst
Muske-Melons, and see whether the Melons will not be more Winy, and better
tasted. Set Cucumbers (likewise) amongst Radish, and see whether the Radish
will not be made the more Biting.

Take Sorrel, and set it amongst Rosps, and see whether the Rasps will

Take Common Briar, and set it amongst Violets, or Wall-Flowers, and Violets,
or Wall-Flowers sweeter, and less Earthy in their Smell. So set Lettuce, or
Cucumbers, amongst Rosemary, or Bays, and see whether the Rosemary, on Bays,
will not be the more Odorate, or Aromaticall.

Contrariwise, you must take heed, how you set Herbs together, that Rosemary
will leese in Sweetness, if it be set with Lauender, or Bays, or the like.
But yet, if you will correct the strength of an Herb, you shall do well to
set other like Herbs by him, to take him down; As if you should set Tansey by
Angelica, it may be, the Angelica would be the weaker, and fitter for Mixture
in Perfume. And if you should set Rue by Common Wormwood, it may be, the
Wormwood would turn to be like Roman Worniewood.

This Axiom is of large extent; And therefore would be severed, and Trial.
Neither must you expect to have a Grass Difference by this kind of Culture,
but only Further Perfection.

Trial would be also made in Herbs Poisonous, and Purgatine, whose ill
Poisons; or Purgatines, by them.

It is reported, that the Shrub called Our Ladies Seal; (which is a Briony,)
and Coleworts, set near together, one or both will die. The Cause is, for that
they be both great Depredatours of the Earth, and one of them starueth the
other. The like is said of a Reed, and a Brake; Both which are succulent; And
therefore the One deceives the Other. And the like of Hemlocke and Rue; Both
which draw strong luyces.

Natural Magic, have noted a Sympathy, between the Sun, Moon, and some
Principal Stars; And certain Herbs, and Plants. And so they have
denominated some Herbs Solar, and some Lunar; And such like Toys put into
great Words. It is manifest, that there are some Flowers, that have Respect to
the Sun, in two Kinds; The one by Opening and Shutting; And the other by
Bowing and Inclining the Head. For Mary-golds, Tulippa's, Pimper^ell, and
indeed most Flowers, do open or spread their Leaves abroad, when the Sun
shines serene and fair: And again, (in some part,) close them, or gather
them inward, either toward Night, or when the Sky is ouercast. Of this there
needs no such Solemn Reason to be assigned; As to say, that they rejoice at
the presence of the Sun; And mourn at the Absence thereof. For it is Nothing
else, but a little Loading of the Leaves, and Swelling them at the Bottom,
with the Moisture of the Air; whereas the dry Air does extend them: And they
make it a Piece of the wonder, that Garden Clauer will hide the Stalk, when
the Sun shows bright; Which is Nothing, but a full Expansion of the leaves.
For the Bowing and Inclining the Head; it is found in the great Flower of the
Sun; in Mary-golds; Wart wort; Mallow Flowers; and others. The Cause is
somewhat more Obscure than the former; But I take it to be no other, but that
the Part against which the Sun beats, waxes more faint and flaccide in the
Stalk; And thereby less able to support the Flower.

Moisture will do in Vegetables, even though they be dead, and severed from
the Earth, appears well in the Experiment of Inglers. They take the Beard of
an Oate; which (if you mark it well,) is wreathed at the Bottom, and one
smooth entire Straw at the Top. They take only the Part that is Wreathed, and
cut off the other, leaving the Beard half the Breadth of a finger in length.
Then they make a little Cross of a Quill, long-wayes of that Part of the
Quill, which has the Pith; And Crosse-wayes of that piece of the Quill without
Pith; The whole Cross being the Breadth of a Finger high. Then they prick the
Bottom where the Pith is, and thereinto they put the Oaten-beard, leaving
half of it sticking forth of the Quill: Then they take a little white Box of
wood, to deceive Men, as if somewhat in the Box did work the Feat: In which,
with a Pin, they make a little Hole, enough to take the Beard, but not to let
the Cross sink down, but to stick. Then likewise by way of Imposture, they
make a Question; As, Who is the Fairest Woman in the Company? Or, Who has a
Glove, or Card? And canse Another to name diners Persons: And upon every
Naming, they stick the Cross in the Box, having first put it toward their
Mouth, as if they charmed it; And the Crasse stirs not; But when they come
to the Person that they would take; As they hold the Orasse to their Mouth,
they touch the Beard with the Tip of their Tongue, and wet it; And so stick
the Cross in the Box; And then you shall see it turn finely and softly, three
or four Turns; Which is caused by the vntwining of the Beard by the Moisture.
You may see it more evidently, if you stick the Cross between your fingers,
in Stead of the Box; And therefore you may see, that this Motion, which is
effected by so little Wet, is stronger than the Closing or Bending of the Head
of a Marigold.

It is reported by some, that the Herb called Rosa-Solis, (whereof they Sun
shines hot and bright, have a great Dew upon it. And therefore, that the right
Name is Ros Solis: which they impute to a Delight and Sympathy, that it has
with the Sun. Men favor Wonders. It were good first to be sure, that the Dew
that is found upon it, be not the Dew of the Morning Preserved, when the Dew of
other Herbs is breathed away; for it has a smooth and thick Leaf, that does
not discharge the Dew so soon, as other Herbs that are more Spungy and Porous.
And it may be Purslane, or some other Herb, does the like, and is not marked.
But if it be so, that it has more Dew at Noone, than in the Morning, then sure
it seems to be an Exudation of the Herb is solfe. As Plums sweat when they
are set into the Oven: for you will not (I hope) think, that it is like
Gedeons Fleeel of Wood, that the Dew should fail upon that, and no where else.

It is certain, that the Honey-dews are found more upon Oahe-le^^es, A^^ of
Beech, or the like: But whether any Cause be, from the Leaf it self, to
concoct^ the Dew, Or whether it be only, that the Leaf is Close and Smooth;
(And therefore drinks not in the Dew, but preserves it;) may be doubted. It
would be well inquired, whether Ma^^^ the Drug, does fall but upon certain
Herbs or L^^^ only. Flowers that have deep Sockets, do gather in the
Bottom, a kind of Honey; As Honey-Suckles; (both the Woodbine, and the
Trisoile;) Dillier; and the like. And in them certainly the Flower bears part
with the Dew.

The Experience is, that the Froth, which they call Woodsears, (being Herbs,
and those Hot Ones; As Lauender-cotton, Sage, Hissope, etc. Of the Cause of
this enquire further; For it seems a Secret. There falls also Mildew upon
Corn, and smutteth it; But it may be, that the same salleth also upon other
Herbs, and is not observed.

It were good, Trial were made, whether the great Consent between Plants and
Water, which is a principal Nourishment of them; will make an Attraction or
Distance, and not at Touch only. Therefore take a Vessel, and in the middle of
it make a false Bottom of course Can^^affe: Fill it with E^^^ above the
Canuaffey and let not the Bar^h be wa^ed; Then sow some good Seeds in that
Earth, But ^^^ the Canuaffe, some half a foot in the Bottom of the Vessel,
lay a great Sp^^ge, th^^owly wet in water; And let it lie so some ten Days.
And see whether the Seeds will sprout, and the Earth become more Moist, and the
Sponge more dry. The Experiment formerly mentioned of the Cucumber, creeping to
the Pot of Water, is far stranger than this.

The Altering of the Sent, Color, or Taste, of Fruit, by Infusing, Mixing, or
Letting into the Bark, or Roast, of the Tree, Herb, or Flower, any Colored,
Aromaticall, or Medicinal; Substance; are but Fancies. Experiments in Consort,
touching the Making Herbs and Fruits Medicinable.
The Cause is, for that those Things have passed their Period, and nourish not.
And Alteration of Vegetables, in those Qualitles, must be by somewhat, that is
apt to go into the Nourishment of the Plant. But this is true; that where Kine
feed upon Wild Garlic, their Milk tastes plainly of the Garlic: And the
Flesh of Muttons is better tasted where the Sheep feed upon Wild Thyme, and
other wholesome Herbs. Galen also speaks of the Curing of the Scirrus of the
Liver, by Milk of a Cow, that feeds but upon certain Herbs; And Honey in
Spain smells (apparently) of the Rosemary, or Orange, from whence the Be
gathers it: And there is an old Tradition of a Maiden that was fed with
Napellus; (which is counted the Strongest Poison of all Vegetables;) which with
use did not hurt the Maid, but poisoned some that had Carnal Company with her.
So it is observed by some, that there is a virtuous Bexoar, and another without
virtue; which appear to the show alike; But the Virtuous is taken from the
Beast, that feeds upon the Mountains, where there are Theriacall Herbs; And
that without Virtue; from those that feed in the Valleys, where no such Herbs
are. Thus far I am of Opinion; That as Steeped Wines and Beeres, are very
Medicinal; and likewise Bread tempred with diverse Powders; So of Meat also,
(as Flesh, Fish, Milk, and Eggs,) that they may be made of great use for
Medicine, and Diet, if the Beasts, Foul, or Fish, be fed with a special kind
of food, fit for the Disease. It were a dangerous Thing also for secret
Empoysonthents. But whether it may be applied unto Plants, and Herbs. I doubt
more; Because the Nourishment of them is a more common Juice; which is hardly
capable of any special Quality, until the Plant do assimilate it.

Means, which they have devised of Making Plants Medicinable. The First is by
Slitting of the Root, and Infusing into it the Medicine; As Hellebore, Opium,
Scammony, Triacle, etc. And then binding it up again. This seems to me the
least probable; Because the Root draws immediately from the Earth; And so the
Nourishment is the more Common, and less Qualified: And besides, it is a long
time in Going up, ere it come to the Fruit. The Second Way is, to Perforate the
Body of the Tree, and there to Infuse the Medicine: Which is somewhat better:
For if any Virtue be received from the Medicine, it has the less way, and the
less time, to go up. The Third is, the Steeping of the Seed or Kernel in
some Liquour, wherein the Medicine is Infused: Which I have little Opinion of,
because the Seed, (I doubt,) will not draw the Parts of the Matter, which have
the Propriety: But it will be far the more likely, if you mingle the Medicine
with Dung; For that the Seed naturally drawing the Moisture of the Dung, may
call in withal some of the Propriety. The fourth is, the Watring of the Plant
often, with an Infusion of the Medicine. This, in one respect, may have more
force than the rest; Because the Medication is often renewed; Whereas the rest
are applied but at one time: And therefore the Virtue may the sooner vanish.
But still I doubt, that the Root is somewhat too stubborn to receive those
fine Impressions; And besides, (as I said before,) they have a great Hill to
go up. I judge therefore the likeliest way to be the Perforation of the Body
of the Tree, in senerall Places, one above the other; And the Filling of the
Holes with Dung mingled with the Medicine. And the Watring of those Lumpes of
Dung, with Squirts of an Infusion of the Medicine in Dunged water, once in
three or four Days.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
VI. Century.
OUR Experiments we take care to be, (as we have often said,) either
Experimenta Fructifera, or Lucifera; Either of Use, or of Discovery: For we
hate Impostures; And despise Curiosities. Experiments in Consort, touching
Curiosities about Fruits and Plants.
Yet because we must apply out Selves somewhat to Others, we will set down
some Curiofities touching Plants.

It is a Curiosity, to have several Fruits upon one Tree; And the more, Early,
and some come Late; So that you, may have, upon the same Tree, Ripe Fruits all
Summer. This is easily done, by Grafting of Seurall Cians, upon several
Boughs of a Stock, in a good Ground, plentifully sed. So you may have all
Kinds of Cherries, and all kinds of Plums, and Peaches, and Apricots, upon
one Tree; But I conceive the Diuer sity of Fruits must be such, as will grast
upon the same Stock. And therefore, I doubt, whether you can have Apples, or
Pears, or Orenges, upon the same Stock, upon which you graft Plummes.

It is a Curiosity to have Fruits of Diverse Shopes, and Figures. This is Fruit
is young, with Moulds of Earth, or Wood. So you may have Cucumbers etc. as Long
as a Cane; Or as Round as a Sphere; Or formed like a Cross. You may have also
Apples, in the sorme of Pears, or Limons. You may have also Fruit in more
Accurate Figures; As we said of Men, Beasts, or Birds, according as you make
the Moulds. Wherein you must understand, that you make the Mould big enough, to
contain the whole Fruit, when it is grown to the greatest: For else you will
choke the Spreading of the Fruit; Which otherwise would spread it self, and
fill the Concaue, and so be turned into the Shape desired; As it is in
Mouldworkes of Liquid Things. Some doubt may be conceived, that the Keeping of
the Sun from the Fruit, may hurt it: But there is ordinary experience of
Fruit that grows Covered. Quare also, whether some small Holes, may not be
made in the Wood, to let in the Sun. And note, that it were best to make the
Moulds partible, glued, or cemented together, that you may open them, when you
take out the Fruit.

Curiosity, to have Inscriptions, or Engrauings, in Fruit, or Trees. This is
easily performed, by Writing with a Needle, or Bodkin, or Knife, or the like,
when the Fruit, or Trees are young; For as they grow, so the Letters will grow
more large, and Graphicall. -- Tenerisque meos incidere Amores
Arboribus, crescent illa, crescetis Amores.


Trees apparrelled with Flowers, or Herbs, by Boring Holes in the Bodies of
them, and Putting into them Earth Helped with Mucke, and Setting Seeds, or
Slips, of Wielets, Stramberries, Wilde-Thyme Camamill, and such like in the
Earth. Wherein they do but grow, in the Tree, as they do in Pots; Though
(perhaps) with some Feeding from the Trees. It would be tried also with Shoots
of Vines and Roots of RedRoses; For it may be, they being of a more Ligueout
Nature, will incorporate with the Tree it self.

Curiosity, to Form Trees and Sbrubs, (as Rosemary, Inniper, and the like,)
into Sundry Shapes; which is done by Moulding them within, and Cutting them
without. But they are but lame Things, being too small to keep Figure: Great
Castles made of Trees upon Frames of Timber, with Turrets, and Arches, were
anciently matters of Magnificence.

Cariofities, I shall place Colouration, though it be somewhat better: For
Beauty in Flowers is their Pre-eminence. It is observed by some, that
Gilly-flowers, Sweet-Williams, Yielets, that are Colored, if they be
neglected, and neither Watered, not New Monlded, nor Transplanted, will turn
White. And it is probable, that the White with much culture, may turn
Colored. For this is certain, that the White Color comes of Scarcity of
Nourishment; Except in Flowers that are only White, and admit no other Colors.

Natures do accompany what Colors; For by that you shall have Light, how to
induce Colors, by Producing those Natures. Whites are more Inodorate, (for the
most part) than Flowers of the same kind Colored; As is found in Single White
Violets, White-Roses, White Gilly-Flowers, White Stock-Grlly-Flowers, etc. We
find also, that Blossoms of Trees, that are White, are commonly Inodorate; As
Cherries, Pearas; Pl^^^^^s; Whereas those of Apples, Crabs, Almonds, and
Peaches, are Blushy, and Smell Sweet. The Cause is, for that the Substance that
makes the Flower, is of the thinnest and sinest of the Plant; Which also
makes Flowers to be of so dainty Colors. And if it be too Sparing, and
Thin, it attaineth no Strength of Odor; Except it be in such Plants, as are
very Succulent; Whereby they need rather to be scanted in their Nourishment,
than replenished, to have them sweet. As we fee in White Satyrian, which is of
a Dainty Smell; And in Beane-Flowers, etc. And again, if the Plant be of
Nature, to put forth White Flowers only, and those not thin, or dry, they
are commonly of rank and fulsome Smell; As May-Flowers, and White Lillies.

Contrariwise, in Berries, the White is commonly more Delicaee, Colored; As
we see in White Grapes; In White Raspes; In White Strawberries; In White
Carra^, etc. The Cause is, for that the Colored are more iuyced, and courfer
iuyced; And therefore not so well and equally Concocted; But the White are
better proportioned, to the Disgestion of the Plant.

But in Fruits, the White commonly is meaner; As in Peare-Plums, etc. And the
Choicest Plammes are Black, The Malberry, (which though they call it a Berry,
is a Fruit,) is better the Black, than the White. The Harvest White-Pl^mme, is
a base Pl^mme; And the Verdoccie and White Date-Plamme, are no very good
Plummes. The Cause is, for that they are all Ouer-watry: Whereas an higher
Concoction is required for Sweetness, or Pleasure of Taste; And therefore all
your dainty Plummes, are a little dry, and come from the Stone; As the
Muscle-Plumme, the Damasin-Plumme, the Peach, the Apricet, etc. Yet some
Fruits, which grow not to be Black, are of the Nature of Berries, sweetest
such as are Paler; As the Cae^r-Cherry, which inclines more to White, is
sweeter than the Red; But the Egriot is more sour.

Take Gilly-Flower Seed, of one kind of Gilly-Flower: (As of the
Cloue-Gilly-Flower, which is the most Common;) And sow it; And there will come
up Gilly-Flowers, some of one Color, and some of another, casually, as the
Seed meets with Nourishment in the Earth; So that the Gardiners find, that
they may have two or three Roots amongst an hundred, that are rare, and of
great Price: As Purple, Carnation of Several Stripes; The Canse is, (no
doubt,) that in Earth, though it be contiguous, and in one Bed, there are very
feuerall luyees; And as the Seed does casually meet with them, so it
commethforth. And it is noted especially, that those which do come up Purple,
do always come up Single; The Iuyee, as it seems, not being able to suffice
a Succulent Color, and a Double Leaf. This Experiment of several Colors,
coming up from one Seed, would be tried also in Larkes-Foot, Moukes-Head,
Rappy, and Hollyoke.

Fruits are colored Red within; The Queene-Apple is; And another Apple, called
the Rose Apple; Mulberries likewise; and Grapes, though most toward the Skin.
There is a Peach also, that has a Circle of Red toward the Stone: And the
Egriot-Cherry is somewhat Red within; But no Pear, nor Warden, not Plumme, nor
Apricet, although they have (many times) Red sides, are Colored Red within.
The Canse may be enquired.

Color of Plants is Green; which is a Color that no Flower is of. There is a
Greenish Prime-Rose, but it is Pale, and scatce a Green; The Leaves of some
Trees turn a little Murry, or Reddish; And they be commonly Young Leaves that
do so; As it is in Oaks, and Vines, and Hasle. Leaves tot into a Yellow; And
some Hollies have part of their Leaves Yellow, that are, (to all seeming,) as
Fresh and Shining, as the Green. I suppose also, that Yellow is a less
Succulent Color, than Green; And a degree nearer White. For it has been
noted, that those Yellow Leaves of Holly stand euor toward the North, or
North-East. Some Roots are Yellow, as Carress; And some Plants Bloud-Red,
Stalk and Leaf, and all; as Amaranthus. Some Herbs incline to Purple, and
Red; As a Kind of Sage does, and a Kind of Mint, and Rosa Solis, etc. And
Some have White Leaves, as another Kind of Sape, and another kind of Mins;
But Azure, and a Pair Purple, are never found in Leaves. This Shows, that
Flowers are made of a Refined luyce, of the Earth; And so are Fruits: But
Leaves of a more Courfe, and Common.

Curiosity also to make Flowers Double; Which is effected by Often Removing
them into New Earth; As on the contrary Part, Double Flowers, by neglecting,
and not Removing, prove Single And the Way to do it speedily, is to sow or set
Seeds, or Slips of Flowers; And as soon as they come up, to remove them into
New Ground, that is good. Enquire also, whether Inoculating of Flowers, (as
Stock-GillyFlowers, Roses, Muske-Roses. etc.) does not make them Double. There
is a Cherry-Tree, that has Double Blossoms; But that Tree bears no Fruit;
And, it may be, that the same Means, which applied to the Tree, does extremely
accelerate the Sap to rise, and break sorth. Would make the Tree spend it
self in Flowers, and those to become Double; Which were a great pleasure to
see; Especially in Apple Trees, Peach-Trees, and Almond-Trees, that have
Blossoms Blush-Coloured.

Making of Fruits, without Core or Stone, is likewise a Curiosity; And somewhat
better: Because whatsoever makes them so, is like to make them more Tender and
Delicate. If a Cions or Shoe, fit to be set in the Ground, have the Pith
finely taken forth, (and not altogether, but some of it left, the better to
save the life,) it will bear a Fruit with little, or no Core, or Stone. And
the like is said to be, of dividing a Quicke-Tree down to the Ground, and
Taking out the Pith, and then binding it up again.

It is reported also, that a Citron grafted upon a Quince have Seeds; And it is
very probable, that (...) grafted upon a Stock, that (...) a Sweeter Fruit may
has make the Fruit sweeter, and more void of the harsh (...) or Seeds.

It is reported, that not only the ^^^^^ ^^^ of the ^^^^ but the Steepping
Juice of the Pith, from Rising in the(...) if you should boar a Tree clean
through, and put a wedge in.It is true, there is some Affinity between the
Pith, and the Kernel,because they are both of a harsh Substance, and both
placed in the Midst.

It is reported, that Trees watered perpetually with Warm Water, will Fruit,
with little or no Core, or ^^^. And the Rule is general, that whatsoever will
make a Water-Tree a Garden-Tree, will make a Garden-Tree to have less Core, or
Stone.

The Rule is certain, that Plants for want of Culture, ^^^^^ to be be baser in
the same Kind; And sometimes so ^^^^, as to change into another Kind.
Experiments in Consort touching the Degenerating of Plants; And of the
Transmutation of them, one into another.
1. The St^^ding ^^^^ not being Removed,^^keth them degenerase. 2. Drangle,
unless the Earth of it self be moist, does the like. 3. So does Removing into
worse Earth, or Gorbearing to C^^^p^st the Earth; As we see that Water-Mini
turns into Field-Mini; And the Colewort into Rape by Neglect, etc.

Whatsouer Fruit uses to be set upon a Ro^^, or a Slipif it be (...)
degenerate. Grapes sown; Figs, Almonds, Pomgranate Kernells make the Fruits
degenerate, and become Wild. And again, Most of those Fruits that use to be
grafted, if they be set of Kernells, or Stones, degenerate. It is true, that
^^^^, (as has been touched before,) do better upon S^^^ S^^, than upon
Grafting: And the Rule of Exception should seem to be this; That whatsoever
P^^^^ requires much Moisture, prospers better upon the Stone, or Kernel,
than upon the Graft. For the Stock, though it glueth a finer Nourishment, yet
it gives a scanter, than the Earth at large.

Seeds, if they be very Old, and yet have strength enough to bring forth Plant,
make the Plant degenerate. And therefore skillful Gardiners make trial of the
Seeds, before they buy them, whether they be good or no, by Putting them into
Water gently Boiled; And if they be good, they will sprout within Half an
Hour.

It is strange which is reported, that Basil too such exposed to the Sun,
does turn into Wild Thyme: Although those two Herbs seem to have small
Affinity; but Basil is almost the only Hot Herb, that has Fat and Succulent
Leaves; Which Oylinesse, if it be drawn forth by the Sun, it is like it will
make a very great Change.

There is an old Tradition, that Boughs of Oak, put into the Earth, Wild
Vines: Which if it be true, (no doubt,) it is not the Oak that turns into a
Vine, but the Oake-Bough Putrefying, qualifieth the Earth, to put forth a Vine
of it self.

Cutting down of an Old Timber-Tree, the Stub has put out sometimes a Tree of
another Kind; As that Beech has put forth Birch; Which, if it be true, the
Cause may be, for that the old Stub is too scant of Juice, to put forth the
former Tree; And therefore puts forth a Tree of a smaller kindey that
needs less Nourishment.

Ground be often sown, with the Grain that grew upon it, it will, in the end,
grow to be of a ba^er kind.

Sterile Years, Carne sown will grow to an Other Kind. Grandia sape quibus
mandauimus Hordes Sulcis.
Infoelix Lolium, and steriles dominantur Auena.
And generally it is a Rule, that Plants, that are brought forth by Culture, as
Corn, will sooner change into other Species, than those that come of
themselves: For that Culture gives but an Aduentitious Nature, which is more
easily put off.

This work of the Transmutation of Plants, one into another, is inter Magnalia
Naturae: For the Transmutation of Species is, in the vulgar philosophy,
pronounced Impossible: And certainly, it is a thing of difficulty, and
requires deep Seatch into Nature: But feeing there appear some manifest
Instances of it, the Opinion of Impossibility is to be rejected; And the
Means thereof to be found out. We see, that in Living Creatures, that come of
Putrefaction, there is much Transmutation, of one into another; As
Catterpillers turn into Flies, etc. And it should seem probable, that what
soever Creature, having life, is generated without Seed, that Creature will
change out of one Species into another. For it is the Seed, and the Nature of
it, which locketh and boundeth in the Creature, that it does not expatiate. So
as we may well conclude, that seeing the Earth, of it self, does put forth
Plants, without Seed, therefore Plants may well have a Transmigration of
Species. Wherefore Wanting Instances, which do occur, we shall give
Directions of the most likely Trialls: And generally, we would not have those,
that read this our Work of Sylua Syluarum, account it strange, or think that
it is an Ouer-Haste, that we have set down Particulars untried; For
contrariwise, in our own Estimation, we account such Particulars, more worthy,
than those that are already tried and known. For these Later must be taken as
you find them; But the Other do level Point blanke at the Inuenting of
Causes, and Axioms.

Flast therefore you must make account, that if you will have one Plant change
into another, you must have the Nourishment overrule the Seed; And therefore
you are to practice it by Nourishments as contrary, as may be, to the Nature of
the Harbs; So nevertheless as the Herb may grow; And likewise with Seeds that
are of the Weakest Sort, and have least Vigor. You shall do well therefore,
to take Marsh-Herbs, and Plant them upon Tops of Hills, and Champaignes; And
such plants as require much Moisture, upon Sandy and very dry Grounds. As for
Example, Marsh-Maltowes, and Sedge, upon Hills; Cucumber and Let^nce. Seeds,
and Coloworis, upon a Sandy Plas: So contrariwise plant Bushes, Heath, Ling,
and Brakes, upon a Wet or Mu^sh Ground. This I conceive also, that all E^c^lent
and Garden-Herbs, set upon the Tops of Hills, will prove more Modicinall,
though leffe E^^^lent, than they were before. And it may be likewise, some
Wilde-Herbs you may make Sallel-Herbs. This is the first Rule for Trans^^ction
of Plants.

The second Rule shall be to bury some few Seeds, of the Herb you Seeds; And
then you shall see, whether the luyee of those other Seeds, do ^^^ so qualify
the Earth, as it will alter the Seed, whereupon you work. As for Example; Put
Parfly^^^ amongst Onion-S^^t Or Lettuce Seed amongst Parthy-Seed; Or Ba^^-Seed
amongst Thyme-Seed; And see the Change of Taste on otherwise. But you shall do
well, to put the Seed you would change, into a little linen Cloth, that it
mingle not with the foreign Seed.

The third Rule shall be, the Making of some Medley or Mixture of Earth, with
some other plants Braised, or Shanes, either in Leaf or Root; As for Example,
make Earth with a Mixture of Calmert-Leaues, stamped, and set in it
Artis^^^kes, or Pars^ips; So take Earth made with Mai^^, or Origa^^m, or Wild
Th^^^, bruised, or stamped, and set in it Fennell-Seed, etc. In which
Operation, the Process of Nature still will be, (as I conceive,) not that the
Harbe you work upon, should draw the Juice of the For ^ne Herbs (For that
Opinion was have formerly rejected;) But that there will be a New Confection of
Mould, which perhaps will alter the Seed, and yet not to the kind of the
former Herb.

The fo^^^ Rule shall be, to ^^^ what Herbs, some ^^^ do put And to take ^^^
Earth, and to Pat it, or to ^^^^^^ it; And in that to set the Seed you would
change: as for example, sake from under Walls, or the like, where Nettles put
forth in abundance, the Earth which you shall there find, without any String,
or Root of the Nettles; And Pot that Earth, and set in it Stock-gilly, flowers,
or Wall Flowers, etc. Or sow in the Seeds of them; And see what the Event will
be: Or take Earth, that you have prepared to put forth Mushromes, of it self,
(whereof you shall find some Instances following;) And sow in it Purslane
Seed, or Lettuce-Seed; For in these Experiments, it is likely enough, that the
Earth being accustomed to send forth one Kind of Nourishment, will alter the
new Seed.

Herb grow Contrary to his Nature; As to make Ground-Herbes rise in Height:
As for example; Carry Camomill, or Wilde-Thyme, or the Green Strawberry, upon
Sticks, as you do Heps upon Poles; And see what the Event will be.

Plants grow out of the Sun, or Open Air; For that is a great Mutation in
Nature; And may induce a Change in the Seed: As barrel up Earth, and sow some
Seed in it, and put it in the Bottom of a Pond; Or put it in some great hollow
Tree; Try also the Sowing of Seeds, in the Bottomes of Caves; And Pots with
Seeds sown, hanged up in Wells, some distance from the Water, and see what the
Event will be.

It is certain, that Timber Trees in Coppice-Words, grow more upright, and
more free from Vnder-Boughs, than those that stand in the Field; The Cause
whereof is, for that Plants have a Natural Motion, to get to the Sun; And
besides, they are not glutted with too much Nourishment; For that the Coppice
shareth with them; And Repletion ever hinders Plants helps Mounting.
Experiments in Consort touching the Proco^tic, and Lowness, and Artificial
dwarsing of Trees.


Trees, that are, of themselves, full of Heat, (which Heat appears by their
Inflammable Gumms,) as Firrs, and Pines, mount of themselves in Height without
Side-Boughs, till they come toward the Top. The Cause is, partly Heat; And
partly Tenuitie of Juice; Both which send the Sap upwards. As for Juniper, it
is but a Shrub, and grows not big enough in Body, to maintain a tall Tree.

Canuas, spread over a Tree grasted low, soon after it puts forth, will
dwarf it, and make it spread. The Cause is plain; For that all Things that
grow, will grow as they find Room.

Trees are generally set of Roots, or Kernells; But if you set them of Slips,
(as of some Trees you may, by name the Mulberry), some of the Slips will take;
And those that take, (as is reported,) will be DwarfeTrees. The Cause is, for
that a Slip draws Nourishment more weakly, than either a Root, or Kernel.

Plants, that put forth their Sap hastily, have their Bodies not proportionable
to their Length; And therefore they are Winders, and Creepers; As Iuy, Briony,
Hops, Woodbine: Whereas Dwarsing requires a slow Putting forth, and less
Vigor of Mounting.

The Scripture says, that Solomon wrote a Natural History, from the Cedar of
Libanus, to the Moss growing upon the Wall: For so the belt Translations have
it. Experiments in Consort, touching the
And it is true that Moss is but the Rudiment of a Plant. And (as it were) the
Mould of Earth, or Bark.

Moss grows chiefly upon Ridges of Houses, tiled or thatched, And Crests of
Walls. And that Moss is of a lightsome, and pleasant Green. The Growing upon
Slopes is caused, for that Moss, as on the one side it comes of Moisture and
Water, so on the other side the Water must but Slide, and not Stand or Poole.
And the Growing upon Tiles, or Walls, etc. is caused, for that those dried
Earths, having not Moisture sufficient to put forth a Plant, do practice
Gormination by Putting forth Moss; Though when by Age, or otherwise, they grow
to relent and resolve, they sometimes put forth Plants; As Wall-Flowers. And
almost all Moss has here and there little Stalks, besides the low Thrumme.

Moss grows upon Alleyes, especially such as lie Cold, and upon Plants are
kept down, the Earth puts forth Moss.

Old Ground, that has been long unbroken up, gathers Moss: Pasture
Grounds, when they grow to Moss, by Tilling them for a year, or two: Which
also depends upon the same Cause; For that, the more Sparing and Staruing
Juice of the Earth, in sufficient for Plants, does breed Moss.

Old Trees are more Mossy, (far) than Young; For that the Sap is Moss.

Fountains have Moss growing upon the Ground about them; Muscosi Fontes; --
The Cause is, for that the Fountains draine the Water from the Ground
Adjacent, and leave but sufficient Moisture to breed Moss: And besides, the
Coldness of the Water conduces to the same.

The Moss of Trees, is a kind of Hair; For it is the Juice of the Tree, that
is Excerned, and does not Affimilate. And upon great Trees the Moss gathers
a Figure, like a Leaf.

The Moister Sort of Trees yield little Moss; As we see in Aspes, Poplars,
etc. Which is partly caused, for the Reason that has been given, of the
francke Putting up of the Sap into the Boughs; And partly, for that the Barks
of those Trees, are more Close and Smooth, than those of Oaks, and Ashes;
Whereby the Moss can the hardlier issue out.

In Clay-Grounds, all Fruit Trees grow full of Moss, both upon Body Boughs;
Which is caused, partly by the Coldness of the Ground, whereby the Plants
nourish less; And partly by the Toughness of the Earth, whereby the Sap is
shut in, and cannot get up, to spread so franckly, as it should do.

Trees be Hide-bound, they wax less Fruitful, and gather Moss: And that they
are helped by Hacking, etc. And therefore by the Reason of Contraries, if Trees
be bound in with Cords, or some Outward Bands, they will put forth more Moss:
Which (I think) happens to Trees that stand Bleake, and upon the Cold Winds.
It would also be tried, whether, if you cover a Tree, somewhat thick upon the
top, after his Powling, it will not gather more Moss. I think also, the
Watring of Trees with Cold Fountaine-Water, will make them grow full of Moss.

Moss the Perfumers have, which comes out of AppleTrees, that has an
Excellent Sent. Quare particularly for the Manner of the Growth, and the Nature
of it. And for this Experiments, sake, being a Thing of Price, I have set down
the last Experiments, how to multiply, and call on Mosses.

Next unto Moss, I will speak of Mushromes; Which are likewise an Imperfect
Plant. These Mushromes have two strange Properties; The One, that they yield so
Delicious a Meat; The other, that they come up so bastily; As in a Night; And
yet they are Unsown. And therefore, such as are Vpstarts in State, they call,
in reproach, Mushromes. It must needs be therefore, that they be made of much
Moisture; And that Moisture Fat, Gross, and yet somewhat Concocted. And
(indeed) we find, that Mushromes cause the Accident, which we call Incubus, or
the Mare, in the Stomach. And therefore the Surfeit of them may Suffocate, and
Empoyson. And this shows, that they are Windy; And that Windiness is Gross,
and Swelling; Not Sharp, or Griping. And upon the same reason Mushromes are a
venereous Meat.

Bark of White, or Red Poplar, (which are of the Moistest of Trees,) cut
small, and cast into Furrows well dunged, will cause the Ground to put forth
Mushromes, at all Seasons of the Year, fit to be eaten. Some add to the
Mixture Leanen of Bread, resolved in Water.

Hilly-Field, where the Stubble is standing, be set on Fire, in a Showry
Season, it will put forth great Store of Mushromes.

Harts-Horne, Shaven, or in Small Pieces, mixed with Dung, and watered, puts
up Mushromes. And we know HartsHorne is of a Fat and Clammy Substance: And it
may be Oxe-Horne would do the like.

Iuy has grown out of a Stags-Horne; Which they suppose, did rather come from
a Confrication of the Horn upon the Iuy than from the Horn it self. There is
not known any Substance, but Earth, and the Procedures of Earth, (as Tile,
Stone, etc.) that yields any Moss, or Herby Substance. There may be Trial
made of some Seeds, as that of Fennel-Seed, Mustard Seed, and Rape-Seed, put
into some little Holes, made in the Horns of Stags, or Oxen, to see if they
will grow.

There is also another Imperfect Plant, that (in show) is like a great
Mushrome: And it is sometimes as broad as ones Hat; Which they call a
Toads-Stoole: But it is not Esculent; And it grows (commonly) by a dead Stub
of a Tree; And likewise about the Roots of Rotten Trees: And therefore seems
to take his Juice from Wood Putrified. Which shows, by the way, that
Wood-Putrified yields a frank Moisture.

There is a Cake, that grows upon the Side of a Dead Tree, that Dead Trees
forget not their Putting forth; No more than the Careasses of Men's Bodies, that
put forth Hair, and Nails, for a Time.

There is a Cod, or Bag, that grows commonly in the Fields; That Tennis-Ball,
and white; And after grows of a Mushrome Color, and full of light Dust upon
the Breaking: And is thought to be dangerous for the Eyes, if the Powder get
into them; And to be good for Kibes. Belike it has a Corrosiue, and Fretting
Nature.

There is an Herb called Iewes-Eare, that grows upon the Roots, Lower Parts
of the Bodies of Trees; Especially of Elders, and sometimes Ashes. It has a
strange Property; For in Warme-water, it swells, and opens extremely. It is
not green, but of a dusky brown Color. And it is used for Squinancies, and
Inflammations in the Throat; Whereby it seems to have a Mollifying, and
Lenifying Virtue.

There is a Kind of Spongy Excrescence, which grows chiefly upon Roots of
the Laser-Tree; And sometimes upon Cedar, and other Trees. It is very White,
and Light, and Friable: Which we call Agarick. It is famous in Physic for the
Purging of Tough phlegm. And it is also an excellent Opener for the Liver: But
Offensive to the Stomach; And in Taste it is, at the first, Sweet, and after
Bitter.

We find no Super-Plant, that is a Formed Plant, but Misseltoe. They Bird,
called a Missel-Bird, that feeds upon a Seed, which many times she cannot
digest, and so expels it whole with her Excrement: which falling upon a
Bough of a Tree, that has some Rift, puts forth the Misseltoe. But this is
a Fable: For it is not probable, that Birds should feed upon that they cannot
digest. But allow that, yet it cannot be for other Reasons: For First, it is
found but upon certain Trees; And those Trees bear no such Fruit, as may
allure that Bird to sit, and feed upon them. It may be, that Bird feeds upon
the Misseltoe-Berries, and so is often found there; Which may have given
occasion to the Tale. But that which makes an End of the Question, is, that
Misseltoe has been found to put forth under the Boughs, and not (only)
above the Boughs: So it cannot be any Thing that falls upon the Bough.
Misseltoe grows chiefly upon Crab-Trees, AppleTrees; sometimes upon Hasses;
And rarely upon Oaks; The Misseltoe whereof is counted very Medicinal. It is
cuer green, Winter and Summer; And bears a White Glistering Berry: And it is
a Plant, utterly differing from the Plant, upon which it grows. Two things
therefore may be certainly set down: First, that Super-fatation must be by
Abundance of Sap, in the Bough that puts it forth: Secondly, that that Sap
must be such, as the Tree does excerne, and cannot affimilate; For else it
would go into a Bough; And besides, it seems to be more Fat and Unctuous,
than the Ordinary Sap of the Tree; Both by the Berry, which is Clammy; And by
that it continues green, Winter and Summer, which the Tree does not.

Experiment of Misseltoe may give Light to other Practices. Therefore Trial
would be made, by Ripping of the Bough of a Crab-Tree, in the Bark; And
Watring of the Wound every Day, with Warm Water Dunged, to see if it would
bring forth Misseltoe, or any such like Thing. But it were yet more likely to
try it, with some other Watring, or Anointing, that were not so Natural to the
Tree, as Water is; As Oil, or Barme of Drink, etc. So they be such Things as
kill not the Bough.

Plants would put forth, if they be forbidden to put forth their Natural
Boughs: Poll therefore a Tree, and cover it, some thickness, with Clay on the
Top; And see what it will put forth. I suppose it will put forth Roots; For so
will a Cions, being turned down into Clay: Therefore, in this Experiment also,
the Tree would be closed with somewhat, that is not so Natural to the Plant,
as Clay is. Try it with Leather, or Cloth, or Painting, so it be not hurtful
to the Tree. And it is certain, that a Brake has been known to grow out of
a Pollard.

Prickles of Trees to be a kind of Excrescence; For they will never be
Boughs, nor bear Leaves. The Plants that have Prickles, are Thorns, black
and white; Brier; Rose; Limon-Trees; CrabTrees; Goose-Berry; Berbery; These
have it in the Bough, The Plants that have Prickles in the Leaf, are; Holly;
Juniper; Whin-bush; Thistle; Nettles also have a small Venomous Prickle; So
has Borrage a small prickle, but harmless. The Cause must be Hasty Putting
forth; Want of Moisture; And the Closeness of the Bark; For the Haste of the
Spirit to put forth, and the Want of Nourishment to put forth a Bough, and the
Closeness of the Bark, cause Prickles in Boughs; And therefore they are ever
like a Pyramid, for that the Moisture spends after a little Putting forth.
And for Prickles in Leaves, they come also of Putting forth more Juice into the
Leaf, than can spread in the Leaf smooth; And therefore the Leaves otherwise
are Rough, as Borrage and Nettles are. As for the Leaves of Holly, they are
Smooth, but never Plain, but as it were with Folds, for the same Cause.

There be also Plants, that though they have no Prickles, yet they Downy or
Velvet Rine, upon their Leaves; As Rose Campion, Stock-Gilly-Flowers,
Coltsfoot; which Down or Nap comes of a Subtle Spirit, in a Soft or Fat
Substance. For it is certain, that both Stock-Gilly-Flowers, and
Rose-Campions, stamped, have been applied, with success,) to the Wrests of
those that have had Tertian, or Quartan Agues; And the Vapor of Coltsfoot
has a Sanatiue virtue, toward the Lungs; And the Leaf also is Healing in
Surgery.

Another Kind of Excrescence is an Exudation of Plants, joined with
Putrefaction; As we see in Oake-Apples, which are found chiefly upon the Leaves
of Oaks; And the like upon Willowes: And Country People have a kind of
Prediction, that if the Oake-Apple, broken, be full of Worms, it is a Sign of
a Pestilent Year; Which is a likely Thing, because they grow of Corruption.

There is also upon Sweet, or other Brier, a fine Tuse, or Brush of Moss, of
diverse Colors; Which if you cut, you shall ever find full of little white
Worms.

It is certain, that Earth taken out of the Foundations of Vaults and Houses,
and Bottomes of Wells, and then put into Pots, will put forth Sundry Kinds of
Herbs: But some Time is required, for the Germination; For if it be taken, but
from a Fathom deep, it will put forth the First Year; If much deeper, not
till after a Year, or Two. Experiments in Consort, touching the Producing of
Perfect P^ants without Seed.


The Nature of the Plants growing out of Earth so taken up, does follow Nature
of the Mould it self; As if the Mould be Soft, and Fine, Herbs; As Grass,
Plantine, and the like; if the Earth be Harder and Courser, it puts forth
Herbs more Rough, as Thistles, Firres, etc.

It is Common Experience, that where Alleyes are close Grauelled, the Earth
puts forth, the first year, Knot-grasse, and after Spire-grasse. The Cause
is, for that the Hard Gravel, or Pebble at the first Laying, will not suffer
the Grass to come forth upright, but turns it to find his way where it can;
But after that the Earth is somewhat loosened at the Top, the Ordinary Grass
comes up.

It is reported, that Earth, being taken out of Shady and Watery some depth, and
Potted, will put forth Herbs of a Fat and Iuycy Substance; As Penny-wort,
Purslane, Hausleeke, Penny-royall, etc.

The Water also does send forth Plants, that have no Roots fixed in Perfect
Plants, being almost but Leaves, and those Small ones; Such is that we call
Duck-Weed; Which has a Leaf no bigger than a Thyme-Leafe, but of a fresher
Green, and puts forth a little String into the Water, far from the
Bottom. As for the Water-Lilly, it has a Root in the Ground, And so have a
Number of other Herbs that grow in Ponds.

It is reported by some of the Ancients, and some Modern Teftimony Plants,
that grow upon the Top of the Sea; Being supposed to grow of some Concretion of
Slime from the Water, where the Sun beats hot, and where the Sea stirs
little. As for Alga Marina, (Sea-weed,) and Eryngium (Sea-Thistle,) both have
Roots; but the Sea-weed under the Water, the Sea-Thistle but upon the Shore.

Herbs, that grow out of Snow, laid up close together, and Putrified; And that
they are all Bitter; And they name one specially, Flomus, which we call
MothMullein It is certain, that Worms are found in Snow commonly, like
Earth-Wormes; And therefore it is not unlike, that it may likewise put forth
Plants.

Ancients have affirmed, that there are some Herbs, that grow out of Stone;
Which may be, for that it is certain, that Toads have been found in the Middle
of a Freestone. We see also, that Flints, lying above Ground, gather Moss;
And Wall-Flowers, and some other Flowers, grow upon Walls; But whether upon the
Maine Brick, or Stone, or whether out of the Lime, or Chinckes, is not well
observed; For Elders and Ashes have been seen to grow out of Steeples: But
they manifestly grow out of Clefts; In so much as when they grow big, they will
disioyne the Stone. And besides it is doubtful, whether the Mortar it self
puts it forth, or whether some Seeds be not let fall by Birds. There be
likewife Rock-Herbs; But I suppose those are, where there is some Mould, or
Earth. It has likewife been found, that great Trees growing upon Quarries,
have put down their Root into the Stone.

Mines in Germany, as is reported, there grow in the Bottom Vegetables; And
the Worke-Folkes use to say, they have Magical Virtue; And will not suffer Men
to gather them.

Sea-Sands seldom bear Plants. Whereof the Cause is yielded, by some of the
Ancients, for that the Sun exhaleth the Moisture; before it can incorporate
with the Earth, and yield a Nourishment for the Plant. And it is affirmed also,
that Sand has (always) his Root in Clay; And that there be no Veins of Sand,
any great depth within the Earth.

Plants put forth for a time, of their own Store, without any Nourishment from
Earth, Water, Stone, etc. Of which Vide the Experiment 29.

It is reported, that Earth, that was brought out of the Indies, and other
Remote Countries, for Ballast of Ships, cast upon some Grounds in Italy, did
put forth Fortaine Herbs, to us in Europe not known; And, that Roots, Barks,
and Seeds, con^used together, and mingled with other Earth, and well Watered
with Warm Water, there came forth Herbs, much like the Other. Experiments in
Consort touching Forr^^ Plants.


Plants brought out of Hot Countries, will endeavor to put forth, at the same
Time, that they usually do in their own Climate; And therefore to preserve
them, there is no more required, than to keep them from the Injury of Putting
back by Cold. It is reported also, that Grain out of the Hotter Countries
translated into the Colder, will be more forward, than the Ordinary Grain of
the Cold Country. It is likely, that this will prove better in Grains, than
in Trees; For that Grains are but Annual; And so the Virtue, of the Seed is
not worn out; Whereas in a Tree, it is embased by the Ground, to which it is
Removed.

Many Plants, which grow in the Hotter Countries; being set in the Colder, will
neucrthelesse, even in those Cold Countries, being sown of Seeds, ate in the
Spring, come up and abide most Part of the Summer; As we find it in Orange,
and Limon-Seeds, etc. The Seeds whereof, Sown in the End of April, will bring
forth Excellent Sallets, mingled with other Herbs. And I doubt not, but the
Seeds of Cloue-Trees, and Pepper-Seeds, etc. if they could come hither Green
enough to be sown, would do the like.

There be some Flowers, Blossoms, Grains, and Fruits, which come more Early;
And Others which come more Late in the Year. Experiments in Consort, touching
the Seasons in which Plants come forth.
The Flowers that come early, with us, are; Prime-Roses, Violets, Anemonies,
Water-Daffadillies, Crocus Vernus, and some early Tulippa's. And they are all
Cold Plants; Which therefore, (as it should seem,) have a quicker Perception,
of the Heat of the Sun Increasing, than the Hot Herbs have; As a Cold Hand
will sooner find a little Warmth, than a Hot. And those that come next after,
are Wall-Flowers, Cowflips, Hyacinths, Rosemary-Flowers, etc. And after them,
Pincks, Roses, Flowerdelnces, etc. And the latest are Gilly-Flowers,
Holly-oakes, Larkes-Foot, etc. The Earliest Blossoms are, the Blossoms of
Peaches, Almonds, Cornelians, Mezerions, etc. And they are of such Trees, as
have much Moisture, either Watrie, or Oily. And therefore Grocus Vernus also,
being an Herb, that has, an Oily luyce, puts forth early. For those also
find the Sun sooner than the Drier Trees. The Grains are, first Rye and
Wheat; Then Oats and Barley; Then Pease and Beans. For though Green Pease and
Beans be eaten sooner, yet the Dry Ones, that are used for Horse-Meat, are
ripe last; And it seems that the Fatter Grain comes first. The Earliest
Fruits are, Strawberries, Cherries, Gooseberries, Corrans; And after them Early
Apples, Early Pears, Apricots, Rasps; And after them Damasins, and most Kind
of Plums, Peaches, etc. And the latest are Apples, Wardens, Grapes, Nuts,
Quinces, Almonds, Sloes, Brier-Berries, Heps, Medlars, Services, Cornelians,
etc.

It is to be noted, that (commonly) Trees that ripen latest, blossom As
Peaches, Cornelians, Sloes, Almonds, etc. And it seems to be a Work of
Providence, that they blossom so soon; For otherwise, they could not have the
Sun long enough to ripen.

There be Fruits, (but rarely,) that come twice a Tear; as some Pears, etc.
And it seems they are such, as abound with Nourishment; Whereby after one
Period, before the Sun waxes too weak, they can endure another. The Violet
also, amongst Flowers, comes twice a Year; Especially the Double White; And
that also is a Plant full of Moisture. Roses come twice, but it is not without
Ca^ting, as has been formerly said.

Muscbuia, though the Corn come not up, till late Spring, yet their Harvest is
as Early as Ours. The Cause is, for that the Strength of the Ground is kept in
with the Snow; And we see with us, that if it be a long Winter, it is commonly
a more Plentiful Tear: And after those kind of Winters likewise, the
Flowers, and Corn, which are Earlier, and Later, do come commonly at once,
and at the same time; Which troubles the Husbandman many times; For you shall
have Red Roses, and Damask Roses, come together; And likewise the Harnest of
Wheat and Barley. But this happens ever, for that the Earlier staieth for the
Later; And not that the Later comes sooner.

Fruit Trees, in the Hot Countries, which have Blossoms, and Young Fruit, and
Ripe Fruit, almost all the Year, succeeding one another. And it is said, the
Orange has the like with us, for a great Part of Summer; And so also has the
Fig. And no doubt, the Natural Motion of Plants, is to have so; But that
either they want luyce to spend; Or they meet with the Cold of the Winter: And
therefore this Circle of Ripening cannot be, but in Succulent Plants, and Hot
Countries.

Herbs are but Annual, and die, Root and all, once a Year; As Borrage,
Lettuce, Cucumbers, Muske-Melons, Bafill, Tobacco, Mustard Seed, and all kinds
of Corn; Some continue many Years; As Hyssope, Germander, Lanander, Fennel,
etc. The Cause of the Dying is double; The first is the Tenderness and
Weakness of the Seed, which makes the Period in a small time; As it is in
Borrage, Lettnce, Cucumbers, Corn, etc. And therefore none of these are Hot.
The other Cause is, for that some Herbs can worse endure Cold; As Basil,
Tobacco, Mustard Seed. And these have (all) much Heat.

The Lasting of Plants is most in those that are Largest of Body; As Oaks,
Elm, Ches-Nut, the Loat-Tree, etc. And this holds in Trees; But in Herbs it
is often contrary; For borage, Colewort, Pompions, which are Herbs of the
Largest Size, are of small Durance; Whereas Hyssope, will last long.
Experiments in Consort touching the Lasting of Herbs and Trees.
The Cause is, for that Trees last according to the Strength, and Quantity of
their Sap and Juice; Being well munited by their Bark against the Injuries of
the Air: But Herbs draw a Weak luyce; And have a Soft Stalk; And therefore
those amongst them which last longest, are Herbs of Strong Smell, and with a
Sticky Stalk.

Trees that bear Mast, and Nuts, are commonly more lasting, than those that
bear Fruits; Especially the Moister Fruits: As Oaks, Beeches, Chestnuts,
Wall-nuts, Almonds, Pine-Trees, etc. last longer than Apples, Pears, Plums,
etc. The Cause is the Fatness and Oylinesse of the Sap; Which ever wastes
less, than the more Watery.

Trees, that bring forth their Leaves late in the Year, and cast them likewise
late, are more lasting, than those that sprout their Leaves Early, or shed them
betimes. The Cause is, for that the late Coming forth shows a Moisture more
fixed; And the other more loose, and more easily resolved, And the same Cause
is, that Wilde-Trees last longer than Garden-Trees; And in the same kind,
those whose Fruit is Acide, more than those whose Fruit is sweet.

Nothing procures the Lasting of Trees, Bushes, and Herbs, so much, Cutting:
For every Cutting causes a Renouation of the Iuyee of the Plant; That it
neither goes so far, nor rises so faintly, as when the Plant is not Cut:
Insomuch as Annual Plants, if you cut them seasonably, and will spare the use
of them, and suffer them to come up still young, will last more Years than
one; As has been partly touched; Such as is Lettuce, Purslane, Cucumber, and
the like. And for Great Trees, we see almost all Ouer-growne-Trees, in
Churchyards, or near Ancient Buildings, and the like, are Pollards, or
Dottards, and not Trees at their full Height.

Some Experiment would be made, how by Art to make Plants more Lasting, than
their ordinary Period; As to make a Stalk of Wheat, etc. last a whole year.
You must ever presuppose, that you handle it so, as the Winter kills it not;
For we speak only of Prolonging the Natural Period. I conceive, that the
Rule will hold; That whatsoever makes the Herb come later, than at his time,
will make it last longer time: It were good to try it, in a Stalk of Wheat,
etc. set in the Shade, and encompassed with a Case of Wood, not touching the
Straw, to keep out Open Air.

As for the Preservation of Fruits, and Plants, as well upon the Tree, or
Stalk, as gathered, we shall handle it under the Title of Conservation of
Bodies.

The Particular Figures of Plants we leave to their Descriptions; Experiments
in Consort touching the several Figures of Plants.
But some few Things, in general, we will observe. Trees and Herbs, in the
Growing forth of their Boughs, and Branches, are not Figured, and keep no
Order. The Cause is, for that the Sap, being restrained in the Rind, and
Bark, breaks not forth at all; (As in the Bodies of Trees, and Stalks of
Herbs.) till they begin to branch; And then, when they make an Eruption, they
break forth casually, where they find best way, in the Bark, or Rind. It is
true, that some Trees are more scattered in their Boughs; As Sallow-Trees,
Warden-Trees, Quince-Trees, Medlar-Trees, Limon-Trees, etc. Some are more in
the form of a Pyramid, and come almost to todd; As the Peare-Tree, (which the
Critickes will have to borrow his name of ^^, Fire,) Orenge-Trees, Firre-Trees,
Service-Trees, LimeTrees, etc. And some are more spread and broad; As Beeches,
Hornebeame, etc. The rest are more indifferent. The Cause of Scattering the
Boughs, is the Hasty breaking forth of the Sap; And therefore those Trees rise
not in a Body of any Height, but branch near the Ground. The Cause of the
Pyramid, is the Keeping in of the Sap, long before it branch; And the spending
of it when it begins to branch, by equal degrees. The Spreading is caused
by the Carrying up of the Sap, plentifully, without Expense; And then putting
it forth speedily, and at once.

Herbs, but no Trees, that may be said to have some kind of Order, in the
Putting forth of their Leaves: For they have Joints, or Knuckles, as it were
Stops in their Germination; As have GillyFlowers, Pinckes, Fennel, Corn,
Reeds, and Canes. The Cause whereof is, for that the Sap asoendeth unequally,
and does (as it were) tire and stop by the way. And it seems, they have some
Closeness, and Hardness in their Stalk, which bindreth the Sap from going
up, until it has gathered into a Knot, and so is more urged to put forth. And
therefore, they are most of them hollow, when the Stalk is dry. As
Fennell-Stalke, Stubble, and Canes.

Flowers have (all) exquisite Figures; And the Flower-Numbers are (chiefly)
Five, and Four; As in Prime-Roses, Brier-Roses, Single MuskeRoses, Single
Pinkes, and Gilly-Flowers, etc. which have five Leaves: Lillies,
Flower-de-luces, Borage, Buglosse, etc. which have four Leaves. But some put
forth Leaves not Numbered; But they are ever small Ones; As Mary-Golds,
Trisoile, etc. We see also, that the Sockets, and Supporters of Flowers, are
Figured; As in the Five Brethren of the Rose; Sockets of Gilly-Flowers, etc.
Leaves also are all Figured, Some Round, Some Long; None Square; And many
iagged on the Sides; Which Leaves of Flowers seldom are. For I account the
Iagging of Pinkes, and GillyFlowers, to be like the Inequality of Oake-leaues,
or Vine-leaues, or the like; But they seldom or never have any small Purles.

Of Plants, Experiments in Consort, touching some Principal^ Differences in
Plants.
some few put forth their Blossoms before their Leaves; As Almonds, Peaches,
Cornelians, Black-Thorne, etc. But most put forth some Leaves before their
Blossoms; As Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, White-Thorne, etc. The Cause is,
for that those, that put forth their Blossoms Sharp Spirit; (And therefore
commonly they all put forth early in the Spring, and ripen very late; As most
of the Particulars before mentioned;) Or else an Oily Juice, which is apter to
put out Flowers, than Leaves.

Plants, some are Green all Winter; Others cast their Leaves. There are Green
a^l Winter; Holly, Iny, Box, Fur, Eugh, Cypress, Juniper, Bays, Rose-Mary,
etc. The Cause of the Holding Green, is the Close and Compact Substance of
their Leaves, and the Pedicles of them. And the Cause of that again, is either
the Tough and Viscous Juice of the Plant; Or the Strength and Heat thereof. Of
the first Sort is Holly; Which is of so Viscous a Juice, as they make Bird-lime
of the Bark of it. The Stalk of Iuy is Tough, and not Fragile, as we see in
other small Twigs dry. Fur yields Pitch. Box is a fast and heavy Wood, as
we see it in Bowls. Eugh is a Strong and Tough Wood, as we see it in Bows. Of
the second Sort is Juniper, which is a Wood Odorate, and makes a hot Fire.
Bays is likewise a Hot and Aromatical Wood; And so is Rose-Mary for a Shrub.
As for the Leaves, their Density appears, in that, either they are Smooth and
Shining, as in Bays, Holly, Iuy, Box, etc. Or in that they are Hard and Spiry,
as in the rest. And Trial would be made of Grasting of RoseMary, and Bays,
and Box, upon a Holly-Stocke; Because they are Planes that come all Winter. It
were good to try it also with Grafts of other Trees, either Fruit Trees, or
Wilde-Trees; To see whether they will not yield their Fruit, or bear their
Leaves, later, and longer in the Winter; because the Sap of the Holly puts
forth most in the Winter. It may be also a Mexerion-Tree, grafted upon a Holly,
will prove both an Earlier, and a Greater Tree.

There be some Plants, that bear no Flower, and yet bear Fruit: Flowers, and
no Fruit: There be some that bear neither Flowers, nor Fruit. Most of the
great Timber Trees, (as Oaks, Beeches, etc.) bear not apparent Flowers: Some
few (likewise) of the Fruit Trees; As Mulberry, Wall-unt, etc. And some Shrubs,
(as Juniper, Holly, etc.) bear no Flowers. Diverse Herbs also bear Seeds,
(which is as the Fruit,) and yet bear no Flowers; As Parslane, etc. Those that
bear Flowers and no Fruit, are few; At the Double Cherry, the Sallow, etc. But
for the Cherry, it is doubtful, whether it be not by Art, or Culture; For if
it be by Art, then Trial would be made, whether Apples, and other Fruits
Blossoms, may not be doubled. There are some Few, that bear neither Fruit,
nor Flower; As the Elm, the Poplers, Box, Brakes, etc.

There be some Plants, that shoot still upwards, and can Support Trees and
Plants: There be some Other, that Creep along the Ground; Or Wind about other
Trees, or Props, and cannot support themselves; As Vines, Iuy, Briar, Briony,
Woodbines, Hop's, Climatis, Camomill, etc. The Cause is, (as has been partly
touched,) for that all Plants, (naturally) move upwards; But if the Sap put up
too fast, it makes a slender Stalks, which will not support the weight: And
therefore these latter Sort are all Swift and Hasty Comers.

The first and most Ordinary Help is Stercoration. Experiments in Consort
touching all Manner of Composts, and Helps of Ground.
The Sheeps-Dung is one of the best; And next, the Dung of Kine: And thirdly,
that of Horses: Which is held to be somewhat too hot, unless it be mingled.
That of Pigeons for a Garden, or a small Quantity of Ground, excels. The
Ordering of Dung is; If the Ground be Arable, to spread it immediately before
the Plonghing and Sowing; And so to Plough it in: For Sun will draw out much
of the Fatness of the Dung: If the Ground be Grazing Ground, to spread it
somewhat late, toward Winter; That the Sun may have the less Power to dry
it up. As for special Composts for Gardens, (as a Hot Bed, etc.) we have
handled them before.

The Second Kind of Compost, is, the Spreading of diverse Kinds of Earths;
Marle, Chalk, Sea-Sand, Earth upon Earth, Pond-Earth; And the Mixtures of
them. Marle is thought to be the best; As having most Fatness; And not Heating
the Ground too much. The next is Sea-Sand; Which (no doubt) obtains a
special Virtue, by the Salt: For Salt is the first Rudiment of life. Chalk
over heateth the Ground a little. And therefore is best upon Gold Clay-Grounds,
or Moist Grounds: But I heard a great Husband say, that it was a common Error,
to think that Chalk helps Arable Grounds, but helps not Grazing Grounds;
Whereas (indeed) it helps, Grass, as well as Corn: But that which breeds
the Error is, because after the Chalking of the Ground, they wear it out with
many Crops, without Rest; And then (indeed) afterward it will bear little
Grass, because the Gound is tired out. It were good to try the laying of
Chalk upon Arable Grounds, a little while before Ploughing; And to Plough it
in, as they do the Dung; But then it must be Friable first, by Rain, or
Lying: As for Earth, it Copasseth it Self; For I knew a Great Garden, that had
a Field (in a manner) powered upon it; And it did bear Fruit excellently the
first year of the Planting: For the Surface of the Earth is cuer the
Fruitfullest. And Earth so prepared has a double Surface. But it is true, as I
co^^eiue, that such Earth, as has Saltpeter bred in it, if you can procure it
without too much charge, does excel. The way to hasten the Breeding of
Saltpeter, is to forbid the Sun, and the Growth of Vegetables, And
therefore, if you make a large Houell, thatched, over some Quantity of Ground;
Nay if you do but Plancke the Ground over, it will breed Saltpeter. As for
Pond-Earth, or Riuer-Earth, it is a very good Compost; Especially if the Pond
have been long uncleansed, and so the Water be not too Hungry: And I judge it
will be yet better, if there be some Mixture of Chalk.

Help of Ground, is, by some other Substances, that have a Virtue to make
Ground Fertile; though they be not merely Earth: wherein Ashes excel; In so
much as the Countries about AEtna, and Vesuuius, have a kind of Amends made
them, for the Mischief the Eruptions (many times) do, by the exceeding Fruit
fullness of the Soil, caused by the Ashes, scattered about. Soot also, though
thin spread, in a Field, or Garden, is tried to be a very good Compost. For
Salt, it is too Costly: But it is tried, that mingled with Seed-Corne, and
sown together, it does good: And I am of Opinion, that Chalk in Powder,
mingled with SeedCorne, would do good; Perhaps as much as Chalking the Ground
all over. As for the Steeping of the Seeds, in several Mixtures with Water, to
give them Vigor; Or Watring Grounds with Compost-Water; We have spoken of them
before.

Help of Ground, is, the Suffering of Vegetables to dye into the Ground; And
so to Fatten it; As the Stubble of Corn, Especially PeaseBrakes cast upon the
Ground, in the Beginning of Winter, will make it very Fruitful. It were good
(also) to try, whether Leaves of Trees swept together, with some Chalk and
Dung mixed, to give them more Heart, would not make a good Compost: For there
is nothing lost, so much as Leaves of Trees; And as they lie scattered, and
without Mixture, they rather make the Ground sour, than otherwise.

The Fifth Help of Ground, is Heat and Warmth. It has been anci^^^^^
practiced Heath, and Ling, and Sedge, with the vantage of (...) Wind, upon the
Ground: We see, that Warmth of Walls and Enclo^^^es, mendeth Ground: We see
also that Lying open to the South, men^^th Ground: We see again, that the
Foldings of Sheep help Ground. (...)ll by their Warmth, as by their Compost:
And it may be doubted, ^^^ther the Covering of the Ground with Brakes, in the
Beginning of the Winter, (where of we spoke in the last Experiment,) helps it
not, by reason of the Warmth. Nay some very good Husbands do suspect, that the
Gathering up of Flints, in Flinty Ground, and Laying them on Heaps, (which is
much used,) is no good Husbandry; For that they would keep the Ground Warm.

The Sixth Help of Ground is, by Watering, and Irrigation; which is Letting
in, and Shutti gout Waters, at seasonable Tunes: For Water, at some Seasons,
and with reasonable dry, death good; But at some other Seasons, and with too
long Stay, does ^^^. And this serves only for Meadows, which are along some
Rtuer. The other way is, to bring Water, from some Hanging Grounds, where there
are Springs, into the Lower Grounds, carrying it in some ^^^ Furrows; And from
those Furrows, drawing it trauerse to spread the Water. And this makes an
excellent Improuement, both for Corn, and Grass. It is the richer, if those
Hanging Grounds be fruitful, because it washes off some of the Fatness of
the Earth: But howsoever it profits much. Generally, where there are great
Ouerflowes, in Fens, or the like, the drowning of them in the Winter, makes
the Summer following more fruitful: The Cause may be, for that it keeps the
Ground warm, and nourishes it: But the Fen-Men hold, that the Sewers must be
kept so, as the Water may not stay too long in the Spring, til the Weeds and
Sedge be grown up; For then the Ground will be like a Wood, which keeps out
the Sun; And so continues the Wet; Whereby it will peuer graze (to purpose)
that year. Thus much for Irrigation. But for Anoydances, and Draynings of
water, where there is too much, and the Helps of Ground in that kind, we
shall speak of them in another Place.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
VII. Century.
THe Differences between Animate and Inanimate Bodies, Experiments in Consort,
touching the Assinities, and Differences, between Plants and Inanimate Bodies.
we shall handle fully under the Title of Life, and Living Spirits, and Powers.
We shall therefore make but a brief Mention of them in this Place. The Maine
Differences are two. All Bodies have Spirits, and Pneumaticall Parts within
them: But the Differences between Animate and Inanimate, are two: The first
is, that the Spirits of Things Animate, are all Continued with themselves, and
are Branched in Veins, and secret Canales, as Blood is: And in Living
Creatures, the Spirits have not only Branches, but certain Cells or Seats,
where the Principal Spirits do reside, and whereunto the rest do resort: But
the Spirits in Things Inanimate are shut in, and cut off by the Tangible Parts;
And are not peruious one to another; As Air is in Snow. The Second Maine
Difference is, that the Spirits of Animate Bodies, are all in some degree,
(more or less,) kindled and inflamed; And have a fine Commixture of Flame, and
an Aeriall Substance. But Inanimate Bodies have their Spirits no whit Inflamed,
or Kindled. And this Difference consists not in the Heat or Coolness of
Spirits; For Cloves and other Spices, Naphtha and Petroleum, have exceeding Hot
Spirits, (hotter a great deal than Oil, Wax, or Tallow, etc.) but not
Inflamed. And when any of those Weak and Temperate Bodies come to be Inflamed,
then they gather a much greater Heat, than others have Vn-inflamed; besides
their Light, and Motion, etc.

Differences, which are Secondary, and proceed from these two Radical
Differences, are; First, Plants are all Figurate and Determinate, which
Inanimate Bodies are not; For look how far the Spirit is able to Spread and
Continue it self; So far goes the Shape, or Figure; And then is determined.
Secondly, Plants do nourish; Inanimate Bodies do not: They have an Accretion,
but no Alimentation. Thirdly, Plants have a Period of Life; which Inanimate
Bodies have not. Fourthly, they have a Succession, and Propagation of their
Kind; which is not in Bodies Inanimate.

Differences between Plants, and Metalls or Fossiles, besides those four
before mentioned, (For Metalls I hold Inanimate,) are these: First, Metalls are
more Durable than Plants: Secondly, they are more Solid and Hard: Thirdly, they
are wholly Subterrany; Whereas Plants are part above Earth, and part under
Earth.

Creatures, that participate of the Nature of Plants, and Metalls both; Coral
is one of the Nearest of both Kinds: Another is Vitrioll, for that is aptest
to sprout with Moisture.

Affinity is between Plants and Mould or Putrefaction: For all Putrefaction
(if it dissolve not in Arefaction) will in the end issue into Plants, or Living
Creatures bred of Putrefaction. I account Moss, and Mushromes, and Agaricke,
and other of those kinds, to be but Moulds of the Ground, Walls, and Trees,
and the like. As for Flesh, and Fish, and Plants themselves, and a Number of
other things, after a Mouldinesse, or Rottensesse, or Corrupting, they will
fall to breed Worms. These Putrefactions, which have Affinity with Plants,
have this Difference from them; That they have no Succession or Propagation,
though they Nourish, and have a Period of Life, and have likewise some Figure.

Citron cut, in a close Room, for three Summer-Moneths, that I was absent; And
at my Return, there were grown forth, out of the Pith cut, Tufts of Hairs, an
Inch long, with little black Heads, as if they would have been some Herb.

The Affinities and Differences between Plants and Living Creatures,
Experiments in Consort touching the Affinities, and Differences, of Plants, and
Living Creatures: And the Consiners and ^^^ ^^^^ of them
are these that follow. They have both of them Spirits Continued, and Branched,
and also Inflamed: But first in Living Creatures, the Spirits have a Cell or
Seat, which Plants have not; As was also formerly said: And secondly, the
Spirits of Living Creatures hold more of Flame, than the Spirits of Plants do.
And these two are the Radical Differences. For the Secondary Differences, they
are as follow. First, Plants are all Fixed to the Earth; Whereas all Living
Creatures are severed, and of themselves. Living Creatures have Local Motion;
Plants have not. Thirdly, Living Creatures nourish from their Upper Parts, by
the Mouth chiefly; Plants nourish from below, namely from the Roots. Fourthly,
Plants have their Seed and Seminall Parts uppermost; Living Creatures have them
lower-most: And therefore it was said, not elegantly alone, but
Philosophically; Homoest Planta inuerse; Man is like a Plant turned upwards;
For the Root in Plants, is as the Head in Living Creatures. Fifthly, Living
Creatures have a more exact Figure than Plants. Sixthly, Living Creatures have
more Diversity of Organs within their Bodies, and (as it were) Inward Figures,
than Plants have. Seventhly, Living Creatures have Sense, which Plants have
not. Eighthly, Living Creatures have Voluntary Motion, which Plants have not.

For the Difference of Sexes in Plants, they are oftentimes by name Male-Piony,
Female-Piony; Male-Rose-mary, FemaleRose mary; Hee-Holly, Shee-Holly; etc. but
Generation by Copulation (certainly) extends not to Plants. The nearest
Approach of it, is between the Hee-Palme, and the Shee-Palme; which, (as they
report,) if they grow near, incline the One to the other: In so much as, (that
which is more strange,) they doubt not to report, that to keep the Trees
upright from Bending, they tie Ropes, or Lines, from the one to the other, that
the Contact might be enjoyed by the Contact of a Middle Body. But this may be
Feigned, or at least Amplified. Nevertheless, I am apt enough to think, that
this same Binarium of a Stronger and a Weaker, like unto Masculine and
Feminine, does hold in all Living Bodies. It is confounded sometimes; As in
some Creatures of Putrefaction, wherein no Marks of Distinction appear: And
it is doubled sometimes; As in Hermaphrodites: But generally there is a Degree
of Strength in most Species.

The Participles or Consiners between Plants and Living Creatures, are Fixed,
and have no Local Motion of Remove, though they have a Motion in their Parts;
Such as are Oysters., Cockles, and such like. There is a Fabulous Narration,
that in the Northern Countries, there should be an Herb that grows in the
likeness of a Lamb, and feeds upon the Grass, in such sort, as it will
bare the Grass round about. But I suppose, that the Figure makes the Fable;
For so we see, there be Bee-Flowers, etc. And as for the Grass, it seems the
Plant, having a great Stalk and Top, does prey upon the Grass, a good way
about, by drawing the Juice of the Earth from it.

The Indian Fig boweth his Roots down so low, Experiments Pr^^^^^ous touching
Plants.
in one year, as of it self it takes Root again: And so multiplieth from
Root to Root; Making of one Tree a kind of Wood. The Cause is the Plenty of
the Sap, and the Softness of the Stalk, which makes the Bough, being
ouerloaden, Leaves, as broad as a little Target, but the Fruit no bigger than
Beans. The Cause is, for that the Continual Shade increases the Leaves, and
abateth the Fruit; which nevertheless is of a pleasant Taste. And that (no
doubt) is caused, by the Supplenesse and Gentleness of the Juice of that
Plant, being that which makes the Boughs also so Flexible.

It is reported by one of the Ancients, that there is a certain Indian Tree,
having few, but very great, Leaves, three Cubits long, and two broad; And that
the Fruit, being of good Taste, grows out of the Bark. It may be, there be
Plants, that pour out the Sap so fast, as they have no leisure, either to
divide into many Leaves, or to put forth Stalks to the Fruit. With us Trees
(generally) have final Leaves, in comparison. The Fig has the greatest; And
next it the Vine, Mulberry, and Sycamore; And the Least are those of the
Willow, Birch, and Thorn. But there be found Herbs with far greater Leaves
than any Tree; As the Burre, Gourd, Cucumber, and Cole-wort. The Cause is,
(like to that of the Indian Fig,) the hasty and plentiful Putting forth of the
Sap.

Things in use for Sweetness; Sugar, Honey, Manna. For Sugar, to the Ancients
it was scarce known, and little used. It is found in Canes: Quare, whether to
the first Knuckle, or further up? And whether the very Bark of the Cane it
self do yield Sugar, or no? For Honey, the Be makes it, or gathers it; But
I have heard from one, that was industrious in Husbandry, that the labor of
the Be is about the Wax; And that he has known in the beginning of May,
Honey-Combs empty of Honey; And within a forthnight, when the Sweet Dewes fall,
filled like a Cellar. It is reported also by some of the Ancients, that there
is a Tree called Occhus, in the Valleys of Hyrcanis, that distilleth Honey in
the Mornings. It is not unlike, that the Sap and Tears of some Trees, may be
sweet. It may be also, that some sweet Iuyces, fit for many uses, may be
concocted out of Fruits, to the Thickness of Honey, or perhaps of Sugar; The
likeliest are Raisins of the Sun, Figs, and Corrans: The Means may be
enquired.

Ancients report of a Tree, by the Persian Sea, upon the ShoreSands, which is
nourished with the Salt Water; And when the Tide ebbeth, you shall see the
Roots, as it were, bare without Bark, (being as it seems corroded by the
Salt,) and grasping the Sands like a Crab; Which nevertheless bears a Fruit.
It were good to try some Hard Trees, as a Seruice-Tree, or Firre-Tree, by
setting them within the Sands.

Plants, which they use for Garments, these that follow. Hemp; Flax; Cotton;
Nettles, (whereof they make Nettle-Cloth;) Sericum, which is a Growing Silk;
They make also Cables of the Bark of Lime-Trees. It is the Stalk that makes
the Filaceous Matter, commonly; And sometimes the Down that grows above.

Countries, a Plant of a Rosy Color, which shuts in the Night, Opens in
the Morning, and Opens wide at Noone; which the Inhabitants of those
Countries say is a Plant that Sleeps. There be Sleepers enough then; For almost
all Flowers do the like.

Plants there are, but rare, that have a Mossy or Downy Root; And likewise that
have a Number of Threads, like Beards; As Mandrakes; whereof Witches and
Impostours make an ugly Image, giving it the Form of a Face at the Top of the
Root, and leave those Strings to make a broad Beard down to the Foot. Also
there is a Kind of Nard, in Creet, (being a Kind of Phu) that has a Root
hairy, like a Rough-Footed-Doues foot, So as you may see, there are of Roots,
Bulbous Roots, Fibrous Roots, and Hirsute Roots. And, I take it, in the
Bulbous, the Sap hasteneth most to the Air, and Sun: In the Fibrous, the Sap
dollghreth more in the Earth, and therefore puts downward: And the Hirsute
is a Middle between both; That besides the Putting forth upwards, and
downwards, puts forth in Round.

There are some Tears of Trees, which are kembed from the Beards of Goats: For
when the Goats bite and crop them, especially in the Mornings, the Dew being
on, the Tear comes forth, and hangs upon their Beards: Of this Sort is
some kind of Ladanum.

The Irrigation of the Plaine-Tree by Wine, is reported by the Ancients, Roots;
For upon Seeds it works no great Effects.

The way to carry Farraine Roots, a long Way, is to vessel them Earthan
Vessels. But if the Vessels be not very Great, you must make some Holes in
the Bottom, to give some Refreshment to the Roots; Which otherwise (as it
seems) will decay, and suffocate.

The ancient Cinnamon, was, of all other Plants, while it grew, the Plants, did
make that more Sterill: For in Showers it prospered worst: It grew also amongst
Bushes of other kinds, where commonly Plants do not thrive: Neither did it
love the Sun: There might be one Cause of all those Effects; Namely, the
sparing Nourishment, which that Plant required. Quare how far Cassia, which
is now the Substitute of Cinnamon, does participate of these Things.

It is reported by one of the Ancients that Cassia when it is gathered, Skins
of Beasts, newly fleyed; And that the Skins Corrupting, and Breeding Worms,
the Worms do devour the Pith and Marrow of it, and so make it Hollow; But
meddle not with the Bark, because to them it is bitter.

There were, in Ancient Time, Vines, of far greater Bodies, than Cups made of
them, and an Image of Jupiter. But it is like they were Wilde-Vines; For the
Vines, that they use for Wine, are so often Cut, and so much Dug and
Dressed, that their Sap spends into the Grapes, and so the Stalk cannot
increase much in Bulk. The Wood of Vines is very durable, without Rotting. And
that which is strange, though no Tree has the Twigges, while they are green,
so brittle, yet the Wood dried is extreme Tough; And was used by the Captains
of Armies, amongst the Romans, for their Cudgells.

It is reported, that in some Places, Vines are suffered to grow like Herbs,
spreading upon the Ground; And that the Grapes of those Vines are very great.
It were good to make trial, whether Plants that use to be borne up by Props,
will not put forth greater Leaves, and greater Fruits, if they be laid along
the Ground; As Hops, l^y, Wood bine, etc.

Quinces, or Apples, etc. if you will keep them long, drown them Honey; But
because Honey (perhaps) will give them a Taste Ouerlushious, it were good to
make Trial in Powder of Sugar; Or in Syrrup of Wine only Boiled to Height.
Both these would likewise be tried in Orenges, Limons, and Pomgranats; For the
Powder of Sugar, and Syrrup of Wine, will serve for more times than once.

Conservation of Fruit would be also tried in Vessels, filled with fine Sand,
or with Powder of Chalk; Or in Meal and Flower; Or in Dust of Oake-wood; Or
in Mill.

Fruits, as you appoint for Long Keeping, you must gather before they be full
Ripe; And in a Fair and Dry Day, toward Noone; And when the Wind blows not
South; And when the Moon is under the Earth; And in Decrease.

Grapes, and hang them in an Empty Vessel, well Stopped; And set the Vessel,
not in a Cellar, but in some dry Place; And it is said, they will last long.
But it is reported by some, they will keep better, in a Vessel half full of
Wine, so that the Grapes touch not the Wine.

Preserving of the Stalk, helps to preserve the Grape; Especially if the
Stalk be put into the Pith of Elder, the Elder not touching the Fruit.

Ancients, that Fruit put in Bottles, and the Bottles let down into Wells
under Water, will keep long.

Herbs and Plants, some are good to eat Raw; As Lettuce, Endive, Purslane,
Tarragon, Cresses, Cucumbers, Muske-Melons, Radish, etc. Others only after
they are Boiled, or have Passed the Fire; As Parsley, Clary, Sage, Parsnips,
Turnips, Asparagus, Artichoakes, (though they also being young are eaten Raw:)
But a Number of Herbs are not Esculent at all; As Worme-wood, Grass,
Greeke-Corne, Centory, Hyssope, Lauender, Balm, etc. The Causes are, for that
the Herbs, that are not Esculent, do want the two Tastes, in which Nourishment
rests; Which are, Fat, and Sweet; And have (contrariwise) Bitter and
Ouer-strong Tastes, or a Juice so Crude, as cannot be ripened to the degree of
Nourishment. Herbs and Plants, that are Esculent Raw, have Fatness, or
Sweetness, (as all Esculent Fruits;) Such are Onions, Lettuce, etc. But then
it must be such a Fatness, (for as for Sweet Things, they are in effect
always Esculent,) as is not Ouer-grosse, and Loading of the Stomach; For
Parsnips and Leeks have Fatness; But it is too Gross and Heavy without
Boiling. It must be also in a Substance somewhat Tender; For we see Wheat,
Barley, Artichoakes, are no good Nourishment, till they have Passed the Fire;
But the Fire does ripen, and makes them soft and tender, and so they become
Esculent. As for Radish, and Tarragon, and the like, they are for Condiments,
and not for Nourishment. And even some of those Herbs, which are not Esculent,
are notwithstanding Poculent; As Hop's, Broom, etc. Quare what Herbs are good
for Drink, besides the two aforenamed; For that it may (perhaps) ease the
Charge of Brewing, if they make Beer to require less Malt, or make it last
longer.

Parts fit for the Nourishment of Man, in Plants, are, Seeds, Roots, and
Fruits; But chiefly Seeds, and Roots. For Leaves, they give no Nourishment, at
all, or very little: No more do Flowers, or Blossoms, or Stalks. The Reason
is, for that Roots, and Seeds, and Fruits, (in as much as all Plants consist of
an Oily and Watery Substance commixed,) have more of the Oily Substance; And
Leaves, Flowers, etc. of the Watery. And secondly, they are more Concocted; For
the Root, which continues ever in the Earth, is still Concocted by the Earth.
And Fruits, and Grains, (we see) are half a year, or more, in Concocting;
Whereas Leaves are out, and Perfect in a Month.

Plants (for the most part) are more strong, both in Taste, and Smell, Seed,
than in the Leaf, and Root. The Cause is, for that in Plants, that are not of
a Fierce and Eager Spirit, the Virtue is increased by Concoction, and
Maturation, which is ever most in the Seed; But in Plants, that are of a Fierce
and Eager Spirit, they are stronger whilst the Spirit is enclosed in the Root;
And the Spirits do but weaken, and dissipate, when they come to the Air, and
Sun; As we see it in Onions, Garlic, Dragon, etc. Nay there be Plants, that
have their Roots very Hot, and Aromaticall; And their Seeds rather Insipide; As
Ginger. The Cause is (as was touched before,) for that the Heat of those Plants
is very Dissipable; which under the Earth is contained and held in; But when it
comes to the Air, it exhaleth.

The Iuyces of Fruits are either Watery, or Oily. I reckon amongst Watery, all
the Fruits out of which Drink is expressed; As the Grape, the Apple, the
Pear, the Cherry, the Pomgranate, etc. And there are some others, which,
though they be not in use for Drink, yet they appear to be of the same
Nature; As Plummes, Serukes, Mulberries, Rasps, Orenges, Limons, etc. And for
those Iuyces, that are so fleshy, as they cannot make Drink by Expression, yet
(perhaps) they may make Drink by Mixture of Water; Poculaque admistis
imitantur vitea Sorbis. And it may be Heps and Brier-Berries would do the
like. Those that have Oily Juice, are; Olives, Almonds, Nuts of all sorts,
Pine-Apples, etc. And their Iuyces are all Inflammable. And you must observe
also, that some of the Watery Iuyces, after they have gathered Spirit, will
Burn and Inflame; As Wine. There is a Third Kind of Fruit, that is sweet,
without either Sharpness, or Oylinesse: Such as is the Fig, and the Date.

It has been noted, that most Trees, and specially those that bear Mast, are
fruitful but once in two years. The Cause (no doubt) is, the Expense of Sap;
For many Orchard-Trees, well Cultured, will bear diverse years together.

There is no Tree, which besides the Natural Fruit, does bear so many
Bastard-Fruits, as the Oak does: For besides the Acorne, it bears Galls,
Oake-Apples, and certain Oake-Nuts, which are Inflammable; And certain
Oake-Berries, sticking close to the Body of the Tree, without Stalk. It
bears also Misseltoe, though rarely. The Cause of all these may be, the
Closeness and Solidenesse of the Wood, and Pith of the Oak; Which makes
several Iuyces find several Eruptions. And therefore, if you will devise to
make any Super-Plants, you must ever give the Sap Plentiful Rising, and Hard
Issue.

Excrescences, which grow upon Trees; Both of them in the Nature of Mushromes:
The one the Romans called Boletus; Which grows upon the Roots of Oaks; And
was one of the Dainties of their Table; The other is Medicinal, that is called
Agaricke, (whereof we have spoken before,) which grows upon the Tops of
Oaks; Though it be affirmed by some, that it grows also at the Roots. I do
conceive, that many Exerescences of Trees grow chiefly, where the Tree is dead,
or faded; For that the Natural Sap of the Tree, corrupts into some
Preternaturall Substance.

Trees bear Most, and Best, on the Lower Boughs; As Oaks, Figs, Wall-Nuts,
Pears, etc. But some bear Best on the TopBoughes; As Crabs, etc. Those that
bear best below, are such, as Shade does more good to, than Hurt. For
generally all Fruits bear best lowest; Because the Sap tireth not, having but
a short Way: And therefore in Fruits spread upon Walls, the Lowest are the
Greatest, as was formerly said; So it is the Shade that hinders the Lower
Boughs; Except it be in such Trees, as delight in Shade; Or at least bear it
well. And therefore, they are either Strong Trees, as the Oak; Or else they
have large Leaves, as the Wallnut and Fig; Or else they grow in Pyra^is, as the
Pear. But if they require very much Sun, they bear best on the Top; As it
is in Crabs, Apples, Plummes, etc.

Trees, that bear best, when they begin to be Old; As Almonds, Pears, Vines,
and all Trees that give Mast. The Cause is, for that all Trees that bear Mast,
have an Oily Fruit; And Young Trees have a more Watery Juice, and less
Concocted; And of the same kind also is the Almond. The Pear likewise, though
it be not Oily, yet it requires much Sap, and well Concocted; For we see it is
a Heavy Fruit, and Solid; Much more than Apples, Plummes, etc. As for the
Vine, it is noted, that it bears more Grapes when it is Young; But Grapes
that make better Wine, when it is Old; For that the Juice is better Concocted:
And we see that Wine is Insflammable; So as it has a kind of Oylinesse. But
the most Part of Trees, amongst which are Apples, Plummes, etc. bear best when
they are Young.

Plants, that have a Milk in them, when they are Cut; As Figs, Old Lettuce,
Sowe-Thistles, Spurge, etc. The Cause may be an Inception of Putrefaction: For
those Milkes have all an Acrimony; though one would think they should be
Lenitiue. For if you write upon Paper, with the Milk of the Fig, the Letters
will not be seen, until you hold the Paper before the Fire, and then they wax
Brown; Which shows that it is a Sharp or Fretting Juice: Lettuce is thought
Poisonous, when it is so Old, as to have Milk; Spurge is a kind of Poison in
it Self; And as for Sowe-Thistles, though Coneyes eat them, yet Sheep and
Cattle will not touch them; And besides the Milk of them, rubbed upon Warts,
in short time, wears them away: Which shows the Milk of them to be
Corrosine. We see also, that Wheat, and other Corn sown, if you take them
forth of the Ground, before they sprout, are full of Milk; And the Beginning
of Germination is ever a Kind of Putrefaction of the Seed. Euphorbium also
has a Milk, though not very white, which is of a great Acrimony. And Saladine
has a yellow Milk, which has likewise much Acrimony; For it cleanses the
Eyes. It is good also for Cataracts.

Mushromes are reported to grow, as well upon the Bodies of Trees, Roots, or
upon the Earth: And especially upon the Oak. The Cause is, for that Strong
Trees, are toward such Excresc^^ces, in the Nature of Earth; And therefore put
forth Moss, Mushromes, and the like.

There is hardly found a Plant, that yields a Red Juice, in the Blade, Ear;
Except it be the Tree that bears Sanguis Draconis: Which grows (chiefly) in
the Island Soquotra: The Herb Amaranthus, (indeed,) is Red all over; And
Brasill is Red in the Wood: And so is Red Sunders. That Tree of the Sanguis
Draconis, grows in the form of a Sugar-loafe. It is like, that the Sap of
that Plant, concocteth in the Body of the Tree. For woe see that Grapes, and
Pomegranats, are Red in the Juice, but are Green in the Tear: And this makes
the Tree of Sanguis Draconis, lesser toward the Top; Because the Juice
hasteneth not up; And besides it is very Astringent; And therefore of Slow
Motion.

It is reported, that Sweet Moss, besides that upon the Apple Trees, Poplars;
And yet (generally) the Poplar is a Smooth Tree of Bark, and has little
Moss. The Moss of the Larix Tree burns also Sweet, and sparkleth in the
Burning, Quaere of the Mosses of Oderate Trees; As Cedar, Cypres, Lignum Aloes,
etc.

The Death that is most without Pain, has been noted to be, upon Taking of
the Petium of Hemloche; which in Humanity was the Form of Execution of
Capital Offenders in Athens. The Poison of the Aspe, that Cleopatra used, has
some affinity with it. The Cause is, for that the Torments of Death are chiefly
raised by the Strife of the Spirits; And these Vapors quench the Spirits by
Degrees; Like to the Death of an extreme Old Man. I conceive it is less
Painful than Opium:, because Opium has Parts of Heat mixed.

There be Fruits, that are Sweet before they be Ripe; As Mirabolanes;
Reuuell-Seeds are Sweet before they ripen, and after grow Spicy. And some never
Ripen to be Sweet; As Tamarinds, Berberries, Crabs, Sloes, etc. The Cause is,
for that the former Kind have ^^^eh and subtle Heat, which causes Early
Sweetness; The latter have a Cold and Acide Juice, which no Heat of the Sun
can sweeten. But as for the Mirabelane, it has Parts of Contrary Natures; For
it is Sweet, and yet Astringont.

There be few Herbs that have a Salt Taste; And contrariwise all Blood of
Living Creatures has a Saltness: The Cause may be, for that Salt, though it
be the Audiment of Life, yet in Plants the Original Taste remains not; For
you shall have them Bitter, Sour, Sweet, Biting, but seldom Salt: But in
Living Creatures, all those High Tastes may happen to be (sometimes) in the
Humors, but are seldom in the Flesh, or Substance; Because it is of a more
Oily Nature; which is not very Susceptible of those Tastes; And the Saltness
it self of Blood, is but a light, and secret Saltness: And even among Plants,
some do participate of Saltness, as Alga Marina, Sampire, Scorny-Grasse, etc.
And they report, there is, in some of the Indian-Seas, a Swimming Plant, which
they call Salgazus, spreading over the Sea, in such sort, as one would think
it were a Meadow. It is certain, that out of the Ashes of all Plants, they
extract a Salt, which they use in Medicines.

Ancients, that there is an Herb growing in the Water, called Lincostis, which
is full of Prickles: This Herb puts forth another small Herb out of the
Leaf; which is imputed to some Moisture, that is gathered between the
Prickles, which Putrified by the Sun, Germinateth. But I remember also I have
seen, for a great Rarity, one Rose grow out of another, like Honey-Suckles,
that they call Top and Top-gallants.

Barley, (as appears in the Malting,) being steeped in Water three days, and
afterward the Water drained from it, and the Barley turned upon a dry floare,
will sprout, half an Inch long at least: And if it be let alone, and not
turned, much more; until the Heart be out. Wheat will do the same. Try it
also with Pease, and Beans. This Experiment is not like that of the Orpin, and
Semper-Vine; For there it is of the old Store, for no Water is added; But here
it is nourished from the Water. The Experiment would be further driven: For it
appears already, by that which has been said, that Earth is not necessary
to the first Sprouting of Plants; And we see that Rose-Buds set in Water, will
Blow: Therefore try whether the Sprouts of such Grains may not be raised to a
further Degree; As to an Herb, or Flower, with Water only; Or some small
Commixture, of Earth: For if they will, it should seem by the Experiments
before, both of the Malt, and of the Roses, that they will come far faster on
in Water, than in Earth: For the Nourishment is easilier drawn out of Water,
than out of Earth. It may give some light also, that Drink infused with Flesh,
as that with the Capon, etc. will nourish faster and easilier, than Meat and
Drink together. Try the same Experiment with Roots, as well as with Grains:
as for Example, take a Turnip, and steep it a while, and then dry it, and see
whether it will sprout.

Malt in the Dren^bing will swell; And in such a manner, as after the Putting
forth in Sprouts, and the drying upon the Keele, there will be gained at least
a Bushel in eight, and yet the Sprouts are rubbed off; And there will be a
Bushel of Dust besides the Malt: Which I suppose to be, not only by the
loose, and open Laying of the Parts, but by some Addition of Substance, drawn
from the Water, in which it was steeped.

Malt gathers a Sweetness to the Taste, which appears yet more in the
Wort. The Dulcoration of Things is worthy to be tried to the full; For that
Dulcoration imports a degree to Nourishment: And the Making of Things
Inalimentall, to become Alimentall, may be an Experiment of great Profit, for
Making new Victual.

Most Seeds in the Growing, leave their Husk or Rind about the Root; Onion
will carry it up, that it will be like a Cap upon the Top of the Young Onion.
The Cause may be, for that the Skin or Husk is not easy to break; As we see
by the Pilling of Onions, what a Holding Substance the Skin is.

Plants, that have Curled Leaves, do all abound with Moisture; Which Curling
is Roughness; As in Clary, and Burre. The Second is Curling on the Sides; As
in Lettuce, and Young Cabbage: And the Third is Folding into an Head; As in
Cabbage full grown, and Cabbage-Lettuce.

It is reported, that Fur, and Pine, especially if they be Old and Putrified,
Rotten Woods do, yet in the sudden Breaking they will sparkle like Hard Sugar.

The Roots of Trees do, (some of them,) put downwards deep into Ground; As
the Oak, Pine, Fur, etc. Some spread more toward the Surface of the Earth;
As the Ash, Cypresse-Tree, Oline, etc. The Cause of this latter may be, for
that such Trees as love the Sun, do not willingly descend far into the
Earth; And therefore they are (commonly) Trees, that shoot up much; For in
their Body, their desire of Approach to the Sun, makes them spread the
less. And the same Reason, under Ground, to avoid Recesse from the Sun,
makes them spread the more. And we see it comes to pass in some Trees,
which have been planted too deep in the Ground, that forloue of Approach to
the Sun, they forsake their first Root, and put out another more toward the
Top of the Earth. And we see also, that the Olive is full of Oily Juice; And
Ash makes the best Fire; And Cypress is an Hot Tree. As for the Oak; which
is of the former sort, it loves the Earth, And therefore grows slowly. And
for the Pine, and Fur likewise, they have so much Heat in themselves, as they
need less the Heat of the Sun. There be Herbs also, that have the same
difference; As the Herb they call Morsus Diaboli; Which puts the Root down
so low, as you cannot pull it up without Breaking; Which gave Occasion to the
N^me, and ^^^; For that it was said, it was so wholesome a Root, that the
Devil, when it was gathered, bit ^^ for Enny. And some of the Ancients do
report, that there was a Goodly Fur; (which they desired to remove whole,)
that had a Root under Ground eight Cubits deep; And so the Root came up broken.

It has been observed, tha^ a Branch of a Tree, being Vnberked some Ground,
has grown; Even of such Trees, as if the Branch were set with the Bark on,
they would not grow; yet co^^driwise we see, that a Tree ^ared round in the
Body, above Ground, will die. The Cause may be, for that the Vnbarke Part
draws the Nourishment best, but the Bark continues it only.

Grapes will continue Fresh, and Moist, all Winter long, if you hang them,
Cluster by Cluster, in the Roof of a Warm Room; Especially, it when you
gather the Cluster, you take off with the Cluster some of the Stock.

Reed or Cane is a Watery Plant, and grows not but in the Water; It has these
Properties; That it is Hollow; That it is Knuckled both Stalk, and Root; That
being Dry, it is more Hard and Fragile, than other Wood; That it puts forth
no Boughs. though many Stalks come out of one Root. It differs much in
Greatness; The smallest being fit for Thatching of Houses; And Stopping the
Chinkes of Ships; Better than Glue, or Pitch. The Second Bigness, is used for
Angle-Rods, and Staves; And in China for beating of Offenders upon the Thighs.
The differing Kinds of them are; The Common Reed; The Cassia Fistula; And the
Sugar-Reed. Of all Blants, it boweth the easiest, and rises again. It
seems, that amongst Plants, which are nourished with Mixture of Earth and
Water, it draws most Nourishment from Water; which makes it the Smoothest of
all others in Bark; And the Hollowest in Body.

Sap of Trees, when they are let Blood, is of differing Natures. Some more
Watery and Clear; As that of Vines; of Beeches; of Pears. Some Thick; As
Apples. Some Gummis; As Cherries. Some Frathie, As Elmes. Some Milkie; As ^^^
In Mulberries, the Sap seems to be (almost) toward the Bark only; For if
you cut the Tree, a little into the Bark, with a Stone, it will come forth; If
you pierce it deeper with a Tool, it will be dry. The Trees, which have the
Moistest Iuyces in their Fruit. have commonly the Moistest Sap in their Body;
For the Vines and Pears are very Moist; Apples somes hat more Spongie: The
Milk of the Fig has the Quality of the R^^nea^, to gather Cheese; And so
have certain Sonre Herbs wherewith they make Cheese in Lent.

Timber and Wood are, in some Trees, more Clean, in some more Kn^^tie: And it
is a good Trial. to try it by Speaking at one End, and Laying the ^are at the
Other: For if it he Kn^^tie, the Voice will not pass well. Some have the
Veins more varied, and chamlotted; As Oak, whereof Wainscat it made; Maple,
whereof Trenchers are made. Some more smooth, as Fur, and Walnnt: Some do
more easily breed Worms and Spiders; Some more hardly, as it is said of Irish
Trees: Besides, there be a Number of Differences that concern their Use; As
Oak, Cedar, and Chesu^t, are the best Builders: Some are best for Ploughs
Timber; As Ash; Some for Peers, that are sometimes wet, and sometimes dry; As
Elm: Some for Planchers; As Deal: Some for Tables, Cupboard, and Desks; As
Wannts: Some for Ship Timber; As Oaks that grow in Moist Grounds; For that
makes the Timber Tough, and not apt to rift with Q^d^an^^ Where in English and
Irish Timber are thought ^^ excel; Some for Mosts of Ships; As Fur, and
Pine, because of their Length, Straightness, and Lightness: Some for Pale; As
Oak: Some for Fuel; As Ash: And so of the rest.

The Coming of Trees and Plants in certain Regions, and net in others,
Casual: For many have been translated, and have prospered well; As
Damaske-Roses, that have not been known in England above an hundred years,
and now are so common. But the liking of Plants in certain Soiles, more than
in others, is merely Natural; As the Fur and Pine love the Mountains; The
Poplar; Willow, Sallow, and Alder, love Rivers, and Moist Places: The Ash
loves Coppices; But is best in Standards alone: luniper loves Chalk; And so
do most FruitTrees: Sampire grows but upon Rocks: Reeds and Ofiers grow
where they are washed with Water: The Vine loves Sides of Hills, turning upon
the South-East Sun, etc.

The Putting forth of certain Herbs discovers of what Nature the Ground
where they put forth, is: As Wild Thyme shows good Feeding Ground for
Cattle, Betony and Strawberries show Grounds fit for Wood: Ca^^^mill shows
Mellow Grounds fit for Wheat. Mustard Seed, growing after the Plough, shows
a good Strong Ground also for Wheat: Burnet shows good Meadow: And the like.

There are found, in diverse Countries, some other Plants, that grow Trees and
Plants, besides Misseltes: As in Syria, there is an Herb called Cassytas that
grows out of tall Trees, and windeth it self about the same Tree where it
grows; And sometimes about Thorns. There is a kind of Polypode, that
grows out of Trees, though it windeth not. So likewise an Herb called
Fannes, upon the Wild Oline. And an Herb called Hippopha^^^^ upon the Fullers
Thorn; Which, they say, is good for the Falling Sickness.

It has been ob^rerue^, by ^ome or the Ancients, that howsoever Cold and
Easterly Winds, are thought to be great Enemies to Fruit; yet nevertheless
South Winds are also found to do Hure; Especially in the Blossoming time; And
the more, if Showers follow. It seems, they call forth the Moisture too fast.
The West Winds are the best. It has been observed also that Green and Open
Winters do hurt Trees; Insomuch as if two or three such Winters come together,
Almond-Trees, and some other Trees, will dye. The Cause is the same with the
former, because the Lust of the Earth ouerspendeth it self; Howsoever some
other of the Ancients have commended Warm Winters.

Snowes, lying long, cause a Fruitful Year: For first, they keep in Strength
of the Earth; Secondly, they water the Earth, better than Rain; For in Snow,
the Earth does (as it were) suck the Water, as out of the Teate. Thirdly, the
Moisture of Snow is the finest Moisture; For it is the Froth of the Cloudy
Waters.

Showers, if they come a little before the Ripening of Fruits, do good
Shoculent and Moist Fruits; As Vines, Olives, Pomegranates; Yet it is rather
for Plenty, than for Goodness; For the best Wines are in the Driest Vintages:
Small Showers are likewise good for Corn, so as Parching Heats come not upon
them. Generally, Night-Showers are better than Day-Showers; For that the Sun
follows not so fast upon them. And we see, even in Watring by the Hand, it is
best, in Summer time, to water in the Evening.

Differences of Earths, and the Trial of them, are worthy to be diligently
inquired. The Earth, that with Showers does easiliest Soften, is commended; And
yet some Earth of that kind will be very Dry, and Hard before the Showers. The
Earth that casts up from the Plough, a Great Clod, is not so good, as that,
which casts up a Smaller Clod. The Earth, that puts forth Moss easily,
and may be called Moldy, is not good. The Earth, that smells well upon the
Digging, or Ploughing, is commended; As containing the Juice of Vegetables
almost already prepared. It is thought by some, that the Ends of low
Raine-Bowes, fall more upon one kind of Earth than upon another: As it may
well be; For that that Earth is most Roscide: And therefore it is commended for
a Sign of good Earth. The Poorness of the Herbs, (it is plain,) show the
Poorness of the Earth; And especially if they be in Color more dark: But if
the Herbs show Withered, or Blasted at the Top, it shows the Earth to be very
Cold: And so does the Mossinesse of Trees. The Earth, whereof the Grass is
soon Parched with the Sun, and Toasted, is commonly Forced Earth, and Barren
in his own Nature. The Tender, Chessoine, and Mellow Earth, is the best; Being
mere Mould, between the two Extremes of Clay, and Sand; Especially if it be
not Loamy, and Binding. The Earth, that after Rain, will scarce be Ploughed,
is commonly Fruitful; For it is Cleaning, and full of Juice.

Ancients, that Dust helps the Fruitfulness of Trees; And of Vines, by name:
Insomuch as they catt Dust upon them of purpose. It should seem, that that
Powdring, when a Shower comes, makes a kind of Soyling to the Tree, being
Earth and Water, finely laid on. And they note, that Countries, where the
Fields and Ways are Dusty, bear the best Vines.

Ancients, for an Excellent Help to Trees, to lay the Stalks and Leaves of
Lupines about the Roots; Or to Plough them into the Ground, where you will sow
Corn. The Burning also of the Cuttings of Vines, and Casting them upon land,
does much Good. And it was generally received of old, that the Dunging of
Grounds, when the West Wind blows, and in the Decrease of the Moon, does
greatly help; The Earth (as it seems) being then more thirsty, and open, to
receive the Dung.

Grafting of Vines upon Vines, (as I take it,) is not now in use: The Ancients
had it, and that three ways: The First was Insition, which is the Ordinary
Manner of Grafting: The Second was Terebration, through the Middle of the
Stock, and Putting in the Cions there: And the Third was Paring of two Vines,
that grow together, to the Marrow, and Binding them close.

Diseases and ill Accidents of Corn, are worthy to be enquired; And would be
more worthy to be enquired, if it were in Men's Power to help them; Whereas
many of them are not to be remedied. The Mildew is one of the Greatest; which
(out of question) comes by Closeness of Air; And therefore in Hills, or
large Champaigne Grounds, it seldom comes; Such as is with us York's Worad.
This cannot be remedied, otherwise than that in Countries of Small Enclosure,
the Grounds be turned into larger Fields: Which I have known to do good in
some Farms. Another Disease is the Putting forth of Wild Oats, whereinto
Corn oftentimes, (especially Barley,) does degenerate. It happens chiefly
from the Weakness of the Grain that is sown; For if it be either too Old, or
Moldy, it will bring forth Wild Oats. Another Disease is the Saciety of the
Ground; For if you sow one Ground still with the same Corn, (I mean not the
same Corn that grew upon the same Ground,) but the same Kind of Grain; (As
Wheat, Barley, etc.) it will prosper but poorly: Therefore besides the Resting
of the Ground, you must vary the Seed. Another ill Accident is, from the Winds,
which hurt at two times; At the Flowring, by Shaking off the Flowers; And at
the full Ripening, by Shaking out the Corn. Another ill Accident is, Drouth,
at the Spindling of the Corn; Which with us is rate; But in Hotter Countries,
common: Insomuch as the Word, Calamitas, was first derived from Calamus, when
the Corn could not get out of the Stalk. Another ill Accident is, Ouer-wet at
Sowing-Time; which with us breeds much Dearth; Insomuch as the Corn never
comes up; And (many times) they are forced to resow Sommer-Corne, where they
sowed Winter-Corne. Another ill Accident is Bitter Frosts, continued, without
Snow; Especially in the Beginning of the Winter, after the Seed is new Sown.
Another Disease is Worms; which sometimes breed in the Root, and happen upon
Hot Suns, and Showers, immediately after the Sowing; And another Worm
breeds in the Ear it Self; Especially when Hot Suns break often out of
Clouds. Another Disease is Weeds; And they are such, as either Choke, and
Ouershadow the Corn, and bear it down; Or starve the Corn, and deceive it
of Nourishment. Another Disease is, Ouer-Rancknesse of the Corn; Which they
use to remedy, by Mowing it after it is come up; Or putting Sheep into it.
Another ill Accident is Laying of Corn with great Raines, near, or in
Harnest. Another ill Accident is, if the Seed happen to have touched Oil, or
any Thing, that is Fat; For those Substances have an Antipathy with Nourishment
of Water.

The Remedies of the Diseases of Corn have been observed as follows.
Steeping of the Grain, before Sowing, a little time in Wine, is thought a
Presernatiue: The Mingling of Seed-Corne with Ashes, is thought to be good: The
Sowing at the Wane of the Moon, is thought to make the Corn sound: It has
not been practiced, but it is thought to be of use, to make some Miscellane in
Corn; As if you sow a few Beans with Wheat, your Wheat will be the better. It
has been observed, that the Sowing of Corn with Honsleeke, does good. Though
Grain, that touches Oil, or Fat, receives hurt, yet the Steeping of it, in
the Dregs of Oil, when it begins to Putrify, (which they call Amurca,) is
thought to assure it against Worms. It is reported also, that it Corn be
Mowed, it will make the Grain Longer, but Emptier, and having More of the
Husk.

Seed of a year old, is the Best; And of two or three years is Worse, And
that which is more Old, is quite Barren; Though (no doubt) some Seeds and
Grains last better than others. The Corn, which in the Vanning lies lowest,
is the best; And the Corn, which broken or bitten retains a little
Yellowness, is better than that which is very White.

Roots of Herbs, the Root of Sorrel goes the furthest into the Earth;
Insomuch as it has bin known to go three Cubits deep; And that it is the
Root that continues fit (longest) to be set again, of any Root that grows.
It is a Cold and Acide Herb, that (as it seems) loves the Earth, and is not
much drawn by the Sun.

Herbs like best, being watered with Salt Water; As Radish, Beet, Rue,
Pennyroyall; This Trial would be extended to some other Herbs; Especially such
as are Strong; As Tarragon, Mustard Seed, Rocket, and the like.

Poisonous Beasts affect Odorate and Wholesome Herbs; As that the Snake loves
Fennel; That the Toad will be much under Sage; That Frogs will be in Cinque
foil. It may be, it is rather the Shade, or other Couerture, that they take
liking in, than the Virtue of the Herb.

Corn, Herbs, or Fruits, are like to be in Plenty, or Scarcity, by some Signs
and Prognostics. in the Beginning of the Year: For as for those, that are
like to be in Plenty, they may be bargained for, upon the Ground; As the Old
Relation was of Thales; who to show how easy it was for a Philosopher to be
rich, when he foresaw a great Plenty of Olives, made a Monopoly of them. And
for Scarcity, Men may make Profit in keeping better the Old Store. Long
Continuance of Snow is believed to make a Fruitful Year of Corn: An Early
Winter, or a very Late Winter, a Barren Year of Corn: An Open and Serene
Winter, an ill Year of Fruit: These we have partly touched before: But other
Prognostickes of like Nature are diligently to be enquired.

Plants, Singularities, wherein they differ from all Other; The Olive has the
Oily Part, only on the Outside; Whereas all other Fruits have it in the Nut, or
Kernel. The Fur has (in effect) no Stone, Nut, nor Kernest; Except you will
count the little Grains Kernells. The Pom granate and Pine Apple have only,
amongst Fruits, Grains distinct in several Cells. No Herbs have Curled
Leaves, but Cabbage, and Cabbage-Lettuce. None have double Leaves, one
belonging to the Stalk, another to the Fruit or Seed, but the Artichoke: No
Flower has that kind of Spread that the Woodbine has. This may be a large
Field of Contemplation; For it shows that in the Frame of Nature, there is,
in the Producing of some Species, a Composition of Matter, which happens often,
and may be much diuersified: In others, such as happens rarely, and admits
little Variety: For so it is likewise in Beasts: Dogs have a Resemblance with
Wolnes, and Foxes; Horses with Asses, Kine with Bustes; Hares with Coneyes;
etc. And so in Birds: Kites and Kastrells have a Resemblance with Hawks;
Common-Doues with Ring-Dea^s, and Tortles; Black-Birds with Thrushes, and
Manisses; Crows with Bauens, Dawes, and Choughas, etc. But Elephants, and
Swine amongst Beasts; And the Bird of Paradise, and the Peacocke amongst Birds;
And some few others; have sea^^^ any other Species, that have Affinity with
them.

We leave the Description of Plants, and their Virtues, to Herballs, and other
like Books of Natural History: Wherein Men's Diligence has b^^^^ great, even
to Curiosity: For our Experiments are only such as do ever ascend a Degree,
to the Deriuing of Causes, and Extracting of Axioms, which, we are not
ignorant, but that some, both of the Ancient, and Modeme Writers, have also
labored, But their Causes, and Axioms, are so full of Imagination, and so
infected with the old Received Theories, as they are mere Inquinations of
Experience, and Concoct it not.

It has been observed by some of the Ancients, that Skins, (especially of
^^ams, newly pulled off, and applied to the Wounds of Stripts, do keep them
from Swelling, and Exulcerating; And likewise Head them, and Close them up;
And that the Whites of Eggs do the same. Experiment Solitary touching Healing
of Wounds.
The Cause is a Temperate Conglutination; For both Bodies are Glommy, and
Viscous, and do bridle the Des^uxe of Humors to the Hu^^^, without Penning
them in too much.

You may turn (almost) all Flesh into a ^^^ ^^^ ^^^, if you take Flesh, and
cut it into Pieces, and put the Pieces into a Glass covered with Parchment;
And so let the Glass stand six or seven Hours ^^^ Boiling Water. Experiment
Solitary, touching ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^
It may be an Experiment of Profit, for Making of Fat, or Grease, for many
uses; But then it must be of such Flesh as is not Edible; As Horses, Dogs,
Bears, Foxes, Bodgers, etc.

It is reported by one of the Ancients, that New Wine, put into Vessels well
stopped, and the Vessels let down into the Sea, will accelerate very much,
the Making of them Ripe, and Potable. Experiment Solitary, touching Repening of
D^^nk before the Time.
The same would be Wort.

Beasts are more Hairy than Men; And Savage Man more than Civil; And the
Plumage of Birds exceeds the Pilosity of Beasts. Experiment Solitary,
touching Pilosity and Plumage.
The Cause of the Smoothness in Men, is not any Abundance of Heat, and
Moisture, Pilosity; But there is requisite to Pilosity, not so much Heat and
Moisture, as Excrementitious Heat and Moisture: (For whatsoever assimilateth,
goes not into the Hair:) And Excrementitious Moisture abounds most in
Beasts, and Men that are more Savage. Much the same Reason is there of the
Plumage of Birds; For Birds assimilate less, and excerne more than Beasts: For
their Excrements are ever liquid, and their Flesh (generally) more dry:
Besides, they have not Instruments for Urine; And so all the Excrementitious
Moisture goes into the Feathers: And therefore it is no Marvel, though Birds
be commonly better Meat than Beasts, because their Flesh does assimilate more
finely, and secerneth more subtly. Again, the Head of Man has Hair upon
the first Birth, which no other Part of the Body has. The Cause may be Want of
Perspiration: For Much of the Matter of Hair, in the other Parts of the Body,
goes forth by Insensible Perspiration; And besides, the Skull being of a more
solid Substance, nourishes and assimilateth less, and excerneth more: And so
likewise does the Chinne; We see also that Hair comes not upon the Palms of
the Hands, nor Soales of the Feet; Which are Parts more Perspirable. And
Children likewise are not Hairy, for that their Skins are more Perspirable.

Birds are of Swifter Motion than Beasts: For the Flight of many Birds is
Swifter, than the Race of any Beasts. Experiment Solitary, touching the
Quickness of Motion in Birds.
The Cause is, for that the Spirits in Birds, are in greater Proportion, in
comparison of the Bulk of their Body, than in Beasts: For as for the Reason
that some give, that they are partly Carried, whereas Beasts go, that is
Nothing; For by that Carriage also, is not without Labor of the Wing.

The Sea is Clearer, when the North wind blows, than when the South Wind.
Experiment Solitary, touching the different Clear enesse of the Sea.
The Cause is, for that Salt Water has a little Oylinesse in the Surface
thereof; As appears in very Hot Days: And again, for that the Southern
Wind relaxeth the Water somewhat; As no Water Boiling Cold Water.

Fire burns Wood, making it first Luminous; Then Black and Brittle: And
lastly, Broken and Incinerate: Sealding Water does none of these. Experiment
Solitary touching the different Heats of Fire and Boiling Water.
The Cause is, for that by Fire, the Spirit of the Body is first Refined, and
Emitted; Whereof the Refining, be Attenuation causes the Light; And the
Emission, first the Fragilitie, and after the Dissolution into Ashes: Neither
does any other Body enter: But in Water the Spirit of the Body is not Refined
so much; And besides Part of the Water enters; Which does increase the Spirit,
and in a degree extinguish it: Therefore we see that Hot Water will quench
Fire. And again we see, that in Bodies, wherein the Water does not much
enter, but only the Heat passes, Hot Water works the Effects of Fire: As in
Eggs Boiled, and Roasted, (into which the Water enters not at all,) there is
scarce difference to be discerned; But in Fruit, and Flesh, whereinto the Water
enters, in some part, there is much more difference.

The Bottom of a Vessel of Boiling Water, (as has been observed,) is not
very much Heated; So as Men may put their Hand under the Vessel, and remove
it. Experiment Solitary touching the Qualification of Heat by Moisture.
The Cause is, for that the Moisture of Water, as it quenches Coals, where it
enters; So it does allay Heat, where it touches: Moisture, although it does
not pass through Bodies, without Communication of some Substance, (As Heat and
Cold do;) yet it works manifest Effects; not by Entrance of the Body, but by
Qualifying of the Heat, and Cold; As we see in this Instance: And we see
likewise, that the Water of Things distilled in Water, (which they call the
Bath,) differs not much from the Water of Things Distilled by Fire: We see
also, that Pewter-Dishes, with Water in them, will not Melt easily; But without
it, they will: Nay we see more, that Butter, or Oil, which in themselves are
Inflammable, yet by Virtue of their Moisture, will do the like.

It has been noted by the Ancients, that it is dangerous to Pick ones Ear,
whilst he Yawneth. Experiment Solitary, touching Yawning.
The Cause is, for that in Yawning, the Inner Parchment of the Ear is
extended, by the Drawing in of the Spirit, and Breath; For in Yawning, and
Sighing both, the Spirit is first strongly Drawn in, and then strongly
Expelled.

It has been observed by the Ancients, that Sneezing does cease the Hiccough.
Experiment Solitary, touching the Hiccough.
The Cause is, for that the Motion of the Hiccough, is a Lifting up of the
Stomach: which Sneezing does somewhat depresse, and divert the Motion another
way. For first we see, that the Hiccough comes of Fullness of Meat,
(especially in Children, which causes an Extension of the Stomach: We see
also, it is caused by Acide Meats, or Drinks, which is by the Pricking of the
Stomach: And this Motion is ceased, either by Diuersion; Or by Detention of
the Spirits: Diuersion, as in Sneezing; Detention, as we see Holding of the
Breath, does help somewhat to cease the Hiccough: And putting a Man into an
Earnest Study does the like; As is commonly used: And Vinegar put to the
Nostbrills, or Gargarized, does it also; For that it is Astringent, and
inhibiteth the Motion of the Spirits.

Looking against the Sun, does induce Sneezing. Experiment Solitary, touching
Sneezing
The Cause; is not the Heating of the Nosthrills; For then the Holding up of
the Nosthrills against the Sun, though one Wink, would do it, But the
Drawing Moisture of the Brain: For it will make the Eyes, run with Water; And
the Drawing of Moisture to the Eyes, does draw it to the Nosthrills, by Motion
of Consent; And so follows Sneezing; As contrariwise, the Tickling of the
Nosthrills within, does draw the Moisture to the Nosthrills, and to the Eyes by
Consent; For they also will Water. But yet, it has been observed, that if one
be about to Sneeze, the Rubbing of the Eyes, till they run with Water, will
prevent it. Where of the Cause is, for that the Humor, which was descending to
the Nosthrills, is diuerted to the Eyes.

The Teeth are more, by Cold Drink, or the like, affected, than the other
Parts. Experiment Solitary, touching the Tenderness of the Teeth.
The Cause is double: The One, for that the Resistance of Bone to Cold, is
greater than of Flesh; for that Flesh shrinketh, but the Bone resists,
whereby the Cold becomes more eager: The Other is, Teeth are Parts without
Blood; Whereas Blood helps to qualify the Cold: And therefore we see, that
the Sinnewes are much affected with Cold; For that they are Parts without
Blood: So the Bones in Sharp Colds wax Brittle; And therefore, it has been
seen, that all Contusions of Bones, in Hard Weather, are more difficult to
Cure.

It has been noted, that the Tongue receives, more easily, Tokens of
Diseases, than the other Parts; As of Heats within, which appear most in the
Blackness of the Tongue. Experiment Solitary, touching the Tongue.
Again, Pied Cattle are spotted in their Tongues, etc. The Cause is, (no
doubt,) the Tenderness of the Part; which thereby receives more easily all
Alterations, than any other Parts of the Flesh.

When the Mouth is out of Taste, it makes Things taste, sometimes Salt;
Chiefly Bitter; And sometimes Loathsome; But never Sweet. Experiment Solitary,
touching the Taste.
The Cause is, the Corrupting of the Moisture about the Tongue; Which many
Bitter, and Salt, and Loathsome; But Sweet never; For the rest are Degrees of
Corruption.

It was observed in the Great Plague of the last Year, that there were seen,
in diverse Ditches, and low Grounds, about London, many Toads, that had Tails,
two or three Inches long, at the least; Whereas Toads (usually) have no Tails
at all. Experiment Solitary touching some Prognostics of Pestilenitall Seasons.
Which argues a great Disposition to Putrefaction in the Soil, and Air. It
is reported likewise, that Roots, (such as Carrets, and Parsuips,) are more
Sweet, and Lushious, in Infectious Years, than in other Years.

Wife Physicians should with all diligence inquire, what Simples Nature Subtle
Parts, without any Mordication, or Acrimony: For they Undermine that which is
Hard; They open that which is Stopped, and Shut; And they expel that which is
Offensive, gently, without too much Perturbation. Experiment Solitary touching
Special Simples for Medicines.
Of this Kind are Elder-Flowers, which therefore are Proper for the Stone: Of
this kind is the DwarfePine; which is Proper for the laundies: Of this kind
is Harts-Horne; which is Proper for Agues, and Infections: Of this kind is
Piony; which is Proper for Stoppings in the Head: Of this kind is Fumitory;
which is Proper for the Spl^^^e: And a Number of Others. Generally, diverse
Creatures bred of Putrefaction, though they be somewhat loathsome to take, are
of this kind; As Earth-wormes, Timber-Sowes, Snailes, etc. And I conceive,
that the Trechischs of Vipers, (which are so much magnified,) and the Flesh of
Snakes some ways condited, and corrected, (which of late are grown into some
Credit,) are of the same Nature. So the Parts of Beasts Putrified; (as
Castereum, and Musk, which have extreme Subtle Parts,) are to be placed
amongst them. We see also that Patrefactions of Plants, (as Agarichs, and jews
^^^^. are of greatest Virtue. The Cause is, for that Putrefection is the
Subtillest of all Motions, in the Parts of Bodies: And since we cannot take
down the Lines of Living Creatures, (which some of the ^^^ say (If they could
be taken down,) would make us Immortal;) the Next is for Subtilty of
Operation, to take Bodies Putresied; Such as may be safely taken.

It has been observed by the Ancients, that Much use of Venus does Dim the
Sight; And yet Eunuchs, which are unable to generate, are (nevertheless) also
Dim Sighted. Experiments in Consort touching Venus.
The Cause of Dimnesse of Sight, in the Former, is the Expense of Spirts; In
the Latter, the Ouer-moisture Brain: For the Ouer-moisture of the Brain does
thicken the Spirits Visuall. and obstructeth their Passages; As we see by the
Decay, in the Sight, in Age; Where also the Diminution of the Spirits
concurreth as another Cause: we see also that Blindness comes by Rheumes,
and ^^^. Now in ^^^. there are all the Notes of Moisture; As the Swelling of
their Thighs, the Looseness of their Belly, the Smoothness of their Skin,
etc.

The Pleasure in the Act of Venus is the greatest of the Pleasures of Senses:
The Matching of it with Itch is improper; though that also be Pleasing to the
touch. But the Conses are Profound. First, all the Organe of the Senses
qualify the Nations of the Spirits; And make so many Several Species of
Motions, and Pleasures or Displeasures thereupon, as there be Dinersitics of
Organs. The Instruments of Sight, Hearing, Taste, and Smell, are of several
frame; And so are the Parts for Generation. Therefore Sealiger does well, to
make the Pleasure of Generation a Sixth Sense; And if there were any other
differing Organs, and Qualified Perfraction for the spirits to pass; there
would be more than the Five Senses; Neither do we well know, whether some
Beasts, and Birds, have not Senses that we know not: And the very some of Dogs
is almost a sense it self. Secondly, the Pleasures of the Touch, are greater
and deeper, than those of the other Senses; As we see in Warming upon Cold; Or
Refrigeration upon Heat: For as the Pains of the Touch, are greater than the
Offenses of other Sense; So likewise are the Pleasures. It is true, that the
Affecting of the Spirits immediately, and (as it were) without an Organ, is of
the greatest Pleasure; Which is but in two things: Sweet Smells; And Wine, and
the like Sweet Vapors. For Smells, we see their great and sudden Effect in
fetching Men again, when they swoune: For Drink, it is certain, that the
Pleasure of Drunkenness, is next the Pleasure of Venus: And Great Joys
(likewise) make the Spirits move, and touch themselves: And the pleasure of
Venus is somewhat of the same Kind.

Men are more inclined to Venus in the Winter, and Women in the Summer. The
Cause is, for that the Spirits, in a Body more Hot and dry, (as the Spirits of
Men are,) by the Summer are more exhaled, and dissipated; And in the Winter
more condensed, and kept entire: But in Bodies that are Cold and Moist, (as
Women's are,) the Summer does Cherish the Spirits, and calls them forth; the
Winter does dull them. Furthermore, the Abstinence or Intermission of the Use
of Venus, in Moist and Well Habituate Bodies, breeds a Number of Diseases;
And especially dangerous Impostumations. The Reason is evident; For that it is
a Principal Euacuation, especially of the Spirits: For of the Spirits, there
is scarce any Euacuation, but in Venus, and Exercise. And therefore the
Omission of either of them, breeds all Diseases of Repletion.

The Nature of Vivification is very worthy the Enquiry: And as the Nature of
Things, is commonly better perceived, in Small, than in Great, and in
imperfect, than in perfect, and in Parts, than in whole: So the Nature of
Vivification is best enquired in Creatures bred of Putrefaction. Experiments in
Consort touching the Insecta.
The Contemplation whereof has many Excellent Fruits. First, in Disclosing the
Original of of Vivification. Secondly, in Disclosing the Original of
Figuration. Thirdly, in Disclosing many Things in the Nature of Perfect
Creatures, which in them lie more hidden. And Fourthly, in Traducing, by way of
Operation, some Observations in the Insecta, to work Effects upon Perfect
Creatures. Note that the word Insecta, agrees not with the Matter, but we ever
use it for Breuities sake, intending by it Creatures bred of Putrefaction.

Insecta are found to breed out of several Matters: Some breed of Mud, or
Dung; As the Earth-wormes, Eeles, Snakes, etc. For they are both Putrefactions:
For Water in Mud does Puttifie, as not able to Preserve it self: And for Dung,
all Excrements are the Refuse and Putrefactions of Nourishment. Some breed in
Wood, both Growing, and Cut down. Quare in what Woods most, and at what
Seasons? We see that the Worms with many Feet, which round themselves into
Balls, are bred chiefly under Logs of Timber, but not in the Timber; And they
are said to be found also, (many times,) in Gardens, where no Logs are. But it
seems their Generation requires a Couerture, both from Sun, and Rain, or
Dew; As the Timber is; And therefore they are not Venomous, but (contrariwise)
are held by the Physicians to clarify the Blood. It is observed also that
Cimices are found in the Holes of Bed-Sides. Some breed in the Hair of Living
Creatures; As Lice, and Tikes; which are bred by the Sweat close kept, and
somewhat are fied by the Hair. The Excrements of Living Creatures, do not only
breed Insecta, when they are Excerned, but also while they are in the Body; As
in Worms, whereto Children are most subject, and are chiefly in the Guts. And
it has been lately observed by Physicians, that in many Pestilent Diseases,
there are Worms found in the upper Parts of the Body, where Excrements are
not, but only Humors Putrified. Fleas breed Principally of Straw or Mass,
where there has been a little Moisture; Or the Chamber and Bed-straw kept
close, and not Aired. It is received that they are killed by Strewing
Worme-wood in the Rooms. And it is truly observed, that Bitter Things are apt,
rather to kill, than engender Putrefaction; And they be Things, that are Fat,
or Sweet, that are aptest to Putrify. There is a Worm, that breeds in
Meal, of the shape of a large white Magget, which is given as a great Dainty
to Nightingales. The Moath breeds upon Cloth, and other Lanifices; Especially
if they be laid up dankish, and wet. It delights to be about the Flame of a
Candle. There is a Worm called a Wenill, brad under Ground, and that feeds
upon Roots; As Parsnips, Carrets, etc. Some breed in Waters, especially shaded,
but they must be Standing-waters; As the Water-Spider, that has six Legs. The
Fly called the Oad-fly, breeds of somewhat that Swimmeth upon the Top of the
Water, and is most about Ponds. There is a Worm that breeds of the Dregs of
Wine Decayed; which afterward, (as is observed by some of the Ancients,)
turns into a Gnat. It has bin observed by the Ancients, that there is a
Worm that breeds in old Snow, and is of Color Reddish, and dull of Motion,
and dies soon after it comes out of Snow. Which should show, that Snow has
in it a secret Warmth; For else it could hardly Viuisie. And the Reason of the
Dying of the Worm, may be the sudden Exhaling of that little Spirit, as soon
as it comes out of the Cold, which had shut it in. For as Butterflies quicken
with Heat, which were benumbed with Cold; So Spirits may exhale with Heat,
which were Preserved in Cold. It is affirmed both by Ancient and Modern
Observation, that in Furnaces of Copper, and Brass, where Chalcites, (which is
Vitrioll,) is often cast in, to mend the working, there rises suddenly a Fly,
which sometimes moves, as if it took hold on the walls of the Furnace;
Sometimes is seen moving in the Fire below; And dies presently, as soon as
it is out of the Furnace. Which is a Noble Instance, and worthy to be weighed;
for it shows that as well Violent Heat of Fire, as the Gentle Heat of Living
Creatures, will Viuifie, if it have Matter Proportionable. Now the great Axiom
of Vivification is, that there must be Heat to dilate the Spirit of the Body;
An Active Spirit to be dilated; Matter Viscous or Tenacious, to hold in the
Spirit; And that Matter to be put forth, and Figured. Now a Spirit dilated by
so ardent a Fire, as that of the Furnace, as soon as ever it cools never so
little, congealeth presently. And (no doubt) this Action is furthered by the
Chalcites, which has a Spirit, that will Put forth and germinate, as we see in
Chymicall Trialls. Briefly, most Things Putrified bring forth Insecta of
several Names; But we will not take upon us now, to Enumerate them all.

Insecta have been noted by the Ancients, to feed little: But this has not
been diligently observed; For Grasshoppers eat up the Green of whole
Countries; And Silke-wormes devour Leaves swiftly; And Ants make great
Provision. It is true, that Creatures, that Sleep and rest much, Eat little;
As Dormise, and Bats, etc. They are all without Blood: Which may be, for that
the Juice of their Bodies, is almost all one; Not Blood, and Flesh, and Skin,
and Bone, as in Perfect Creatures; The Integrall Parts have Extreme Variety,
but the Similar Parts little. It is true, that they have, (some of them,) a
Disphragme, and an Intestine; And they have all Skins; Which in most of the
Insecta are cast often. They are not (generally) of long Life: Yet Bees have
been known to live seven years: And Snakes are thought, the rather for the
Casting of their Spoils, to live till they be Old: And Eeles, which many times
breed of Putrefaction, will live and grow very long: And those that Enterchange
from Worms to Flies in the Summer, and from Flies to Worms in the Winter,
have been kept in Boxes our kyears at the least. Yet there are certain Flies,
that are called Ephemera, that live but a day. The Cause is, the Exility of the
Spirit; Or perhaps the Absence of the Sun; For that if they were brought in,
or kept close, they might live longer. Many of the Insecta, (as Butterflies,
and other Flies,) revive easily, when they seem dead, being brought to the
Sun, or Fire, The Cause whereof is, the Diffusion of the Vital Spirit, and
the Easy Dilating of it by a little Heat. They stir a good while, after
their Heads are off, or that they be cut in Pecces; Which is caused also, for
that their Vital Spirits are more diffused thorow-out all their Parts, and
less confined to Organs, than in Perfect Creatures.

Insecta have Voluntary Motion, and therefore Imagination; And whereas some of
the Ancients have said, that their Motion is Indeterminate, and their
Imagination Indefinite, it is negligently observed; For Arts go right forwards
to their Hills; And Bees do (admirably) know the way, from a Flowery Heath, two
or three Miles off, to their Hiues. It may be, Gnats, and Flies, have their
Imagination more mutable, and giddy, as Small Birds likewise have. It is said
by some of the Ancients, that they have only the Sense of Feeling; which is
manifestly untrue: For if they go forthright to a Place, they must needs have
Sight: Besides they delight more in one Flower, or Herb, than in another, and
therefore have Taste: And Bees are called with Sound upon Brass, and therefore
they have Hearing: Which shows likewise that though their Spirit be diffused,
yet there is a Seat of their Senses in their Head.

Other Observations concerning the Insecta, together with the Enumeration of
them, we refer to that place, where we mean to handle the Title of
Animal's in general.

A Man Leapeth better with Weights, in his Hands, than without. Experiment
Solitary touching Leaping.
The Cause is, for that the Weight, (if it be proportionable,) strengthens the
Sinneues, by Contracting them. For otherwise, where no Contraction Weight
hinders. As we see in Horse-Races, Men are curious to foresee, that there
be not the least Weight, upon the one Horse, more than upon the other. In
Leaping with Weights, the Arms are first cast backwards, and then forwards,
with so much the greater Force: For the Hands go backward before they take
their Raise. Quaere, if the contrary Motion of the Spirits, immediately before
the Motion we intend, does not cause the Spirits, as it were, to break forth
with more Force: As Breath also drawn, and kept in, comes forth more
forcibly: And in Casting of any Thing, the Arms, to make a greater Swing, are
first cast backward.

Of Musical Tones, and Unequal Sounds, we have spoken before; But touching
the Pleasure, and Displeasure of the Senses, not so fully. Experiment Solitary,
touching the Pleasures, and Displeasures of the Senses, especially of Hearing.
Harsh Sounds, as of a Saw, when it is sharpened; Grinding of one Stone
against another; Squeaking, or Skriching Noise; make a Shiuering or Horror in
the Body, and set the Teeth on edge. The Cause is, for that the Objects of the
Ear, do affect the Spirits (immediately) most Pleasure and Offense. We see,
there is no Color that affects the Eye much with Displeasure: There be
Sights, that are Horrible, because they excite the Memory of Things that are
Odious, or Fearful; But the same Things Painted do little affect. As for
Smells, Tastes, and Touches, they be Things that do affect, by a
Participation, or Impulsion of the Body, of the Object. So it is Sound alone,
that does immediately, and incorporeally, affect most: This is most manifest in
Music; and Concords and Discords in Music: For all Sounds, whether they be
sharp, or Flat, if they be Sweet, have a Roundnesse and Equality; And if they
be Harsh, are Unequal: For a Discord it self is but a Harshnesse of Diners
Sounds Meeting. It is true, that Inequality, not Stayed upon, but Passing, is
rather an Increase of Sweetness: As in the Purling of a Wreathed String; And
in the Rancity of a Trumpet; And in the Nightinghale-Pipe of a Regal; And in a
Discord straight falling upon a Concord: But if you stay upon it, it is
Offensive; And therefore, there be these three Degrees of Pleasing, and
Displeasing in Sounds; Sweet Sounds; Discords and Harsh Sounds, which we call
by diverse Names, as Skriching, or Grating, such as we now speak of. As for
the Setting of the Teeth on Edge, we see plainly, what an Intercourse there is,
between the Teeth, and the Organ of the Hearing, by the Taking of the End of a
Bow, between the Teeth, and Striking upon the String.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
VIII. Century.
THere be Mineralls, and Fossiles, in great Variety; But of Veins of Earth
Medicinal, Experiment Solitary touching Veins of Medicinal Earth.
but few; The Chief are, Terra Lemnia, Terra Sigillata communis, and Bolus
Arminus: Whereof Terra Lemnia is the Chief. The Virtues of them are, for
Curing of Wounds, Stanching of Blood, Stopping of Flaxes and Rheumes, and
Arresting the Spreading of Poison, Infection, and Putrefaction: And they have,
of all other Simples, the Perfectest and Purest Quality of Drying, with little
or no Mixture of any other Quality. Yet it is true, that the Bole-Arminicke is
the most Cold of them; And that Terra Lemnia is the most Hot; For which Cause,
the Island Lemnos, where it is dug, was in the Old Fabulous Ages consecrated
to Vulcan.

About the Bottom of the Straights are gathered great Quantities of Sponges,
Experiment Solitary, touching the Growth of Sponges.
which are gathered from the sides of Rocks, being as it were a large, but
tough, Moss. It is the more to be noted, because that there be but few
Substances, Plant-like, that grow deep within the Sea; For they are gathered
sometimes fifteen Fathom deep; And when they are laid on Shore, they seem
to be of great Bulk; But crushed together, will be transported in a very small
Room.

It seems, that Fish, that are used to the Salt Water, do nevertheless
delight more in Fresh. Experiment Solitary touching Seafish put in Fish Waters.
We see, that Salmons, and Smelts, love to get into Rivers, though it be
against the Stream. At the Haven of Constantinople, you shall have great
Quantities of Fish that come from the Euxine-Sea; that when they come into the
Fresh Water, do inebriate and turn up their Bellies; So as you may take them
with your Hand. I doubt, there has not been sufficient Experiment made of
Putting Seafish into Fresh Water, Ponds, and Pooles. It is a Thing of great
Use, and Pleasure: For so you may have them new at some good distance from the
Sea: And besides, it may be, the Fish will eat the pleasanter, and may fall to
breed: And it is said that Colchester Oysters, which are put into Pits, where
the Sea goes and comes, (but yet so, that there is a Fresh Water Coming
also to them, when the Sea voideth,) become by that means Fatter, and more
Grown.

The Turkish-Bow gives a very Forcible Shoot; Insomuch as it has been
known, that the Arrow has pierced a Stecle Target, or a Piece of Brass of
two Inches thick: But that which is more strange, the Arrow, if it be Headed
with Wood, has been known to pierce through a Wood, of eight Inches thick.
And it is certain, that we had in use at one time, for Sea Fight, short
Arrows, which they called Sprights, without any other Heads, save Wood
sharpened; which were discharged out of Muskets, and would pierce through the
Sides of Ships, where a Bullet would not pierce. But this depends upon one of
the greatest Secrets in all Nature; Which is, that Similitude of Substance
Experiment Solitary, touching Attraction by Simulitude of Substance.
will cause Attraction, where the Body is wholly freed from the Motion of
Gravity: For if that were taken away, Lead would draw Lead, and Gold would
draw Gold, and Iron would draw Iron, without the help of the Lodestone. But
this same Motion of Weight or Gravity, (which is a mere Motion of the Matter,
and has no Affinity with the Form, or Kind,) does kill the other Motion,
except it self be killed by a violent Motion; As in these Instances of
Arrows; For then the Motion of Attraction by Similitude of Substance,
begins to show it self. But we shall handle this Point of Nature fully in
due Place.

They have in Turkey, and the East, certain Confections, which they call
Seruetts, which are like to Candied Conserues; And are made of Sugar and
Limons, or Sugar and Citrons, or Sugar and Violets, and some other Flowers; And
some Mixture of Amber for the more delicate Persons; Water, and thereof make
their Drink because they are forbidden Wine by their Law. Experiment Solitary,
touching certain Drinks in Turkey.
But I do much marvel that no Englishman, or Dutehman, or German, does set up
Brewing in Constantinople; Considering they have such Quantity of Barley. For
as so the general Sort of Men, Frugalitie may be the Cause of Drinking Water;
For that it is no small Saving, to pay nothing for ones Drink: But the better
Sort might well be at the Cost. And yet I wonder the less at it, because I
see France, Italy, or Spain, have not taken into use, Beer, or Ale; Which
(perhaps) if they did, would better both their Healths, and their Complexions.
It is likely it would be Matter of great Gain to any, that should begin it in
Turkey.

In Bathing in Hot Water, Sweat (nevertheless) comes not in the Parts under
the Water. Experiments in Consort, touching Sweat.
The Cause is; First, for that Sweat is a Kind of Colliquation. And that Kind
of Colliquation is not made, either by an Ouer-Drie Heat, or an Ouer-Moist
Heat. For Ouer-Moisture does somewhat extinguish the Heat; As we see that even
Hot Water quenches Fire: And Ouer-Drie Heat shuts the Pores: And therefore
Men will sooner Sweat covered before the Sun, or Fire, than if they stood
Naked; And Earthen Bottles, filled with Hot Water, do provoke, in Bed, a Sweat
more daintily, than Bricke-bats Hot. Secondly, Hot Water does cause Euaporation
from the Skin; So as it spends the Matter, in those Parts under the Water,
before it issues in Sweat. Again, Sweat comes more plentifully, if the Heat
be increased by Degrees, than if it be greatest at first, or equal. The Cause
is, for that the Pores are better opened by a Gentle Heat, than by a more
Violent; And by their opening the Sweat issues more abundantly. And therefore
Physicians may do well, when they provoke Sweat in Bed, by Bottles, with a
Decoction of Sudorisicke Herbs in Hot Water, to make two Degrees of Heat in the
Bottles; And to lay in the Bed, the less Heated first, and after half an
Hour the more Heated.

Sweat is Salt in Taste; The Cause is, for that, that Part of the Nourishment,
Fresh and Sweet, turns into Blood, and Flesh; And the Sweat is only that Part
which is Separate, and Excerned. Blood also Raw has some Saltness, more than
Flesh; because the Assimilation into Flesh, is not without a little and subtle
Excretion from the Blood.

Sweat comes forth more out of the Upper Parts of the Body, than Lower; The
Reason is, because those Parts are more replenished with Spirits; And the
Spirits are they that put forth Sweat: Besides, they are less Fleshy, and
Sweat issues (chiefly) out of the Parts that are less Fleshy, and more Dry;
As the Forehead, and Breast.

Men Sweat more in Sleep, than Waking; And yet Sleep does rather Fluxions,
than cause them; As Rheumes, Looseness of the Body, etc. The Cause is, for
that in Sleep, the Heat and Spirits do naturally move inwards, and there
rest. But when they are collected once within, the Heat becomes more Violent,
and Irritate; And thereby expels Sweat.

Cold Sweats are (many times) Mortal, and near Death; And always Suspected;
As in Great Fears, Hypochondricall Passions, etc. The Cause is, for that Cold
Sweats come by a Relaxation or Forsaking of the Spirits, whereby the Moisture of
the Body, which Heat did keep firm in the Parts, seuereth, and issues out.

Diseases, which cannot be discharged by Sweat, Sweat is ill, and rather to be
stayed; As in Diseases of the Lungs, and Fluxes of the Belly; But in those
Diseases, which are expelled by Sweat, it eases and lightneth; As in Agues,
Pestilences, etc. The Cause is, for that Sweat in the Latter Sort is partly
Critical, and sends forth the Matter that offends; But in the Former, it
either proceeds from the Labor of the Spirits, which shows them Oppressed;
Or from Motion of Consent, when Nature not able to expel the Disease, where it
is seated, moves to an Expulsion indifferent over all the Body.

The Nature of the Glo-wormexs is hitherto not well observed. Experiment
Solitary, touching the GloWorme.
Thus much we see; That they breed chiefly in the Hottest Months of Summer;
And that they breed not in Champaigne, but in Bushes, and Hedges. Whereby Spirit
of them is very fine, and not to be refined, but by Summer Heats: And again,
that by reason of the Finenesse, it does easily exhale. In Italy, and the
Hotter Countries, there is a Fly they call Lucciole, that shines as the
Glo-worme does; And it may be is the Flying Glo-worme. But that Fly is chiefly
upon Fens, and Marrishes. But yet the two former Observations hold; For they
are not seen, but in the Heat of Summer; And Sedge, or other Green of the
Fens, give as good Shade, as Bushes. It may be the Glo-wormes of the Cold
Countries ripen not so far as to be Winged.

The Passions of the Mind, work upon the Body the Impressions following.
Experiments in Consort, touching the Impressions, which the Passions of the
Mind make upon the Body.
Fear causes Palenesse; Trembling; The Standing of the Hair upright;
Starting; and Skritching. The Palenesse is caused, for that the Blood runs
inward, to succor the Heart. The Trembling is caused, for that through the
Flight of the Spirits inward, the Outward Parts are destituted, and not
sustained. Standing Upright of the Hair is caused, Shutting of the Pores of
the Skin, the Hair that lies asloape, must needs Rise, Starting is both an
Apprehension of the Thing feared, (And, in that kind, it is a Motion of
Shrincking;) And likewise an Inquisition, in the beginning, what the Matter
should be; (And in that kind it is a Motion of Erection;) And therefore, when
a Man would listen suddenly to any Thing, he Starteth; For the Starting is an
Erection of the Spirits to attend. Skritching is an Appetite of Expelling that
which suddenly strikes the Spirits: For it must be noted, that many Motions,
though they be unprofitable to expel that which hurts, yet they are Offers
of Nature, and cause Motions by Consent; As in Groaning, or Crying upon Pain.

Grief and Pain cause Sighing; Sobbing; Groaning; Screaming; and Roaring;
Tears; Distorting of the Face; Grinding of the Teeth; Sweating. Sighing is
caused by the Drawing in of a greater Quantity of Breath to refresh the Heart
that labors: like a great Draught when one is thirsty. Sobbing is the same
Thing stronger. Groaning, and Screaming, and Roaring, are caused by an Appetite
of Expulsion, as has been said: For when the Spirits cannot expel the Thing
that hurts, in their Strife to do it, by Motion of Consent, they expel the
Voice. And this is, when the Spirits yield, and give over to resist; For if one
do constantly resist Pain, he will not groan. Tears are caused by a
Contraction of the Spirits of the Brain; Which Contraction by consequence
astringeth the Moisture of the Brain, and thereby sends Tears into the
Eyes. And this Contraction, or Compression causes also Wringing of the Hands;
For Wringing is a Gesture of Expression of Moisture. The Distorting of the Face
is caused by a Contention, first to bear and resist, and then to expel; Which
makes the Parts knit first, and afterward open. Grinding of the Teeth is
caused (likewise) by a Gathering and Serring of the Spirits together to resist;
Which makes the Teeth also to set hard one against another. Sweating is also a
Compound Motion by the Labor of the Spirits, first to resist, and then to
expel.

Joy causes a Cheerfulness, and Vigor in the Eyes; Singing; Leaping; And
sometimes Tears. All these are the Effects of the Dilatation, and Coming
forth of the Spirits into the Outward Parts; Which makes them more Linely, and
Stirring. We know it has been seen, that Excessive Sudden Joy, has caused
Present Death, while the Spirits did spread so much, as they could not retire
again. As for Tears, they are the Effects of Compression of the Moisture of
the Brain. upon Dilatation of the Spirits. For Compression of the Spirits
works an Expression of the Moisture of the Brain, by Consent, as has been
said in Grief. But then in Joy, it works it diversely; viz. by Prepulsion of
the Moisture, when the Spirits dilate, and occupy more Room.

Anger causes Palenesse in some, and the Going and Coming of the in Others:
Also Trembling in some, Swelling; Foaming at the Month; Stamping; Bending of
the Fist. Palenesse, and Going, and Coming of the Color, are caused by the
Burning of the Spirits about the Heart; Which to refresh themselves call in
more Spirits from the Outward Parts. And if the Palenesse be alone, without
Sending forth the Color again, it is commonly joined with some Fear; But in
many there is no Palenesse at all, but contrariwise Redness about the Cheeks,
and Gills; Which is by the Sending forsh of the Spirits in an Appetite to
Revenge. Trembling in Anger is likewise by a Calling in of the Spirits; And is
commonly, when Anger is joined with Fear. Swelling is caused, both by a
Dilatation of the Spirits by Ouer-Heating, and by a Liquefaction or Boiling of
the Humors thereupon. Foaming at the Mouth is from the same Cause, being an
Ebullition. Stamping. and Bending of the Fist, are caused by an Imagination of
the Act of Revenge.

Light Displeasure or Dislike, causes Shaking of the Head; Frowning, Knitting
of the B^^^es. These Effects arise from the same Causes that Trembling, and
Horror do; Namely, from the Retiring of the Spirits. but in a less degree.
For the Shaking of the Head is but a Slow and Definite Trembling; And is a
Gesture of Slight Refusal: And we see also, that a Dislike causes (often)
that Gesture of the Hand, which we use, when we refuse a Thing, or warn it
away. The Frowning, and Knitting of the Brows, is a Gathering, or Serring of
the Spirits, to resist in some Measure. And we see also, this Knitting of the
Brows will follow upon earnest Studying, or Cogitation of any Thing, though it
be without Dislike.

Shame causes Blushing; And Casting down of the Eyes. Blushing is the Resort
of Blood to the Face; Which in the Passion of Shame is the Part that labors
most. And although the Blushing will be seen in the whole Breast, if it be
Naked, yet that is but in Passage to the Face. As for the Casting down of the
Eyes, it proceeds of the Reverence a Man bears to other Men; Whereby, when
he is ashamed, he cannot endure to look firmly upon Others: And we see that
Blushing, and the Casting down of the Eyes both, are more when we come before
Many; Ore Pompeij quid mollius? Nunquam non coram pluribus erubuit: And
likewise when we come before Great, or Reverend Persons.

Pity causes sometimes Tears; And a Flexion or Cast of the Eye aside. Tears
come from the same Cause that they do in Grief: for Pity is but Grief in
Another Behalf. The Cast of the Eye is a Gesture of Auersion, or Loathnesse
to behold the Object of Pity.

Wonder causes Astonishment, or an Immovable Posture of the Body; Casting up
of the Eyes to Heaven; And Lifting up of the Hands. For Astonishment, it is
caused by the Fixing of the Mind upon one Object of Cogitation, whereby it
does not spatiate and transcurre, as it uses: For in Wonder the Spirits fly
not, as in Fear; But only settle, and are made less apt to move. As for the
Casting up of the Eyes, and Lifting up of the Hands, it is a Kind of Appeal
to the Deity; Which is the Author, by Power, and Providence, of Strange
Wonders.

Laughing causes a Dilatation of the Mouth, and Lips; A Continued Expulsion of
the Breath, with the loud Noise, which makes the Interiection of Laughing;
Shaking of the Breast, and Sides; Running of the Eyes with Water, if it be
Violent, and Continued. Wherein first it is to be understood, that Laughing is
scarce (properly) a Passion, but has his Source from the Intellect; For in
Laughing there ever precedeth a Conceit of somewhat Ridiculous, And therefore
it is Proper to Man. Secondly, that the Cause of Laughing is but a Light Touch
of the Spirits, and not so deep an Impression as in other Passions. And
therefore, (that which has no Affinity with the Passions of the Mind) it is
moved, and that in great vehemence, only by Tickling some Parts of the Body:
And we see that Men even in a Grieved State of Mind, yet cannot sometimes
forbear Laughing. Thirdly, it is ever joined with some Degree of Delight: And
therefore Exhilaration has some Affinity with Joy, though it be a much Lighter
Motion: Res seneraest verum Gandium. Fourthly, that the Object of it is
Deformity, Absurdity, Shrewd Turns, and the like. Now to speak of the Causes
of the Effects before mentioned, whereunto these General Notes give some
Light, For the Dilatation of the Mouth and Lips, Continued Expulsion of the
Breath and Voice, and Shaking of the Breast and Sides, they proceed (all) from
the Dilatation of the Spirits; Especially being Sudden. So likewise, the
Running of the Eyes with Water, (as has been formerly touched, where we spoke
of the Tears of Joy and Grief,) is an Effect of Dilatation of the Spirits.
And for Suddenness, it is a great Part of the Matter: For we see, that any
Shrewd Turn that lights upon Another; Or any Deformity, etc. moves
Laughter in the Instant; Which after a little time it does not. So we cannot
Laugh at any Thing after it is Stale, but whilst it is New: And even in
Tickling, if you Tickle the Sides, and give warning; Or give a Hard or
Continued Touch, it does not move Laughter so much.

Lust causes a Flagrancy in the Eyes; and Priapisme. The Cause of Lust, the
Sight, and the Touch, are the Things desired: And therefore the Spirits resort
to those part^, whch are most affected. And note well in general, (For that
great Use may be made of the Observation,) that (evermore) the Spirits, in all
Passions, resort most to the Parts, that labor most, or are most affected. As
in the last, which has been mentioned, they resort to the Eyes, and Venereous
Parts: In Fear, and Anger, to the Heart: In Shame to the Face: And in Light
Dislikes to the Head.

It has been observed by the Ancients and is yet believed, that the Sperme of
Drunken Men is Unfruitful. Experiments in Consort touching Drunkenness.
The Cause is, for that it is Ouer-moistened, and wants Spissitude. And we
have a merry Saying, that they that go Drunk to Bed, get Daughters.

Drunken Men are taken with a plain Defect, or Destitution in Voluntary
Motion. They ^^ele: They tremble: They cannot stand, nor speak strongly. The
^^^^ is, for that the Spirits of the Wine, oppress the Spirits Animal, and
^^^ pate Part of the Place, where they are; And so make them Weak to move. And
therefore Drunken Men are apt to fall asleep: And Opiates, and Stupefactines,
(as Poppy, Henbane, Hemlocke, etc.) induce a kind of Drunkenness, by the
Grossness of their Vapor; As Wine does by the Quantity of the Vapor.
Besides, they rob the Spirits Animal of their Matter, whereby they are
nourished: For the Spirits of the Wine prey upon it, as well as they: And so
they make the Spirits less Supple, and Apt to move.

Drunken Men imagine every Thing turns round; They imagine Things Come upon
them; They See not well Things a far off; Those Things that they See near
hand, they See out of their Place; And (sometimes) they see Things double. The
Cause of the Imagination that Things turn Round, is, for that the Spirits
themselves turn, being compressed by the Vapor of the Wine: (For any Liquid
Body upon Compression, turns, as we see in Water:) And it is all one to the
Sight, whether the Visuall Spirits move, or the Object moves, or the Medium
moves. And we see that long Turning Round breeds the same Imagination. The
Cause of the Imagination that Things come upon them, is, for that the Spirits
Visuall themselves draw back; which makes the Object seem to come on; And
besides, when they see Things turn Round, and Move, Fear makes them think
they come upon them. The Cause that they cannot see Things a far off, is the
Weakness of the Spirits; for in every Megrim, or Vertige, there is an
Obtenebration joined with a Semblance of Turning round; Which we see also in
the lighter Sort of Swonnings. The Cause of Seeing things out of their Place,
is the Refraction: of the Spirits Visuall; For the Vapor is as an Unequal
Medium; And it is, as the Sight of Things, out of place, in Water. The Cause of
Seeing Things double, is, the Swift and Unquiet Motion of the Spirits, (being
Oppressed,) to and fro; For, (as was said before,) the Motion of the Spirits
Visuall, and the Motion of the Object, make the same Appearances; And for the
Swift Motion of the Object, we see, that if you fillip a Lute-String, it
shows double, or Treble.

Men are sooner Drunk with Small Draughts, than with Great. And again, Wine
Sugared inebriateth less, than Wine Pure. The Cause of the Former is, for that
the Wine descends not so fast to the Bottom of the Stomach; But makes
longer Stay in the Upper Part of the Stomach, and sends Vapors faster to the
Head; And therefore inebriateth sooner. And, for the same Reason, Sops in Wine,
(Quantity for Quantity,) inebriate more, than Wine of it self. The Cause of
the Latter is, for that the Sugar does inspissate the Spirits of the Wine, and
makes them not so easy to resolve into Vapor. Nay further, it is thought, to
be some Remedy against Inebriating, if Wine Sugared be taken after Wine Pure.
And the same Effect is wrought either by Oil, or Milk, taken upon much
Drinking.

The Use of Wine, in Dry, and Consumed Bodies, is hurtful; In Moist, and Full
Bodies, it is good. The Cause is, for that the Spirits of the Wine Experiment
Solitary touching the Help or Hint of Wine, though Moderately used.
do prey upon the Dew, or Radical Moisture, (as they term it,) of the Body,
and so deceive the Animal Spirits. But where there is Moisture Enough, or
Superfluous, there Wine helps to digest, and desiccate Moisture.

The Catterpiller is one of the most General of Worms, and breeds of Dew,
and Leaves: For we see infinite Number of Catterpillers, Experiment Solitary,
touching Catterpillers.
which breed upon Trees, and Hedges; By which the Leaves of the Trees, Hedges,
are in great Part consumed; As well by their Breeding out of the Leaf, as by
their Feeding upon the Leaf. They breed in the Spring chiefly, because then
there is both Dew, and Leaf. And they breed commonly when the East Winds have
much blown: The Cause whereof is, the Dryness of that Wind: For to all
Vivification upon Putrefaction, it is requisite the Matter be not too Moist:
And therefore we see, they have Copwebs about them, which is a sign of a Slimy
Dryness: As we see upon the Ground, whereupon, by Dew, and Sun, Copwebs
breed all over. We see also the Green Catterpiller breeds in the Inward
Parts of Roses, especially not blown, where the Dew sticks: But especially
Catterpillers, both the greatest, and the most, breed upon Cabbages, which have
a Fat Leaf, and apt to Putrify. The Catterpiller toward the End of Summer
waxes Volatile, and turns to a Butterfly, or perhaps some other Fly. There
is a Catterpiller, that has a Furre, or Down upon him, and seems to have
Affinity with the Silke-worme

The Flies Cantharides are bred of a Worm, or Catterpiller, but peculiar to
certain Fruit Trees; As are the Fig Tree, the Pine Tree, and the Wild Briar;
All which bear Sweet Fruit; And Fruit that has a kind of secret Biting, or
Sharpness: For the Fig has a Milk in it, that is Sweet, Corrosiue: The
Pineapple has a Kernel that is Strong and Absterside: The Fruit of the Briar
is said to make Children, or those that Eat them, Scabbed. And therefore, no
marvel though Cantharides Experiment Solitary, touching the Flies Cantharides.
have such a Corrosiue, and Cauterizing Quality; For there is not any other of
the Insecta, but is bred of a Duller Matter. The Body of the Cantharides is
bright colored; And it may be, that the delicate-coloured Dragon-Flies, may
have likewise some Corrosiue Quality.

Lassitude is remedied by Bathing, or Anointing with Oil, and Warm water.
Experiments in Consort, touching Lassitude.
The Cause is, for that all Lassitude is a kind of Contusion, and Compression
of the Parts; And Bathing, and Anointing give a Relaxation, or Emollition: And
the Mixture of Oil, and Water, is better than either of Water Enters better
into the Pores, and Oil after Entry softneth better. It is found also, that
the Taking of Tobacco does help and discharge Lassitude. The Reason whereof
is, partly, because by Chearing or Comforting of the Spirits it opens the
Parts Compressed, or Contused: And chiefly, because it refreshes the Spirits
by the Opiate Virtue thereof; And so discharges Weariness; as Sleep likewise
does.

In Going up a Hill, the Knees will be most Weary; In Going down a Hill,
Thighs. The Cause is, for that, in the Lift of the Feet, when a Man Goes up
the Hill, the Weight of the Body bears most upon the Knees; And in Going
down the Hill, upon the Thighs.

The Casting of the Skin, is by the Ancients compared, to the Breaking of the
Secundine, or Call; but not rightly: For that were to make every Casting
Experiment Solitary touching the Casting of the Skin, and Shell, in some
Creatures.
of the Skin a New Birth: And besides, the Secundine is but a general Cover,
not shaped according to the Parts; But the Skin is shaped according to the
Parts. The Creatures, that cast their Skin, are; The Snake, the Viper, the
Grasshopper, the Lizard, the Silk worm, etc. Those that cast their Shell, are;
The Lobster, the Crab, the Crafish, the Hodmandod or Dedman, the Tortoise, etc.
The Old Skins are found, but the Old Shells never: So as it is like, they scale
off, and crumble away by degrees. And they are known, by the Extreme
Tenderness and Softness of the New Shell; And somewhat by the Freshness of
the Color of it. The Cause of the Casting of Skin, and Shell, should seem to
be the great Quantity of Matter in those Creatures, that is fit to make Skin,
or Shell; And again, the Looseness of the Skin, or Shell, that sticks not
close to the Flesh. For it is certain, that it is the New Skin, or Shell, that
puts off the Old: So we see, that in Dear, it is the Young Horn, that
puts off the Old; And in Birds, the Young Feathers put off the Old: And so
Birds, that have much Matter for their Beak, cast their Beakes; the New Beak
Putting off the Old.

Lying, not Erect, but Hollow, which is in the Making of the Bed; Or with the
Legs gathered up, which is in the Posture of the Body, is the more Wholesome.
Experiments in Consort touching the Postures of the Body.
The Reason is, the better Comforting of the Stomach, which is by that less
Pensile: And we see, that in Weak Stomachs, the Gally-Slanes, notwithstanding
their Misery otherwise, are commonly Fat and Fleshy; And the Reason is, because
the Stomach is supported somewhat in Sitting; And is Pensile in Standing, or
Going. And therefore, for Prolongation of Life, it is good to choose those
Exercises, where the Limbs move more than the Stomach, and Belly; As in
Rowing, and in Sawing being Set.

Megrims and Giddiness are rather when we Rise, after long Sitting, than while
we Sit. The Cause is, for that the Vapors, which were gathered by Sitting, by
the Sudden Motion, fly more up into the Head.

Leaning long upon any Part makes it Numme, and, as we call it, Asleep. The
Cause is, for that the Compression of the Part suffers not the Spirits to
have free Access; And therefore, when we come out of it, we feel a Stinging
or ^^^^^ing; Which is the Re-entrance of the Spirits.

It has been noted, that those Years are Pestilentiall, and Unwholesome,
when there are great Numbers of Frogs, Flies, Locusts, etc. Experiment
Solitary, touching Pestilentiall Years.
The Cause is plain; For that those Creatures being engendered of Putrefaction,
Disposition of the Year, and Constitution of the Air, to Diseases of
Putrefaction. And the same Prognesticke, (as has been said before,) holds,
if you find Worms in OakeApples. For the Constitution of the Air, appears
more subtly, in any of these Things, than to the Sense of Man.

It is an Observation amongst Country People, that Years of Store of Hawes and
Heps, do commonly portend Cold Winters; And they ascribe it to Gods
Providence, that, (as the Scripture says) reaches even to the Falling of a
Sparrow; And much more is like to reach to the Preservation Birds in such
Seasons. Experiment Solitary, touchine the Prognostics of Hard Winters.
The Natural Cause also may be the Want of Heat, and Abundance of Moisture, in
the Summer precedent; Which puts forth those Fruits, and must needs leave
great Quantity of Cold Vapors, not dissipate; Which causes the Cold of the
Winter following.

They have in Turkey, a Drink called Coffa, made of a Berry of the same Name,
as Black as Soot, and of a Strong Sent, but not Aromaticall; Which they take,
beaten into Powder, in Water, as Hot as they can drink it: And they take it,
and sit at it, in their Coffa-Houses, which are like our Tauernes. Experiment
Solitary touching Medicines that Condense, and Relieve the Spirits.
This Drink comfort the Brain, and Heart, and helps Disgestion.
Certainly this Berry Coffa; The Root, and Leaf Betel; Leaf Tobacco; And the
Tear of Poppy, (Opium,) of which the Turks are great Takers, (supposing it
expels all Fear;) do all Condense the Spirits, and make them Strong, and
Aleger. But it seems they are taken after several manners; For Coffa and
Opium are taken down; Tobacco but in Smoke; And Betel is but champed in the
Mouth, with a little Lime. It is like there are more of them, if they were well
found out, and well corrected. Quare of Henbane-Seed; Of Mandrake; Of Saffron,
Root, and Flower; Of Folium Indum; Of Amber-grice; Of the Assyrian Amomum, if
it may be had; And of the Scarlet Powder, which they call Kermez; And
(generally) of all such Things, as do inebriate, and provoke Sleep. Note that
Tobacco is not taken in Root, or Seed, which are more forcible ever than Leaves.

The Turks have a Black Powder, made of a Mineral called Alcohole; Which
with a fine long Pencill they lay under their Eyelids; Which does color them
Black; Whereby the White of the Eye is set off more white. Experiment
Solitary, touching Faintings of the Body.
With the same Powder they color also the Hairs of their Eyelids, and
Eyebrows, which they draw into Embowed Arches. You shall find that Xenophon
makes Mention, that the Medes used to paint their Eyes. The Turks use with
the same Tincture, to color the Hair of their Heads and Beards Black: And
diverse with us, that are grown Gray, and yet would appear Young, find means
to make their Hair black, by Combing it, (as they say,) with a Leaden Comb,
or the like. As for the Chinese, who are of an ill Complexion, (being
Oliuaster,) they paint their Cheeks Scarlet; Especially their King, and
Grandes. Generally, Barbarous People, that go Naked, do not only paint
Themselves, but they pownce and raze their Skin, that the Painting may not be
taken forth; And make it into Works. So do the West Indians; And so did the
Ancient Picts, and Brittons; So that it seems, Men would have the Colors of
Birds Feathers, if they could tell how; Or at least, they will have Gay Skins,
instead of Gay Clothes.

It is strange, that the Use of Bathing, as a Part of Diet, is left. Experiment
Solitary, touching the Use of Bathing and Anointing.
With the Romans, and Grecians, it was as usual, as Eating, or Sleeping: And
so is it amongst the Turks at this day: Whereas with us it remains but as a
Part of Physic. I am of Opinion, that the Use of it, as it was with the
Romans, was hurtful to Health; For that it made the Body Soft, and Turks it
is more proper, because that their Drinking Water, and Feeding upon Rize, and
other Food of small Nourishment, makes their Bodies so Solid, and Hard, as
you need not fear that Bathing should make them Froathie. Besides, the Turks
are great Sitters, and seldom walk; Whereby they Sweat less, and need
Bathing more. But yet certain it is, that Bathing, and especially Anointing,
may be so used, as it may be a great Help to Health, and Prolongation of Life.
But hereof we shall speak in due Place, when we come to handle Experiments
Medicinal.

The Turks have a Pretty Art of Chamoletting of Paper, which is not with us in
use. Experiment Solitary, touching Chamoletting of Paper.
They take diverse Oyled Colors, and put them severally (in drops) upon Water;
And stir the Water lightly; And then wet their Paper, (being of some
Thickness,) with it; And the Paper will be Waued, and Veined, like Chamolet,
or Marble.

It is somewhat strange, that the Blood of all Birds, and Beasts, and Fishes,
should be of a Red Color, and only the Blood of the Cuttle should be as Black
as Ink. Experiment Solitary, touching CuttleInke.
A Man would think, that the Cause should be the High Concoction of that
Blood; For we see in ordinary Puddings, that the Boiling turns the Blood to
be Black; And the Cuttle is accounted a delicate Meat, and is much in Request.

It is reported of Credit, that if you take Earth, from Land adjoining to the
River of Nile; And preserve it in that manner, that it neither come to be Wet,
nor Wasted; And Weigh it daily, it will not alter Weight until the seventeenth
of June, which is the Day when the River begins Ponderous, till the River
comes to his Height Which if it be true, it cannot be caused, but by the
Air, which then begins to Condense; And so turns within that Small Mould
into a degree of Moisture; Which produces Weight. Experiment Solitary touching
Increase of Weigh, in Earth.
So it has been observed, that Tobacco, Cut, and Weighed, and then Dried by
the Fire, loses Weight; And after being laid in the open Air, recouereth
Weight again. And it should seem, that as soon as ever the River begins
to increase, the whole Body of the Air thereabouts suffers a Change: For
(that which is more strange,) it is credibly affirmed, that upon that very Day,
when the River first rises, great Plagues, in Caire, use suddenly to break up.

Those that are very Cold, and especially in their Feet, cannot get to Sleep.
Experiments in Consort, touching Sleep.
The Cause may be, for that in Sleep is required a Free Respiration, which
Cold does shut in, and hinder: For we see, that in great Colds, one Breath.
Another Cause may be, for that Cold calls the Spirits to succor; And
therefore they cannot so well close; and go together in the Head; Which is
ever requisite to Sleep. And for the same Cause, Pain, and Noise hinder
Sleep; And Darkness (contrariwise) furthereth Sleep.

Some Noises (whereof we spoke in the 112. Experiment) help Sleep; As the
Blowing of the Wind, the Trickling of Water, Humming of Bees, Soft Singing,
Reading, etc. The Cause is, for that they move in the Spirits a gentle
Attention; And whatsoever moves Attention, without too much Labor, stilleth
the Natural and discursiue Motion of the Spirits.

Sleep nourishes, or at least preserves Bodies, a long time, without
Nourishment. Beasts that sleep in Winter, (as it is noted of Wild Bears,)
during their Sleep wax very Fat, though they Eat nothing. Bats have been found
in Ouens, and other Hollow Close Places, Matted one upon another; And therefore
it is likely that they Sleep in the Winter time, and eat Nothing. Quare,
whether Bees do not Sleep all Winter, and spare their Honey? Butterflies, and
other Flies, do not only Sleep, but lie as Dead all Winter; And yet with a
little Heat of Sun, or Fire, reuine again. A Dormonse, both Winter and
Summer, will Sleep some dayes' together, and eat Nothing.

To restore Teeth in Age, were Magnale Naturae. Experiments in Consort,
touching Teeth and Hard Substances in the Bodies of Living Creatures.
It may be thought of. But howsoever the Nature of the Teeth deserves to be
enquired of, as well as the other Parts of Living Creatures Bodies.

There be Five Parts in the Bodies of Liuing-Creatures, that are of Hard Skull;
The Teeth; The Bones; The Horns; and the Nails. The greatest Quantity of Hard
Substance Continued, is toward the Head. For there is the Skull of one Entire
Bone; There are the Teeth; There are the Maxillary Bones; There is the Hard
Bone, that is the Instrument of Hearing; And thence issue the Horns: So that
the Building of Living Creatures Bodies, is like the Building of a
Timber-House, where the Walls, and other Parts have Columns, and Beams; But
the Roof is, in the better Sort of Houses, all Tile, or Lead, or Stone. As for
Birds, they have Three other Hard Substances proper to them; The Bill, which is
of like Matter with the Teeth; For no Birds have Teeth: The Shell of the Egg:
And their Quills: For as for their Spur, it is but a Nail. But no
Liuing-Creatures, that have Shells very hard; (As Oysters, Cockles, Mussles,
Scallops, Crabs, Lobsters, Cra-fish, Shrimps, and especially the Tortoise,)
have Bones within them, but only little Gristles.

Bones, after full Growth, continue at a Stay: And so does the Skull: in some
Creatures, are cast, and renewed: Teeth stand at a Stay except their Wearing: As
for Nails, they grow continually: And Bills and Beakes will ouer-grow, and
sometimes be cast; as in Eagles, and Parrots.

Most of the Hard Substances fly to the Extremes of the Body, As Skull, and
Beakes: Only the Bones are more Inward, and clad with Flesh. As for the
Entrails, they are all without Bones; Save that a Bone is (sometimes) found in
the Heart of a Stag; And it may be in some other Creature.

Skull has Brains, as a kind of Marrow, within it. The Backbone has one
Kind of Marrow, which has an Affinity with the Brain; And other Bones of the
Body have another. The Iaw-Bones have no Marrow Severed, but a little Pulpe of
Marrow diffused. Teeth likewise are thought to have a kind of Marrow diffused,
which causes the Sense, and Pain: But it is rather Sinnew; For Marrow has no
Sense; No more than Blood. Horn is alike throughout; And so is the Nail.

Hard Substances have Sense, but the Teeth: And the Teeth have Sense, not only
of Pain, but of Cold.

But we will leave the Enquiries of other Hard Substances, unto their several
Places; And now enquire only of the Teeth.

Teeth are, in Men, of three Kinds: Sharp, as the Fore-Teeth; Broad, as the
Back-Teeth, which we call the Molar-Teeth, or Grinders; And Pointed-Teeth, or
Canine, which are between both. But there have been some Men, that have had
their Teeth undivided, as of one whole Bone, with some little Mark in the
Place of the Division; As Pyrrhus had. Some Creatures have Ouer-long, or
Out-growing Teeth, which we call Fangs, or Tuskes; As Boares, Pikes, Salmons,
and Dogs though less. Some Living Creatures have Teeth against Teeth; As Men,
and Horses; And some have Teeth, especially their Master-Teeth, indented one
within Another, like Sawes; As Lions; And so again have Dogs. Some Fishes have
diverse Rows of Teeth in the Roofes of their Mouths; As Pikes, Salmons,
Trouts, etc. And many more in Salt-Waters. Snakes, and other Serpents, have
Venomous Teeth; which are sometimes mistaken for their Sting.

Beast that has Horns, has Upper Teeth; And no Beast, that has Teeth above,
wants them below: But yet if they be of the same kind, it follows not,
that if the Hard Matter goes not into Upper Teeth, it will go into Horns;
Not yet ^^ converse; For Does, that have no Horns, have no Upper Teeth.

Horses have, at three years old, a Tooth put forth, which they call the Colts
Tooth; And at four years old there comes the Mark-Tooth, which has a Hole,
as big as you may lay a Pease within it; And that wears shorter and shorter,
every year; Till that at eight years old, the Tooth is smooth, and the Hole
gone; And then they say; That the Mark is out of the Horses Mouth.

Teeth of Men breed first, when the Child is about a year and half old: And
then they cast them, and new come about seven years old. But diverse have
Backward-Teeth come forth at Twenty, yea some at Thirty, and Forty. Quare of
the manner of the Coming of them forth. They tell a Tale of the old Countess
of Desmond, who lived till she was seuen-score years old, that she did
Dentire, twice, or thrice; Casting her old Teeth, and others Coming in their
Place.

Teeth are much hurt by Sweetmeats; And by Painting with Mercury; And by
Things Ouer-hot; And by Things Ouer-cold; And by Rheumes. And the Pain of the
Teeth, is one of the sharpest of Pains.

Concerning Teeth, those Things are to be Considered. 1. The Preserving of
them. 2. The Keeping of them White. 3. The Drawing of them with Least Pain. 4.
The Staying and Easing of the Toothache. 5. The Binding in of Artificial
Teeth, where have been stricken out. 6. And last of all, that Great One, of
Restoring Teeth in Age. The Instances that give any likelihood of Restoring
Teeth in Age, are; The Late Coming of Teeth in some; And the Renewing of the
Beakes in Birds, which are Commateriall with Teeth. Quare therefore more
particularly how that comes. And again, the Renewing of Horns. But yet that
has not been known to have been provoked by Art; Therefore let Trial be
made, whether Horns may be procured to grow in Beasts that are not Horned, and
how? And whether they may be procured to come Larger than usual; As to make an
Ox, or a Dear, have a Greater Head of Horns? And whether the Head of a
Dear, that by Age is more Spitted, may be brought again to be more Branched;
For those Trialls, and the like, will show, whether by Art such Hard Matter can
be called, and provoked. It may be tried also, whether Birds may not have some
thing done to them, when they are Young, whereby they may be made to have
Greater, or Longer Bills; Or Greater and Longer Tallons? And whether Children
may not have some Wash, or Something to make their Teeth Better, and Stronger?
Coral is in use as an Help to the Teeth of Children.

Some Living Creatures generate but at certain Seasons of the Year; As Dear,
Sheep, Wild Conneyes, etc. Experiments in Consort, touching the Generation
and Bearing of Living Creatures in the Womb.
And most Sorts of Birds, and Fishes: Others at any time of the Year, as Men;
And all Domesticke Creatures; As Horses, Hogs, Dogs, Cats, etc. The Cause
of Generation at all Seasons seems to be Fullness: For Generation is from
Redundance. This Fullness arises from two Causes; Either from the Nature of
the Creature, if it be Hot, and Moist, and Sanguine; Or from Plenty of Food.
For the first, Men, Horses, Dogs, etc. which breed at all Seasons, are full
of Heat, and Moisture; Dones are the fullest of Heat and Moisture amongst
Birds, and therefore breed often; The Tame Dove almost continually. But Dear
are a Melancholy Dry Creature, as appears by their Fearfulness, and the
Hardness of their Flesh. Sheep are a Cold Creature, as appears by their
Mildness, and for that they seldom Drink. Most sort of Birds are of a dry
Substance in comparison of Beasts, Fishes are cold. For the second Cause,
Fullness of Food; Men, Kine, Swine, Dogs, etc. seed full; And we see that those
Creatures, which being Wild, generate seldom, being Tame, generate often;
Which is from Warmth, and Fullness of Food. We find, that the Time of Going to
Rut of Deore is in September; For that they need the whole Summers Feed and
Grass, to make them fit for Generation. And if Rain come Early about the
Middle of September, they go to Rut somewhat the sooner; If Drought, somewhat
the later. So Sheep, in respect of their small Neat. generate about the same
time, or somewhat before. But for the most part, Creatures that generate at
certain Seasons, generate in the Spring; As Birds, and Fishes; For that the
End of the Winter, and the Heat, and Comfort of the Spring prepares them.
There is also another Reason, why some Creatures generate at certain Seasons:
And that is the Relation of their Time of Bearing, to the time of Generation:
For no Creature goes to generate, whilst the Female is full; Nor whilst she
is busy in Sitting or Rearing her Young. And therefore it is found by
Experience, that if you take the Eggs, or Young Ones, out of the Neasts of
Birds, they will fall to generate again, three or four times, one after
another.

Living Creatures, some are Longer time in the Womb, and some Shorter. Women
go commonly nine Months; The Cow and the Ewe about six Months; Does go
about nine Months; Mares eleven Months; Bitches nine Weeks; Elephants are
said to go two Years; For the Received Tradition of ten Years is Fabulous.
For Birds there is double Enquiry; The Distance between the Treading or
Coupling, and the Laying of the Egg; And again between the Egg Laid, and
the Disclosing or Hetching. And amongst Birds, there is less Diversity of
Time, than amongst other Creatures; yet some there is: For the Hen sits but
three Weeks; The Turky-Hen, Goose, and Ducke, a Month: Quare of others. The
Cause of the great Difference of Times, amongst Living Creatures, is, Either
from the Nature of the Kind; Or from the Constitution of the Womb. For the
former, those that are longer in Coming to their Maturity or Growth, are
longer in the Womb; As is chiefly seen in Men; And so Elephants which are
long in the Womb, are long time in Coming to their full Growth. But in most
other Kinds, the Constitution of the Womb, (that is, the Hardness or
Dryness thereof,) is concurrent with the former Cause. For the ^^lt has about
four years of Growth; And so the Fawn; And so the Calfe. But Whelps, which
come to their Growth (commonly) within three Quarters of a year, are but nine
Weeks in the Womb. As for Birds, as there is less Diversity, amongst them,
in the time of their Bringing forth; So there is less Diversity in the time of
their Growth; Most of them coming to their Growth within a Twelue-Moneth.

Creatures bring forth many Young Ones at a Burden; As Bitches, Hares,
Conneyes, etc. Some (ordinatily) but One; As Women, Lionesses, etc. This may be
caused, either by the Quantity of Sperme required to the Producing One of that
Kind; which if less be required, may admit greater Number; If more, fewer: Or
by the Partitions and Cells of the Womb, which may fever the Sperme.

There is no doubt, but Light by Refraction will show greater, as well as
Things Colored. Experiments in Consort, touching Species Visible.
For like as a Shilling, in the Bottomes of the Water. will show greater; So
will a Candle in a Lantern, in the Bottom of the Water. Glo-wormes in
Glasses were put in the Water, to make the Fish come. But I am not yet
informed, whether when a Diuer Diueth, having his Eyes open, and swimmeth upon
his Back; whether (I say) he sees Things in the Air greater, or less. For
it is manifest, that when the Eye stands in the Finer Medium, and the Object
is in the Grosser, things show greater; But contrariwise, when the Eye is
placed in the Grosser Medium, and the Object in the Finer, how it works I
know not.

It would be well boulted out, whether great Refractions may not be Reflections,
as well as upon Direct Beams. For Example, We see that take an Empty Basen,
put an Angel of Gold, or what you will, into it; Then go so far from the
Basen, till you cannot see the Angel, because it is not in a Right Line; Then
fill the Basen with Water, and you shall see it out of his Place, because of
the Reflection. To proceed therefore, put a Looking-glass into a Basen of
Water; I suppose you shall not see the Image in a Right Line, or at equal
Angles, but aside. I know not, whether this Experiment may not be extended so,
as you might see the Image, and not the Glass; Which for Beauty, and
Strangeness, were a fine Proof: For then you should see the Image like a
Spirit in the Air. As for Example, If there be a Cesterne or Poole of Water.
you shall place over against it a Picture of the Devil, or what you will, so
as you do not see the Water. Then put a Looking-glass in the Water: Now if
you can see the Devils Picture aside, not seeing the Water, it will look like
a Devil indeed. They have an old Tale in Oxford, that Friar Bacon walked
between two Steeples: Which was thought to be done by Glasses, when he walked
upon the Ground.

A Weighty Body put into Motion, is more easily impelled, than at first when it
Rests. Experiments in Consort, touching Impulsion, and Percussion.
The Cause is, Partly because Motion does discuss the Torpour of Solid
Bodies, Which beside their Motion of Gravity, have in them a Natural Appetite,
not to move at all; And partly, because a Body that rests, does get, by the
Resistance of the Body upon which it rests, Compression of Parts, than it
has of it Self: And therefore needs more Force to be put in Motion. For if
a Weighty Body be Pensile, and hang but by a Thread, the Percussion will make an
Impulsion very near as easily, as if it were already in Motion.

A Body Ouer-great, or Ouer-small, will not be thrown so far, as a Body of a
Middle Six: So that (it seems) there must be a Commensuration, or
Proportion, between the Body Moved, and the Force, to make it move well. The
Cause is, because to the Impulsion, there is requisite the Force of the Body
that Moves, and the Resistance of the Body that is Moved: And if the Body be
too great, it yields too little; And if it be too small, it resists too
little.

It is Common Experience, that no Weight will press or cut so strong, Body, as
Falling, or stricken from above. It may be the Air has some part in
furthering the Percussion: But the chief Cause I take to be, for that the
Parts of the Body Moved, have by Impulsion, or by the Motion of Gravity
continued, a Compression in them, as well downwards, as they have when they are
thrown, or Shot through the Air, forwards. I conceive also, that the quick
Loose of that Motion, preuenteth the Resistance of the Body below; And Priority
of the Force, (always,) is of great Efficacy; As appears in infinite
Instances.

Tickling is most in the Soles of the Feet, and under the Arme-Holes, and on
the Sides. Experiment Solitary, touching Titillation.
The Cause is, the Thinness of the Skin in those Parts; Joined with the
Rareness of being touched there. For all Tickling is a Motion of the Spirits,
which the Thinness of the Skin, and Suddenness, and Rareness of Touch, do
further: For we see, a Feather, or a Rush, drawn along the Lip. or Cheek,
does tickle; Whereas a Thing more Obtuse, or a Touch more Hard, does not. And
for Suddenness; We see no Man can tickle himself: We see also, that the
Palm of the Hand, though it has as Thin a Skin as the other Parts
Mentioned, yet is not Ticklish, because it is accustomed to be Touched.
Tickling also causes Laughter. The Cause may be, the Emission of the Spirits,
and so of the Breath, by a Flight from Titillation; For upon Tickling, we see
there is ever a Starting, or Shrinking away of the Part, to avoid it; And we
see also, that if you Tickle the Nosthrills, with a Feather, or Straw, it
procures Sneezing; Which is a Sudden Emission of the Spirits, that do
likewise expel the Moisture. And Tickling is ever Painful, and not well
endured.

It is strange, that the River of Nilus, Ouer-flowing, as it does, the Country
of Egypt, there should be nevertheless little or no Rain in that Country.
Experiment Solitary, touching the Scarcity of Rain in Egypt:
The Cause must be, Either in the Nature of the Water; Or in the Nature of the
Air; Or of Both. In the Water, it may be ascribed, either Long ^^^ of the
Water: For Swift Running Waters vapor, not so much as Standing Waters; Or else
to the Concoction of the Water; For Waters well Concocted vapor not so much,
as Waters Raw; No more than Waters upon the Fire do vapor so much, after some
time of Boiling, as at the first. And it is true, that the Water of Nilus is
sweeter than other Waters in Taste; And it is excellent Good for the Stone, and
Hypochondriacall Melancholy; Which shows it is Lenefying: And it runs
through a Country of a Hot Climate, and flat, without Shade, either of Woods,
or Hills; Whereby the Sun must needs have great Power to Concoct it. As for
the Air, (from whence I conceive this Want of Showers comes chiefly;) The
Cause must be, for that the Air is, of it self, Thin and Thirsty; And as
soon as ever it gets any Moisture from the Water, it imbibeth, and
dissipateth it, in the whole body of the Air; And suffers it not to remain
in Vapor; Whereby it might breed Rain.

It has been touched in the Title of Percolations, (Namely such as are
Inwards,) that the Whites of Eggs, and Milk, do clarify; And it is certain,
that in Egypt, they prepare and clarify the Water of Nile, by Iarres of
Stone, and Stirring it about with a few Stamped Almonds; Wherewith they also
besmeare the Mouth of the Vessel; And so draw it off, after it has rested
some time. Experiment Solitary, touching Clarification.
It were good, to try this Clarifying with Almonds, in New Beer, or Must, to
hasten, and perfect the Clarifying.

There be scarce to be found any Vegetables, that have Branches, and no Leaves;
except you allow Coral for one. Experiment Solitary touching Plants without
Leaves
But there is also in the Deserts of S. Macario in Egypt, a Plant which is
Long, Leauelesse, Brown of Color, and Branched like Coral, faue that it
closes at the Top. This Water within House, spreads and displayeth
strangely; And the People thereabouts have a Superstitious Belief, that in the
Labor of Women, it helps to the Easy Deliverance.

The Crystalline Venice Glass, is reported to be a Mixture, in equal
Portions, of Stones, brought from Pauia, by the River Ticinum; And the Ashes of
a Weed called by the Arabs Kall, which is gathered in a Desert between
Alexandria and Rosetta; And is by the Egyptians used first Ashes into Lumps,
like a Stone; And so sell them to the Venetians for their Glasse-workes.
Experiment Solitary, touching the Materials of Glass.


It is strange, and well to be noted, how long Carcasses have continued
Vncorrupt, and in their former Dimensions; As appears in the Mummies of
Egypt; Having lafted, as is conceived, (some of them,) three thousand years.
Experiment Solitary, touching Prohibition of Putrefaction, and the Long
Conservation of Bodies.
It is true, they find Means to draw forth the Brains, and to take forth the
Entrails, which are the Parts apteft to corrupt. But that is nothing to the
Wonder: For we see, what a Soft and Corruptible Substance the Flesh, of all
the other Parts of the Body, is. But it should seem, that according to our
Observation, and Axiorne, in our hundredth Experiment, Putrefaction, which we
conceive to be so Natural a Period of Bodies, is but an Accident; And that
Matter makes not that Haste to Corruption, that is conceived. And therefore
Bodies, in Shining-Amber; In Quicke-Siluer; In Balmes, (whereof we now
speak;) In Wax; In Honey; In Gummes; And (it may be) in Conseruatories of
Snow; etc. are preserved very long. It need not go for Repetition, if we
resume again that which we said in the aforesaid Experiment, concerning
Annihilation; Namely, that if you provide against three Causes of Putrefaction,
Bodies will not corrupt: The First is, that the Air be excluded; For that
undermines the Body, and conspireth with the Spirit of the Body to dissolve
it. The Second is, that the Body Adjacent and Ambiens be not Commateriall, but
merely Heterogeneall toward the Body that is to be presured: For if Nothing
can be received by the One, Nothing can issue from the Other, Such are
Quicksilver, and White-Amber, to Herbs, and Flies, and such Bodies. The Third
is, that the Body to be preserved, be not of that Grass, that it may corrupt
within it self, although no Part of it issue into the Body Adjacent: And
therefore it must be rather Thin, and Small, than of Bulk. There is a Fourth
Remedy also, which is; That if the Body to be preserved be of Bulk, as a
Corpse is, then the Body that Incloseth it, must have a Virtue to draw forth,
and dry the Moisture of the Inward Body; For else the Putrefaction will play
within, though Nothing issue forth. I remember Liuy does relate, that there
were found, at a time, two Coffins of Lead, in a Tomb; Whereof the one
contained the Body of King Numa; It being some four hundred years after his
Death: And the other, his Books of Sacred Rites and Ceremonies, and the
Discipline of the Pontises; And that in the Coffin that had the Body, there was
Nothing (at all) to be seen, but a little light Cinders about the Sides; But
in the Coffin that had the Books, they were found as fresh, as if they had
been but newly Written; being written in Parchment, and covered over with
Watch-Candles of Wax, three or four fold. By this it seems, that the Romans.
in Numa's time, were not so good Embalmers, as the Egyptians were; Which was
the Cause that the Body was utterly consumed. But I find in Plutarch, and
Others, that when Augustus Caesar visited the Sepulcher of Alexander, the
Great, in Alexandria, he found the Body to keep his Dimension; But withal,
that, notwithstanding all the Embalming, (which no doubt was of the best,) the
Body was so Tender, as Caesar touching but the Nose of it, defaced it. Which
makes me find it very strange, that the Egyptian Mummies should be reported
to be as Hard as Stone-Pitch: For I find no difference but one; Which indeed
may be very Material; Namely, that the Ancient Egyptian Mummies, were
shrouded in a Number of Folds of Linen, besmeared with Gums, in manner of
Seare-Cloth; Which it does not appear was practiced upon the Body of Alexander.

Near the Castle of Catie, and by the Wells of Assan, in the Land of Idumea, a
great Part of the Way, you would think the Sea were near hand, though it be a
good distance off: And it is Nothing, but the Shining of the Nitre, upon the
Sea-Sands; Such Abundance of Nitre the Shores there do put forth. Experiment
Solitary, touching the Abundance of Nitre in certain Sea-Shoares.


The Dead-Sea, which vomiteth up Bitumen, is of that Crassitude, as Living
Bodies bound Hand and Foot, cast into it, have been borne up and not sunk.
Experiment Solitary, touching Bodies that are borne up by Water.
Which shows, that all Sinking into Water, is but an Ouer-Weight of the Body,
put into the Water, in respect of the Water: So Water so strong, and heavy, of
Quicke-Siluer, (perhaps,) or the like, as may bear up Iron: Of which I see no
Use, but Imposture. We see also, that all Metalls, except Gold, for the same
reason swim upon Quicke-Siluer.

It is reported, that at the Feet of a Hill, near the More mortuum, there is a
Black Stone, (whereof Pilgrims make Fires,) which burns like a Coal, and
diminishes not; But only waxes Brighter, and Whiter. Experiment Solitary,
touching Fuel, that consumes little, or nothing.
That it should do so, is not strange; For we see Iron Red Hot burns, time
so: For Iron, as soon as it is out of the Fire, deadeth straight ways.
Certainly, it were a Thing of great Use, and Profit, if you could find out
Fuel, that would burn Hot, and yet last long, Neither am I altogether
Incredulous, but there may be such Candles, as they say are made of Salamanders
Wool; Being a Kind of Mineral, which whiteneth also in the Burning, and
consumes not. The Question is this; Flame must be made of somewhat; And
commonly it is made of some Tangible Body, which has Weight: But it is not
impossible, perhaps, that it should be made of Spirit, or Vapor, in a Body;
(which Spirit on Vapor has no Weight;) such as is the Matter of Ignis ^^^^^s.
But then you will say, that that Vapor also can last but a short time: To that
it may be answered, That by the help of Oil, and Wax, and other
Candle-Stuffe, the Flame may continue, and the Wieke not burn.

Sea-Coale last longer than Char-Coale; And Char-Coale of Roots, being coaled
into great Pieces, last longer than Ordinary Char-Coale, Turfe, and Peat, and
Cow-Sheards, are cheap Fuels, and last long. Experiment Solitary Oeconomicall
touching Cheap Fuel.
Small-Coale, or Briar-Coale, powered upon Char-Coale, make them last longer.
Sedge is a cheap Fuel to Brew, or Bake with; the rather because it is good
for Sea-Coale with Earth, or Chalko; For if that Mixture be, as the
Sea-Coale-Men use it, privily, to make the Bulk of the Coal greater, it is
Deceit; But if it be used purposely, and be made known, it is Saving.

It is, at this Day, in use, in G^^^^ to couch Pat-Sheards or Vessels of Earth,
in their Walls, to gather the Wind from the Top; and to pass it down in
Spouts into Rooms. Experiment Solitary, touching the Gathering of Wind for
Freshness.
It is a Device for Freshness, in great Heats: And it is said, there are some
Rooms in Italy, and Spain, for Freshness, and Gathering the Winds, and
Air, in the Heats of Summer. But they be Pennings of the Winds, and Enlarging
them again, and Making them Reuerberate, and go round in Circles, rather than
this Device of Spouts in the Wall.

There would be used much diligence, in the Choice of some Bodies, and Places,
(as it were,) for the Testing of Air; to discover the Wholesomenesse or
Vnwholesomenesse, as well of Seasons, as of the Seats of Dwellings. Experiment
Solitary touching the Trials of Aires.
It is certain, that there be some Heuses, wherein Confitures, and Pies, will
gather Mould, more than in Others. And I am persuaded, that a Piece of Raw
Flesh, or Fish, will sooner corrupt in some Aires, than in Others. They be
noble Experiments, that can make this Discovery; For they serve for a Natural
Divination of Seasons; Better than the Astronomer can by their Figures: And
again, they teach Men where to choose their Dwelling, for their better Health.

There is a Kind of Stone, about Bethles^, which they grind to Powder, and
put into Water, whereof Cattle drink; Which makes them give more Milk.
Experiment Solitary touching Increasing of Milk in Milch Beasts.
Surely, there would be some better Trialls made of Mixtures of Water in Ponds
for Cattle, to make them more Milch; Or to Fatten them; Or to Keep them from
Murraine, It may be, Chalk, and Nitre, are of the best.

It is reported, that in the Valley, near the Mountain Carmel, in Judea,
there is a Sand, which, of all other, has most Affinity with Glass; Insomuch
as other Mineralls, laid in it, turn to a Glassie Substance, without the Fire;
And again Glass put into it, turns into the Mother-Sand. Experiment
Solitary, touching Sand of the Nature of Glass.
Natural Furnace, or Heat in the Earth: And yet they do not speak of any
Eruption of Flames. It were good to try in Glasse-Workes, whether the Crude
Materials of Glass, mingled with Glass, already made, and Re-moulten, do
not facilitate the Making of Glass with less Heat.

In the Sea, upon the South-West of Sicilie, much Coral is found. Experiment
Solitary, touching the Growth of Coral.
It is a Sub-Marine Plan. It has no Leanes: It brancheth only when it is under
Water; It is Soft, and Green of Color; But being brought into the Air, it
becomes Hard, and Shining Red, as we see. It is said also, White Berry; But
we find it not brought over with the Coral. Belike it is cast away as
nothing worth: Inquire better of it, for the Difcouerie of the Nature of the
Plant.

The Manns of Calabria is the best, and in most Plenty. Experiment Solitary,
touching the Gathering of Manna.
They gather it from the Leaf of the Mulberry Tree; But not of such Mulberry
Trees, as grow in the Valley's. And Manns falls upon the Leaves by Night, as
other Deawes do. It should seem, that before those Deawes come upon Trees in
the Valley's, they dissipate, and cannot hold out. It should seem also, the
Mulberry-Leafe, it self, has some Coagulating Virtue, which inspissateth the
Deaw, for that it is not found upon other Trees: And we see by the
Silke-Worme, which feeds upon that Leaf, what is Dainty Smooth Juice it has;
And the Leaves also, (especially of the Black Mulberry,) are somewhat Bristly,
which may help to preserve the Deaw. Certainly, it were not amiss, to obscrue
a little better, the Deawes that fall upon Trees, or Herbs, Growing on
Mountains; For, it may be, many Deawes fall, that spend before they come to
the Valleys. And I suppose, that he that would gather the best May-Deaw for
Medicine, should gather it from the Hills.

It is said, they have a manner, to prepare their Greeke-Wines, to keep them
from Fuming, and Inebriating, by adding some Sulphur, or Allome: Whereof the
one is Vnctnous, and the other is Astringent. Experiment Solitary, touching the
Correcting of Wine.
And certain it Natures do best repress Fumes. This Experiment would be
transferred, unto other Wine, and Strong Beer, by Putting in some like
Substances, while they work; Which may make them both to Fume less, and to
Inflame less.

It is conceived by some, (not improbably,) that the reason, why Wilde-Fires,
(Whereof the principal Ingredient is Bitumen,) do not quench with Water, is,
for that the first Concretion of Bitumen is a Mixture, of a Fiery, and Watery
Substance: So is not Sulphur. Experiment Solitary touching the Materials of
WildFire.
This appears, for that in the Place near Puteoli, which they call the Court
of Valcan, you Earth, a Horrible Thundering of Fire, and Water, conflicting
together: And there break forth also Spouts of Boiling Water. Now that Place
yields great Quantities of Bitumen; Whereas AEtna, and Vesuuius, and the
like, which consist upon Sulphur, shoot forth Smoke, and Ashes, and Pumice,
but no Water. It is reported also, that Bitumen Mingled with Lime, and Put
under Water, will make, as it were, an Artificial Rock; The Substance
becomes so Hard.

There is a Cement, compounded of Flower, Whites of Eggs, and Stone powdered,
that becomes Hard as Marble; wherewith Piscina mirabilis, near Cuma, is said
to have the Walls Plastered. Experiment Solitary, touching Plaster growing as
Hard as Marble.
And it is certain, and tried, that the Powder of Lodestone, and Flint, by
the Addition of Whites of Eggs, and Gumm-Dragon, made into Paste, will in a
few days Stone.

It has been noted by the Ancients, that in Full or Impure Bodies, Ulcers or
Hurts in the Legs, are Hard to Cure; And in the Head more Easy. Experiment
Solitary touching Judgment of the Cure in some Ulcers and Hurts.
The Cause is, for that Ulcers or Hurts in the Legs require Deficcation, which
by the Defluxion of Humors to the Lower Parts is hindered; Whereas Hurts and
Ulcers in the Head require it not; But contrariwise Dryness makes them more
apt to Consolidate. And in Modern Observation, Frenchmen, and Englishmen;
Where of the ones Constitution is more Dry, and the others more Moist. And
therefore a Hurt of the Head is harder to cure in a Frenchman, and of the
Leg in an Englishman.

It has been noted by the Ancients, that Southern Winds, blowing much,
without Rain, do cause a Feuourous Disposition of the Year; But with Rain,
not. Experiment Solitary, touching the Healthfulnesse or Vnhealthfulnesse of
the Southern Wind.
The Cause is, for that Southern Winds do, of themselves, qualify the Air,
to be apt to cause Fevers; But when Showers are joined, they do Refrigerate in
Part, and Check the Sultry Heat of the Southern Wind. Therefore this holds
not in the Seacoasts, because the Vapor of the Sea, without Showers, does
refresh.

It has been noted by the Ancients, that Wounds which are made with Brass,
heal more easily, than Wounds made with Iron. Experiment Solitary, touching
Wounds.
The Cause is, for that Brass has, in it self, a Sanatiue Virtue; And so in
the very Instant helps somewhat: But Iron is Corrosiue, and not Sanatiue.
Chirurgians about Wounds, were rather of Brass, than Iron.

In the Cold Countries, when Men's Noses, and Ears are Mortified, and (as it
were) Gangrened with Cold, if they come to a Fire, they rot off presently.
Experiment Solitary touching Mortification by Cold.
The Cause is, for that the few Spirits, that remain in those Parts, are
suddenly drawn forth, and so Putrefaction is made Complete. But Snow Put upon
them, helps; For that it preserves those Spirits that remain, till they can
revive; And besides, Snow has in it a Secret Warmth: As the Monk proved out
of the Text; Qui dat Niuem sicut Lanam, Gelu sicut Cineres spargit. Whereby he
did infer, that Snow did warm like Wool, and Frost did fret like Ashes.
Warm Water also does good, Because by little and little it opens the Pores,
without any sudden Working upon the Spirits. This Experiment may be transferred
unto the Cure of Gangrenes, either Coming of themselves, or induced by too
much Applying of Opiates: Wherein you must beware of Dry Heat, and resort to
Things that are Refrigerant, with an Inward Warmth, and Virtue of Cherishing.

Weigh Iron, and Aqua Fortis, severally; Then dissolve the Iron in the Aqua
Fortis: And weigh the Dissolution; And you shall find it to Weight, as the
Bodies did severally: Notwithstanding a good deal of Wast, by a thick Vapor,
that issues during the Working: Which shows, that the Opening of a Body,
does increase the Weight. Experiment Solitary touching Weight.
This was tried once, or twice, but I know not, whether there were any Error,
in the Trial.

Take of Aquafortis two Ounces, of Quicksilver two Drachmes; (For that Charge
the Aquafortis will bear;) The Dissolution will not bear a Flint, as big as
a Nutmeg: Yet (no doubt) the Increasing of the Weight of Water, will increase
his Power of Bearing: As we see Broine, when it Egg. Experiment Solitary
touching the Super-Natation of Bodies.
And I remember well a Physician, that used to give some Mineral Baths for the
Gout. etc. And the Body when it was put into the Bath, could not get down so
easily, as in Ordinary Water. But it seems, the Weight of the Quicksilver,
more than the Weight of a Stone; does not compense the Weight of a Stone, more
than the Weight of the Aquafortis.

Let there be a Body of Unequal Weight; (As of Wood and Lead, or Bone and
Lead;) If you throw it from you with the Light-End forward it will turn, and
the Weightier End will recover to be Forwards; Unless the Body be Ouer-long.
Experiment Solitary, touching the Flying of Unequal Bodies in the Air.
The Cause is, for that the more Dense Body, has Pressure of the Parts, from
the first Impulsion; Which is the Cause, (though heretofore not found out, as
has been often said,) of all Violent Motions: And when the Hinder Part moves
swifter, (for that it less endures Pressure of Parts,) than the Forward Part
can make way for it, it must needs be, that the Body turn over: For (turned)
it can more easily draw forward the Lighter Part. Ga^^laeus notes it well;
That if an Open Trough, wherein Water is, be driven faster than the Water can
follow, the Water gathers upon an heap, toward the Hinder End, where the
Motion began; Which he supposes, (holding confidently the Motion of the
Earth,) to be the Cause of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Ocean; Because the
Earth ouer-runneth the Water. Which Theory, though it be false, yet the first
Experiment is true. As for the Inequality of the Pressure of Parts, it
appears manifestly in this; That if you take a Body of Stone, or Iron, and
another of Wood, of the same Magnitude, and Shape, and throw them with equal
Force, you cannot possibly throw the Wood, so far, as the Stone, or Iron.

It is certain, (as it has been formerly, in part, touched,) that Water may
be the Medium of Sounds. Experiment Solitary, touching Water, that it may be
the Medium of Sounds.
If you dash a Stone against a Stone in the Bottom of the Water, it makes a
Sound. So a long Pole struck upon Gravel, in the Bottom of the Water, makes
a Sound. Nay, if you should think that the Sound comes up by the Pole, and
not by the Water, you shall find that an Anchor, let down by a Roape, makes
a Sound; And yet the Roape is no Solid Body, whereby the Sound can ascend.

All Objects of the Senses, which are very Offensive, do cause the Spirits to
retire; And upon their Flight, the Parts are (in some degree) destitute; And so
there is induced in them a Trepidation and Horror. Experiment Solitary, of the
Flight of the Spirits upon Odious Objects.
For Sounds, we see that the Grating of a Saw, or any very Harsh Noise, will
set the Teeth on edge, and make all the Body Shiuer. For Tastes, we see that
Potion, or Pills, the Head, and the Neck shake. For Odious Smells, the like
Effect follows, which is less perceived, because there is a Remedy at hand,
by Stopping of the Nose: But in Horses, that can use no such Help, we see the
Smell of a Carrion, especially of a Dead Horse, makes them fly away, and take
on, almost as if they were Mad. For Feeling, if you come out of the Sun,
suddenly, into a Shade, there follows a Chillness or Shiuering in all the
Body. And even in Sight, which has (in effect) no Odious Object, Coming into
Sudden Darkness, induces an Offer to Shiuer.

There is, in the City of Ticinum, in Italy, a Church, that has Windownes
only from above: It is in Length an Hundred Feet, in Breadth Twenty Feet, and
in Height near Fifty; Having a Door in the Midst. Experiment Solitary,
touching the Super-Reflexion of Eccho's.
It reports the Voice, twelve or thirteen times, if you stand by the Close
End-Wall, over against the Door. The Echo fades, and dies by Echo at
Pont-charenton does. And the Voice sounds, as if it came from above the
Door. And if you stand at the Lower End, or on either Side of the Door, the
Echo holds; But if you stand in the Door, or in the Midst just over
against the Door, not. Note that all Eccho's sound better against Old Walls,
than New; Because they are more Dry, and Hollow.

Those Effects, which are wrought by the Percussion of the Sense, and by Things
in Fact, are produced likewise, in some degree, by the Imagination. Experiment
Solitary touching the Force of Imagination, Im^^a ^^ng that of the Sense.
Therefore if a Man see another eat Sour or Acide Things, which set the Teeth
on edge, this Object tainteth the Imagination. So that he that sees the Thing
done by another, has his own Teeth also set on Wheels that turn, Himself
waxes Turne-sicke. So if a Man be upon an High Place, without Railes, or good
Hold, except he be used to it, he is Ready to Fall: For Imagining a Fall, it
puts his Spirits into the very Action of a Fall. So Many upon the Seeing of
others Bleed, or Strangled, or Tortured, Themselves are ready to faint, as if
they Bled, or were in Strife.

Take a Stocke-Gilly-Flower, and tie it gently upon a Stick, and put them both
into a Stoop Glass, full of Quicksilver, so that the Flower be covered: Then
lay a little Weight upon the Top of the Glass, that may Flower Fresh, and the
Stalk Harder, and less Flexible, than it was. Experiment Solitary, touching
Preservation of Bodies.
If you compare it with another Flower, gathered at the same time, it will be
the more manifest. This shows, that Bodies do preserve excellently in
Quicksilver; And not preserve only, but, by the Coldness of the Quicksilver,
Indurate; For the Freshness of the Flower may be merely Conservation; (which
is the more to be observed because the Quicksilver presses the Flower;) But
the Stiffenesse of the Stalk, cannot be without Induration, from the Cold (as
it seems,) of the Quicksilver.

It is reported by some of the Ancients, that in Cyprus, there is a Kind of
Iron, that being cut into Little Pieces, and put into the Ground, if it be well
Watered, will increase into Greater Pieces. Experiment Solitary, touching the
Growth, or Multiplying of Metalis.
This is certain, and known of Old; That Lead will multiply, and Increase; As
has been seen in Old Statua's of Stone, which have been put in Cellars;
Feet of them being bound with Leaden Bands; Where (after a time,) there
appeared, that the Lead did swell; Insomuch as it hanged upon the Stone like
Warts.

I call Drowning of Metalls, when that the Baser Metal, is so incorporate with
the more Rich, as it can by no Means be separated again: which is a kind of
Version, though False: As if Silver should be inseparably incorporated with
Gold; Or Copper, and Lead, with Silver. Experiment Solitary, touching the
Drowning of the mne Base Metal in the more Precious.
The Ancient Electrum had in it a Fifth of Silver to the Gold; And made a
Compound Metal, as fit for most uses, as Gold; And more Resplendent, and more
Qualified in some other Properties; But then that was easily Separated. This to
do privily, or to make the Compound pass for the Rich Metal Simple, is an
Adulteration, or Counterfeiting: But if it be done Auowedly, and without
Disguizing, it may be a great Saving of the Richer Metal. I remember to have
heard of a Man, skillful in Metalls, that a Fifteenth Part of Silver,
incorporate with Gold, will not be Recovered by any Water of Separation; Except
you put a Greater Quantity of Silver, to draw to it the Less; which (he said)
is the last Refuge in Separations. But that is a tedious way, which no Man
(almost) will think on. This would be better enquired; And the Quantity of the
Fifteenth turned to a Twentieth; And likewise with some little Additionall,
that may further the Intrinsique Incorporation. Note that Silver in Gold will
be detected by Weight, compared with the Dimension; But Lead in Silver, ( Lead
being the Weightier Metal,) will not be detected; If you take so much the more
Silver, as will counteruaile the Ouer-Weight of the Lead.

Gold is the only Substance, which has nothing in it Volatile, and yet
melts without much difficulty. Experiment Solitary touching Fixation of
Bodies.
The Melting shows that it is not Ieiune, or Scarce in Spirit. So that the
Fixing of it, is not Want of Spirit to fly out, but the Equal Spreading of the
Tangible Parts, and the Close Coaceruation of them: Whereby they have the less
Appetite, and no Means (at all) to issue forth. It were good therefore to try,
whether Glass Re-moulten do leese any Weight? For the Parts in Glass are
euenly Spread; But they are not so Close as in Gold; As we see by the Easy
Admission of Light, Heat, and Cold; And by the Smalnesse of the Weight. There
be other Bodies, Fixed, which have little, or no Spirit: So as there is nothing
to fly out; As we see in the Stuff, whereof Coppells are made; Which they put
into Furnaces; Upon which Fire works not: So that there are three Causes of
Fixation; The Even Spreading both of the Spirits, and Tangible Parts; The
Closeness of the Tangible Parts; And the Ieiunenesse or Extreme Comminution of
Spirits: Of which Three, the Two First may be joined with a Nature Liquefiable;
The Last not.

It is Profound Contemplation in Nature, to consider of the Emptiness, (as we
may call it,) or Insatisfaction of several Bodies; And of their Appetite to
take in Others. Experiment Solitary, touching the Restless Nature of Things in
Themselves, and their Desire to Change.
Air takes in Lights, and Sounds, and Smells, and Vapors; And it is most
manifest, that it does it, with a kind of Thirst, as not satisfied with his
own former Consistence; For else it would never receive them in so suddenly,
and easily. Water, and all Liquours, do hastily receive Dry and more
Terrestrial Bodies, Proportionable: Dry Bodies, on the other side, drink in
Waters, and Liquours: So that, (as it was well said, by one of the Ancients, of
Earthy and Watery Substances,) One is a Glue to another. Parchment, Skins,
Cloth, etc. drink in Liquours, though themselves be Entire Bodies, and not
Comminuted, as Sand, and Ashes; Nor apparently Porous: Metalls themselves do
receive in readily Strong Water; And Strong Water likewise do readily pierce
into Metalls, and Stones: And that Strong-Water will touch upon Gold, that will
not touch upon Silver; And e conuerso. And Gold, which seems by the Weight,
to be the Closest, and most Solid Body, does greedily drink in Quicksilver.
And it seems, that this Reception of other Bodies, is not Violent: For it is
(many times) Reciprocal, and as it were with Consent. Of the Cause of this,
and to what Axiom it may be referred, consider attentively; For as for the
Pretty Assertion, that Matter is like a Common Strumpet, that desires all
Forms, it is but a Wandering Notion. Only Flame does not content it self to
take in any other Body; But either, to overcome and turn another Body into it
Self, as by Victory; Or it Self to dye, and go out,

NATVRALL HISTORY.
IX. Century.
IT is certain, that all Bodies whatsoever, though they have no Sense, yet
they have Perception: For when one Body is applied to another, there is a Kind
of Election, to embrace that which is Agreeable, and to exclude or expel that
which is Ingrate: And whether the Body be Alterant, or Altered, evermore a
Perception precedeth Operation: For else all Bodies would be alike One to
Another. Experiments in Consort, touching Perception in Bodies Insensible,
tending to Natural Divination, or Subtle Trials.
And sometimes this Perception, in some Kind of Bodies, is far more Subtle
than the Sense; So that the Sense is but a dull Thing in Comparison of it: We
see a Weather-Glasse, will find the least difference of the Weather, in Heat,
or Cold, when Men find it not. And this Perception also, is sometimes at
Distance, as well as upon the Touch; As when the Lodestone draws Iron; or
Flame fireth Naphtha of Babylon, a great distance off. It is therefore a
Subject of a very Noble Enquiry, to enquire of the more Subtle Perceptions;
For it is another Key to open Nature, as well as the Sense; And sometimes
Better. And besides, it is a Principal Means of Natural Divination; For that
which in these Perceptions appears early, in the great Effects comes long
after. It is true also, that it serves to discover that which is Hid, as well
as to foretell that which is to Come; As it is in many Subtle Trialls; As to
try whether Seeds be old, or new, the Sense cannot inform: But if you boil
them in Water, the New Seeds will sprout sooner: And so of Water, the Taste
will not discover the best Water; But the Speedy Consuming of it, and many
other Means, which we have heretofore set down, will discover it. So in all
Physiognomy, the Lineaments of the Body will discover those Natural
Inclinations of the Mind, which Dissimulation will conceal, or Discipline
will suppress. We shall therefore now handle only, those two Perceptions,
which pertain to Natural Divination, and Discovery: Leaving the Handling of
Perception in other Things, to be disposed Elsewhere. Now it is true, that
Divination is attained by other Means; As if you know the Causes; If you know
the Concomitants; you may judge of the Effect to follow: And the like may be
said of Discovery; But we tie our Selves here, to that Divination and
Discovery chiefly, which is Caused by an Early, or Subtle Perception.

The Aptness or Propension of Air, or Water, to Corrupt or Putrify, (no
doubt,) is to be found before it break forth into manifest Effects of
Diseases, Blastings, or the like. We will therefore set down some
Prognostics of Pestilentiall and Unwholesome Years.

Wind blowing much from the South, without Rain; And Worms in the Oake-Apple;
have been spoken of before. Also the Plenty of Frogs, Grashappers, Flies, and
the like Creatures bred of Putrefaction, does portend Pestilentiall Years.

Great, and Early Heats in the Spring, (and namely in May,) without Winds,
portend the same; And generally so do Years with little Wind, or Thunder.

Great Droughts in Summer, lasting till toward the End of August, and Gentle
Showers upon them; And then some Dry Weather again; Do portend a Pestilent
Summer, the Year following: For about the End of August, all the Sweetness of
the Earth, which goes into Plants, and Trees, is exhaled; (And much more if
the August be dry;) So that nothing then can breathe forth of the Earth, but a
gross Vapor, which is apt to Corrupt the Air: And that Vapor, by the first
Showers, if they be Gentle, is released, and comes forth abundantly.
Therefore they that come abroad soon after those Showers, are commonly taken
with Sickness: And in Affricke, no Body will stir out of doors, after the
first Showers. But if the Showers come vehemently, then they rather wash and
fill the Earth, than give it leave to breathe forth presently. But if Dry
Weather come again, then it fixes and continues the Corruption of the Air,
upon the first Showers begun; And makes it of ill Influence, even to the Next
Summer; Except a very Frostie Winter discharge it; Which seldom succeeds
such Droughts.

The Lesser Infections, of the Small Pockes, Purple Fevers, Agues, in Summer
Precedent, and houering all Winter, do portend a great Pestilence in the
Summer following; For Putrefaction does not rise to his height at once.

It were good to lay a Piece of Raw Flesh, or Fish, in the Open Air; Sign of
a Disposition in the Air to Putrefaction. And because you cannot be informed,
whether the Putrefaction be quick or late, except you compare this Experiment
with the like Experiment in another Year, it were not amiss, in the same
Year, and at the same Time, to lay one Piece of Flesh, or Fish, in the Open
Air, and another of the same Kind and Bigness, within Doors: For I judge,
that if a general Disposition be in the Air to Putrefie, the Flesh, or Fish,
will sooner Putrefie abroad, where the Air has more power, than in the House,
where it has less, being many ways corrected. And this Experiment would be
made about the End of March: For that Season is likest to discover, what the
Winter has done; And what the Summer following will do upon the Air. And
because the Air (no doubt) receives great Tincture, and Infusion from the
Earth; It were good to try that Exposing of Flesh, or Fish, both upon a Stake
of Wood, some height above the Earth, and upon the Flat of the Earth.

Take May-Dew, and see whether it putrify quickly, or no? For that Quality of
the Air, and Vapor of the Earth, more or less Corrupted.

A Dry March, and a Dry May, portend a Wholesome Summer, if there Showring
April between: But otherwise, it is a Sign of a Pestilentiall Year.

As the Discovery of the Disposition of the Air, is good for the Prognostics
Wholesome, and Unwholesome Years; So it is of much more use, for the Choice of
Places to dwell in: At the least, for Lodges, and Retiring Places for Health;
(For Mansion Houses respect Provisions, as well as Health; Wherein the
Experiments above mentioned may serve.

Choice of Places, or Seats, it is good to make Trial, not only of Aptness of
Air to corrupt, but also of the Moisture and Dryness of the Air; and the
Temper of it, in Heat, or Cold; For that may concern Health diversely. We see
that there be some Houses, wherein Sweet Meats will relent, and Baked Meats
will mould, more than in others; And Wainscoats will also sweat more; so that
they will almost run with Water: All which, (no doubt,) are caused chiefly by
the Moistness of the Air, in those Seats. But because it is better to know
it, before a Man builds his House, than to find it after, take the
Experiments following.

Wool, or a Sponge, or Bread, in the Place you would try, comparing it with
some other Places; And see whether it does not moisten, and make the Wool, or
Sponge, etc. more Ponderous, than the other? And if it do, you may judge of
that Place, as Situate in a Gross, and Moist Air.

Places, either by the Nature of the Earth, or by the Situation of Woods, and
Hills, the Air is more Unequal, than in Others; and Inequality of Air is
ever an Enemy to Health; It were good to take two Weather-Glasses, Matches in
all things, and to set them, for the same Hours of One day, in several
Places, where no Shade is, nor Enclosures: And to mark, when you set them, how
far the Water comes; And to compare them, when you come again, how the
Water stands then: And if you find them Unequal, you may be sure that the
Place where the Water is lowest, is in the Warmer Air, and the other in the
Colder. And the greater the Inequality be, of the Ascent, or Descent of the
Water, the greater is the Inequality of the Temper of the Air.

Predictions likewise of Cold and Long Winters, and Hot and Dry Summers, are
good to be known; As well for the Discovery of the Causes, as for diverse
Provisions. That of Plenty of Hawes, and Heps, and Briar-Berries, has been
spoken of before. If Wainscast, or Stone, that have used to Sweat, be more
dry, in the Beginning of Winter; Or the Drops of the Eaues of Houses come more
slowly down, than they use; it portendeth a Hard and Frostie Winter. The Cause
is, for that it shows an Inclination of the Air, to Dry Weather; which in
Winter is ever joined with Frost.

Moist and Cool Summer, portendeth a Hard Winter. The Cause is, for that the
Vapors of the Earth, are not dissipated in the Summer, by the Sun; And so
they rebound upon the Winter.

Hot and Dry Summer, and Autumn, and especially if the Heat and Drought
extend far into September, portendeth an Open Beginning of Winter; And Colds
to succeed, toward the latter Part of the Winter, and the Beginning of the
Spring: For till then, the former Heat and Drought bear the Sway; And the
Vapors are not sufficiently Multiplied.

Open and Warm Winter portendeth a Hot and Dry Summer: For the Vapors
disperse into the Winter Showers; Whereas Cold and Frost keeps them in, and
transporteth them into the late Spring, and Summer following.

Birds that use to change Countries, at certain Seasons, if they come
Temperature of Weather, according to that Country whence they came: As the
Winter-Birds, (namely Woodcocks, Feldefares, etc.) if they come earlier, and
out of the Northern Countries, with us show Cold Winters. And if it be in the
same Country, then they show a Temperature of Season, like unto that Season in
which they come: As swallows, Bats, Cuckooes, etc. that come toward Summer,
if they come early, show a Hot Summer to follow.

The Prognostics, more Immediate, of Weather to follow soon after, Seasons.
The Resounding of the Sea upon the Shore; And the Murmur of Winds in the
Woods, without apparent Wind; show Wind to follow: For such Winds, breathing
chiefly out of the Earth, are not at the first perceived, except they be pent,
by Water, or Wood. And therefore a Murmur out of Caves likewise portendeth as
much.

The Upper Regions of the Air, perceive the Collection of the Matter and
Winds, before the Air here below: And therefore the Obscuring of the Smaller
Stars is is a Sign of Tempests following. And of this kind you shall find
a Number of Instances in our Inquisition De Ventis.

Great Mountains have a Perception of the Disposition of the Air to Tempests,
sooner than the Valley's or Plains below: And therefore they say in Wales,
when certain Hills have their Night-Cups on, they mean Mischief. The Cause
is, for that Tempests, which are for the most part bred above, in the Middle
Region, (as they call it,) are soonest perceived to collect in the Places next
it.

The Air, and Fire, have Subtle Perceptions of Wind Rising, before Men find
it. We see the Trembling of a Candle will discover a Wind that otherwise we
do not feel; And the Flexuous Burning of Flames does show the Air begins
to be unquiet; And so do Coals of Fire by Casting off the Ashes more than
they use. The Cause, is, for that no Wind, at the first, till it has struck
and driven the Air, is Apparent to the Sense: But Flame is easier to move,
than Air: And for the Ashes, it is no marvel, though Wind unperceived shake
them off; For we usually try, which way the Wind blows, by casting up
Grass, or Chafe, or such light Things, into the Air.

When Wind expireth from under the Sea; As it causes some Resounding Water,
(whereof we spoke before,) so it causes some Light Motions of Bubbles, and
White Circles of Froth. The Cause is, for that the Wind cannot be perceived by
the Sense, until there be an Eruption of a great Quantity, from under the
Water; And so it gets into a Body: Whereas in the first Putting up it
comes in little Portions.

We spoke of the Ashes, that Coals cast off; And of Grass, and Chafe Wind;
So any Light Thing that moves, when we find no Wind, shows a Wind at hand:
As when Feathers, or Down of Thistles, fly to and fro in the Air.

For Prognostics of Weather from Living Creatures, it is to be noted; That
Creatures that Live in the Open Air, (Sub Dio,) must needs have a Quicker
Impression from the Air, than Men that live most within Doors; And especially
Birds, who live in the Air, freest, and clearest; And are aptest by their
Voice to tell Tales, what they find; And likewise by the Motion of their
Flight to express the same.

Water-Fowles, (as Sea-Gulls, More-Hens, etc.) when they flock and fly
together, from the Sea toward the Shores; And contrariwise, LandBirds, (as
Crows, Swallows, etc.) when they fly from the Land to the Waters, and beat
the Waters with their Wings; do fore-shew Rain, and Wind. The Cause is,
Pleasure, that both Kinds take in the Moistness, and Density of the Air: And
so desire to be in Motion, and upon the Wing, whither soever they would
otherwise go: For it is no Marvel, that Water-Fowle do joy most in that
Air, which is likest Water; And LandBirds also, (many of them,) delight in
Bathing, and Moist Air. For the same Reason also, many Birds do proine their
Feathers; And Geese do gaggle; And Crows seem to call upon Rain: All which
is but the Comfort they seem to receive in the Relenting of the Air.

Heron, when she foareth high, (so as sometimes she is seen to pass over a
Cloud,) shows Winds: But Kites flying aloft, show Fair and Dry Weather. The
Cause may be, for that they both mount most into the Air, of that Temper,
wherein they delight: And the Heron, being a Water-Fowle, takes pleasure in
the Air, that is Condensed: And besides, being but Heavy of Wing, needs the
Help of the Grosser Air. But the Kite affects not so much the Grossness
of the Air, as the Cold and Freshness thereof; For being a Bird of Prey, and
therefore Hot, she delights in the Fresh Air; And (many times) flies
against the Wind; As Trouts, and Salmons swim against the Stream. And yet it
is true also, that all Birds find an Ease in the depth of the Air; As
Swimmers do in a Deep Water. And therefore when they are aloft, they can
uphold themselves with their Wings Spread, scarce moving them.

Fishes, when they play toward the Top of the Water, do commonly foretell
Rain. The Cause is, for that a Fish hating the Dry, will not approach the
Air, till it grows Moist; And when it is Dry, will fly it, and Swim Lower.

Beasts do take Comfort, (generally,) in a Moist Air; And it makes them eat
their Meat better: And therefore Sheep will get up betimes in the Morning, to
feed, against Rain: And Cattle, and Dear, and Conneyes, will feed hard
before Rain: And a Heifer, will put up his Nose, and snuff in the Air,
against Rain.

The Trifoile, against Rain, swells in the Stalk; and so stands Wet,
Stalks do erect, and Leaves bow down. I here is a Small Red Flower in the
Stubble-Fields, which Country People call the Wincopipe; Which if it open in
the Morning, you may be sure of a fair Day to follow.

Even in Men, Aches, and Hurts, and Corns, do engrieue, either toward Rain,
or toward Frost: For the One makes the Humors more to Abound; And the Other
makes them Sharper. So we see both Extremes bring the Gout.

Worms, Vermin, etc. do fore-shew (likewise) Rain: For Earthwormes Moules
will cast up more, and Fleas bite more, against Rain.

Solid Bodies likewise fore-shew Rain. As Stones, and Wainscot, when sweat:
And Boxes, and Peggs of Wood, when they Draw, and Wind hard; Though the Former
be but from an Outward Cause; For that the Stone, or Wainscot, turns and
beats back the Air against it self; But the latter is an Inward Swelling
of the Body of the Wood it self.

Apetite is moved chiefly by Things that are Cold, and Dry: The Cause, is for
that Cold is a Kind of Indigence of Nature, and calls upon Supply; And so is
Dryness: And therefore all Sour Things, (as Vinegar, Juice of Limons, Oil of
Vitrioll, etc.) provoke Appetite. Experiment Solitary, touching the Nature of
Appetite in the Stomach.
And the Disease, which they call Appetitus Caninus, consists in the Matter
of an Acide Glassy Phlegm, in the Mouth of the Stomach. Appetite is also moved
by Sour Things; For that Sour Things, induce a Contraction in the Nerves,
placed in the Mouth of the Stomach; Which is a great Cause of Appetite. As for
the Cause, why Onions, and Salt, and Pepper, in Baked Meats, move Appetite, it
is by Vellication of those Nerves; For Motion whetteth. As for Worme-Wood,
Olives, Capers, and others of that kind, which participate of Bitterness,
they move Appetite by Abstersion. So as there be four Principal Causes of
Appetite; The Refrigeration of the Stomach, joined with some Dryness;
Contraction; Vellication; And Abstersion: Besides Hunger, which is an
Emptiness: And yet Over Fasting does (many times) cause the Appetite to cease;
For that Want of Meat makes the Stomach draw Humors; And such Humors as are
Light, and Choleric, which quench Appetite most.

It has been observed by the Ancients, that where a Rainbow seems no hang
over, or to touch, there breaths forth a Sweet Smell. Experiment Solitary,
touching Sweetness of Odor from the Rainbow.
The Cause is, for that this happens but in certain Matters, which have in
themselves some Sweetness; Which the Gentle Dew of the Rainbow does draw
forth. And the like do Safe Showers; For they also make Dew of the Rainbow,
where it falls. It may be also, that the Water it self bath some Sweetness:
For the Rainbow consists of a Glo^^eration of Small Drops, which cannot
possibly fall, but from the Air, that is very Low: And therefore may hold the
very Sweetness of the Herbs, and Flowers, as a Distilled Water: For Rain, and
other Dew, that fall from high, cannot preserve the Smell, being dissipated in
the drawing up: Neither do we know, whether some Water it self, may not have
some degree of Sweetness. It is true, that we find it sensibly in no Poole,
River, nor Fountain; But good Earth, newly turned up, has a Freshness, and
good Sent; Which water, if it be not too Equal, (For Equal Objects never move
the Sense.) may also have. Certain it is, that Bay Salt, which is but a kind
of Water Congealed, will sometimes smell like Violets.

To Sweet Smells Heat is requisite, to Concoct the Matter; And some Moisture to
Spread the Breath of them. For Heat, we see that Woods, and Spices, are more
Odorate in the Hot Countries, than in the Cold: For Moisture, we see that
Things too much Dried, lose their Sweetness: And Flowers growing, smell better
in a Morning, or Evening, than at Noone. Experiment Solitary, touching Sweet
Smells.
Some Sweet Smells are destroyed by Approach to the Fire; As Violets,
Wall-Flowers, Gilly-Flowers, Pinckes; And generally all Flowers that have Cool
and Delicate Spirits. Some continue both on the Fire, and from the Fire, As
Rose Water, etc. Some do scarce come forth, or at least not so pleasantly, as
by means of the Fire; as Juniper, Sweet Gums, etc. And all Smells, that are
Enclosed in a Fast Body: But (generally) those Smells are the most Grateful,
where the Degree of Heat is Small; Or where the Strength of the Smell is
allayed; For these Things do rather woo the Sense, than Satiate it. And
therefore the Smell of Violets, and Roses, exceeds in Sweetness that of
Spices, and Gummes; And the Strongest Sort of Smells, are best in a weft, a
far off.

It is certain, that no Smell issues, but with Emission of some Corporeal
Substance; Not as it is in Light, and Colors, and in Sounds. Experiment
Solitary touching the Corportall Substance of Smells.
For we see plainly, that Smell does spread nothing that distance, that the
other do. It is true, that some Woods of Orenges, and Heathes of Rose-Mary,
will Sea, perhaps twenty Miles; But what is that, since a Peale of Ordnance
will do as much, which moves in a small compass? Whereas those Woods, and
Heathes, are of Vast Spaces: Besides we see that Smells do adhere to Hard
Bodies; As in Persuming of Gloves, etc. which shows them Corporeal; And do
Last a great while, which Sounds, and Light do not.

The Excrements of most Creatures Smell ill; Chiefly to the same Creature that
voideth them: For we see, besides that of Man, that Pigeons, and Horses thrive
best, if their Houses, and Stables be kept Sweet; And so of Cage-Birds: And the
Cat burieth that which she voideth: Beasts, which feed upon Flesh. Experiment
Solitary touching Fetide and Fragrant Odours.
Dogs (almost) only of Beasts, delight in Fetide Odours; Which shows there
is somewhat in their Sense of Smell, differing from the Smells of other Beasts.
But the Cause, why Excrements smell ill, is manifest; For that the Body it
self rejects them; Much more the Spirits: And we see, that those Excrements,
that are of the First Digestion; Smell the worst; As the Excrements from the
Belly: Those that are from the Second Digestion, less ill; As Urine; And those
that are from the Third, yet less; For Sweat is not so bad, as the other two;
Especially of some Persons, that are full of Heat. Likewise most Putrefactions
are of an Odious Smell: For they smell either Fetide, or Moldy. The Cause may
be, for that Putrefaction does bring forth such a Consistence, as is most
Contrary to the Consistence of the Body, whilst it is Sound: For it is a mere
dissolution of that Form. Besides, there is another Reason which is Profound:
And it is, that the Objects that please any of the Senses, have (all) some
Equality, and (as it were) Order, in their Composition: But where those are
wanting, the Object is ever Ingrate. So Mixture of many Disagreeing Colors is
ever unpleasant to the Eye: Mixture of Discordant Sounds is unpleasant to the
Ear: Mixture, or Hotch-Potch of many Tastes, is unpleasant to the Taste:
Harshnesse and Ruggedness of Bodies, is unpleasant to the Touch: Now it is
certain, that all Putrefaction, being a Dissolution of the first Form, is a
mere Confusion, and Unformed Mixture of the Part. Nevertheless, it is
strange, and seems to Cross the former Observation, that some Putrefactions
and Excrements do yield Excellent Odours; As Ciuet, and Musk; And as some
think Ambergris: For diverse take it, (though improbably,) to come from the
Sperme of Fish: And the Moss, we spoke of from Apple Trees, is little better
than an Excretion. The Reason may be, for that there passes in the Excrements,
and remains in the Putrefactions, some good Spirits; especially where they
proceed from Creatures, that are very Hot. But it may be also joined with a
further Cause, which is more Subtle; And it is, that the Senses love not to be
Ouerpleased; But to have a C^^^^^^ of somewhat is in it self Ingrate.
Certainly, we see how Discords in Music, falling upon Concords, make the
Sweetest Strains: And we see again, what Strange Tastes delight the Taste; As
Red-Herrings, Caueary, Parmizan, etc. And it may be, the same holds in
Smells. For those kind of Smells, that we have mentioned, are all Strong, and
do Pull and Vellicate the Sense. And we find also, that Places where Men
Urine, commonly have some smell of Violets: And Urine, if one has eaten
Nutmegge, has so too.

The Sloathfull, General, and Indefinite Contemplations, and Notions, of the
Elements, and their Coniugations; Of the Influences of Heaven; Of Heat, Cold,
Moisture, Drought; Qualities, Active, Passive; And the like; have swallowed up
the true Passages, and Processes, and Affects, and Consistences of Matter, and
Natural Bodies. Therefore they are to be set aside, being but Notionall, and
ill Limited; And Definite Axioms are to be drawn out of Measured Instances:
And so Assent to be made to the more General Axioms, by Scale. And of these
Kinds of Processes of Natures, and Characters of Matter, we will now set down
some Instances.

All Putrefactions come chiefly from the Inward Spirits of the Body; And partly
also from the Ambient Body, be it Air, Liquour, or whatsoever else. Experiment
Solitary, touching the Causes of Putrefaction.
And this last, by two Means: Either by Ingresse of the Substance Ambient
Body, into the Body Putrified; Or by Excitation and Solicitation of the Body
Putrified, and the Parts thereof, by the Body Ambient. As for the Received
Opinion, that Putrefaction is caused, either by Cold, or Peregrine and
Preternaturall Heat, it is but Nugation: For Cold in Things Inanimate, is the
greatest Enemy that is, to Putrefaction; though it extinguisheth Vivification,
which ever consists in Spirits Attenuate. which the Cold does congeale, and
coagulate. And as for the Peregrins Heat, it is thus far true; That if the
Proportion of the Aduentiue Heat, be greatly Predominant, to the Natural Heat,
and Spirits of the Body, it tends to Dissolution, or Notable Alteration. But
this is wrought by Emission, or Suppression, or Suffocation, of the Native
Spirits; And also by the Disordination, and Discomposture of the Tangible
Parts; And other Passages of Nature; And not by a Conflict of Heats.

In Versions, or Maine Alterations of Bodies, there is a Medium between the
Body, as it is at first, and the Body Resulting; which Medium is Corpus
imperfecte Mistum, and is Transitory, and not durable; As Mists, Smoaks,
Vapors, Chylus in the Stomach, Living Creatures in the first Vinification: And
Middle Action, which produces such Imperfect Bodies, is fitly called, (by some
of the Ancients,) Inquination, or Inconcoction, which is a Kind of
Putrefaction; For the Parts are in Confusion, till they settle, one way, or
other. Experiment Solitary, touching Bodies Imperfectly Mixed.


The word Concoction, or Digestion, is chiefly taken into use from Living
Creatures, and their Organs; And from thence extended to Liquours, and Fruits,
etc. Therefore they speak of Meat Concocted; Urine and Excrements And the
Four Disgestions, (In the Stomach; In the Liver; In the Arteries and Nerves;
And in the Several Parts of the Body;) are likewise called Concoctions: And
they are all made to be the Works of Heat: All which Notions are but ignorant
Catches of a few Things, which are most Obuious to Men's Observations. The
Constantest Notion of Concoction is, that it should signify the Degrees of
Alteration, of one Body into another, from Crudity to Perfect Concoction; Which
is the Vltimity of that Action, or Process: And while the Body to be Converted
and Altered, is too strong for the Efficient, that should Convert, or Alter it,
(whereby it resists and holds fast in some degree the first Form, or
Consistence;) it is (all that while,) Crude, and Inconcoct; And the Process is
to be called Crudity and Inconcoction. It is true, that Concoction is, in great
part, the Work of Heat; But not the Work of Heat alone: For all Things, that
further the Conversion, or Alteration, (as Rest, Mixture of a Body already
Concocted, etc.) are also Means to Concoction. And there are of Concoction two
Periods; The one Assimilation, or Absolute Conversion and Subaction; The other
Maturation: whereof the Former is most conspicuous in the Bodies of Living
Creatures; In which there is an Absolute Conversion, and Assimilation of the
Nourishment into the Body: And likewise in the Bodies of Plants: And again in
Metalls, where there is a full Transmutation. The other, (which is Maturation,)
is seen in Liquours, and Fruits; wherein there is not desired, nor pretended,
an utter Conversion, but only an Alteration to that Form, which is most
sought, for Man's use; As in Clarifying of Drinks; Ripening of Fruits, etc. But
note, that there be two Kinds of Absolute Conuersions; The one is, when a Body
is converted into another Body, which was before; As when Nourishment is turned
into Flesh; That is it which we call Assimilation. The other is, when the
Conversion is into a Body merely New, and which was not before; As if Silver
should be turned to Gold; or Iron to Copper: And this Conversion is better
called, for distinctions sake, Transmutation.

There are also diverse other Great Alterations of Matter, and Bodies, besides
those that tend to Concoction, and Maturation; For whatsoever does so alter a
Body, as it returns not again to that it was, may be called Alteratio Mayor:
As when Meat is Boiled, or Roasted, or Fried, etc. Experiment Solitary,
touching Alterations, which may be called Majors.
Or when Bread and Meat are Baked; Or when Cheese is made of Curds, or Butter
of Cream, or Goales of wood, or Brickes of Earth; And a Number Notions
Philosophical to Plebcian Terms; Or to say, where the Notions cannot fitly be
reconciled, that there wants a Term, or Nomenclature for it; (as the
Ancients used;) They be but Shifts of Ignorance; For Knowledge will be ever a
Wandering and Indigested Thing, if it be but a Commixture of a few Notions, that
are at hand and occur, and not excited from sufficient Number of Instances,
and those well collated.

The Consistences of Bodies are very diverse: Dense, Rare; Tangible,
Pneumaticall, Volatile, Fixed; Determinate, Not Determinate, Hard, Soft;
Cleaving, Not Cleaving; Congealeable, Not Congealeable; Liquefiable, Not
Liquefiable; Fragile, Tough; Flexible Inflexible; Tractile, or to be drawn
forth in length, Intractile; Porous, Solid; Equal, and Smooth, Unequal,
Venous, and Fibrous, and with Grains, Entire; And diverse Others; All which to
refer to Heat, and Cold; and Moisture, and Drought, is a Compendious and
Inutile Speculation. But of these see principally our Abecedarium Nature; And
otherwise Sparfim in this in our Sylua Syluarum: Nevertheless in some good
part, We shall handle diverse of them now presently.

Liquefiable, and Not Liquefiable, proceed from these Causes: Liquefaction is
ever caused by the Detention of the Spirits, which play within the Body, and
Open it. Experiment Solitary touching Bodies Liquefiable, and not Liquefiable.
Therefore such Bodies, as are more Turgide of Spirit; Or that have their
Spirits more Sraitly Imprisoned; Or again Better Pleased and Content; are
Liquefiable: For these three Dispositions of Bodies, do arrest the Emission of
the Spirits. An Example of the first two Properties is in Metalls; And of the
Last in Grease, Pitch, Sulphur, Butter, Wax, etc. The Disposition not to
Liquefie proceeds from the Easy Emission of the Spirits; whereby the Grosser
Parts contract; And therefore, Bodies Ieiune of Spirits; Or which part with
their Spirits more Willingly; are not Liquefiable; As Wood, Clay, Freestone,
etc. But yet, even many of those Bodies, that will not Melt, or will hardly
Melt, will notwithstanding Soften; As Iron in the Forge; And a Stick bathed in
Hot Ashes, which thereby becomes more Flexible. Moreover, there are some
Bodies, which do Liquefie, or dissolve by Fire; As Metalls, Wax, etc. And
other Bodies, which dissolve in Water; As Salt, Sugar, etc. The Cause of the
former proceeds from the Dilatation of the Spirits by Heat: The Cause of the
Latter proceeds from the Opening of the Tangible Parts, which desire to
receive the Liquour. Again, there are some Bodies, that dissolve with both; As
Gum, etc. And those be such Bodies, as on the One Side have good store of
Spirit; And on the other Side, have the Tangible Parts Indigent of Moisture;
For the former helps to the Dilating of the Spirits by the Fire; And the
Latter stimulateth the Parts to Receive the Liquour.

Of Bodies, some are Fragile; And some are Tough, and Not Fragile; And in the
Breaking, some Fragile Bodies break but where the Force is; Some shatter and
fly in many Pieces. Experiment Solitary touching Bodies Fragile, and Tough.
Of Fragility the Cause is an Impotency to be Extended: And therefore Stone is
more Fragile than Metal; Fictile Earth is more Fragile than Crude Earth; And
Dry Wood than Green. And the Cause of this Unaptness to Extension, is the
Small Quantity of Spirits; (For it is the Spirit that furthereth the Extension
or Dilatation of Bodies;) And it is ever Concomitant with Porosity, and with
Dryness in the Tangible Parts: Contrariwise, Tough Bodies have more Spirit,
and sewer Pores, and Moister Tangible Parts: Therefore we see that Parchment,
or Leather will stretch, Paper will not; Woollen Cloth will tenter, Linen
scarcely.

All Solid Bodies consist of Parts of two several Natures; Pneumaticall, and
Tangible; And it is well to be noted, that the Pneumaticall Substance is in
some Bodies, the Nature Spirit of the Body; And in some other, plain Air that
is gotten in; As in Bodies desiccate, by Heat, or Age: For in them, when the
Native Spirit goes forth, and the Moisture with it, the Air with time gets
into the Pores. Experiment Solitary, touching the Two Kinds of Pneumaticals in
Bodies
And those Bodies are Fragile; For the Native Spirit is more Yielding, and
Extensiue, (especially to follow the Parts,) than Air. The Native Spirits also
admit great Diversity; As Hot, Cold, Active, Dull, etc. Whence proceed most of
the Virtues, and Qualities (as we call them) of Bodies: But the Air
intermixed, is without Virtues, and makes Things Infioide, and without any
Extimulation.

The Concretion of Bodies is (commonly) solued by the Contrary; As Ice, which
is congealed by Gold, is dissolved by Heat; Salt and Sugar, which are Excocted
by Heat, are Dissolved by Cold, and Moisture. Experiment Solitary, touching
Concretion, and Dissolution of Bodies.
The Cause is, for that these Operations, are rather Returns to their former
Nature, than Alterations: So that the Contrary cures. As for Oil, it Cold,
nor thicken with Heat. The Cause of both Effects, though they be produced by
Contrary Efficients, seems to be the Same; And that is, because the Spirit of
the Oil, by either Means, exhaleth little; For the Cold keeps it in; and
the Heat, (except it be Vehement,) does not call it forth. As for Cold, though
it take hold of the Tangible Parts, yet as to the Spirits, it does rather make
them Swell, than Congeale them: As when Ice is congealed in a Cup, the Ice will
Swell in stead of Contracting; And sometimes Rift.

Of Bodies, some (we see) are Hard, and some Soft: The Hardness is caused
(chiefly) by the Ieiunenesse of the Spirits; And their Imparitie with the
Tangible Parts: Both which, if they be in a greater degree, makes them, not
only Hard, but Fragile, and less Enduring of Pressure; Steel, Stone, Glass,
Dry Wood, etc. Experiment Solitary, touching Hard and Soft Bodies.
Softness comes (contrariwise) by the Greater Quantity of Spirits; (which
ever helps to Induce Yielding and Cession;) And by the more Equal Spreading
of the Tangible Parts, which thereby are more Sliding, and Following; As in
Gold, Lead, Wax, etc. But note, that Soft Bodies, (as we use the word,) are of
two Kinds; The one, that easily glueth place to another Body, but alters not
Bulk, by Rising in other Places: And therefore we see that Wax, if you put
any Thing into it, does not rise in Bulk, but only gives Place: For you may
not think, that in Printing of Wax, the Wax rises up at all; But only the
depressed Part gives place, and the other remains as it was. The other, that
alters Bulk in the Cession; As Water, or other Liquours, if you put a Stone,
or any Thing into them, they give place (indeed) easily, but then they rise all
over: Which is a False Cession; For it is in Place, and not in Body.

All Bodies Ductile, and Tensile, (as Metals that will be drawn into Wires;
Wool and Towe that will be drawn into Yarne, or Thread;) have in them the
Appetite of Not Discontinuing, Strong; Which makes them follow the Force, that
pulls them out; And yet so, as not to Discontinue Body. Experiment Solitary
touching Bodies Ductile, and Tensile.
Viscous Bodies, (likewise,) as Pitch, Wax, Bird-Lime, Cheese toasted, will
draw forth, and roape. But the difference between Bodies Fibrous, and Bodies
Viscous, is Plain; For all Wool, and Towe, and Cotton, and Silk, (especially
raw Silk,) have, besides their Desire of Continuance, in regard of the
Tenuitie of their Thread, a Greediness of Moisture; And by Moisture to join
and incorporate with other Thread; Especially if there be a little Wreathing; As
appears by the Twisting of Thread; And the Practice of Twirling about of
Spindles. And we see also, that Gold and Silver Thread cannot be made without
Twisting.

The Differences of Impressible; and Not Impressible Figurable; and Not
Figurable; Mouldable and Not Mouldable; Scissile and Not Scissile; And many
other Passions of Matter, are Plebcian Notions, applied unto the Instruments
and Uses which Men ordinarily practice; But they are all but the Effects of
some of these Causes following; Which we will Enumerate Experiment Solitary,
touching other Passions of Matter, and Characters of Bodies.,
The First is the Cession, or Not Cession of Bodies, into a Smaller Space or
Room, keeping the Outward Bulk, and not flying up. The Second is the Stronger
or Weaker Appetite, in Bodies, to Continuitie, and to fly Discontinuitie. The
Third is the Disposition of Bodies, to Contract, or Not Contract; And again,
to Extend, or Not Extend. The Fourth is the Small Quantity, or Great
Quantity, of the Pneumaticall in Bodies. The Fifth is the Nature of the
Pneumalicall, whether is ^^ Native Spirit of the Body, or Common Air. The
Sixth is, the Nature of the Native Spirits in the Body, whether they be Active
and Eager, or Dull and Gentle. The Seventh is the Emission or Detention of the
Spirits in Bodies. The Eighth is the Dilatation, or Contraction of the Spirits
in Bodies, while they are detained. The Ninth is the Collocation of the Spirits
in Bodies; whether the Collocation be Equal, or Unequal; And again, whether
the Spirits be Coaceruate, or Diffused. The Tenth is the Densitie, or Raritie
of the Tangible Parts. The Eleventh is the Equality or Inequality of the
Tangible Parts. The Twelfth is the Disgestion, or Cruditie of the Tangible
Parts. The Thirteenth is the Nature of the Matter, whether Sulphurous or
Mercuriall, Watrie or Oily, Dry and Terrestrial, or Moist and Liquid; which
Natures of Sulphurous and Mercuriall, seem to be Natures Radical, and
Principiall. The Fourteenth is the Placing of the Tangible Parts, in Length, or
Transuerse; (As it is in the Warpe, and the Woofe, of Textiles;) More Inward,
or More Outward; etc. The Fifteenth is the Porofitie, or Imporositie betwixt
the Tangible Parts; And the Greatness, or Smalnesse of the Pores. The
Sixteenth is the Collocation and Pesture of the Pores. There may be more
Causes; but these do occur for the Present.

Take Lead, and melt it, and in the Midst of it, when it begins to
Congeale, make a little Dint, or Hole, and put Quicke-Siluer wrapped in a Piece
of Linen into that Hole, and the Quicke-Siluer will fix, and run no more, and
endure the Hammer. Experiment Solitary, touching Induration by Sympathic.
This is a Noble Instance of Induration, by Consent of one Body with another,
and Motion of Excitation Imitate; For to ascribe it only to the Vapor of Lead,
is less Probable. Quare whether the Fixing may be in such a degree, as it will
be Figured like other Metals? For if so, you may make Works of it for some
purposes, so they come not near the Fire.

Sugar has put down the use of Honey; Insomuch as we have lost those
Observations, and Preparations of Honey, which the Ancients had, when it was
more in Price. Experiment Solitary touching Honey and Sugar.
First, it seems that there was, in old time, Tree-Honey, as well as
Bee-Honey; Which was the Tear or Blood issuing Tree: Insomuch as one of the
Ancients relates, that in Trebisond, there was Honey issuing from the
Box-Trees, which made Men Mad. Again, in Ancient time, there was a Kind of
Honey, which either of the own Nature, or by Art, would grow as Hard as Sugar;
And was not so Lushious as Ours. They had also a Wine of Honey, which they made
thus. They crushed the Honey into a great Quantity of Water, and then strained
the Liquour; After they boiled it in a Copper to the half: Then they powered it
into Earthen Vessels, for a small time; And after tunned it into Vessels of
Wood, and kept it for many years. They have also, at this day, in Russia, and
those Northern Countries, Mead Simple, which (well made, and seasoned) is a
good wholesome Drink, and very Clear. They use also in Wales, a Compound
Drink of Mead, with Herbs, and Spices. But meane-while it were good, in
recompense of that we have lost in Honey, there were brought in use a Sugar
Mead^ (for so we may call it,) though without any Mixture at all of Honey; And
to brew it, and keep it stale, as they use Mead; For certainly, though it
would not be so Abster sieve, and Opening, and Solutiue a Drink as Mead; yet it
will be more grateful to the Stomach, and more Lenitiue, and fit to be used in
Sharp Diseases. For we see, that the use of Sugar in Beer, and Ale, has
good Effects in such Cases.

It is reported by the Ancients, that there was a Kind of Steel, in some
places, which would polish almost as white and bright as Silver. Experiment
Solitary, touching the Finer Sort of Base Metals.
And that there was in India a Kind of Brass, which (being polished) could
scarce be discerned from Gold. This was in the Natural Ure; But I am
doubtful, whether Men have sufficiently refined Metals, which we Base; As
whether Iron, Brass, and Tin, be refined to the Height? But when they come
to such a Finenesse, as serves the ordinary use, they try no further.

There have been found certain Cements under Earth, that are very Soft; And
yet, taken forth into the Sun, harden as Hard as Marble: There are also
ordinary Quarries in Sommerset-Shire, which in the Quarry Building prove firm,
and hard. Experiment Solitary touching Coments and Quarries.


Living Creatures (generally) do change their Hair with Age, turning to be
Gray, and White: As is seen in Men, though some Earlier, some Later; In
Horses, that are Dappled, and turn White; In Old Squirrels, that turn Grisly;
And many Others. Experiment Solitary, touching the Altering of the Color of
Hairs and Feathers.
So do some Birds; As Cygnets; from Gray turn White; Hawks, from Brown
turn more White: And some Birds there be, that upon their Moulting, do turn
Color; As Robin-Redbrests, after their Moulting, grow to be Red again, by
degrees; So do Gold-Finches upon the Head. The Cause is, for that Moisture
does (chiefly) color Hair, and Feathers; And Dryness turns them Gray and
White; Now Hair in Age waxes Drier: So do Feathers. As for Feathers, after
Moulting, they are Young Feathers, and so all one as the Feathers of Young
Birds. So the Beard is younger than the Hair of the Head, and does (for the
most part,) wax Hoare later. Out of this Ground, a Man may devise the Means of
Altering the Color of Birds, and the Retardation of Heare-Haires. But of this
see the fifth Experiment.

The Difference between Male and Female, in some Creatures, is not to be
discerned, otherwise than in the Parts of Generation: As in Horses and Mares,
Dogs and Bitches, Doves He and She, and others. Experiment Solitary, touching
the Differences of Living Creatures, Male and Female.
But some differ in Magnitude, and that diversely; For in most the Male is the
greater; As in Man, Pheasants, Peacocks, Turkey's; and the like: And in some
few, Hawks, the Female. Some differ in the Hair, and Feathers, both in the
Quantity, Crispation, and Colors of them; As He-Lions are Mi^sute, and have
great Maines; The She Is are smooth like Cats. Bulls are more Crispe upon the
Forehead than Cowes; The Peacocke, and Pheasant-Cocke, and Gold-Finch-Cocke,
have glorious and fine Colors; The Henn's have not. Generally, the He Is in
Birds have the fairest Feathers. Some differ in diverse Features; As Bucks have
Horns, Does none; Rams have more wreathed Horns than Ewes; Cocks have
great Combs and Spurs, Henns little or none; Boares have great Fangs, Sowes
much less; The TurkyCocke has great and Swelling Gills, the Hen has less;
Men have generally Deeper and Stronger Voices than Women. Some differ in
Faculty; As the Cocks amongst Singing Birds, are the best Singers. The Chief
Cause of all these, (no doubt,) is, for that the Males have more Strength of
Heat than the Females; Which appears manifestly in this, that all young
Creatures Males, are like Females; And so are Eunuchs, and Gelt Creatures of
all kinds, liker Females. Now Heat causes Greatness of Growth, generally,
where there is Moisture enough to work upon: But if there be found in any
Creature, (which is seen rarely,) an Ouer-great Heat in proportion to the
Moisture, in them the Female is the greater; As in Hawks, and Sparrowes. And
if the Heat be balanced with the Moisture, then there is no Difference to be
seen between Male and Female: As in the Instances of Horses, and Dogs. We
see also, that the Horns of Oxen, and Cowes, for the most part, are Larger
than the Bulls; which is caused by abundance of Moisture, which in the Horns
of the Bull faileth^ Again, Heat causes Pilosuy, and Crispation; And so
likewise Beards in Men. It also expels finer Moisture which Want of Heat
cannot Expel: And that is the Cause of the Beauty and Variety of Feathers:
Again, Heat does put forth many Excreseences, and much Solid Matter, which
Want of Heat cannot do: And this is the Cause of Horns, and of the Greatness
of them; And of the Greatness of the Combs and Spurs of Cocks, Gills of
Turky-Cocks, and Fangs of Boares. Heat also dilateth the Pipes, and Organs,
which causes the Deepnesse of the Voice. Again, Heat refineth the Spirits,
and that causes the Cock-Singing Bird, to Excel the Hen.

There be Fishes greater than any Beasts; As the Whale is far greater than
the Elephant. Experiment Solitary, touching the Com^ar^^e Magnitude of Living
Creatures.
And Beasts are (generally) greater than Birds. For Fishes, the Cause may be,
that because they Live not in the Air, they have not their Moisture drawn and
Soaked by the Air, and Sunbeams. Also they rest always, in a manner, and
are supported by the Water, whereas Motion and Labor do consuine. As for the
Greatness of Beasts, Birds, it is caused, for that Beasts stay Longer time in
the Womb, than Birds, and there Nourish, and Grow; Whereas in Birds, after the
Egg Laid, there is no further Growth, or Nourishment from the Female: For the
Sitting does Vinifie, and not Nourish.

We have partly touched before the Means of Producing Fruits, without Coares,
or Stones. Experiment Solitary, touching Exessasion of Fruits.
And this we add further, that the Cause must be Abundance of Moisture; For
that the Coare, and Stone are made of a Dry Sap^. And we see that it is
possible, to make a Tree put forth only Blossom, without Fruit; As in
Cherries with Double Flowers; Much more into Fruit without Stone, or Coares. It
is reported, that a Cions of an Apple, grafted upon a Colo^^^ Stalk, sends
forth a great Apple without a Coare. It is not unlikely, that if the Inward
Pith of a Tree, were taken out, so that the Juice came only by the Bark, it
would work the Effect. For it has been observed, that in Pollards, if the
Water get in on the Top, and they become Hollow, they put forth the more. We
add also, that it is delivered for certain by some, that if the Cions be
grafted, the Small End downwards, it will make Fruit have little or no Coares,
and Stones.

Tobacco is a thing of great Price, if it be in request; For an ^^^ of it will
be worth, (as is affirmed,) two Hundred Pounds, by the year, toward Charge.
Experiment Solitary touching the Melieration of Tobacco.
The Charge of making the Ground and otherwise, is great, but nothing to the
Profit. But the English Tobacco, has small credit, as being too Dull, and
Eartby, Nay the ^^^^ Tobacco; though Hotter Climate, can get no credit, for the
same ^^^ that a Trial to make Tobacco more Aromaticall, and better Concocted
here in England, were a Thing of great profit. Some have gone about to do it
by Drenching the English Tobacco, in a Decoction or Infusion of Indian Tobacco:
But those are but Sophistications, and Toys; For Nothing that is once Perfect,
and has run his Race, can receive much Amendment. You must ever resort to the
Beginnings of Things for Melioration. The Way of Maturation of Tobacco must, as
in other Plants, be, from the Heat, Either of the Earth, or of the Sun: We
see some Leading of this in Musk-Melons; which are sown upon a Hot Bed, Dunged
below, upon a Bancke turned upon the South Sun, to give Heat by Reflection;
Laid upon Tiles, which increases the Heat, And Covered with Straw to keep
them from Cold. They remove them also, which adds some Life: And by these
Helps they become as good in England, as in Italy, or Prouence. These, and the
like Means, may be tried in Tobacco. Enquire also of the Steeping of the
Roots, in some such Liquour, as may give them Vigor to put forth Strong.

Heat of the Sun, for the Maturation of Fruits; Yea and the Heat of
Vivification of Living Creatures; are both represented and supplied, by the
Heat of Fire; And likewise, the Heats of the Sun, and Life, are represented
one by the other. Experiment Solitary touching several Heats, working the same
Effects.
Trees, set upon the Backs of Chimneyes, do ripen Fruit sooner. Vines, that
have been drawn in at the Window of Kitchen, have sent forth Grapes ripe a
Month (at least) before others. Stoues, at the Back of Walls, bring forth
Orenges here with us. Eggs, as is reported by some, have been hatched in the
warmth of an Oven. It is reported by the Ancients, that the Estrich Lays her
Eggs under Sand, where the Heat of the Sun disclosed them.

Barley in the Boiling swells not much; Wheat swells more; Rize extremely;
In so much as a Quarter of a Pint (vnboyled) will arise to a Pint boiled.
Experiment Solitary, touching Swelling and Dilatation in Boiling.
The Cause (no doubt) is, for that the more Close and Compact the Body is, the
more it will dilate: Now Barley is the most Hollow; Wheat more Solid than
that; and Rize most Solid of all. It may be also that some Bodies have a Kind
of Lentour, and more Depertible Nature than others; As we see it Evident in
Colouration; For a Small Quantity of Saffron, will Tinct more, than a very
great Quantity of Bresill, or Wine.

Fruit grows Sweet by Rolling, or Pressing them gently with the Hand; As
Rowling-Peares, Damasins, etc. Experiment Solitary, touching the Dulcoration of
Fruits.
By Rottenness; As Medlars, Seruickes, Sloe's, Heps, etc. By Time; As Apples,
Wardens, Pomgranats, etc. By certain Special Maturations; As by Laying them
in Hay, Straw, etc. Fire; As in Roasting, Stewing, Baking, etc. The Cause of
the Sweetness by Rolling, and Pressing, is Emollition, which they properly
enduce; As in Beating of Stock Fish, Flesh, etc. By Rottenness is, for that
the Spirits of the Fruit, by Putrefaction, gather Heat, and thereby digest the
Harder Part: For in all Putrefactions, there is a Degree of Heat. By Time and
Keeping is, because the Spirits of the Body, do ever feed upon the Tangible
Parts, and attenuate them. By Several Maturations is, by some Degree of Heat.
And by Fire is, because it is the Proper Work of Heat to Refine, and to
Incorporate; And all Soreness consists in some Grossness of the Body: And
all Incorporation does make the Mixture of the Body, more Equal, in all the
Parts; Which ever induces a Milder Taste.

Of Fleshes, some are Edible; Some, except it be in Famine, not. Experiment
Solitary, touching Flesh Edible, and not Edible.
For those that are not Edible, the Cause is, for that they have (commonly) too
much Bitterness of Taste; And therefore those Creatures, which are Fierce and
Choleric, are not Edible; As Lions, Wolnes, Squirrells, Dogs, Foxes, Horses,
etc. As for Kine, Sheep, Goats, Dear, Swine, Conneyes, etc. We see they are
Mild, and Fearful. Yet it is true, that Horses, which are Beasts of Courage,
have been, and are eaten by some Nations; As the Scythians were called
Hippophagi; And the Chinese eat Horseflesh at this day; And some Gluttons
have used to have Colts-flesh baked. In Birds, such as are Carniuor a, and
Birds of Prey, are commonly no Good Meat; But the Reason is, rather the
Choleric Nature of those Birds, than their Feeding upon Flesh; For Puits,
Gulls, Shouelers, Duckes, do feed upon Flesh, and yet are Good Meat: And we
see, that those Birds, which are of Prey, or feed upon Flesh, are good Meat,
when they are very Young; As Hawks, Rookes out of the Neast, Owls, etc. Man's
Flesh is not Eaten. The Reasons are Three: First, because Men in Humanity do
abhor it: Secondly, because no Living Creature, that Dies of it self, is
good to Eat: And therefore the Ca^^^ (themselves) eat no Mans-flesh, of those
that Dye of Themselves, but of such as are Slain. The Third is, because there
must be (generally) some Disparity, between the Nourishment, and the Body
Nourished; And they must not be Ouer-neere, or like: Yet we see, that in great
Weaknesses, and Consumptions, Man have been sustained with Woman's Milk: And
Ficinus fondly (as I conceive) advises, for the Prolongation of Life, that a
Vein be opened in the Arm of some wholesome Young Man; And the Blood to be
sucked. It is said, that Witches do greedily eat Men's flesh; which if it be
true, besides a Devilish Appetite in them, it is likely to proceed, for that
Man's flesh may send up High and Pleasing Vapors, which may stir the
Imagination; And Witches Felicity is chiefly in Imagination, as has been said.

There is an Ancient Received Tradition of the Salamander, that it lives in
the Fire, and has force also to extinguish the Fire. Experiment Solitary,
touching the Salamander.
It must have two Things, if it be true, to this Operation: The One a very
Close Skin, whereby Flame, which in the Midst is not so hot, cannot enter: For
Palm of the Hand be anointed thick with White of Egg, and then Aquanita be
poured upon it, and Enflamed, yet one may endure the Flame a pretty while. The
other is some Extreme Cold and Quenching virtue, in the Body of that Creature,
which choaketh the Fire. We see that Milk quenches Wilde-Fire, better than
Water, because it enters better.

Time does change Fruit, (as Apples, Pears, Pomgranats, etc.) from more Sour,
to more Sweet: But contrariwise Liquours, (even those that are of the Juice of
Fruit,) from more Sweet to more Sour; As Wort, Must, New Veriuyce, etc.
Experiment Solitary, touching the Contrary Operations of Time, upon Fruits, and
Liquours.
The Cause is, the Congregation of the Spirits together: For in both Kinds,
the Spirit is attenuated by Time; But in the Diffused, and more Mastered by the
Grosser Parts, which the Spirits do but digest: But in Drinks the Spirits
do reign, and finding less Opposition of the Parts, become themselves more
Strong; Which causes also more Strength in the Liquour; Such, as if the
Spirits be of the Hotter Sort, the Liquour becomes apt to Burn; But in Time,
it causes likewise, when the Higher Spirits are Euapourated, more Soreness.

It has been observed by the Ancients, that Plates of Metal, and especially
of Brass, applied presently to a Blow, will keep it down from Swelling.
Experiment Solitary touching Blows and Bruises.
The Cause is Repercussion, without Humectation, or Entrance Body: for the
Plate has only a Virtuall Cold, which does not search into the Hurt; Whereas
all Plasters, and Ointments do enter. Surely, the Cause, that Blows and
Bruises enduce Swellings, is, for that the Spirits resorting to Succor the
Part that Labors, draw also the Humors with them: For we see, that it is
not the Repulse, and the Return of the Humor in the Part Stricken, that
causes it; For that Gouts, and Tooth-Aches cause Swelling, where there is no
Percussion at all.

The Nature of the Orris Root, is almost Singular; For there be few Odoriferous
Roots; And in those that are, in any degree, Sweet, it is but the same
Sweetness with the Wood, or Leaf: But the Orris is not Sweet Leaf; Neither
is the Flower any thing so Sweet as the Root. Experiment Solitary, touching the
Orris Root.
The Root seems to have a Tender dainty Heat; Which when it comes above
Ground, to the Sun, and the Air, vanishes: For it is a great Mollifier; And
has a Smell like a Violet.

It has been observed by the Ancients, that a great Vessel full, drawn into
Bottles; And then the Liquour put again into the Vessel; will not fill the
Vessel again, so full as it was, but that it may take in more Liquour: And
that this holds more in Wine, than in Water. Experiment Solitary touching the
Compression of Liquours.
The Cause Expense of the Liquour, in regard some may stick to the Sides of
the Bottles: But there may be a Cause more Subtle; Which is, that the Liquour
in the Vessel, is not so much Compressed, as in the Bottle; Because in the
Vessel, the Liquour meets with Liquour chiefly; But in the Bottles a Small
Quantity of Liquour, meets with the Sides of the Bottles, which Compresse it
so, that it does not Open again.

Water, being contiguous with Air, Cools it, but Moisteneth it not, except
it Vapor. Experiment Solitary, touching the Working of Water upon Air
Contiguous.
The Cause is, for that Heat, and Cold have a Virtuall Transition, without
Communication of Substance; but Moisture not: And to all Madefaction there is
required an Imbibition: But where the Bodies are of such several Leuity, and
Gravity, as they Mingle not, there can follow no Imbibition. And therefore,
Oil likewise lies at the Top of Water, without Commixture: And a Drop of
Water, running swiftly over a Straw, or Smooth Body, wetteth not.

Starre-light Nights, yea and bright Moone-shine Nights, are Colder than Cloudy
Nights. Experiment Solitary, touching the Nature of Air.
The Cause is, the Dryness and Finenesse of the Air, which thereby becomes
more Piercing, and Sharp? And therefore Great Continents are colder than
Islands: And as for the Moon, though Air to Moisture, yet when it shines
bright, it argues the Air is dry. Also Close Air is warmer than Open Air;
which (it may be) is, for that the true Cause of Cold, is an Expiration from
the Globe of the Earth, which in open Places is stronger; And again, Air it
self, if it be not altered by that Expiration, is not without some Secret
Degree of Heat: As it is not likewise without some Secret Degree of Light: For
otherwise Cats, and Owls, could not see in the Night; But that Air has a
little Light. Proportionable to the Visuall Spirits of those Creatures.

The Eyes do move ^^^^^^ way; For when one Eye moves to the Nosthrill, the
other moves from the Nosthrill. Experiments in Consort, touching the Eyes, and
Sight.
The Cause is Motion of Consent, which in the Spirits, and Parts Spiritual, is
Strong. But yet Use will induce the Contrary: For some can Squint, when they
Tradition is, that if Children be set upon a Table, with a Candle behind them,
both Eyes will move Outward; As affecting to see the Light, and so induce
Squinting.

We see more exquisitely with One Eye Shut, than with Both Open. Cause is, for
that the Spirits Visuall unite themselves more, and so become Stronger. For you
may see, by looking in a Glass, that when you shut one Eye, the Pupil of the
other Eye, that is Open, Dilateth.

The Eyes, if the Sight meet not in one Angle, See Things Double. The Cause is,
for that Seeing two Things, and Seeing one Thing twice, works the same
Effect: And therefore a little Pellet, held between two Fingers, laid
a-crosse, seems Double.

Pore-blinde Men, see best in the Dimmer Lights; And likewise have Sight
Stronger near hand, than those that are not Pore-blinde; And can Read and
Write smaller Letters. The Cause is, for that the Spirits Visuall, in those
that are Pore-blinde, are Thinner, and Rarer, than in others; And therefore the
Greater Light disperseth them. For the same Cause they need Contracting; But
being Contracted, are more strong, than the Visuall Spirits of Ordinary Eyes
are; As when we see through a Level, the Sight is the Stronger: And so is it,
when you gather the Eyelids somewhat close: And it is commonly seen in those
that are Poreblinde, that they do much gather the Eyelids together. But Old
Men, when they would see to Read, put the Paper somewhat a far off. The
Cause is, for that Old Men's Spirits Visuall, contrary to those of Pore-blinde
Men, unite not, but when the Object is at some good distance, from their Eyes.

Men see better, when their Eyes are ouer-against the Sun, or a Candle, if
they put their Hand a little before their Eye. The Reason is, for that the
Glaring of the Sun, or the Candle, does weaken the Eye; whereas the Light
Circumfused is enough for the Perception. For we see, that an Ouerlight makes
the Eyes Dazell; Insomuch as Perpetual Looking against the Sun, would Cause
Blindness. Again, if Men come out of a Great Light, into a Dark Room; And
contrariwise, if they come out of a Dark Room, into a Light Room, they seem
to have a Mist before their Eyes, and see worse, than they shall do, after
they have stayed a little while, either in the Light, or in the Dark. The
Cause is, for that the Spirits Visuall, are upon a Sudden Change, disturbed,
and put out of Order; And till they be recollected, do not perform their
Function well. For when they are much Dilated by Light, they cannot Contract
suddenly; And when they are much Contracted by Darkness, they cannot Dilate
suddenly. And Excess of both these, (that is, of the Dilatation, and
Contraction of the Spirits Visuall,) if it belong, Destroys the Eye. For as
long Looking against the Sun, or Fire, hurts the Eye by Dilatation; So
Curious Painting in Small Volumes, and Reading of Small Letters, do hurt the
Eye by Contraction.

Anger, the Eyes wax Red; And in Blushing, not the Eyes, but the Ears, and the
Parts behind them. The Cause is, for that in Anger, the Spirits ascend and wax
Eager; Which is most easily seen in the Eyes, because they are Translucide;
Though withal it makes both the Cheeks, and the Gills Red; But in Blushing,
it is true, the Spirits ascend likewise to Succor, both the Eyes, and the
Face, which are the Parts that labor: But then they are repulsed by the Eyes,
for that the Eyes, in Shame do put back the Spirits, that ascend to them, as
unwilling to look abroad: For no Men, in that Passion, does look strongly,
but Deiectedly; And that Repulsion from the Eyes, Diuerteth the Spirits and
Heat more to the Ears, and the Parts by them.

Objects of the Sight, may cause a great Pleasure and Delight in the Spirits,
but no Pain, or great Offense; Except it be by Memory, as has been said. The
Glimpses and Beams of Diamonds that strike the Eye; Indian Feathers, that have
glorious Colors; The Coming into a Fair Garden; The Coming into a Fair
Room richly furnished; A Beautiful Person; And the like; do delight and
exhilarate the Spirits much. The Reason, why it holds not in the Offense, is,
for that the Sight is the most Spiritual of the Senses; whereby it has no
Object Gross enough to offend it. But the Cause (chiefly) is, for that there
be no Active Objects to offend the Eye. For Harmonicall Sounds, and Discordant
Sounds, are both Active, and Positive: So are Sweet Smells, and Stinks: So are
Bitter, and Sweet, in Tastes: So are Ouer-Hot, and Ouer-Cold, in Touch: But
Blackness, and Darkness, are indeed but Priuatiues; And therefore have little
or no Actiuitie. Somewhat they do Contristate, but very little.

Water of the Sea, or otherwise, looks Blacker when it is moved, and Whiter
when it rests. Experiment Solitary, touching the Color of the Sea, or other
Water.
The Cause is, for that by means of the Motion, the Beams of light pass not
Straight, and therefore must be darkened, whereas, when it rests, the Beams
do pass Straight. Besides, Splendor has a Degree of Whiteness; Especially
if there be a little Repercussion: Looking-glass with the Steel behind,
looks Whiter, than Glass Simple. This Experiment deserves to be driven
further, in Trying by what Means Motion may hinder Sight.

Shellfish have been, by some of the Ancients, compared and sorted with the
Insecta; But I see no reason why they should; For they have Male, and Female,
as other Fish have: Neither are they bred of Putrefaction; Especially such as
do Move. Experiment Solitary touching ShellFish.
Nevertheless it is certain, that Oisters, and Cockles, and Mussles, which
Move not, have no discriminate Sex: Quare in what time, and how they are bred?
It seems that Shells of Oisters are bred where none were before; A (...)
tried, that the great Horse-Mussle, with the fine shell, that breeds in
Ponds, has bred within thirty years: But then, which is strange, it has
been tried, that they do not only Gape, and Shut, as the Oisters do, but
Remone from one Place to Another.

The Senses are alike Strong, both on the Right Side, and on the Left; But the
Limbs on the Right Side are Stronger. Experiment Solitary, touching the Right
Side, and the Left.
The Cause may be, for that the Brain, which is the Instrument of Sense, is
alike on both Sides; But Motion, and Habilities of Moving, are somewhat helped
from the Liner, which lies on the Right Side. It may be also, for that the
Senses are Exercise, indifferently, on both Sides, from the Time of our Birth;
But the Limbs are used most on the Right Side, whereby Custom helps; For
we see that some are Left Handed: Which are such, as have used the Left Hand
most.

Frictions make the Parts more Fleshie, and Full: As we see both in Men; And
in Carrying of Horses, etc. Experiment Solitary touching Frictions.
The Cause is, for that they draw greater Quantity of Spirits and Blond to the
Parts: And again, because Aliment more forcibly from within: And again,
because they relax the Pores, and so make better Passage for the Spirits,
Blond, and Aliment: Lastly, because they dissipate and digest any Inutile or
Excrementitious Moisture, which lies in the Flesh: All which help
Assimilation. Frictions also do more F^ll, and Impinguate the Body, than
Exercise. The Cause is, for that in Frictions, the Inward Parts are at rest;
Which in Exercise are beaten (many times) too much: And for the same Reason,
(as we have noted heretofore,) Gally-Slaues are Fat and Fleshie, because they
stir the Limbs more, and the Inward Parts less.

All Globes afar off appear Flat. Experiment Solitary touching Globes
appearing Flat at Distance.
The Cause is, for that Distance, being a Secundary Object of Sight, is not
otherwise discerned, than by more or less Light; which Disparitie when it
cannot be discerned, all seems One: As it is (generally) in Objects not
distinctly discerned; For so Letters, Duskish Paper: And all Engrauings, and
Embossings, (afar off) appear Plain.

The Utmost Parts of Shadows seem ever to Tremble. Experiment Solitary
touching Shadows.
The Cause is, for that the little Moats, which we see in the Sun, do ever
Stir, though there be no Wind; And therefore those Moving, in the Meeting
Light and the Shadow, from the Light to the Shadow, and from the Shadow to the
Light, do show the Shadow to Move, because the Medium Moves.

Shallow, and Narrow Seas, Break more than Deep, and Large. Experiment
Solitary touching the Rolling and Breaking of the Seas
The Cause is, for that the Impulsion being the same in Both; Where there is
great Quantity of ^^^, and likewise Space Enough; there the Water Rowleth, and
Moves, both more Slowly, and with a Sloper Rise, and Water, and less Space,
and the Water dasheth more against the Bottom; there it moves more Swiftly,
and more in Precipice; For in the Breaking of the Wanes there is ever a
Precipice.

It has been observed by the Ancients, that Salt Water Boiled, or Boiled and
Cooled again, is more Potable, than of it self Raw: And yet the Taste of
Salt, in Distillations by Fire, rises not; For the Distilled Water will be
Fresh. Experiment Solitary touching the Dulcoration of Salt Water.
The Cause may be, for that the Salt Part of the Water, Scumme on the Top; And
partly goes into a Sediment in the Bottom: And so is rather a Separation,
than an Euaporation. But it is too gross to rise into a Vapor: And so is a
Bitter Taste likewise; For Simple Distilled Waters, of Wormwood, and the like,
are not Bitter.

It has been set down before, that Pits upon the Sea-Shoare, turn into
Fresh Water, by Percolation of the Salt through the Sand: But it is further
noted, by some of the Ancients, that in some Places of Affricke, after a time,
the Water in such Pits will become Brackish again. Experiment Solitary
touching the Return of Saltness in Pits upon the SeaShore.
The Cause is, for that after a time, the very Sands, through which the
SaltWater Salt; And so the Strainer it self is tincted with Salt. The Remedy
therefore is, to dig still New Pits, when the old wax Brackish; As if you
would change your Strainer.

It has been observed by the Ancients, that Salt Water, will dissolve Salt
put into it, in less time, than Fresh Water will dissolve it. Experiment
Solitary touching Attraction by Similitude of Substance.
The Cause may be, for that the Salt in the Precedent Water, does, by
Similitude of Substance, draw the Salt new put in, unto it; Whereby it
diffuseth in the Liquour more speedily. This is a Noble Experiment, if it be
true; For it Infusions; And it is likewise a good Instance of Attraction, by
Similitude of Substance. Try it with Sugar put into Water, formerly Sugared;
And into other Water Vnsugred.

Put Sugar into Wine, part of it above, part under the Wine; And you shall
find, (that which may seem strange,) that the Sugar above the Wine, will
soften and dissolve sooner, than that within the Wine. Experiment Solitary
touching Attraction.
The Cause is, for that the Wine enters that Part of the Sugar, which is under
Wine, by Simple Infusion, or Spreading; But that Part above the Wine, is
likewise forced by Sacking: For all Spungie Bodies expel the Air, and draw in
Liquour, if it be Contiguous: As we see it also in Spunges, put part above the
Water. It is worthy the Inquiry, to see how you may make more Accurate
Infusions, by Help of Attraction.

Water in Wells is warmer in Winter, than in Summer: And so Air in Caves.
Experiment Solitary touching Heat under Earth.
The Cause is, for that in the Hither Parts, under the Earth, there is a Degree
of some Heat; (As appears in Sulphurous Veins, etc.) Which shur close in,
(as in Winter,) is the More; But if it Peripire, (as Summer,) it is the Less.

It is reported, that amongst the Leucadians, in Ancient time, upon a
Superstition, they did use to Precipitate a Man, from a High Cliffe into the
Sea; Tying about him, with Strings, at some distance, many great Fowls; And
fixing unto his Body diverse Feathers, spread, to break the Fast. Experiment
Solitary touching Flying in the Air.
Certainly many Birds of good Wing, (As Kites, and the like,) would bear up a
good Weight, as they file; And Spreading of Feathers, thin, and close, and in
great Breadth, will likewise bear up a great Weight; Being even laid, without
Tilting upon the Sides. The further Extension of this Experiment for Flying may
be thought upon.

There is, in some Places, (namely in Cephalonia,) a little Shrub, which they
call Holy-Oake, or Dwarfe-Oake: Upon the Leaves whereof there rises a Tumor,
like a Blister; Which they gather, and rub out of it, a certain Red Dust, that
conuerteth (after a while) into Worms, Wine, (as is reported,) when they begin
to Quicken: With this Dust they die Scarlet. Experiment Solitary touching the
Dye of Scarlet.


In Zant, it is very ordinary, to make Men Impotent, to accompany with their
Wines. Experiment Solitary touching ^^^^.
The like is Practiced in Gasconie; Where it is called Nouer l' eguillette. It
is practiced always upon the Wedding Day. And in Zant, the Mothers themselves
do it, by way of Prevention; Because thereby they hinder other Charms, and
can undo their Own. It is a Thing the Civil Law takes knowledge of; And
therefore is of no Light Regard.

It is a Common Experiment, but the Cause is mistaken. Experiment Solitary,
touching the Rise of Water, by Means of Flame.
Take a Pot, (Or better a Glass, because therein you may see the Motion,) And
set a Candle lighted in the Bottom of a Basen of Water; And turn the Mouth of
the Pot, or Glass, over the Candle, and it will make the Water rise. They
Drawing of Heat; Which is not true: For it appears plainly to be but a Motion
of Nexe, which they call Ne detur vacuum; And it proceeds thus. The Flame of
the Candle, as soon as it is covered, being suffocated by the Close Air,
lesseneth by little and little: During which time, there is some little Ascent
of Water, but not much: For the Flame Occupying less and less Room, as it
lesseneth, the Water succeeds. But upon the Instant of the Candles Going out,
there is a sudden Rise, of a great deal of Water; For that the Body of the
Flame fills no more Place; And so the Air, and the Water succeed. It works
the same Effect, if in stead of Water, you put Flower, or Sand, into the Basen:
Which shows, that it is not the Flames Drawing the Liquour, as Nourishment;
As it is supposed; For all Bodies are alike unto it; As it is ever in Motion of
Nexe; Insomuch as I have seen the Glass, being held by the Hand, has lifted
up the Basen, and all: The Motion of Nexe did so Claspe the Bottom of the
Basen. That Experiment, when the Basen was lifted up, was made with Oil, and
not with Water; Nevertheless this is true, that at the very first Setting of
the Mouth of the Glass, upon the Bottom of the Basen, it draws up the Water
a little, and then stands at a Stay, almost till the Candles Going out, as
was said. This may show some Attraction at first: But of this we will speak
more, when we handle Attractions by Heat.

Of the Power of the Gelestiall Bodies, and what more Secret Influences they
have, besides the two Manifest Influences of Heat, and Light, We shall speak,
when we handle Experiments touching the Celestial Bodies: Meane-while, we
will give some Directions for more certain Trials, of the Virtue and
Influences of the Moon; which is our Nearest Neighbor. Experiments in
Consort, touching the Influences of the Moon.


The Influences of the Moon, (most observed,) are Four. The Drawing forth of
Heat: The Inducing of Putrefaction: The Increase of Moisture: The Exciting of
the Motions of Spirits.

For the Drawing forth of Heat, we have formerly prescribed, to take Water
Warm, and to set Part of it against the Moone-Beames, and Part of it with a
Skreene between; And to see whether that which stands Exposed to the Beams,
will not Cool sooner. But because this is but a Small Interposition, (though
in the Sun we see a Small Shade does much,) it were good to try it, when the
Moon shines, and when the Moon shines not at all; And with Water Warm in a
Glasse-Bottle, as well as in a Dish; And with C^^^rs; And with Iron Red-Hot;
etc.

For the In^^^ing of Putrefaction, it were good to try it with Flesh, or Fish,
Exposed to the Moone-Beames; And again Exposed to the Air, when the Moon
shines not, for the like time; To see whether will corrupt sooner: And try it
also with Capon, or some other Foul, laid abroad, to see whether it will
mortify, and become tender sooner? Try it also with Dead Flies, or Dead
Worms, having a little Water cast upon them, to see whether will Putrify
sooner. Try it also with an Apple, or Orange, having Holes made in their Tops,
to see whether will Rot or Mould sooner^ Try it also with Holland-Cheese,
having Wine put into it, whether will breed Mites sooner, or greater?

For the Increase of Moisture, the Opinion Received is; That Seeds Hair, and
Nails, and Hedges, and Herbs, Cut, etc. will grow soonest, if they be Set, or
Cut, in the Increase of the Moon. Also that Brains in Rabits, Wood-cocks,
Calves, etc. are fullest in the Full of the Moon: And so of ^^^ in the Bones;
And so of Oysters, and ^^^, which of all the rest are the easiest tried, if you
have them in Pits.

Take some ^^^^ ^^^^ and set some of them immediately Change; And others of the
same kind immediately after the Full: Let them be as Like as can be: The Earth
also the Same as near as may be; And therefore beft in Pots: Let the Pots also
stand, where no Rain, or Sun may come to them, lest the Difference of the
Weather confound the Experiment: And then see in what Time, the Seeds Set in
the Increase of the Moon, come to a certain Height; And how they differ from
chose that are Set in the Decrease of the Moon.

It is like, that the Brain of Man waxes Moister, and Fuller, upon Full of
the Moon: And therefore it were good for those that have Moist Brains, and
are great Drinkers, to take Fume of Lignum Aloes, RoseMary ^^^^ about the full
of the Moon. It is like also, that the ^^^ in men's Bodies, Increase, and
Decrease, as the Moon does; And therefore it were good to Purge, some day, or
two, after the Full; For that then the ^^^ will not replenish so soon again.

As for the ^^^ of the Motion of the Spirits, you must note that Growth of
Hedges, Herbs, Hair, ^^^ is caused from the Moon, by ^^^ of the Spirits, as
well as by Increase of the Moisture. But for Spirit in particular, the great
Instante is in ^^^.

There may be other Secret Effects of the Influence of the Moon, Observation.
It may be, that if it so fill out, that the Wind be North, or North-East, in
the Full of the Moon, it increases Cold; And if South, or South-West, it
disposes the Air, for a good while, to Warmth, and Rain; Which would be
observed.

Children, and Young Cattle, that are Brought forth in the Full of the Moon,
are stronger, and larger, than those that are brought forth in the Wane: And
those also which are Begotten in the Full of the Moon: So that it might be
good Husbandry, to put Rams, and Bulls to their Females, somewhat before the
Full of the Moon. It may be also, that the Eggs laid in the Full of the Moon,
breed the better Bird: And a Number of the like Effects, which may be brought
into Observation: Quare also, whether great Thunders, and Earthquakes, be not
most in the Full of the Moon?

The Turning of Wine to Vinegar, is a Kind of Putrefaction: And in Making of
Vinegar, they use to set Vessels of Wine over against the Noone-Sunne; which
calls out the more Oily Spirits, and leaves the Liquour more Sour, and
Hard. Experiment Solitary touching Vinegar.
We see also, that Burnt-Wine is more Hard, and Astringent, than Wine Unburned.
It is said, that Cider in Nauigations under the Line ripeneth, when Wine or
Beer soureth. It were good to set a Rundlet of Veriuyce over against the
Sun, in Summer, as they do Vinegar, to see whether it will Ripen, and
Sweeten.

There be diverse Creatures, that Sleep all Winter; As the Bear, the
Hedgehog, the Bat, the Be, etc. Experiment Solitary, touching Creatures that
Sleep all Winter.
These all wax Fat when they Sleep, and egest not. The Cause of their
Fattening, during their Sleeping time, may be the Want of Assimilating, For
whatsoever Attimilation not to Flesh, Sweat, or Fat. These Creatures, for part
of their Sleeping Time, have been observed not to Stir at all; And for the
other part, to Stir, but not to Remove. And they get Warm and Close Places
to Sleep in. When the Flemmings Wintred in Noua Zembla, the Bears, about the
Middle of November, went to Sleep; And then the Foxes began to come forth,
which durst not before. It is noted by some of the Ancients, that the
Shee-Beare breeds, and lies in with her Young, during that time of Rest: And
that a Bear, Big with Young, has seldom been seen.

Some Living Creatures are Procreated by Copulation between Male, and Female:
Some by Putrefaction; And of those which come by Putrefaction, many do
(nevertheless) afterward procreate by Copulation. Experiment Solitary
touching the Generating of Creatures by Copulation, and by Putrefaction.
For the Cause of both Generations: First, it is most certain, that the Cause
of all Vivification, is a Gentle and Proportionable Heat, working upon
Glutinous and Yielding Substance: For the Heat does bring forth Spirit in that
Substance: And the Substance, being Glutinous, produces Two Effects: The One,
that the Spirit is Detained, and cannot Break forth: The Other, that the
Matter being Gentle, and Yielding, is driven forwards by the Motion of the
Spirits, after some Swelling into Shape, and Members. Therefore all Sperme, all
Menstruous Substance, all Matter whereof Creatures are produced by
Putrefaction, have evermore a Closeness, Lentour, and Sequacity. It seems
therefore, that the Generation by Sperme only, and by Putrefaction, have two
Different Causes. The First is, for that Creatures, which have a Definite and
Exact Shape, (as those have which are Procreated by Copulation,) cannot be
produced by a Weak, and Casual Heat; Nor out of Matter, which is not exactly
Prepared, according to the Species. The Second is, for that there is a greater
Time required, for Maturation of Perfect Creatures; For if the Time required in
Vivification be of any length, then the Spirit will Exhale, before the Creature
be Mature: Except it be Enclosed in a Place where it may have Continuance of
the Heat, Access of some Nourishment to maintain it, and Closeness that may
keep it from Exhaling. And such Places are the Wombes, and Matrices, of the
Females. And therefore all Creatures, made of Putrefaction, are of more
Uncertain Shape; And are made in Shorter Time; And need not so Perfect an
Enclosure, though some Closeness be commonly required. As for the Heathen
Opinion, which was, that upon great Mutations of the World, Perfect Creatures
were first Engendered of Concretion; As well as Frogs, and Worms, and Flies,
and such like, are now; We know it to be vain: But if any such Thing should
be admitted, Discoursing according to Sense, it cannot be, except you admit a
Chaos first, and Commixture of Heaven, and Earth. For the Frame of the World,
once in Order, cannot effect it by any Extesse, or Casualtie.

NATVRALL HISTORY.
X. Century.
THe Philosophy of Pythagoras, (which was full of Superstition,) did first
plant a Monstrous Imagination, Which afterward was, by the School of Plato,
and Others, Warred, and Nourished. Experiments in Consort touching the
Transmission, and Influx, or Im^^teriate Virtues, and the Force of Imagination.
It was, that the World was One, Entire, Perfect, Living Creature; Insomuch as
Apolloni^ of Tya^a, a Pythagorean Prophet, affirmed, that the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea, was the Respiration of the World, drawing in Water as
Breath, and putting it forth again. They went on, and inferred; That if the
World were a Living Creature, it had a Soul, and Spirit; Which also they ha^^^
calling it Spiritus Mundi; The Spirit or Soul of the World: By which they did
not intend God; (for they did admit of a Deity besides;) But only the Soul,
or Essential Form of the Vniue^se. This Foundation being laid, they might
build upon it, what they would; For in a Living Creature, though never so
great, (As for Example, in a great Whale,) the Sense, and the Affects of any
one Part of the Body, instantly make a Transcursion tho^ rowout the whole Body:
So that by this they did insinuate, that no Distance of Place, nor Want or
Indisposition of Matter, could hinder Magical Operations; But that, (for
Example,) we might here in Europe, have Sense and Feeling of that, which was
done in China: And likewise, we might work any Effect, without, and against
Matter: And this, not Helped by the Cooperation of Angels, or Spirits, but only
by the Unity and Harmony of Nature. There were some also, that staid not
here; but went further, and held; That if the Spirit of Man, (whom they call
the Microcosme,) do give a fit touch to the Spirit of the World, by strong
Imaginations, and Beleefes, it might command Nature; For Paracelsus, and some
darksome Authors of Magic, do ascribe to Imagination Exalted, the Power of
Miracle-working Faith. With these Vast and Bottomless Follies, Men have been
(in part) entertained.

But we, that hold firm to the Works of God; And to the Sense, which is Gods
Lamp; (Lucerna Dei Spiraculum Hominis;) willen quire, with all Sobriety, and
Severity, whether there be to be found, in the Footsteps of Nature, any such
Transmission and Influx of Immateriate Virtues; And what the Force of
Imagination is; Either upon the Body Imaginant, or upon another Body: Wherein
it will be like that Labor of Hercules, in Purging the Stable of Augeas, to
separate from Superstitious, and Magical Arts, and Observations, any thing
that is clean, and pure Natural; And not to be either Contemned, or
Condemned. And although we shall have occasion to speak of this in more
Places than One, yet we will now make some Entrance thereinto.

Men are to be Admonished, that they do not withdraw Credit, from the
Operations by Transmission of Spirits, and Force of Imagination, because the
Effects fail sometimes. Experiments in Consort, Moa^^, touching Transmission
of Spirits, and the Force of Imagination.
For as in Infection, and Contagion from Body to Body, (as the Plague, and the
like,) it is most certain, that the Infection is received (many times) by the
Body Passive, but yet is by the Strength, and good Disposition thereof,
Repulsed, and wrought out, before it be formed into a Disease; So much more in
Impressions from Mind to Mind, or from Spirit to Spirit, the Impression
takes, but is Encountered, and Overcome, by the Mind and Spirit, which is
Passive, before it work any manifest Effect. And therefore, they work most
upon Weak Minds, and Spirits: As those of Women; Sick Persons;
Superstitious, and Fearful Persons; Children, and Young Creatures; Nescio quis
teneros Oculus mihi fascinat Agnos: The Poet speaks not of Sheep, but of
Lambs. As for the Weakness of the Power of them, upon Kings, and Magistrates;
It may be ascribed, (besides the maine, which is the Protection of God, over
those that Execute his Place,) to the Weakness of the Imagination of the
Imaginant: For it is hard, for a Witch, or a Sorcerer, to put on a Belief,
that they can hurt such Persons.

Men are to be Admonished, on the other side, that they do not easily
Operations, because they Succeed many times; For the Cause of this Success, is
(often) to be truly ascribed, unto the Force of Affection and Imagination, upon
the Body Agent; And then by a Secondary Means, it may work upon a Diverse
Body: As for Example; If a Man carry a Planets Seal, or a Ring, or some Part
of a Beast, believing strongly, that it will help him to obtain his Love; Or
to keep him from danger of hurt in Fight; Or to prevail in a Suit; etc. it
may make him more Active, and Industrious; And again, more Confident, and
Persisting, than otherwise he would be. Now the great Effects that may come of
Industry, and Perseverance, (especially in Civil Business,) who knows not?
For we see Audacitie does almost bind and mare the weaker Sort of Minds; And
the State of Humane Actions is so variable, that to try Things often, and never
to give over, does Wonders: Therefore, it were a Mere Fallacy and Mistaking,
to ascribe that to the Force of Imagination, upon another Body, which is but
the Force of Imagination upon the Proper Body: For there is no doubt, but that
Imagination, and Vehement Affection, work greatly upon the Body of the
Imaginant: As we shall show in due place.

Men are to be Admonished, that as they are not to mistake the Causes
Operations; So, much less, they are to mistake the Fact, or Effect; And rashly
to take that for done, which is not done. And therefore, as diverse wise Indges
have prescribed, and cautioned, Men may not too rashly believe, the Confessions
of Witches, nor yet the Enidence against them. For the Witches themselves are
Imaginatiue, and believe oft-times, they do that, which they do not: And
People are Credulous in that point, and ready to impute Accidents, and Natural
Operations, to Witch Craft. It is worthy the Observing, that both in Ancient,
and Late times; (As in the Thassalian Witches, and the Meetings of Witches that
have been recorded by so many late Confessions;) the great Wonders which they
tell, of Carrying in the Air; Transforming themselves into other Bodies; etc.
are still reported to be wrought, not by Incantations, or Ceremonies; But by
Ointments, and Anointing themselves all over. This may justly move a Man to
think, that these Fables are the Effects of Imagination: For it is certain,
that Ointments do all, (if they be laid on any thing thick,) by Stopping of
the Pores, shut in the Vapors, and send them to the Head extremely. And for
the Particular Ingredients of those Magical Ointments, it is like they are
Opiate, and Soporiferous. For Anointing of the Forehead, Neck, Feet,
Backbone, we know is used for Procuring Dead Sleeps: And if any Man say, that
this Effect would be better done by Inward Potions; Answer may be made, that
the Medicines, which go to the Ointments, are so strong, that if they were
used inwards, they would kill those that use them: And therefore they work
Potently, though Outward.

We will divide the Several Kinds of the Operations, by Transmission of
Spirits, and Imagination; Which will give no small Light to the Experiments
that follow. All Operations by Transmission of Spirits, and Imagination have
this; That they Work at Distance, and not at Touch; And they are these being
distinguished.

Transmission or Emission, of the Thinner, and more Airy Parts of Bodies; As in
Odours, and Infections; And this is, of all the rest, the most Corporeal. But
you must remember withal, that there be a Number of those Emissions, both
Wholesome, and Unwholesome, that give no Smell at all: For the Plague, many
times, when it is taken, gives no Sent at all: And there be many Good and
Healthful Aires, that do appear by Habitation, and other Proofs, that
differ not in Smell from other Aires. And under this Head, you may place all
Imbibitions of Air, where the Substance is Material, Odour-like; Whereof some
nevertheless are strange, and very suddenly diffused; As the Alteration, which
the Air receives in Egypt, almost immediately, upon the Rising of the River
of Nilus, whereof we have spoken.

Transmission or Emission of those Things that we call Spiritual Species; As
Visibles, and Sounds: The one whereof we have handled; And the other we shall
handle in due place. These move swiftly, and at great distance; But then they
require a Medium well disposed; And their Transmission is easily stopped.

Emissions, which cause Attraction of Certain Bodies at Distance; Wherein
though the Loadstone be commonly placed in the First Rank, yet we think good
to except it, and refer it to another Head: But the Drawing of Amber, and
let, and other Electricke Bodies; And the Attraction in Gold of the Spirit of
Quicksilver, at distance; And the Attraction of Heat at distance; And that of
Fire to Naphtha; And that of some Herbs to Water, though at distance; And
diverse others; We shall handle, but yet not under this present Title, but under
the Title of Attraction in general.

The Fourth is the Emission of Spirits, and Immateriate Powers and Virtues, in
those Things, which work by the Universal Configuration, and Sympathy of the
World; Not by Forms, or Colestiall Influxes, (as is vainly caught and
received,) but by the Primitive Nature of Matter, and the Seeds of Things. Of
this kind is, (as we yet suppose,) the Working of the Lodestone, which is by
Consent with the Globe of the Earth: Of this Kind is the Motion of Gravity,
which is by Consent of De^se Bodies, with the Globe of the Earth: Of this kind
is some Disposition of Bodies to Rotation, and particularly from East to West:
Of which kind we conceive the Maine Float and Re-float of the Sea is, which is
by Consent of the Universe, as Part of the Diurnall Motion. These I^^teriate
Virtues have this Property differing from Others; That the Diversity of the
Medium hinders them not; But they pass through all Mediums; yet at
Determinate distances. And of these we shall speak, as they are incident to
several Titles.

The Fifth is the Emissions of Spirits; And this is the Principal in our
Operation of the Spirits of the Mind of Man, upon other Spirits: And this is
of a Double Nature: The Operations of the Affections, if they be Vehement; And
the Operation of the Imagination, if it be Strong. But these two are so
Conp^^d, as we shall handle them together: For when an E^^io^, or Am^ro^^
Aspect does infect the Spirits of Another, there is Joined both Affection, and
Imagination.

The Sixth is, the Influxes of the Hea^^ly Bodies, besides those two Heat, and
Light. But these we will handle, where we handle the C^lestiall Bodies, and
Motions.

The Seventh is the Operations of Sympathy; Which the Writers of Natural
Magic have brought into an Art, or Precept: And it is this; That if you
desire to Super-induce, any Virtue or Disposition, upon a Person, you should
take the Living Creature, in which that Virtue is most Emine^^, and in
Perfection: Of that Creature you must take the Parts, wherein that Virtue
chiefly is Collecate: Again, you must take those Parts, in the Time, and Act,
when that Virtue is most in Exercise; And then you must apply it to that Part
of Man, wherein that Virtue chiefly Consists. As if you would Super-induce
Courage and Fortitude, take a Lion, or a Coche; And take the Heart, Teeth, or
Paw of the Lion; Or the Heart, or Spur of the Cock: Take those Parts
immediately after the Lion, or the Cock have been in Fight; And let them be
worn, upon a Man's Heart, or Wrest. Of these and such like Sympathies, we shall
speak under this present Title.

The Eighth and last is, an Emission of Immateriate Virtues; Such as Sympathy
of Indiuiduals: For as there is a Sympathy of Species; So, (it may be) there is
a Sympathy of Indiuiduals: That is, that in Things, or the Parts of Things,
that have been once Contiguous, or Entire, there should remain a Transmission
of Virtue, from the One to the Other: As between the Weapon, and the Wound.
Whereupon is blazed abroad the Operation of Vnguentum Teli: And so of a Piece
of Lard, or Stick of Elder, etc. that if Part of it be Consumed or Putrified,
it will work upon the other Part Severed. Now we will pursue the Instances
themselves.

The Plague is many times taken without Manifest Sense, as has been said.
Experiments in Consort, touching Emission of Spirits in Vapor, or Exhalation,
Odour-like.
And they report, that where it is found, it has a Sent, of the Smell of a
Mellow Apple; And (as some say) of May-Flowers: And it is also received, that
Smells of Flowers, that are Mellow and Lushious, are ill for the Plague; As
White Lillies, Cowslips, and Hyacinths.

Plague is not easily received by such, as continually are about them, that
have the Plague; As Keepers of the Sick, and Physicians; Nor Antidotes, either
Inward, (as Mithridate; InniperBerries; Rue, Leaf and Seed; etc.) Or Outward,
(as Angelica, Zedoary, and the like, in the Mouth; Tar, Galbanum, and the
like, in Perfume;) Nor again by Old People, and such as are of a Dry and Cold
Complexion. On the other side, the Plague takes soonest hold of those, that
come out of a Fresh Air; And of those that are Fasting; And of Children; And
it is likewise noted to go in a Blood, more than to a Stranger.

Infection, next the Plague, is the Smell of the Iayle; When Prisoners have
been Long, and Close, and Nastily kepti Whereof we have had, in our time,
Experience, twice or thrice; when both the Judges that sat upon the Iayle, and
Numbers of those that attended the Business, or were present, Sickned upon it,
and Died. Therefore it were good wisdom, that in such Cases, the Iayle were
Aired, before they be brought forth.

Foul Smells be made by Art, and by the Hand, they consist chiefly of Man's
Flesh, or Sweat, Putrified; For they are not those Stinckes, which the
Nosthrils straight abhor, and expel, that are most Pernicious; But such
Aires, as have some Similitude with Man's Body; And so insinuate themselves, and
betray the Spirits. There may be great danger, in using such Compositions, in
great Meetings of People, within Houses; As in Churches; At Arraignments; At
Plays and Solemnities; And the like; For Poisoning of Air is no less
dangerous than Poisoning of Water; Which has been used by the Turks in the
Wars; And was used by Emanuel Commenus toward the Christians, when they
passed through his Country to the Holy Land. And these Empoisonments of Air,
are the more dangerous in Meetings of People; Because the much Breath of
People, does further the Reception of the Infection: And therefore, where any
such Thing is feared, it were good, those Public Places were perfumed, before
the Assemblies.

Empoysonment of Particular Persons, by Odours, has been reported to be in
Perfumed Gloves, or the like: And it is like, they Mingle the Poison that is
dexdly, with some Smells that are Sweet, which also makes it the sooner
received. Plagues also have been raised by Annointings of the Chinckes of
Doors, and the like; Nor so much by the Touch, as for that it is common for
Men, when they find any thing Wet upon their Fingers, to put them to their
Nose; Which Men therefore should take heed how they do. The best is, that
these Compositions of Infectious Aires, cannot be made without Danger of Death,
to them that make them. But then again, they may have some Antidotes to save
themselves, So that Men ought not to be secure of it.

There have been, in diverse Countries, great Plagues, by the Putrefaction,
Swarms of Grasse-Hoppers, and L^custs, when they have been dead, and cast
upon Heaps.

It happens often in Mines, that there are Damps, which kill, either by
Suffocation, or by the Poisonous Nature of the Mineral: And those that deal
much in Refining, or other Works about Metals, and Minerals, have their
Brains Hurt and Stupefied by the Metalline Vapors. Amongst which, it is
noted, that the Spirits of Quicksilver, ever fly to the Skull, Teeth, or
Bones; In so much as Gilders use to have a Piece of Gold in their Mouth, to
draw the Spirits of the Quicksilver; Which Gold afterward they find to be
Whintened. There are also certain Lakes, and Pits, such as that of Anernus,
that Poison Birds, (as is said,) which fly over them; Or Men, that stay too
long about them.

The Vapor of Char-Code, or Sea-Coale, in a Close Room, has killed Tll
Smell; But steals on by little and little; Enducing only a F^^^nesse, without
any Manifest Strangling. When the Dutchmen Wintred at Noua Zembla, and that
they could gather no more Sticks, they fell to make Fire of some Sea-Coale
they had, wherewith (at first) they were much refreshed; But a little after
they had sit about the Fire, there grew a General Silence, and lothnesse to
speak amongst them; And immediately after, One of the Weakest of the Company,
fell down in a Swoune; Whereupon they doubting what it was, opened their
door, to let in Air, and so saved themselves. The Effect (no doubt) is
wrought by the Inspissation of the Air; And so of the Breath, and Spirits. The
like ensues in Rooms newly Plastered, if a Fire be made in them; Whereof no
less Man than the Emperor Ioninianus Died.

Vide the Experiment, 803. touching the Infectious Nature of the Air, Showers,
after long Drought.

It has come to pass, that some Apothecaries, upon Stamping of Coloquintida,
Sk^^ring, by the Vapor only.

It has been a Practice, to burn a Pepper, they call Ginny-Pepper; Spirit,
that it provoke a Continual Sneezing, in those that are in the Room.

It is an Ancient Tradition, that Bleare-Byes infect Sound-Eyes; And Menstruous
Woman, looking upon a Glass, does rust it. Nay they have an Opinion, which
seems Fabulous; That Menstruous Women, going over a Field, or Garden, do
Corn and Herbs good by Killing the Worms.

Tradition is no less Ancient, that the Bafiliske kills by Aspect; And that
the Wolf, if he see a Man first, by Aspect strikes a Man hoarse.

Perfumes Convenient do dry and strengthen the Brain; And stay Rbeumes and
Defluxions; As we find in Fame of Rose-Mary dried, and Lignum Aloes, and
Calamus, taken at the Mouth, and Nosthrils; And no doubt there be other
Perfumes, that do moisten, and refresh; And are fit to be used in Burning
Agues, Consumptions, and too much Wakefulnesse; Such as are, Rose Water,
Vinegar, Limon-Pills, Violets, the Leanes of Vines sprinkled with a little
Rose Water, etc.

Sudden Faintings, and Swonnings, to put a Handkerchiefe with Rose Water, or a
Little Vinegar, to the Nose; Which gathers together again the Spirits, which
are upon point to resolve, and fall away.

Tobacco comfort the Spirits, and discharges Weariness; Which it works
partly by Opening; But chiefly by the Opiate Virtue, which condenseth the
Spirits. It were good therefore to try the Taking of Fumes by Pipes, (as they
do in Tobacco,) of other Things; As well to dry, and comfort, as for other
Intentions. I wish Trial be made of the Drying Fume, of Rose-Mary, and Lignum
Aloes, before mentioned, in Pipe; And so of Nutmeg, and Folium Indum; etc.

Following of the Plough, has been approved, for Refreshing the Spirits, and
Procuring Appetite: But to do it in the Ploughing for Wheat, or Rye, is not so
good; Because the Earth has spent her Sweet Breath, in Vegetables, put forth
in Summer. It is better therefore to do it, when you sow Barley. But because
Ploughing is tied to Seasons, it is best to take the Air of the Earth, new
turned up, by Digging with the Spade; Or Standing by him that Diggeth.
Gentlewomen may do themselves much good by kneeling upon a Cushion, and
Weeding. And these Things you may practice in the best Seasons; Which is ever
the Early Spring. before the Earth puts forth the Vegetables; And in the
Sweetest Earth you can choose. It would be done also, when the Dew is a little
off the Ground, lest the Vapor be too Moist. I knew a great Man, that lived
Long, who had a Clean Clod of Earth, brought to him every Morning, as he sat
in his Bed; And he would hold his Head over it, a good pretty while. I Commend
also, sometimes, in Digging of New Earth, to pour in some Malmesey, or Greek
Wine; That the Vapor of the Earth, and Wine together, may comfort the Spirits,
the more; Provided always, it be not taken, for a Heathen Sacrifice, or
Libation to the Earth.

Physic, Use of Pomanders, and Knots of Powders, for Drying of Rheumes,
Comforting of the Heart, Prouking of Sleep, etc. For though those Things be
not so Strong as Perfumes, yet you may have them continually in your Hand;
whereas Perfumes you can take but at Times; And besides, there be diverse
Things, that breath better of themselves, than when they come to the Fire; As
Nigella Romana, the Seed of Melanthium, A^o^num, etc.

There be two Things, which (inwardly used) do Cool and condense Spirits; And
I wish the same to be tried outwardly in Vapors. The One is Nitre, which I
would have dissoluted in Malmesey, or GreekeWine, and so the Smell of the Wine
taken; Or if you would have it more forcible, pour of it upon a Fire-pan, well
heated, as they do Rose Water, and Vinegar. The other is, the Distilled Water
of Wild Poppy; which I wish to be mingled, at half, with Rose Water, and so
taken with some Mixture of a few Clones, in a Perfuming-Pan. The like would be
done with the Distilled Water of Saffron Flowers.

Smells of Musk, and Amber, and Ciuit, are thought to further Venereous Which
they may do by the Refreshing and Calling forth of the Spirits.

Incense, and Nidorous Smells, (such as were of Sacrifices,) were thought
Brain, and to dispose Men to Devotion: Which they may do, by a kind of
Sadness, and Contristation of the Spirits: And partly also by Heating, and
Exalting them. We see, that amongst the Jews, the Principal Perfume of the
Sanctuary, was forbidden all Common Uses.

There be some Perfumes, prescribed by the Writers of Natural Magic,
Pleasant Dreams; And some others, (as they say,) that procure Prophetical
Dreams; As the Seeds of Flax, Fleawort, etc.

It is certain, that Odours do, in a small Degree, Nourish; Especially Odor
of Wine: And we see Men a hungered, do love to smell Hot Bread. It is related,
that Democritus, when he lay a dying, heard a Woman, in the House, complain,
that she should be kept from being at a Feast, and Solemnity, (which she much
desired to see,) because there would be a Corpse in the House; Whereupon he
caused Loaves of New Bread to be sent for, and opened them; And powered a little
Wine into them; And so kept himself alive with the Odor of them, till the
Feast was past. I knew a Gentleman, that would fast (sometimes) three or four,
yea five days, without Meat, Bread, or Drink; But the same Man used to have
continually, a great Wispe of Herbs, that he smelled on: And amongst those
Herbs, some Esculent Herbs of strong Sent; As Onions, Garlic, Leekes, and
the like.

They do use, for the Accident of the Mother, to burn Feathers, and Things of
Ill Odor: And by those Ill Smells, the Rising of the Mother is put down.

There be Aires, which the Physicians advise their Patients to remove
Consumptions, or upon Recovery of Long Sicknessess Which (commonly) are Plain
Champaignes, but Grasing, and not Ouen-growne with Heath, or the like: Or else
Timber-Shades, as in Forests, and the like. It is noted also, that Groves of
Bays do forbid Pestilent Aires; Which was accounted a great Cause of the
Wholesome Air of Antiochia. There be also some Soyles that put forth Odorate
Herbs of themselves; As Wild Thyme; Wild Maioram; Penny-Roiall; Camomill;
And in which the BriarRoses smell almost like Muske-Roses; Which (no doubt) are
Signs that do discover an Excellent Air.

Men, to think of having Healthful Air, in their Houses; Which will never
be, if the Rooms be Low-roosed, or full of Windows, and Doors; For the one
makes the Air Close, and not Fresh; And the other makes it Exceeding
Unequal; Which is a great Enemy to Health. The Windows also should not be
high up to the Roof, (which is in use for Beauty, and Magnificence,) but Low.
Also Stone-Walls are not wholesome; But Timber is more wholesome; And
especially Brick. Nay it has been used by some, with great Success, to make
their Walls thick; And to put a Lay of Chalk between the Brickes, to take
away all Dampishnesse.

These Emissions, (as we said before,) are handled, and ought to be handled, by
themselves, under their Proper Titles: That is, Visibles, and Andibles, each
apart: In this Place, it shall suffice to give some general Observations,
Common to both. Experiment Solitary touching the Emissions of Spiritual Species
which Affect the Senses.
First, they seem to be Incorporeall. Secondly, they Work Swiftly. Thirdly,
they Work at Large Distances. Curious Varieties. Fifthly, they are not
Effectiue of any Thing; Nor leave no Work behind them; But are Energies
merely; For their Working upon Mirrours, and Places of Echo, does not alter
any Thing in those Bodies; But it is the same Action with the Original, only
Repercussed. And as for the Shaking of windows, or Rarefying the Air by Great
Noyses; And the Heat caused by Burning-Glasses; They are rather Concomitants of
the Andible, and Visible Species, than the Effects of them. Sixthly, they seem
to be ofso Tender, and Weak a Nature, as they affect only such a Rare, and
Attenuate Substance, as is the spirit of Living Creatures.

It is mentioned in some Stories, that where Children have been Exposed, or
taken away young from their Parents; And that afterward they have approached
to their Parents presence, the Parents, (though they have not known them,)
have had a Secret Joy, or Other Alteration thereupon. Experiments in Consort,
touching the Emission of Immatcriate Virtues from the Minds, and Spirits of
Men, either by Affectious, or by Imaginations, or by other Impressions.


There was an Egyptian South-Sayer, that made Anthonius believe, that his
Genius, (which otherwise was Brave, and Confident,) was, in the Presence of
Octanianus Caesar, Poor, and Cowardly: And therefore, he advised him, to
absent himself, (as much as he could,) and remove far from him. This
South-Sayer was thought to be suborned by Cleopatra, Egypt, and other Remote
Places from Rome. Howsouer Perdominant or Mastering Spirit, of one Man over
Another, is Ancient, and Received still, even in Vulgar Opinion.

There are Conceits, that some Men, that are of an Ill, and Melancholy do
incline the Company, into which they come, to be Sad; and Ill disposed; And
contrariwise, that Others, that are of a Iouiall Nature, do dispose the
Company to be Merry and Cheerful. And again, that some Men are Lucky to be
kept Company with, and Employed; And Others Unlucky. Certninly, it is agreeable
to Reason, that there are, at the least, some Light Effluxions from Spirit to
Spirit, when Men are in Presence one with another, as well as from Body to Body.

It has been observed, that Old Men, who have loved Tongue Company, Long Life;
Their Spirits, (as it seems,) being Recreated by such Company. Such were the
Ancient Sophists, and Rhetoricians; Which ever had Young Auditors, and
Disciples; As Gorgias, Protagoras, Isocrates, etc. Who lived till they were an
Hundred years Old. And so likewise did many of the Grammarians, and
Schoolmasters; such as was Orbilius, etc.

Audacity and Confidence does; in Civil Business, so great Effects, Man may
(reasonably) doubt, that besides the very Daring, and Earnestness, and
Persisting and Importunity, there should be some Secret Binding, and Stooping
of other Men's Spirits, to such Persons.

The Affections (no doubt) do make the Spirits more Powerful, and Active; And
especially those Affections, which draw the Spirits into the Eyes: Which are
two: Love, and Envy, which is called Oculus Malus. As for Love, the Platonists,
(some of them,) go so far, as to hold that the Spirit of the Lover, does
pass into the Spirits, of the Person Loved; Which causes the desire of
Return into the Body, whence it was Emitted: Whereupon follows that Appetite
of Contact, and Coninuction. which is in Lovers. And this is observed likewise,
that the Aspects that procure Love, are not Gazings, but Sudden Glances, and
Dartings of the Eye. As for Envy, that emitteth some Malign and Poisonous
Spirit, which takes hold of the Spirit of Another; And is likewise of greatest
Force, when the Cast of the Eye is Oblique. It has been noted also, that it
is most Dangerous, when an Envious Eye is cast upon Persons in Glory, and
Triumph, and Joy. The Reason whereof is, for that, at such times, the Spirits
come forth most, into the Outward Parts, and so meet the Percussion of the
Envious Eye, more at Hand: And therefore it has been noted, that after great
Triumphs, Men have been ill disposed, for some Days following. We see the
Opinion of Fascination is Ancient, for both Effects; Of Procuring Love; And
Sickness caused by Envy: And Fascination is ever by the Eye. But yet if there
be any such Infection from Spirit to Spirit, there is no doubt, but that it
works by Presence, and not by the Eye alone; Yet most Forcibly by the Eye.

Fear, and Shame, are likewise Infection; For we see that the Starting Start:
And when one Man is out of Conntenance in a Company, others do likewise Blush
in his behalf.

Now we will speak of the Force of Imagination upon other Bodies; And of the
Means to Exalt and Strengthen it. Imagination, in this Place, I understand to
be, the Representation of an Individual Thought. Imagination is of three
Kinds: The First Joined with Belief of that which is to Come: The Second
Joined with Memory of that which is Past: And the Third is of Things Present,
or as if they were Present; For I comprehend in this, Imaginations Feigned, and
at Pleasure; As if one should Imagine such a Man to be in the Vestments of a
Pope; Or to have Wings. I single out, for this time, that which is with Faith,
or Belief of that which is to Come. The Inquisition of this Subject, in our
way, (which is by Induction,) is wonderful hard; for the Things that are
reported, are full of Fables; And New Experiments can hardly be made, but with
Extreme Caution, for the Reason which we will hereafter declare.

The Power of Imagination is in three Kinds; The First, upon the Body of the
Imaginant; Including likewise the Child in the Mothers Womb; The Second is,
the Power of it upon Dead Bodies, as Plants, Wood, Stone, Metal, etc. The
Third is, the Power of it, upon the Spirits of Men, and Living Creatures: And
with this last we will only meddle.

The Problem therefore is, whether a Man Constantly and Strongly Believing,
that such a Thing shall be; (As that such an One will Love Him; Or that such an
One will Grant him his Request; Or that such an One shall Recover a Sickness;
Or the like;) It does help any thing to the Effecting of the Thing it self.
And here again we must warily distinguish; For it is not meant, (as has been
partly said before,) that it should help by Making a Man more Stout, or more
Industrious; (In which kind a Constant Belief does much;) But merely by a
Secret Operation, or Binding, or Changing the Spirit of Another: And in this it
is hard, (as we began to say,) to make any New Experiment; For I cannot command
my Self to Believe what I will, and so no Trial can be made. Nay it is worse;
For whatsoever a Man Imagines doubtingly, or with Fear, must needs do hurt,
if Imagination have any Power at all; For a Man represents that oftener, that
he fears, than the contrary.

The Help therefore is, for a Man to work by Another, in whom he may Create
Belief, and not by Himself; Until Himself have found by Experience, that
Imagination does prevail; For then Experience works in Himself Belief; If
the Belief, that such a Thing shall be, be joined with a Belief, that his
Imagination may procure it.

For Example; I related one time to a Man, that was Curious, and That I saw a
Kinds of Iugler, that had a Pair of Cards, and would tell a Man what Card he
thought. This Pretended Learned Man told me; It was a Mistaking in Me; For
(said he) it was not the Knowledge of the Man's Thought, (for that is Proper to
God,) but it was the Enforcing of a Thought upon him, and Binding his
Imagination by a Stronger, that he could Think no other Card. And thereupon he
asked me a Question, or two, which I thought he did but cunningly, knowing
before what used to be the Feats of the Iugler. Sir, (said he,) do you
remember whether he told the Card, the Man thought, Himself, or bade Another
to tell it. I answered (as was true;) That be bade Another tell it. Whereunto
he said; so I thought: For (said he) Himself could not have put on so strong
an Imagination; But by telling the other the Card, (who believed that the
Iugler was some Strange Man, and could do Strange Things,) that other Man
caught a strong Imagination. I harkened unto him, thinking for a Vanity he
spoke prettily. Then he asked me another Question: Says he; Do you remember,
whether he had the Man think the Card first, and afterward told the other Man
in his Ear, what he should think, Or else that he did whisper first in the
Man's Ear, that should tell the Card, telling that such a Man should think
such a Card, and after bade the Man think a Card? I told him, as was true;
That he did first whisper the Man in the Ear, that such a Man should think
such a Card: Upon this the Learned Man did much Exult, and Please himself,
saying; Lo, you may see that my Opinion is right: For if the Man had: thought
first, his Thought had been Fixed; But the other Imagining first, bound his
Thought. Which though it did somewhat sink with me, yet I made it Lighter
than I thought, and said; I thought it was Confederacy, between the Iugler,
and the two Servants: Though (Indeed) I had no Reason so to think: For they
were both my Fathers Servants; And he had never played in the House before. The
Iugler also did cause a Garter to be held up; And took upon him, to know, that
such a One, should point in such a Place, of the Garter; As it should be near
so many Inches to the Longer End, and so many to the Shorter; And still he did
it, by First Telling the Imaginer, and after Bidding the Actour Think.

Having told this Relation, not for the Weight thereof, but because it does
handsomely open the Nature of the Question; I return to that I said; That
Experiments of Imagination, must be practiced by Others, and not by a Man's
Self. For there be Three Means to fortify Belief: The First is Experience:
The Second is Reason: And the Third is Authority: And that of these, which is
far the most Potent, is Authority: For Belief upon Reason, or Experience,
will Stagger.

Authority, it is of two Kinds; Belief in an Art; And Belief in a Man. And
for Things of Belief in an Art; A Man may exercise them by Himself; But for
Belief in a Man, it must be by Another. Therefore, if a Man believe in
Astrology, and find a Figure Prosperous; Or believe in Natural Magic, and
that a Ring with such a Stone, or such a Piece of a Living Creature, Carried,
will do good; It may help his Imagination: But the Belief in a Man is far
the more Active. But howsoever, all Authority must be out of a Man's Self,
turned (as was said,) either upon an Art, or upon a Man: And where Authority
is from one Man to another, there the Second must be Ignorant, and not Learned,
or Full of Thoughts; And such are (for the most part) all Witches, and
Superstitious Persons; Whose Beleefes, tied to their Teachers, and Traditions,
are no whit controlled, either by Reason, or Experience: And upon the same
Reason, in Magic, they use (for the most part,) Boys, and Young People;
whose Spirits easiliest take Belief, and Imagination.

Now to fortify Imagination, there be three Ways: The Authority whence the
Belief is derived; Means to Quicken and Corroborate the Imagination; And
Means to Repeat it, and Refresh it.

Authority, we have already spoken: As for the Second; Namely the Means to
Quicken, and Corroborate the Imagination; We see what has been used in
Magic; (If there be in those Practices any thing that is purely Natural;) As
Vestments; Characters; Words; Seals; Some Parts of Plants, or Living
Creatures; Stones; Choice of the Hour; Gestures and Motions; Also Incenses,
and Odours; Choice of Society, which increases Imagination; Diets and
Preparations for some time before. And for Words, there have been ever used,
either Barbarous Words, of no Sense, lest they should disturb the Imagination;
Or Words of Similitude, that may second and feed the Imagination: And this was
ever as well in Heathen Charms, as in Charms of latter Times. There are used
also Scripture-Words; For that the Belief, that Religious Texts, and Words,
have Power, may strengthen the Imagination: And for the same Reason, Hebrew
Words, (which amongst us is counted the Holy Tongue, and the Words more
Mystical,) are often used.

Refreshing of the Imagination, (which was the Third Means of Exalting it;)
We see the Practices of Magic, as in Images of Wax,

and the like, that should Melt by little, and little; Or some other Things
Buried in Mucke, that should Putrify by little and little; Or the like: For so
often as the Imaginant does think of those Things, so often does he represent to
his Imagination, the Effect of that he desires.

If there be any Power in Imagination, it is less credible, that it should
Incorporcall and Immateriate a Virtue, as to work at great Distances; Or
through all Mediums Or upon all Bodies: But that the Distance must be
Competent; The Medium not Adverse; And the Body Apt and Proportionate.
Therefore if there be any Operation upon Bodies, in Absence, by Nature; it is
like to be conveyed from Man to Man, as Fame is; As if a Witch, by Imagination,
should hurt any afar off, it cannot be naturally, but by Working upon the
Spirit of some, that comes to the Witch; And from that Party upon the
Imagination of Another; And so upon Another; till it come to one that has
resort to the Party Intended; And so by Him to the Party intended himself. And
although they speak, that it suffices, to take a Point, or a Piece of the
Garment, or the Name of the Party, or the like; yet there is less Credit to be
given to those Things, except it be by Working of evil Spirits.

The Experiments, which may certainly demonstrate the Power of Imagination,
upon other Bodies, are few, or none: For the Experiments of Witchcraft, are no
clear Proofs; For that they may be, by a Tacit Operation of Malign Spirits:
We shall therefore be forced, in this Enquire, to resort to New Experiments:
Wherein we can give only Directions of Trialls, and not any Positive
Experiments. And if any Man think, that we ought to have stayed, till we had
made Experiment, of some of them, our selves, (as we do commonly in other
Titles,) the Truth is, that these Effects of Imagination upon other Bodies,
have so little Credit with us, as we shall try them at leisure: But in the
mean Time, we will lead others the way.

When you work by the Imagination of Another, it is necessary, that Precedent
Opinion of you, that you can do Strange Things; Or that you are a Man of Art,
as they call it; For else the Simple Affirmation to Another, that this or that
shall be, can work but a weak Impression, in his Imagination.

It were good, because you cannot discern fully of the Strength of
Imagination, in one Man more than another, that you did use the Imagination of
more than One; That so you may light upon a Strong One. As if a Physician
should tell Three, or Four, of his Patients Servants, that their Master shall
surely recover.

The Imagination of One, that you shall use, (such is the Variety of Men's
Minds,) cannot be always alike Constant, and Strong; And if the Success
follow not speedily, it will faint and leese Strength. To remedy this, you must
pretend to Him, whose Imagination you use, several Degrees of Means, by which
to Operate; As to prescribe him, that every three Days, if he find not the
Success Apparent, he do use another Root, or Part of a Beast, or Ring, etc.
As being of more Force; And if that fail, Another; And if that, Another; till
Seven Times. Also you must prescribe a good Large Time for the Effect you
promise; As if you should tell a Servant of a Sick-Man, that his Master shall
recover, but it will be Fourteen days, ear he finds it apparently, etc.
All this to entertain the Imagination, that it waver less.

Potions, or Things taken into the Body: Incenses and Perfumes taken at the
Nosthrills; And Ointments of some Parts; do (naturally) work upon the
Imagination of Him that takes them. And therefore it must needs greatly
Cooperate with the Imagination of him, whom you use, if you presribe him,
before he do use the Receipt, for the Work which he desires, that he do take
such a Pill, or a Spoonefull of Liquour, Or burn such an Incense; Or Anoint
his Temples, or the Soles of his Feet, with such an Ointment, or Oil: And you
must choose, for the Composition of such Pill, Perfume, or Ointment, such
Ingredients, as do make the Spirits, a little more Gross, or Muddy: Whereby
the Imagination will fix the better.

Body Passive, and to be Wrought Upon, (I mean not of the Imaginant,) is
better wrought upon, (as has been partly touched,) at some Times, than at
other: As if you should prescribe a Servant, about a Sick Person, (whom you
have possessed, that his Master shall recover,) when his Master is fast
asleep, to use such a Root, or such a Root. For Imagination is like to work
better upon Sleeping Men, than Men Awake, As we shall show when we handle
Dreams.

Art of Memory, that Images Visible, work better than other Conceits: As if
you would remember the Word Philosophy, you shall more surely do it, by
Imagining that such a Man, (For Men are best Places,) is reading upon
Aristotle's Physickes; Than if you should Imagine him to say; I Will go study
Philosophy. And therefore, this Observation would be translated to the Subject
we now speak of: For the more Lustrous the Imagination is, it fills and
fixes the better. And therefore I conceive, that you shall, in that
Experiment, (whereof we spoke before,) of Binding of Thoughts, less fail, if
you tell One, that such an One shall name one of Twenty Men, than if it were One
of Twenty Cards. The Experiment of Binding of Thoughts, would be Diuersified,
and tried to the Full: And you are to note, whether it hit for the most part,
though not always.

Things, Imagination has most Force: And the Rule, (as I conceive,) is, that
it has most Force upon Things, that have the Lightest, and Easiest Motions.
And therefore above all, upon the Spirits of Men: And in them, upon such
Affections, as move Lightest; As upon Procuring of Love; Binding of Lust, which
is ever with Imagination; upon Men in Fear; Or Men in Irresolution; And the
like. Whatsoever is of this kind would be thoroughly enquired. Trialls likewise
would be made upon Plants. and that diligently: As if you should tell a Man,
that such a Tree would Dye this year; And will him, at these and these times,
to go unto it, to see how it thriueth. As for In^^imate Things, it is true,
that the Mount of Shuffling of Cards, or Casting of Dice, are very Light
Motions; And there is a Folly very usual, that Gamesters imagine, that some
that stand by them, bring them ill Luck. There would be Trial also made, of
holding a Ring by a Thread in a Glass, and telling him that holds it,
before, that it shall strike so many times against the Side of the Glass, and
no more; Or of Holding a Key between two Men's Fingers, without a Charm; And
to tell those that hold it, that at such a Name, it shall go off their
Fingers: For these two are Extreme Light Motions. And howsoever I have no
Opinion of these things, yet so much I conceive to be true; That Strong
Imagination has more Force upon Things Living, Or that have, been Living, than
Things merely Inauimate; And more Force likewise upon Light, and Subtle
Motions, than upon Motions Vehement, or P^nderous.

It is an usual Observation, that if the Body of One Murdered, be Murderer,
the Wounds will bleed a-fresh, Some do affirm, that the Dead Body, upon the
Presence of the Murderer, has opened the Eyes; And that there have been such
like Motions, as well where the Party Murdered has been Strengled, or
Drew^ed, as where they have been Killed by Wounds, It may be, that this
participateth of a Miracle, by Gods Just Judgment, who usually brings
Murders to Lights But if it be Natural, it must be referred to Imagination.

The Tying of the Point upon the day of Marriage, to make Men Impotent Wives,
which (as we have formerly touched,) is so frequent in Zant, and Gascony, if it
be Natural, must be referred to the Imagination of Him that Tieth the Point. I
conceive it to have the less Affinity with Witchcraft, because not Peculiar
Persons only, (such as Witches are,) but any Body may do it.

There be many Things that work upon the Spirits of Man, by Secret Sympathy,
and Antipathy; The Virtues of Precious Stones worn, have been anciently and
generally Received: And curiously assigned to Work several Effects.
Experiments in Consort, touching the Secret Virtue of Sympathy, and Antipathy
So much is true; That Stones have in them fine Spirits; As appears by their
Splendor: And therefore they may work by Consort upon the Spirits of Men, to
Comfort, and Exhilarate them. Effect, are the Diamond. the Emerald, the Iacinth
Oriental, and the Gold-Stone, which is the Yellow Topaze. As for their
particular Proprieties, there is no Credit to be given to them. But it is
manifest, that Light, above all things, excels in Comforting the Spirits of
Men: And it is very probable, that Light Varied does the same Effect, with more
Nouelty. And this is one of the Causes, why Precious Stones comfort. And
therefore it were good to have Tincted Lanthornes. or Tincted Skreenes, of
Glass Colored into Green, Blew, Carnation, Crimson, Purple, etc. And to use
them with Candles in the Night. So likewise to have Round Glasses, not only of
Glass Colored through, but with Colors laid between Crystals, with Handles
to hold in ones Hand. Prismes are also Comfortable Things. They have of
Paris-Worke, Looking-Glasses, bordered with broad Borders of small Crystal,
and great Counterfete Precious Stones, of all Colors, that are most Glorious
and Pleasant to behold; Especially in the Night. The Pictures of Indian
Feathers, are likewise Comfortable, and Pleasant to behold. So also Fair and
Clear Pooles do greatly comfort the Eyes, and Spirits; Especially when the
Sun is not Glaring, but Ouercast; Or when the Moon shines.

Bracelets fit to Comfort the Spirits; And they be of Three Intentions:
Refrigerant; Corroborant; and Aperient. For Refrigerant, I wish them to be of
Pearl, or of Coral, as is used: And it has been noted that Coral, if the
Party that wears it be ill disposed, will wax Pale: Which I believe to be
true, because otherwise Distemper of Heat will make Coral lose Color. I
Commend also Beads, or little Plates of Lapis Lazuli; And Beads of Nitre,
either alone, or with some Cordial Mixture.

Corroboration and Confortation, take such Bodies as are of Astringent Quality,
without Manifest Cold. I commend Bead-Amber; which is full of Astriction, but
yet is Unctuous, and not Cold; And is conceived to Impinguate those that wear
such Beads: I commend also, Beads of HartsHorne, and Iuory, which are of the
like Nature; Also Orenge-Beads; Also Beads of Lignum Aloes, Macerated first in
Rose Water, and Dried.

Opening, I Commend Beads, or Pieces of the Roots of Cardius Benedictus: Also
of the Roots of Piony the Male; And of Orris; And of Calamus Aromaticus; And of
Rue.

Contraction of Sinnewes; Which is Manifest, in that it comes either by Cold,
or Dryness; As after Consumptions, and Long Agues: For Cold and Dryness do
(both of them) Contract, and Corrugate. We see also, that Chasing a little
above the Place in pain, eases the Crampe; Which is wrought by the
Dilatation, of the Contracted Sinnewes, by Heat. There are in use, for the
Prevention of the Crampe, two Things; The one Rings of Sea Horse Teeth, worn
upon the Fingers; The other Bands of Green Periwinckle, (the Herb,) tied
about the Calfe of the Leg, or the Thigh, etc. where the Crampe uses to come.
I do find this the more strange, because Neither of these have any Relaxing
Virtue, but rather the Contrary. I judge therefore, that their Working, is
rather upon the Spirits, within the Nerves, to make them strive less; Than
upon the Bodily Substance of the Nerves.

Trial made of two other Kinds of Bracelets, for Comforting the Heart, and
Spirits; The one of the Trechisch of Vipers, made into little Pieces of Beads;
For since they do great Good Inwards, (especially for Pestilent Agues, it is
like they will be Effectual Outward; Where they may be applied in greater
Quantity. There would be Trochish likewise made of Snakes; Whose Flesh dried,
is thought to have a very Opening, and Cordial Virtue. The other is, of Beads
made of the Scarlet Powder, which they call Kermes; Which is the Principal
Ingredient in their Cordial Confection Alkermes: The Beads would be made up
with AmberGrice, and some Pomander.

It has been long received, and confirmed by diverse Trialls; That Male-Piony,
dried, tied to the Neck, does help the Falling Sickness; And likewise the
Incubus, which we call the Mare. The Cause of both these Diseases, and
especially of the Epilepsie from the Stomach, is the Grossness of the
Vapors, which rise and enter into the Cells of the Brain: And therefore the
Working is, by Extreme, and Subtle Attenuations; Which that Simple has. I
judge the like to be in Castoreum, Musk, Rew-Seed, Agnus Castus Seed, etc.

There is a Stone, which they call the Bloud-Stone, which worn is Bleed at the
Nose: Which (no doubt) is by Astriction, and Cooling of the Spirits. Quare, if
the Stone taken out of the Toads Head, be not of the like Virtue? For the Toade
loves Shade, and Coolness.

Light may be taken from the Experiment of the Horse-Tooth-Ring, Garland of
Periwinckle, how that those things, which assuage the Strife of the Spirits,
do help diseases, contrary to the Intention desired: For in the Curing of the
Crampe, the Intention is to relax the Sinnewes; But the Contraction of the
Spirits, that they strive less, is the best Help: So to procure easy
Tranailes of Women, the Intention is to bring down the Child; But the best
Help is, to stay the Coming down too Fast: Whereunto they say, the
Toad-Stone likewise helps. So in Pestilent Feaners, the Intention is to
expel the Intection by Sweat, and Enapouration; But the best Means to do it,
is by Nitre, Diascordium, and other Cool Things, which do for a time arrest
the Expulsion, till Nature can do it more quietly. For as one faith prettily;
In the Quenching of the Flame of a Pestilent Ague, Nature is like People, that
come to quench the Fire of a House; which are so busy, as one of them lets
another. Surely, it is an Excellent Axiom, and of Manifold Use, that whasoeuer
appeaseth the Contention of the Spirits, furthereth their Action.

The Writers of Natural Magic, commend the Wearing of the Spoil Snake, for
Preserving of Health; I doubt it is but a Conceit; For that the Snake is
thought to renew her Touth, by Casting her Spoil. They might as well take the
Beak of an Eagle, or a Piece of a Harts-Horne, because those Renew.

It has been Anciently Received, (For Pericles the Athenian used it,)
Bladders of Quicksilver, or Tablets of Arsenicke, as Preseruatines against the
Plague: Not as they conceive, for any Comfort they yield to the Spirits, but
for that being Poisons themselves, they draw the Venom to them, from the
Spirits.

Vide the Experiments 95.96. and 97. touching the Several Sympathies,
Antipathies, for Medicinal Use.

Guts or Skin of a Wolf being applied to the Belly, do cure the Cholicke. It
is true, that the Wolf is a Beast of great Edacity, and Disgestion; And so, it
may be, the Parts of him comfort the Bowels.

Scare-Crowes, are set up to keep Birds from Corn, and Fruit; It is reported
by some, that the Head of a Wolf, whole, dried, and hanged up in a Done-House,
will scare away Vermin; Such as are Weasils, Polcats, and the like. It may be,
the Head of a Dog will do as much; For those Vermin with us, know Dogs better
than Wolves.

Brains of some Creatures, (when their Heads are roasted) taken in Wine, are
said to strengthen the Memory: As the Brains of Hares; Brains of Hens;
Brains of Deeres, etc. And it seems, to be incident to the Brains of those
Creatures, that are Fearful.

Ointment, that Witches use, is reported to be made, of the Fat of Children,
dug out of their Granes; Of the Iuyees of Smallage, Wolfebane, and
Cinquefoile; Mingled with the Meal of fine Wheat. But I suppose that the
Soperiferous Medicines are likest to do it; Which are Henbane, Hemlocke,
Mandrake, Moone-Shade, Tobacco, Opium, Saffron, PoplarLeaues, etc.

Affections of Beasts, when they are in Strength, do add some Virtue, unto
Inanimate Things; As that the Skin of a Sheep, devoured by a Wolf, moves
Itching; That a Stone, bitten by a Dog in Anger, being thrown at him, drunk
in Powder, provoke Choler.

Diet of Women with Child, does work much upon the Infant; As if the Mother
eat Quinces much, and Coriander-Seed, (the Nature of both which is to repress
and stay Vapors, that ascend to the Brain,) it will make the Child
Ingenious: And on the contrary side, if the Mother eat (much) Onions, or
Beans, or such Vapourous Food; Or drink Wine, or Strong Drink, immoderately;
Or Fast much; Or be given to much Musing; (All which send, or draw Vapors to
the Head,) It endangereth the Child to become Lunaticke, or of Ionperfect
Memory: And I make the same Judgment of Tobacco, often taken by the Mother.

Writers of Natural Magic report, that the Heart of an Ape, worn near the
Heart, comfort the Heart, and increases Audacity. It is true, that the Ape
is a Merry and Bold Beast. And that the same Heart likewise of an Ape, applied
to the Neck, or Head, helps the Wit; And is good for the Falling Sickness:
The Ape also is a Witty Beast, and has a Dry Brain; Which may be some Cause
of Attenuation of Vapors in the Head. Yet it is said to move Dreams also. It
may be, the Heart of a Man would do more, but that is more against Men's Minds
to use it; Except it be in such as wear the Relics of Saints.

Flesh of a Hedgehog, Dressed, and Eaten, is said to be a great Drier: It is
true, that the Juice of a Hedgehog, must needs be Harsh, and Dry, because it
puts forth so many Prickles: For Plants also, that are full of Prickles, are
generally Dry: As Briars, Thorns, Berberries: And therefore the Ashes of a
Hedgehog are said to be a great Desiccatiue of Fistula's.

Mummy has great force in Stanching of Blood; which, as it may be Mixture of
Balmes, that are Glutinous; So it may also partake of a Secret Propriety; In
that the Blood draws Man's Flesh. And it is approved, that the Moss, which
grows upon the Skull of a Dead Men, unburied, will stanch Blood potently. And
so do the Dregs, or Powder of Blood, severed from the Water, and Dried.

It has been practiced, to make White Swallows, by Anointing of Eggs with
Oil. Which Effect may be produced, by the Stopping of the Pores of the Shell,
and making the Juice, that puts forth the Feathers afterward, more
Penurious. And it may be, the Anointing of the Eggs, will be as Effectual, as
the Anointing of the Body; Of which Vide the Experiment 93.

It is reported, that the White of an Egg, or Blood, mingled with Salt Water,
does gather the Saltness, and makes the Water sweeter. This may be by
Adhesion; As in the 6. Experiment of Clarification: It may be also, that Blood,
and the White of an Egg, (which is the Malter of a Living Creature,) have some
Sympathy with Salt: For all Life has a Sympathy with Salt. We see that Salt,
laid to a Cut Finger, heals it; So as it seems Salt draws Blood, as well
as Blood draws Salt.

It has been anciently received, that the Sea-Hare, has an Antipathy Lungs,
(if it comes near the Body,) and erodeth them. Where of the Cause is
conceived to be, a Quality it has of Heating the Brath, and Spirits; As
Cantharides have upon the Watery Parts of the Body; As ^ine and Hydro^icall
Water. And it is a good Rule, that whatsoever has an Operation upon certain
Kinds of Matters, that, in Mars Body; works most upon those Parts, wherein
that kind of Matter ^^^.

Generally, that which is Dead, or Corrapted, or Excerned, has Antipathy
Thing, when it is Alive, and when it is Sound; And with those Parts which do
Excerne: As a Carcass of Man is most Infectious, and Odious to Man; A Carrion
of an Horse to an Horse, etc. Puro^^ Matter of Wounds, and Ulcers, Car^^ctes,
Pockes, Scabs, Leprousie, to Sound Flesh; And the Excrement of every Species to
that Creature that Externeth them. But the Excrements are less Per^icious than
the Corruptions.

It is a Common Experience, that Dog know the Dog-Killer; When Infection. some
Petty F^^^^^^ is sent out to kill the Dogs; And that, though they have never
seen him before; yet they will all come forth, and bark, and fly at him.

The Relutions touching the Force of ^^^, and the Secret ^^^ Nature are so
uncertain, as they require a great deal of Examination, ere ^^^ conclude upon
them. I would have it first thoroughly inquired, whether there be any Secret
Passages of Sympathy, between Persons of near Blood; As Parents, Children,
Brothers, Sisters, NurseChildren, Husbands, Wives, etc. There be many Reports
in History, that upon the Death of Persons of such Nearenesse, Men have had an
inward Feeling of it. I my Self remember, that being in Paris, and my Father
dying in London, two or three days before my Fathers death, I had a Dream,
which I told to diverse English Gentlemen; That my Fathers House, in the
Country, was Plastered all over with Black Mortar. There is an Opinion
abroad, (whether Idle or no I cannot say,) That loving and kind Husbands, have
a Sense of their Wives Breeding Child, by some Accident in their own Body.

Near in Blood, there may be the like Passage, and Instincts of Nature,
between great Friends, and Enemies: And sometimes the Reucaling is unto
Another Person, and not to the Party Himself. I remember Philippus Commineus,
(a grave Writer,) reports; That the Archbishop of Vienna, (a Reverend
l'relate,) said (one day) after Mass, to King Lewis the eleventh of France;
Sir, your Mortal Enemy is dead; What time Duke Charles of Burgundy was
Slain, at the Battle of Granson, against the Switzers. Some trial also would
be made, whether Pact or Agreement do any thing; As if two Friends should
agree, that such a Day in every Week, they being in far Distant Places,
should Pray one for Another; Or should put on a Ring, or Tablet, one for
another Sake; Whether if one of them should break their Vow and Promise, the
other should have any Feeling of it, in Absence.

Force in Imaginations and Affections of Singular Persons; It is Probable the
Force is much more in the Joint Imaginations and Affections of Multitudes: As
if a Victory should be won, or lost, in Remote Parts, whether is there not
some Sense thereof, in the People whom it concerns; Because of the great Joy,
or Grief, that many Men are prossest with, at once? Pius Quintus, at the very
time, when that Memorable Victory was won, by the Christians, against the
Turks, at the Nauall Battle of Lepanto, being then hearing of Causes in
Consistory, brake off suddenly, and said to those about him; It is now more
time, we should give thanks to God, for the great Victory he has granted us,
against the Turks. It is true, that Victory had a Sympathy with his Spirit;
For it was merely his Work, to conclude that League. It may be, that
Revelation was Divine; But what shall we say then, to a Number of Examples,
amongst the Grecians, and Romans? Where the People, being in Theaters at
Plays, have had News of Victories, and Overthrows, some few days, before
any Messenger could come.

It is true, that that may hold in these Things, which is the general Root of
Superstition; Namely, that Men observe when Things Hit, and not when they
Miss: And commit to Memory the one, And forget and pass over the other. But
touching Divination, and the Misgiuing of Minds, we shall speak more, when
we handle in general, the Nature of Minds, and Souls, and Spirits.

We have given formerly some Rules of Imgination; And touching Fortifying of
the Same. We have set down also some few Instances, and Directions, of the
Force of Imagination, upon Beasts, Birds, etc. upon Plants; And upon Inanimate
Bodies: Wherein you must still observe, that your Trialls be upon Subtle and
Light Motions, and not the contrary; For you will sooner, by Imagination, bind
a Bird from Singing, than from Eating, or Flying: And I leave it to every Man,
to choose Experiments, which himself thinks most Commodious; Giving now but a
few Examples of every of the Three Kinds.

Use some Imaginant, (observing the Rules formerly prescribed,) for Binding of
a Bird from Singing; And the like of a Dog from Barking. Try also the
Imagination of some, whom you shall accommodate with things to fortify it, in
Cocke-Fights, to make one Cock more Hardy, and the other more Cowardly. It
would be tried also, in Flying of Hawks; Or in Coursing of a Dear, or Hare,
with Greyhounds; Or in Horse-Races; And the like Comparatiue Motions: For you
may sooner by Imagination, quicken or slack a Motion, than raise or cease it;
As it is easier to make a Dog go slower, than to make him stand still that
he may not run.

In Plants also, you may try the Force of Imagination, upon the Lighter Sort
of Motions: As upon the Sudden Fading, or Lively Coming up of Herbs; Or upon
their Bending one way, or other; Or upon their Closing, and Opening; etc.

For Inanimate Things, you may try the Force of Imagination, upon Working of
Beer, when the Barme is put in; Or upon the Coming of Butter, or Cheese,
after the Cherming, or the Rennet be put in.

It is an Ancient Tradition, every where alleged, for Example of Secret and
Influxes, that the Torpede Marina, if it be touched with a long Stick, does
stupefie the Hand of him that touches it. It is one degree of Working at
Distance, to work by the Continuance of a Fit Medium; As Sound will be
conveyed to the Ear, by striking upon a Bow-String, if the Horn of the Bow be
held to the Ear.

The Writers of Natural Magic, do attribute much to the Virtues, Parts of
Living Creatures; So as they be taken from them, the Creatures remaining still
alive: As if the Creature still living did infuse some Immateriate Virtue, and
Vigor, into the Part Severed. So much may be true; that any Part, taken from a
Living Creature, newly Slain, may be of greater force, than if it were taken
from the like Creature dying of it Self, because it is fuller of Spirit.

Trial would be made, of the like Parts of Indiuidualls, in Plants, and Living
Creatures; As to cut off a Stock of a tree; And to lay that, whith you cut
off, to Putrify, to see whether it will Decay the Rest of the Stock: Or if
you should cut off part off the Tail, or Leg of a Dog, or a Cat, and lay
it to Putrify, and so see whether it will Fester, or keep from Healing, the
Part which remains.

Continue Love, if one wear a Ring, or a Bracelet, of the Hair of the Party
Beloved. But that may be by the Exciting of the Imagination: And perhaps a
Glove, or other like Favor, may as well do it.

Sympathy of Indiuiduals, that have been Entire, or have Touched, is of all
others the most Incredible: Yet according unto our faithful Manner of
Examination of Nature, we will make some little mention of it. The Taking away
of Warts, by Rubbing them with Somewhat that afterward is put to waste, and
consume, is a Common Experiment: And I do apprehend it the rather, because of
mine own Experience. I had, from my Childhood, a Warts, upon one of my
Fingers: Afterward when I was about Sixteen Years old, being then at Paris,
there grew upon both my Hands a Number of Warts, (at the least an hundred,) in
a Months Space. The English Ambassadors Lady, who was a Woman far from
Superstition, told me, one day; She would help me away with my Warts:
Whereupon she got a Piece of Lard, with the Skin on, and rubbed the Warts all
over, with the Fat Side; And amongst the rest that Wart, which I had had from
my Childhood; Then she uailed the Piece of Lord, with the Fat toward the
Sun, upon a Poast of her Chamber Window, which was to the South, The Success
was, that within five weeks space, all the Warts went quite away: And that
Wart, which I had so long endured, for Company. But at the rest I did little
marvel, because they came in a Short time, and might go away in a Short Time
again: But the Going away of that, which had staid so long, does yet stick
with me. They say the like is done, by the Rubbing of Warts with a Green
Elder Stick, and then Burying the Stick to Rot in Mucke. It would be tried,
with Corns, and Wenns, and such other Excrescences. I would have it also
tried, with some Parts of Living Creatures, that are nearest the Nature of
Excrescences; As the Combs of Cocks, the Spurs of Cocks, the Horns of
Beasts, etc. And I would have it tried both wnyes; Both by Rubbing those Parts
with Lord, or Elder, as before; And by Cutting off some Piece of those Parts,
and laying it to Consume; To see whether it will Work any Effect, toward the
Consumption of that Part, which was once Joined with it.

Anointing of the Weapon, than makes the Wound, will heal the Wound it self.
In this Experiment, upon the Relation of Men of Credit, (though my self, as
yet, am not fully inclined to beleoue it,) you shall note the Points following.
First the Ointment, wherewith this is done, is made of Diverse Ingredients;
whereof the Strangest and Hardest to come by, are the Moss upon the Skull of a
dead Men, Unburied; And the Fats of a Bear, and a Bear, killed in the Act of
Generation. These two last I could easily suspect to be prescribed at a
Starting Hole; That if the Experiment proved not, it mouight be pretended, that
the Beasts were not killed in the due Time; For as for the Moss, it is
certain, there is great Quantity of it in Ireland, upon Slain Bodies, laid
on Heaps, Unburied. The other Ingredients are, the Bloud-Stone in Powder, and
some other Things, which seem to have a Virtue to Stanch Blood; As also the
Moss has. And the Description of the Whole Ointment is to be found in the
Chymicall Dispensatorie of Crollius. Secondly, the same Kind of Ointment,
applied to the Hurt it self, works not the Effect; but only applied to the
Weapon. Thirdly, (which I like well) they do not observe the Confecting of the
Ointment, under any certain Constellation; which commonly is the Excuse of
Magical Medicines, when they fail, that they were not made under a fit Figure
of Heaven. Fourthly, it may be applied to the Weapon, though the Party Hurt be
at great Distance. Fifthly, it seems the Imagination of the Party, to be
Cured, is not needful to Concur; For it may be done, without the Knowledge,
of the Party Wounded; And thus much has been tried, that the Ointment (for
Experiments sake,) has been wiped off the Weapon, without the knowledge of
the Party Hurt, and presently the Party Hurt, has been in great Rage of
Pain, till the Weapon was Reannointed. Sixthly, it is affirmed, that if you
cannot get the Weapon, yet if you put an Instrument of Iron, or Wood,
resembling the Weapon, into the Wound, whereby it bleedeth, the Anointing of
that Instrument will serve, and work the Effect. This I doubt should be a
Device, to keep this strange Forms of Cure, in Request, and Use; Because many
times you cannot come by the Weapon it self. Seventhly, the Wound must be at
first Washed cleans, with White Wine, or the Parties own Water; And then bound
up close in Fine Linen, and no more Dressing renewed, till it be whole.
Eighthly, the Sword it self must be Wrapped up Close, as far as the Ointment
goes, that it takes no Wind. Ninthly, the Ointment, if you wipe it off from
the Sword, and keep it, will Serve again; and rather Increase in Virtue, than
Diminish. Tenthly, it will Cure in farte Shorter Time, than Ointments of Wounds
commonly do. Lastly, it will Cure a Beast, as well as a Man; which I like best
of all the rest, because it subiecteth the Matter, to an Easy Trial.

I would have Men know, that though I reprehend, the Easy Passing over, of the
Causes of Things, by Ascribing them to Secret and Hidden Virtues, and
Proprieties; (For this has arrested, and laid asleep, all true Enquiry, and
Indications;) yet I do not understand, but that in the Practical Part of
Knowledge, much will be left to Experience, and Probation, whereunto Indication
cannot so fully reach: And this not only in Specie, but in Indiuiduo.
Experiment Solitary touching Secret Proprieties.
So in Physic, if you will cure the Iaundies, it is not enough to say, that
the Medicine must not be Cooling; For that will hinder the Opening which the
Disease requires: That it must not be Hot; For that will exasperate Choler:
That it must go to the Gall; For there is the Obstruction which causes the
Disease, etc. But you must receive from Experience, that Powder of Chamapytis,
or the like, drunk in Beer, is good for the Iaundies: So again, a wise
Physician does not continue still the same Medicine, to a Patient; But he will
vary, if the first Medicine does not apparently succeed; For of those Remedies,
that are good for the Iaundies, Stone, Agues, etc. that will do good in one
Body, which will not do good in Another; According to the Correspondence the
Medicine has to the Indiuduall Body.

The Delight which Men have in Popularity, Fame, Honor, Submission, and
Subjection of other Men's Minds, Wills, or Affections, (although these Things
may be desired for other Ends,) seems to be a Thing, in it self, without
Contemplation of Consequence, Grateful and agreeable to the Nature of Man.
Experiment Solitary, touching the General Sympathy of Men's Spirits.
This Thing (surely) is not without some Signification, as if all Spirits and
Souls of Men, came forth out of one Divine Limbus; Else why should Men be so
much affected with that, which others think, or say? The best Temper of Minds
desires Good Name, and True Honor: The Lighter, Popularity, and Applause; The
more depraved, Subjection, and Tyranny; As is seen in great Conquerours, and
Troublers of the World: And yet more in Arch-Heretickes; for the Introducing of
new Doctrines, is likewise an Affectation of Tyranny, over the Understandings,
and Beleefes of Men.

A TABLE OF the Experiments.
Century. I.
OF Strayning or Percolation, Outward and inward; Experiments 8. page 1 Of
Motion upon Pressure. Experiments 5. page 3 Of Separations of Bodies Liquid by
weight. Exper. 3. page.4 Of Infusions, in Water and Air. Exper. 7. page.5 Of the
Appetite of Continuation in Liquids. Exper. 1 page.6 Of Artificial Springs.
Exper. 1. page.7 Of the Venomous Quality of Man's Siesh. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Turning
Air into Water. Exp. 1. page.8 Of Helping or Altering the Shape of the Body.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of Condensing of Air, to yield Weight, or Nourishment. Exp. 1.
page.9 Of Flame and Air Commixed. Exp. 1. page.10 Of the Secret Nature of Flame.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of Flame, in the Midst, and on the Sides. Exp. 1. page.11 Of
Motion of Gravity. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Contraction of Bodies in Bulk. Exp. 1.
page.12 Of making Vines more fruitful. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Several Operations
of Purging Medicines. Exp. 9. ibid. Of Meats and Drinks most Nourishing. Exp.
15. page.15 Of Medicines applied in Order. Exp. 1. page.19 of Cure by Custom.
Exp. 1. page 20 Of Cure by Excess. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Cure by Motion of Consent
Exp. 1. ibid. Of Cure of Diseases contrary to Predisposuion. Exp. 1 page.21 Of
Preparation before and after Purging. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Stanching Blood. Exp. 1.
page.22 Of Change of Aliments and Medicines. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Diets. Exp. 1.
ibid. Of Production of Cold. Exp. 7. ibid. Of Turning Air into water. Exp. 7.
page.24 Of Induration of Bodies Exp. 8. page.26 Of Preying of Air upon Water.
Exp. 1. page.28 Of the Force of Union. Exp. 1. page.29 Of Making Feathers and
Hairs of diverse Colors. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Nourishment of young Creatures, in
the Egg, or Womb. Exp. 1. page.30 Of Sympathy, and Antipathy. Exp. 3. ibid. Of
the Spirits, or Pneumaticalls in Bodies. Exp. 1. page.31 Of the Power of Heat.
Exp. 1. page.32 Of Impossibility of Annihilation. Exp. 1. page.33
Century. II.
OF Music. Exp. 14. page.35 Of the Nullity and Entity of Sounds. Exp. 9.
page.39 Of Production, Conservation, and Delation of Sounds. Exp. 14. p.41 Of
Magnitude, Exility, and Damps of Sounds. Exp. 25 page.45 Of Loudness, and
Softness of Sounds. Exp. 3. page.49 Of Communication of Sounds. Exp. 3. ibid.
Of Equality and Inequality of Sounds. Exp. 9. page.50 Of more Treble and Base
Tones. Exp. 6. page.52 Of Proportion of Treble and Base. Exp. 4. page.53 of
Exterior, and Interior Sounds. Exp. 4. page.54 Of Articulation of Sounds. Exp.
9. ibid.
Century. III.
OF the Lines in which Sounds move. Exp. 6. page.57 Of the Lasting or Perishing
of Sounds. Exp. 5. page.58 Of the Passage or Interception of Sounds. Exp. 5.
page.59 Of the Medium of Sounds. Exp. 4. page.60 Of the Figures of Bodies
yielding Sounds. Exp. 3. page.61. Of Mixture of Sounds. Exp. 5. page.62 Of
Melioration of Sounds. Exp. 7 page.63 Of Imitation of Sounds. Exp. 6 page.64 Of
Reflection of Sounds. Exp. 13 page.65 Of Consent and Dissent between Audibles,
and Visibles. Exp. 23 pg.68 Of Sympathy and Antipathie of Sounds. Exp. 5.
page.72 Of Hindering or Helping of Hearing. Exp. 4. page.73 Of the Spiritual and
Fine Nature of Sounds. Exp. 4. ibid. Of Orient Colors in Dissolutions of
Metalls. Exp. 1. page.74 Of Prolongation of Life. Exp. 1. page.75 Of the Appetite
of Union in Bodies. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the like Operations of Heat and Time. Exp.
1. page.76 Of the Differing Operations of Fire and Time. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Motions by Imitation. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Infectious of Diseases. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
the Incorporation of Powders and Liquours. Exp. 1. page.77 Of Exercise of the
Body; And the Benefits, or Evils thereof. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Meats soon
Glutting, or No Glutting. Exp. 1. ibid.
Century. IV.
Of Clarification of Liquours, and the Accelerating thereof. Exp. II. page.81 Of
Maturation, and the Accelerating thereof; And of the Maturation of Drinks, and
Fruits. Exp. 15. page.83 Of Making Gold. Exp. 1. page.86 Of the Several Natures
of Gold. Exp. 1. page.88 Of Inducing and Accelerating Putrefaction. Exp. 12.
ibid. Of Prohibiting and Preventing Putrefaction. Exp. 11. page.90 Of Rotten
Wood Shining. Exp. 1. page.93 Of Acceleration of Birth. Exp. 1. page.94 Of
Acceleration of Growth and Stature. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Bodies Sulphurous and
Mercuriall. Exp. 5. page.95 Of the Chameleon. Exp. 1. page.96 Of Subterrany
Fires. Exp. 1. page.97 Of Nitrous Water. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Congealing of Air.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of Congealing Water into Crystal. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Preserving
the Smell, and Color, in Rose-Leaues. Exp. 1. page.98 Of the Lasting of Flame.
Exp. 10. ibid. Of Infusions or Burialls of diverse Bodies in Earth. Exp. 5.
page.101 Of the Affects of Men's Bodies from several Winds. Exp. 1. page.102 Of
Winter and Summer Sicknesses. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Pestilentiall Years. Exp. 1.
ibid. Of Epidemicall Diseases. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Preservation of Liquours in
Wells, or deep Vaults. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Stutting. Exp. 1. page.103 Of Sweet
Smells. Exp. 4. ibid. Of the Goodness, and Choice of Waters. Exp. 7. page.104
Of Temperate Heats under the AEquinoctiall. Exp. 1. page.105 Of the Colouration
of Black and Tawney Moors. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Motion after the instant of
Death. Exp. 1. page.106
Century. V.
OF Accelerating or Hastening forward Germination. Exper. 12. page.109 Of
Retarding or putting back Germination. Exp. 9. page.112 Of Meliorating, or
making better, Fruits, and Plants. Exp. 55. page.114 Of Compound Fruits, and
Flowers. Exp. 3. page.122 Of Sympathy and Antipathy of Plants. Exp. 19. page.123
Of Making Herbs and Fruits Medicinable. Exp. 2. page.128
Century. VI.
OF Curiosities about Fruits, and Plants. Exp. 17. page.131 Of the Degenerating
of Plants; And of their Transmutation one into another. Exp. 14. page.135 Of the
Proceritie and Lowness of Plants; And of Artificial Dwarsing them. Exp. 5.
page.138 Of the Ruatments of Plants; And of the Excrescences of Plants, or
Super-Plants. Exp. 26. ibid. Of producing Perfect Plants without Seed. Exp. 11.
page.143 Of Foreign Plants. Exp. 3. page.144 Of the Seasons of several Plants.
Exp. 6. page.145 Of the Lasting of Plants. Exp. 5. page.146 Of several Figures
of Plants. Exp. 3. page.147 Of some principal Differences in Plants. Exp. 4.
page.148 Of all Manner of Composts and Helps for Ground. Exp. 6. page.149
Century. VII.
OF the Affinities and Differences between Plants, and Bodies Inanimate. Exp.
6. page.153 Of Affinities and Differences between Plants, and Living Creatures;
And of the Consiners and Participles of Both. Exp. 3. page.154 Of Plants
Experiments Promiscuous. Exp. 67. page.155 Of Healing of Wounds. Exp. 1. page.169
Of Fat diffused in Flesh. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Ripening Drink speedily. Exp. 1.
page.170 Of Pilositie and Plumage. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Quickness of Motion in
Birds. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Clearness of the Sea, the North Wind blowing. Exp.
1. ibid. Of the Different Heats of Fire and Boiling Water. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the
Qualification of Heat by Moisture. Exp. 1. page.171 Of Yawning. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
the Hiccough. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Sneezing. Exp. 1. page.172 Of the Tenderness of
the Teeth. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Tongue. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Mouth out of
Taste. Exp. 1. ibid. Of some Prognostics of Pestilentiall Seasons. Exp. 1.
ibid. Of Special Simples for Medicines. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Venus. Exp. 3.
page.173 Of the Infecta, or Creatures bred of Putrefaction. Exp. 3. page.174 Of
Leaping. Exp. 1. page.177 Of the Pleasures and Displeasures of Hearing, and of
the other Senses. Exp. 1. ibid.
Century. VIII.
OF Veins of Earth Medicinal. Exp. 1. page.181 Of Sponges. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Seafish in Fresh Waters. Exp. 1. page.182 Of Attraction by Similitude of
Substance. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Certain Drinks in Turkey. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Sweat.
Exp. 6. page.183 Of the Glo-Worme. Exp. 1. page.184 Of the Impressions upon the
Body, from several Passions of the Mind. Exp. 10. ibid. Of Drunkenness. Exp.
4. page.187 Of the Hurt, or Help of Wine, taken moderately. Exp. 1. page.188 Of
Catterpillers. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Flies Cantharides. Exp. 1. page.189 Of
Lassitude. Exp. 2. ibid. Of Casting the Skin, and Shell, in some Creatures.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Postures of the Body. Exp. 3. page.190 Of Pestilentiall
Years. Exp. 1. ibid. Of some Prognostics of Hard Winters. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
certain Medicines that condense and relieve the Spirits. Exp. 1. page.191 Of
paintings of the Body. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the use of Bathing, and Anointing.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of Chamoletting of Paper. Exp. 1. page.192 Of Cuttle-Inke. Exp. 1.
ibid. Of Earth increasing in Weight. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Sleep. Exp. 3. ibid. Of
Teeth, and Hard Substances in the Bodies of Living Creatures. Exp. 11. page.193
Of the Generation, and Bearing of Living Creatures in the Womb. Exp. 3.
page.195 Of Species Visible. Exp. 2. page.196 Of Impulsion, and Percussion. Exp.
3. page.197 Of Titillation. Exp. 1. page.198 Of Scarcity of Rain in Egypt. Exp.
1. ibid. Of Clarification. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Plants without Leaves. Exp. 1.
page.199 Of the Materials of Glass. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Prohibition of
Putrefaction, and the long Conservation of Bodies. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Abundance
of Nitre in certain Sea-Shoares. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Bodies borne up by Water.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of Fuel consuminglittle or nothing. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Cheap
Fuel. Exp. 1. page.201 Of Gathering of Wind for Freshness. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Trialls of Aires. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Increasing Milk in Milch-Beasts. Exp. 1.
ibid. Of Sand of the Nature of Glass. Exp. 1. page.202 Of the Growth of Coral.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Gathering of Manna. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Correcting of Wines.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of Bitumen, one of the Materials of Wilde-Fire. Exp. 1. page.203
Of Plaster growing as hard as Marble. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Cure of some Ulcers
and Hurts. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Healthfulnesse or Vnhealthfulnesse of the
Southern Wind. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Wounds made with Brass, and with Iron. Exp.
1. ibid. Of Mortification by Cold. Exp. 1. page.204 Of Weight. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Super-Natation of Bodies. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Flying of Unequal Bodies in the
Air. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Water that it may be the Medium of Sounds. Exp. 1.
page.205 Of the Flight of the Spirits upon odious Objects. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the
Super-Reflexion of Eccho's. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Force of Imagination imitating
that of the Sense. Exp. 1. page.206 Of Preservation of Bodies. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
the Growth, or Multiplying of Metalls. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Drowning the more
base Metal in the more Precious. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Fixation of Bodies. Exp. 1.
page.207 Of the Restless Nature of Things in Themselves, and their Desire to
Change. Exp. 1. ibid.
Century. IX.
OF Perception in Bodies Insensible, tending to Natural Divination, and
Subtle Trialls. Exp. 30. page.211 Of the Causes of Appetite in the Stomach.
Exp. 1. page.217 Of Sweetness of Odor from the Rainbow. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Sweet Smells. Exp. 1. page.218 Of the Corporeal Substance of Smells. Exp. 1.
ibid. Of Fetide and Fragrant Odours. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Causes of
Putrefaction. Exp. 1. page.220 Of Bodies imperfectly Mixed. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Concoction and Crudity. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Alterations, which may be called
Majors. Exp. 1. page.221 Of Bodies Liquesiable, and Not Liquesiable. Exp. 1.
page.222 Of Bodies Fragile and Tough. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the two Kinds of
Pneumaticalls in Bodies. Exp. 1. page.223 Of Concretion and Dissolution of
Bodies. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Bodies Hard and Soft. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Bodies Ductile,
and Tensile. Exp. 1. page.224 Of Several Passions of Matter, and Characters of
Bodies. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Induration by Sympathy. Exp. 1. page.225 Of Honey and
Sugar. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Finer fort of Base Metalls. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
certain Cements and Quarries. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Altering of Colors in
Hairs and Feathers. Exp. 1. page.226 Of the Differences of Living Creatures,
Male and Female. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Comparatiue Magnitude of Living
Creatures. Exp. 1. page.227 Of Producing Fruit without Coare or Stone. Exp. 1.
ibid. Of the Melioration of Tobacco. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Several Heats working
the same Effects. Exp. 1. page.228 Of Swelling and Dilatation in Boiling. Exp.
1. ibid. Of the Dulcoration of Fruits. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Flesh Edible, and not
Edible. Exp. 1. page.229 Of the Salamander. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Contrary
Operations of Time, upon Fruits and Liquours. Exp. 1. page.230 Of Blows and
Bruises. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Orris Root. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Compression of
Liquours. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the working of Water upon Air Contiguous. Exp. 1.
page.231 Of the Nature of Air. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Eyes and sight. Exp. 7.
ibid. Of the Color of the Sea, or other Water. Exp. 1. page.233 Of Shellfish.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Right Side, and the Left. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Frictions. Exp.
1. ibid. Of Globes appearing flat at distance, Exp. 1. page.234 Of Shadows.
Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Rolling, and Breaking of the Seat. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the
Dulcoration of Salt Water. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Return of Saltness in Pits by
the Sea-Shoare. Exp. 1. ibid. Of Attraction by Similitude of Substance. Exp. 1.
page.235 Of Attraction. Exper. I. ibid. Of Heat under Earth. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Flying in the Air. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Scarlet Dye. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
Maleficiating. Exp. 1. ibid. Of the Rise of Liquours, or Powders, by means of
Flame. Exp. 1. page.236 Of the Influences of the Moon. Exp. 8. ibid. Of
Vinegar. Exp. 1. page.238 Of Creatures that sleep all Winter. Exp. 1. ibid. Of
the Generating of Creatures by Copulation, and by Putrefaction. Exp. 1. ibid.
Century. X.
OF the Transmission and Influx of Immateriate Virtues, and the Force of
Imagination; whereof there be Experiments Monitory three; In all, Exp. 11.
page.241 Of Emission of Spirits in Vapor, or Exhalation, Odour-like. Exp. 26.
page.246 Of Emissions of Spiritual Species, which affect the Senses. Exp. 1.
page.250 Of Emission of Immateriate Virtues, from the Minds, and Spirits of
Men, by Affections, Imagination, or other Impressions. Exp. 21. ibid. Of the
Secret Virtue of Sympathy, and Antipathy. Exp. 39. page.257 Of Secret Virtues
and Properties. Exp. 1. page.265 Of the General Sympathy of Men's Spirits. Exp.
1. page.266
Faults escaped in the Printing.
PAge 6. line 28. latter, read later. p.18. l. 10. Quilt, r. Quilts. p. 32 l.
3y. Amalgama, r. Amalagma. p. 93. l.35. lose. r.lost. p.122, l.3 Coppies, r.
Coppice. p. 139. on the Top of the Lease, wants part of the Title; Rudiments
of Plants, and of the Exerscences of Plants, or Super-Plants. p.222, l.5. in
redundat.

FINIS.
NEW ATLANTIS A Work unfinished.
Written by the Right Honorable, FRANCIS Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban.

VERITAS TEMPORE PATET OCCVLTA
PS


To the Reader.
THis Fable my Lord devised, to the end that He might exhibit therein, a
Model or Description of a College, instituted for the Interpreting of Nature,
and the Producing of Great and Marvelous Works for the Benefit of Men; Under
the Name of Salomons House, or the College of the Six Days Works. And even
so far his Lordship has proceeded, us to finish that Part. Certainly, the
Model is more Vast, and High, then can possibly be imitated in all things;
Notwithstanding most Things therein are within Men's Power to effect. His
Lordship thought also in this present Fable, to have composed a Frame of Laws,
or of the best State or Mould of a Commonwealth; But foreseeing it would be a
long Work, his Desire of Collecting the Natural History diuerted him, which
He preferred many degrees before it.

This Work of the New Atlantis (as much as concerns the English Edition)
his Lordship designed for this Place; In regard it has so near Affinity (in
one Part of it) with the Preceding Natural History.

W: Rawley.

NEW ATLANTIS.
WE sailed from Peru, (where we had continued by the space of one whole
year,) for China and Iapan, by the South Sea; taking with us Victuals for
twelve Months; And had good Winds from the East, though soft and weak, for
five Months space, and more. But then the Wind came about, and settled in the
West for many days, so as we could make little or no way, and were sometimes
in purpose to turn back. But then again there arose Strong and Great Winds
from the South, with a Point East; which carried us up, (for all that we could
do) toward the North: By which time our Victuals failed us, though we had
made good spare of them. So that finding our selves, in the Midst of the
greatest Wilderness of Waters in the World, without Victual, we gave our
Selves for lost Men, and prepared for Death. Yet we did lift up our Hearts and
Voices to GOD above, who shows his Wonders in the Deep; Beseeching him of
his Mercy, that as in the Beginning He discovered the Face of the Deep, and
brought forth Dry-Land; So he would now discover Land to us, that we might not
perish. And it came to pass, that the next Day about Evening, we saw within a
Kenning before us, toward the North, as it were thick Clouds, which did put
us in some hope of Land; Knowing how that part of the South Sea was utterly
unknown; And might have Islands, or Continents, that hithertoo were not come
to light.

Wherefore we bent our Course thither, where we saw the Appearance of Land, all
that night; And in the Dawning of the next Day, we might plainly discern that
it was a Land; Flatt to our sight, and full of Boscage; which made it show the
more Dark, And after an Hour and a halfs Sailing, we entered into a good
Haven, being the Port of a fair City; Not great indeed, but well built, and
that gave a pleasant view from the Sea: And we thinking every Minute long, till
we were on Land, came close to the Shore, and offered to land. But straightwayes
we saw diverse of the People, with Bastons in their Hands, (as it were)
forbidding us to land; Yet without any Cries or Fierceness, but only as
warning us off, by Signs that they made. Whereupon being not a little
discomforted, we were aduising with our selves, what we should do. During
which time, there made forth to us a small Boat, with about eight Persons in
it; whereof One of them had in his Hand a Tipstaffe of a yellow Cane, tipped at
both ends with Blew, who came aboard our Shipp, without any show of Distrust at
all. And when he saw one of our Number, present himself somewhat before the
rest, he drew forth a little Scroule of Parchment, (somewhat yellower then our
Parchment, and shining like the Leaves of Writing Tables, but otherwise soft
and flexible,) and delivered it to our foremost Man. In which Scroule were
written in Ancient Hebrew, and in Ancient Greek, and in good Latin of the
School, and in Spanish, these words; Land ye not, none of you; And provide
to be gone, from this Coast, within sixteen days, except you have further
time given you. Meanewhile, if you want Fresh Water, or Victual, or help for
your Sick, or that your Ship needs repair, write down your wants, and you
shall have that, which belongs to Mercy. This Scroule was Signed with a
Stamp of Cherubins Wings, not spread, but hanging downwards; And by them a
Cross. This being delivered, the Officer returned, and left only a Servant
with us to receive our Answer. Consulting hereupon amongst our Selves, we
were much perplexed. The Denial of Landing, and Hasty Warning us away,
troubled us much; On the otherside, to find that the People had Languages, and
were so full of Humanity, did comfort us not a little. And above all, the Sign
of the Cross to that Instrument, was to us a great Rejoicing, and as it were a
certain Presage of Good. Our Answer was in the Spanish tongue; That for our
Shipp, it was well; For we had rather met with Clames, and contrary winds,
then any Tempests. For our Sick, they were many, and in very ill Case; So that
if they were not permitted to Land, they ran danger of their Lives. Our other
Wants we set down in particular, adding; That we had some little store of
Merchandise, which if it pleased them to deal for, it might supply our Wants,
without being chargeable unto them. We offered some Reward in Pistoletts unto
the Servant, and a piece of Crimson Veluett to be presented to the Officer: But
the Servant took them not, nor would scarce look upon them; And so left us,
and went back in another little Boat, which was sent for him.

About three Hours after we had dispatched our Answer, there came toward us,
a Person (as it seemed) of place. He had on him a Gown with wide Sleeves, of a
kind of Water Chamolett, of an excellent Azure Color, far more glossy then
ours: His under Apparel was Green; And so was his Hatt, being in the form of
a Turban, daintely made, and not so huge as the Turkish Turbans; And the Locks
of his Hair came down below the Brimms of it. A Reverend Man was he to
behold. He came in a Boat, gilt in some part of it, with four Persons more
only in that Boat; And was followed by another Boat, wherein were some
Twenty. When he was come within a Flight-shott of our Shipp, Signs were made
to us, that we should send forth some to meet him upon the Water; which we
presently did in our Shipp-Boate, sending the principal Man amongst us save
one, and four of our Number with him. When we were come within six yards of
their Boat, they called to us to stay, and not to approach further; which we
did. And thereupon the Man, whom I before described, stood up, and with a loud
voice, in Spanish, asked; Are ye Christians? We answered; We were; fearing the
less, because of the Cross we had seen in the Subscription. At which Answer
the said Person lift up his Right Hand toward Heaven, and drew it softly to
his Mouth, (which is the Gesture they use, when they thank GOD;) And then said:
If ye will swear, (all of you,) by the Meritts of the SAVIOVR, that ye are
no Pirates; Nor have shed blood, lawfully, nor unlawfully, within forty days
past; you may have License to come on Land. We said; We were all ready to
take that Oath. Whereupon one of those that were with him, being (as it seemed)
a Notary, made an Entry of this Act. Which done, another of the Attendants of
the Great Person, which was with him in the same Boat, after his Lord had
spoken a little to him, said aloud; My Lord would have you know, that it is not
of Pride, or Greatness, that ^e comes not aboard your Shipp; But for that, in
your Answer, your declare, that you have many Sick amongst you, he was warned
by the Conseruatour of Health, of the City, that he should keep a distance.
We bowed our selves toward him, and answered; We were his humble Servants;
And accounted for great Honor, and singular Humanity toward us, that which
was already done; But hoped well, that the Nature, of the Sickness, of our Men,
was not infectious. Sc he returned; And a while after came the Notary to us
aboard our Ship; Holding in his hand a Fruit of that Cuntry, like an Orange,
but of color between Orange tawney and Scarlett; which cast a most excellent
Odor. He used it (as it seems) for a Preservative against Infection. He gave
us our Oath; By the Name of Jesus, and his Merits: And after told us, that the
next day, by six of the Clock, in the Morning, we should be sent to, and
brought to the Strangers House, (so he called it,) where we should be
accommodated of things, both for our Whole, and for our Sick So he left us;
And when we offered him some Pistoletts he smiling said; He must not be twice
paid, for one Labor: Meaning (as I take it) that he had Salary sufficient of
the State for his Service. For (as I after learned) they call an Officer, that
takes Rewards, Twice-paid.

The next Morning early, there came to us the same Officer, that came to us at
first with his Cane, and told us; He came to conduct us to the Strangers House;
And that he had prevented the Hour, because we might have the whole day
before us, for our Business. For (said he) If you will follow my Advice there
shall first go with me some few of you, and see the place, and how it may be
made convenient for you; And then you may send for your Sick, and the rest of
your Number, which ye will bring on Land. We thanked him, and said; That this
Care, which he took of desolate Strangers, GOD would reward. And so six of us
went on Land with him: And when we were on Land, he went before us, and turned
to us, and said; He was but our Servant, and our Guide. He ledd us through
three fair Streets; And all the way we went, there were gathered some People on
both sides, standing in 2 Row; But in so civil a fashion, as if it had been,
not to wonder at us, but to welcome us: And diverse of them, as we passed by
them, put their Arms a little abroad; which is their Gesture, when they bid
any welcome. The Strangers House is a fair and spacious House, built of Brick,
of somewhat a blewer Color then our Brick; And with handsome windows, some of
Glass, some of a kind of Cambrick oiled. He brought us first into a fair
Parlour above stairs, and then asked us; What Number of Persons we were? And
how many sick? We answered, We were in all, (sick and whole,) one and fifty
Persons, whereof our sick were seventeen. He desired us to have patience a
little, and to stay till he came back to us; which was about an Hour after;
And then he led us to see the Chambers, which were provided for us, being in
number nineteen. They having cast it (as it seems) that four of those
Chambers, which were better then the rest, might receive four of the
principal Men of our Company; And lodge them alone by themselves; And the
other 15. Chambers were to lodge us two and two together. The Chambers were
handsome and cheerful Chambers, and furnished ciuilly. Then he ledd us to a
long Gallery, like a Dorture, where he showed us all along the one side (for
the other side was but Wall and VVindow,) seventeen Cells, very neat ones,
having partitions of Cedar wood. Which Gallery, and Cells, being in all
forty, (many more then we needed,) were instituted as an Infirmary for sick
Persons. And he told us withal, that as any of our Sick waxed well, he might
be removed from his Cell, to a Chamber: For which purpose, there were set
forth ten spare Chambers, besides the Number we spoke of before. This done, he
brought us back to the Parlour, and lifting up his Cane a little, (as they do
when they give any Charge or Command) said to us; Ye are to know, that the
Custom of the Land requires, that after this day, and too morrow, (which we
give you for removing of your people from your Ship,) you are to keep within
doors for three days. But let it not trouble you, nor do not think your
selves restrained, but rather left to your Rest and Ease. You shall want
nothing, and there are six of our People appointed to attend you, for any
Business you may have abroad. We gave him thanks, with all Affection and
Respect, and said; GOD surely is manifested in this Land. We offered him also
twenty Pistoletts; But he smiled, and only said; What? twice paid! And so he
left us. Soon after our Dinner was served in; Which was right good Viands,
both for Bread, and Meat: Better then any Collegiate Diett, that I have known
in Europe. We had also Drink of three sorts, all wholesome and good; Wine of
the Grape; A Drink of Grain, such as is with us our Ale, but more clear: And
a kind of Sider made of a Fruit of that Cuntry; A wonderful pleasing and
Refreshing Drink. Besides, there were brought in to us, great store of those
Scarlett Orenges, for our Sick; which (they said) were an assured Remedy for
sickness taken at Sea. There was given us also, a Box of small gray, or whitish
Pills, which they wished our Sick should take, one of the Pills, every night
before sleep; which (they said) would hasten their Recovery. The next day,
after that our Trouble of Carriage, and Removing of our Men, and Goods, out of
our Shipp, was somewhat settled and quiett, I thought good to call our Company
together, and when they were assembled, said unto them; My dear Friends; Let us
know our selves, and how it stands with us. We are Men cast on Land, as Jonas
was, out of the Whales Belly, when we were as buried in the Deep: And now we
are on Land, we are but between Death and Life; For we are beyond, both the
Old World, and the New; And whether ever we shall see Europe, GOD only
knows. It is a kind of Miracle has brought us hither: And it must be
little less, that shall bring us hence. Therefore in regard of our Deliverance
past, and our danger present, and to come, let us look up to GOD, and every
man reform his own ways. Besides we are come here amongst a Christian
People, full of Piety and Humanity: Let us not bring that Confusion of face
upon our selves, as to show our vices, or unworthiness before them. Yet there
is more. For they have by Commandment, (though in form of Courtesy)
Cloistered us within these Walls, for three days: Who knows, whether it be
not, to take some taste of our manners and conditions? And if they find them
bad, to banish us straight-wayes; If good to give us further time. For these
Men, that they have given us for Attendance, may withal have an eye upon us.
Therefore for GODS love, and as we love the weal of our Souls and Bodies, let
us so behave our selves, as we may be at peace with GOD, and may find grace
in the Eyes of this People. Our Company with one voice thanked me for my good
Admonition, and promised me to live soearly and ciuilly, and without giving any
the least occasion of Offense. So we spent our three days joyfully, and
without care, in expectation what would be done with us, when they were
expired. During which time, we had every hour joy of the Amendment of our
Sick; who thought themselves cast into some Divine Poole of Healing; They
mended so kindly, ans so fast.

The Morrow after our three days were past, there came to us a new Man, that we
had not seen before, clothed in Blew as the former was, save that his Turban
was white, with a small red Cross on the Topp. He had also a Tippet of fine
Linen. At his Coming in, he did bend to us a little, and put his Arms
abroad. We of our parts saluted him in a very lowly and submissiue manner; As
looking that from him, we should receive Sentence of Life, or Death. He
desired to speak with some few of us: Whereupon six of us only stayed, and the
rest avoided the Room. He said; I am by Office Gouerner of this House of
Strangers, and by Vocation I am a Christian Priest; and therefore am come to
you, to offer you my service, both as Strangers, and chiefly as Christians.
Some things I may tell you, which I think you will not be unwilling to hear.
The State has given you License to Stay on Land, for the space of six weeks:
And let it not trouble you, if your occasions ask further time, for the Law in
this point is not precise; And I do not doubt, but my self shall be able, to
obtain for you, such further time, as may be convenient. Ye shall also
understand, that the Strangers House, is at this time Rich, and much aforehand;
For it has laid up Reuenew these 37. years: For so long it is, since any
Stranger arrived in this part: And therefore take ye no care; The State will
defray you all the time you stay: Neither shall you stay one day the less for
that. As for any Merchandise ye have brought, ye shall be well used, and have
your return, either in Merchandise, or in Gold and Silver: For to us it is all
one. And if you have any other Request to make, hide it not. For ye shall
find, we will not make your Countenance to fall, by the Answer ye shall
receive. Only this I must tell you, that none of you must go above a Karan,
(that is with them a Mile and an half) from the walls of the City, without
especial leave. We answered, after we had looked awhile one upon another,
admiring this gracious and parent-like usage; That we could not tell what to
say: For we wanted words to express our Thanks; And his Noble free Offers
lest us nothing to ask. It seemed to us, that we had before us a picture of
our Salvation in Heaven: For we that were a while since in the Jaws of Death,
were now brought into a place, where we found nothing but Consolations. For the
Commandment laid upon us, we would not fail to obey it, though it was
impossible, but our Hearts should be enflamed to tread further upon this Happy
and Holy Ground. We added; That our Tongues should first cleave to the Roofes
of our Mouths, ere we should forget, either his Reverend Person, or this whole
Nation, in our Prayers. We also most humbly besought him, to accept of us as
his true servants, by as just a Right, as ever Men on Earth were bounden;
laying and presenting, both our persons, and all we had, at his feet. He said;
He was a Priest, and looked for a Priests reward; which was our Brotherly love,
and the Good of our Souls and Bodies. So he went from us, not without tears
of Tenderness in his Eyes; And left us also confused with Joy and Kindness,
saying amongst our selves; That we were come into a Land of Angels, which did
appear to us daily, and prevent us with Comforts, which we thought not of,
much less expected.

The next day about 10. of the Clock, the Governor came to us again, and
after Salutations, said familiarly; That he was come to visit us; And called
for a Chair, and satt him down; And we being some 10. of us, (the rest were
of the meaner Sort; or else gone abroad;) sat down with him. And when we were
set, he began thus. We of this Island of Bensalem (for so they call it in
their Language) have this; That by means of our solitary Situation; and of the
Laws of Secrecy, which we have for our Travelers; and our rare Admission of
Strangers; we know well most part of the Habitable World, and are our selves
unknown. Therefore because he that knows least, is sit to ask
Questions, it is more Reason, for the Entertainment of the time, that ye ask
me Questions, then that I ask you. We answered; That we humbly thanked him,
that he would give us leave so to do: And that we conceived by the taste we
had already, that there was no wordly thing on Earth, more worthy to be known,
then the State of that happy Land. But above all (We said) since that we were
met from the fever all Ends of the World; and boped assuredly, that we should
meet one day in the Kingdom of Heaven (for that we were both parts
Christians) we desired to know (in respect that Land was so remote, and so
divided by vast and unknown Seas, from the Land, where our SAVIOVR walked on
Earth) who was the Apostle of that Nation, and how it was converted to the
Faith? It appeared in his face, that he took great Contentment in this our
Question: He said; Ye knit my Heart to you, by asking this Question in the
first place; For it shows that you First seek the Kingdom of Heaven; And I
shall gladly, and briefly, satis fie your demand.

About twenty Years after the Ascension of our SAVIOVR, it came to pass, that
there was seen by the People of Renfusa, (a City upon the Eastern Coast of our
Island,) within Night, (the Night was Cloudy, and Calm,) as it might be some
mile into the Sea, a great Pillar of Light; Not sharp, but in form of a
Column, or Cylinder, rising from the Sea, a great way up toward Heaven; and
on the topp of it was seen a large Cross of Light, more bright and
resplendent then the Body of the Pillar. Upon which so strange a Spectacle, the
People of the City gathered apace together upon the Sands, to wonder; And so
after put themselves into a number of small Boats, to go nearer to this
Marvelous sight. But when the Boats were come within (about) 60. yeards of
the Pillar, they found themselves all bound, and could go no further; yet so
as they might move to go about, but might not approach nearer: So as the
Boats stood all as in a Theater, beholding this Light, as an Heavenly Sign.
It so fell out, that there was in one of the Boats, one of our Wise Men, of the
Society of Salomons House; which House, or College (my good Brethren) is the
very Eye of this Kingdom; Who having a while attentively and devoutly viewed,
and contemplated this Pillar, and Cross, fell down upon his face; And then
raised himself upon his knees, and listing up his Hands to Heaven, made his
prayers in this manner.

LOrd God of Heaven and Earth; thou have vouchsafed of thy Grace, to those of
our Order, to know thy Works of Creation, and the Secretts of them; And to
discern (as far as appertains to the Generations of Men) Between Divine
Miracles, Works of Nature, Works of Art, and Impostures and Illusions of all
sorts. I do here acknowledge and testify before this People, that the Thing
which we now see before our eyes, is thy Finger, and a true Miracle. And
for-as-much, as we learn in our Books, that thou never workest Miracles, but
to a Divine and Excellent End, (for the Laws of Nature are thine own Laws,
and thou exceedest them not but upon great cause) we most humbly beseech thee,
to prosper this great Sign; And to give us the Interpretation and use of it in
Mercy; Which thou do in some part secretly promise, by sending it unto us.

When he had made his Prayer, he presently found the Boat he was in,
moveable and unbound; whereas all the rest remained still fast; And taking that
for an assurance of Leave to approach, he caused the Boat to be softly, and
with silence, rowed toward the Pillar. But ere he came near it, the Pillar
and Cross of Light brake up, and cast it self abroad, as it were, into a
Firmament of many Stars; which also vanished soon after, and there was
nothing lest to be seen, but a small Arc, or Chest of Cedar, dry, and not wett
at all with water, though it swam. And in the Fore-end of it, which was toward
him, grew a small green Branch of Palm; And when the wise Man had taken it,
with all reverence, into his Boat, it opened of it self, and there were found
in it, a Book, and a Letter; Both written in fine Parchment, and wrapped in
Sindons of Linen. The Book contained all the Canonical Books of the Old and
New Testament, according as you have them; (For we know well what the Churches
with you receive;) And the Apocalypse it self; And Some other Books of the
New Testament, which were not at that time written, were nevertheless in the
Book. And for the Letter, it was in these words.

IBartholomew, a Servant of the Highest, and Apostle of JESUS CHRIST, was
warned by an Angel, that appeared to me, in a vision of Glory, that I should
commit this Arc to the floods of the Sea. Therefore, I do testify and
declare, unto that People, where GOD shall ordain this Ark to come to Land,
that in the same day, is come unto them Salvation and Peace, and Good Will,
from the Father, and from the LORD JESUS.

There was also in both these writings, as well the Book, as the Letter,
wrought a great Miracle, Conform to that of the Apostles, in the Original
Gift of Tongues. For there being at that time, in this Land, Hebrews,
Persians, and Indians, besides the Natives, every one redd upon the Book, and
Letter, as if they had been written in his own Language. And thus was this
Land saved from Infidelity, (as the Remain of the Old World was from Water) by
an Ark, through the Apostolical and Miraculous Euangelisme of Saint
Bartholomew. And here he paused, and a Messenger came, and called him from us.
So this was all that passed in that Conference.

The next Day, the same Governor came again to us, immediately after Dinner,
and excused himself, saying; That the Day before, he was called from us,
somewhat abruptly, but now he would make us amends, and spend time with us; if
we held his Company, and Conference agreeable. We answered; That we held it
so agreeable and pleasing to us, as we forgot both Dangers past, and Fears to
come, for the time we heard him speak; And that we thought, an Hour spent
with him, was worth Years of our former life. He bowed himself a little to
us, and after we were set again, he said; Well, the Questions are on your
part. One of our Number said, after a little Pause; That there was a Matter,
we were no less desirous to know, then fearful to ask, least we might
presume too far. But encouraged by his rare Humanity toward us, (that could
scarce think our selves Strangers, being his vowed and professed Servants,) We
would take the Hardines to propound it: Humbly beseeching him, if he thought
it not fit to be answered, that he would pardon it, though he rejected it.
We said; We well observed those his words, which he formerly spoke, that
this happy Island, where we now stood, was known to few, and yet knew must of
the Nations of the World; which we found to be true, considering they had the
Languages of Europe, and knew much of our State and Business; And yet we in
Europe, (notwithstanding all the remote Discoueries, and Nauigations of this
last Age) never heard any of the least Inkling or Glimse of this Island. This
we found wonderful strange; For that all Nations have Enterknowledge one of
another, either by Voyage into Foreign Parts, or by Strangers that come to
them: And though the Trauailer into a Foreign Country, does commonly know
more by the Eye, then he that stays at home can by relation of the Trauailer;
Yet both ways suffice to make a mutual Knowledge, in some degree, on both
parts. But for this Island, we never heard tell of any Shipp of theirs, that
had been Seen to arrive upon any Shore of Europe; No, nor of either the East
or West Indies, nor yet of any Shipp of any other part of the World, that had
made return from them. And yet the Marvel rested not in this; For the
Situation of it (as his Lordship said,) in the secret Conclaue of such a vast
Sea might cause it. But then, that they should have Knowledge of the
Languages, Books, Affairs, of those that lie such a distance from them, it
was a thing we could not tell what to make of; For that it seemed to us a
condition and Propriety of Divine Powers and Beings, to be hidden and unseen
to others, and yet to have others open, and as in a light to them. At this
speech the Governor gave a gracious smile, and said; That we did well to ask
pardon for this Question we now asked; For that it imported, as if we thought
this Land, a Land of Magicians; that sent forth Spirits of the Air into all
parts, to bring them News and Intelligence of other Countries. It was answered
by us all, in all possible humblenes, but yet with a Countenance taking
knowledge, that we knew he spoke it but merrily; That we were apt enough to
think, there was some what supernatural in this Island; but yet rather as
Angelical, then Magical. But to let his Lordship know truly, what it was,
that made us tender and doubtful to ask this Question, it was, not any such
conceit, but because we remembered, he had given a Touch in his former Speech,
that this Land had Laws of Secrecy touching Strangers. To this he said; You
remember it aright: And therefore in that I shall say to you, I must reserve
some particulars, which it is not lawful for me to reveal; but there will
be enough left, to give you satisfaction.

You shall understand (that which perhaps you will scarce think credible) that
about three thousand Years ago; or somewhat more, the Navigations of the World
(specially for remote Voyages) was greater then at this Day. Do not think
with your selves, that I know not how much it is increased with you, within
these sixescore Years: I know it well; And yet I say, greater then, than now:
Whether it was, that the Example of the Ark, that saved the Remnant of Men,
from the universal Deluge, gave Men confidence to adventure upon the Waters;
Or what it was; but such is the Truth. The Phoeniceans, and specially the
Tyrians, had great Fleetes. So had the Carthaginians their Colony, which is yet
further West. Toward the East the Shipping of Egypt, and of Palestina was
likewise great. China also, and the great Atlantis, (that you call America)
which have now but Iunks, and Canoa's, abounded then in tall Ships. This
Island, (as appears by faithful Registers of those times) had then fifteen
hundred strong Ships, of great content. Of all this, there is with you sparing
Memory, or none; But we have large Knowledge thereof.

At that time, this Land was known and frequented by the Ships and Vessels
of all the Nations before named. And (as it comes to pass) they had many
times Men of other Countries, that were no Sailors, that came with them; As
Persians, Chaldeans, Arabians; So as almost all Nations of Might and Fame
resorted hither; Of whom we have some Stirps, and little Tribes with us, at
this day. And for our own Ships, they went sundry Voyages; as well to your
Streights, which you call the Pillars of Hercules, As to other parts in the
Atlantique and Mediterrane Seas; As to Paguin, (which is the same with
Cambaline) and Quinzy, upon the Oriental Seas, as far as to the Borders of
the East Tartary.

At the same time, and an Age after, or more, the Inhabitants of the great
Atlantis did flourish. For though the Narration and Description, which is made
by a great Man with you; that the Descendents of Neptune planted there; and of
the Magnificent Temple, Palace, City, and Hill; And the manifold streams of
goody Nauigable Rivers, (which as so many Chains environed the same Site, and
Temple;) And the several Degrees of Ascent, whereby Men did climb up to the
same, as if it bad bin a Scala Caeli; be all Poetical and Fabulous: Yet so much
is true, that the said Country of Atlantis; As well that of Peru then Called
Coya, as that of Mexico then named Tyrambel, were mighty and proud Kingdoms,
in Arms, Shipping, and Riches: So Mighty, as at one time, (or at least within
the space of 10. Years,) they both made two great Expeditions; They of
Tirambel through the Atlantique to the Mediterrane Sea; and they of Coya
through the South Sea upon this our Island: And for the former of these, which
was into Europe, the same Author amongst you, (as it seems,) had some
relation from the Egyptian Priest, whom he cites. For assuredly such a thing
there wa^. But whether it were the Ancient Athenians, that had the glory of the
Repulse, and Resistance of those Forces, I can say nothing: But certain it is,
there never came back, either Ship, or M^r, from that Voyage. Neither had the
other Voyage of those of Coya upon us, had better fortune, if they had not met
with Enemies of greater clemency. For the King of this Island, (by name
Altabin,) a wife Man, and a great Warrier; Knowing well both his own strength,
and that of his Enemies; handled the matter so, as he cut off their
Landforces, from their Ships; and encoyled both their Navy, and their Camp,
with a greater Power then theirs, both by Sea and Land: And compelled them to
render themselves without striking stroke: And after they were at his Mercy,
contenting himself only with their Oath, that they should no more bear Arms
against him, dismissed them all in safety. But the Divine Revenge ouertooke not
long after those proud Enterprises. For within less then the space of one
Hundred Years, the Great Atlantis was utterly lost and destroyed: Not by a
great Earthquake, as your Man says; (For that whole Tract is little subject to
Earthquakes;) But by a particular Deluge or Inundation; Those Countries having,
at this Day, far greater Rivers, and far higher Mountains, to pour down
waters, then any part of the Old World. But it is true, that the same
Inundation was not deep; Not past forty foot, in most places, from the
Ground; So that, although it destroyed Man and Beast generally, yet some few
wild Inhabitants of the Wood escaped. Birds also were saved by flying to the
high Trees and Woods. For as for Men, although they had Buildings in many
places, higher then the Depth of the Water; Yet that Inundation, though it were
shallow, had a long Continuance; whereby they of the Vale, that were not
drowned, perished for want of Food, and other things necessary. So as marvel
you not at the thin Population of America, nor at the Rudeness and Ignorance
of the People; For you must account your Inhabitants of America as a young
People; Younger a thousand years, at the least, then the rest of the World:
For that there was so much time, between the Universal Flood, and their
Particular Inundation. For the poor Remnant of Humane Seed, which remained in
their Mountains, Peopled the Country again slowly, by little and little; And
being simple and savage People, (Not like Noah and his Sons, which was the
chief Family of the Earth) they were not able to leave Letters, Arts, and
Ciuillity, to their Posterity; And having likewise in their Mountanous
Habitations been used, (in respect of the Extreme Cold of those Regions,) to
cloth themselves with the Skinns of Tigers, Bears, and great Hairy Goats,
that they have in those Parts; When after they came down into the Valley, and
found the Intolerable Heates which are there, and knew no means of lighter
Apparel; they were forced to beginn the Custom of Going Naked, which
continues at this day. Only they take great pride and delight, in the
Feathers of Birds; And this also they took from those their Ancestors of the
Mountains, who were invited unto it, by the infinite Flights of Birds, that
came up to the high Grounds, while the Waters stood below. So you see, by this
maine Accident of Time, we lost our Traffic with the Americans, with whom,
of all others, in regard they lay nearest to us, we had most Commerce. As for
the other Parts of the World, it is most manifest, that in the Ages following,
(whether it were in respect of Wars, or by a natural Revolution of Time,)
Navigations did every where greatly decay; And specially, far Voyages, (the
rather by the use of Galleys, and such Vessels as could hardly brook the
Ocean,) were altogether left and omitted. So then, that part of Intercourse,
which could be from other Nations, to Sail to us, you see how it has long
since ceased; Except it were by some rare Accident, as this of yours. But now
of the Cessation of that other Part of Intercourse, which might be by our
Sailing to other Nations, I must yield you some other Cause. For I cannot say,
(if I shall say truly,) but our Shipping, for Number, Strength, Mariners,
Pylots, and all things that appertain to Navigations, is as great as ever; And
therefore why we should sit at home, I shall now give you an account by it
self; And it will draw nearer, to give you satisfaction, to your principal
Question.

There reigned in this Island, about 1900. years ago, a King, whose memory of
all others we most adore; Not Superstitiously, but as Divine Instrument, though
a Mortal Man: His Name was Solamona: And we esteem him as the Lawgiver of
our Nation. This King had a large heart, inscrutable for good; And was wholly
bent to make his kingdom and People Happy. He therefore taking into
Consideration, how sufficient and substantive this Land was, to maintain it
self, without any aid (at all) of the Forrainer; Being 5600. Miles in circuit,
and of rare Fertility of Soil, in the greatest part thereof; And finding also
the Shipping of this Country might be plentifully set on work, both by
Fishing, and by Transportations from Port to Port, and likewise by Sailing unto
some small Islands that are not far from us, and are under the Crown and
Laws of this State; And recalling into his Memory, the happy and flourishing
Estate, wherein this Land then was; So as it might be a thousand ways
altered to the worse, but scarce any one way to the better; thought nothing
wanted to his Noble and Heroical Intentions, but only (as far as Humane
foresight might reach) to give perpetuity to that, which was in his time so
happily established. Therefore amongst his other Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom, he did ordain the Interdicts and Prohibitions, which we have
touching Extrance of Strangers; which at that time (though it was after the
Calamity of America) was frequent; Doubting Novelties, and Commixture of
Manners. It is true, the like Law, against the Admission of Strangers without
License, is an Ancient Law, in the Kingdom of China, and yet continued in use.
But there it is a poor Thing; And has made them a curious, ignorant,
fearful, foolish Nation. But our Lawgiver made his Law of another temper.
For first, he has preserved all points of Humanity, in taking Order, and
making Provision for the Relief of Strangers distressed; whereof you have
tasted. At which Speech (as reason was) we all rose up, and bowed our selves.
He went on. That King also still desiring to join Humanity and Policy
together; And thinking it against Humanity, to detain Strangers here against
their wills; And against Policy, that they should return, and discover their
Knowledge of this Estate, he took this Course: He did or daine, that of the
Strangers, that should be permitted to Land, as many (at all times) might
depart as would; But as many as would stay, should have very good Conditions,
and Means to live, from the State. Wherein he saw so far, that now in so
many Ages since the Prohibition, we have memory not of one Shipp that ever
returned, and but of thirteen Persons only at several times, that chose to
return in our Bottomes. What those few that returned may have reported abroad
I know not. But you must think, Whatsoever they have said, could be taken
where they came, but for a Dream. Now for our Traveling from hence into Parts
abroad, our Lawgiver thought fit altogether to restrain it. So is it not in
China. For the Chineles sail where they will, or can; which shows, that
their Law of Keeping out Strangers, is a Law of Pusillanimity, and fear. But
this restraint of ours, has one only Exception, which is admirable;
Preserving the good which comes by communicating with Strangers, and avoiding
the Hurt; And I will now open it to you. And here I shall seem a little to
digress, but you will by and by find it pertinent. Ye shall understand, (my
dear Friends,) that amongst the Excellent Acts of that King, one above all
has the pre-eminence. It was the Erection, and Institution of an Order, or
Society, which we call Salomons House; The Noblest Foundation, (as we
think,) that ever was upon the Earth; And the Lantern of this Kingdom. It
is dedicated to the Study of the Works, and Creatures of GOD. Some think it
bears the Founders Name a little corrupted, as if it should be Solamona's
House. But the Records write it, as it is spoken. So as I take it to be
denominate of the King of the Hebrews, which is famous with you, and no
Stranger to us. For we have some Parts of his works, which with you are lost;
Namely that Natural History, which he wrote of all Plants, from the Cedar of
Libanus, to the Moss that grows out of the Wall; And of all things that have
Life and Motion. This makes me think, that our King finding himself to
Symbolize, in many things, with that King of the Hebrews (which lived many
years before him) honored him with the Title of this Foundation. And I am the
rather induced to be of this Opinion, for that I find in ancient Records, this
Order or Society is sometimes called Salomons House; And sometimes the
College of the six Days Works: whereby I am satisfied, That our Excellent
King had learned from the Hebrews; That GOD had created the World, and all
that therein is, within six Days; And therefore he instituting that House,
for the finding out of the true Nature of all Things, (whereby GOD might have
the more Glory in the Workmanship of them, and Men the more fruit in the use
of them,) did give it also that second Name. But now to come to our present
purpose. When the King bad forbidden, to all his People, Navigations into any
Part, that was not under his Crown, he made nevertheless this Ordinance; That
every twelve years there should be set forth, out of this Kingdom, two Ships,
appointed to several Voyages; That in either of these Ships, there should be a
Mission of three of the Fellows, or Brethren of Salomons House; whose Errand
was only to give us Knowledge of the Affairs and State of those Countries, to
which they were designed; And especially of the Sciences, Arts, Manufactures,
and Inventions of all the World; And withal to bring unto us, Books,
Instruments, and Patterns, in every kind: That the Ships, after they had
landed the Brethren, should return; And that the Brethren should stay abroad
till the new Mission. These Ships are not otherwise fraught, then with Store of
Victuals, and good Quantity of Treasure to remain with the Brethren, for the
buying of such Things, and rewarding of such Persons, as they should think
fit. Now for me to tell you, how the Vulgar sort of Mariners are contained
from being discovered at Land; And how they that must be put on shore for any
time, color themselves under the Names of other Nations; And to what places
these Voyages have been designed; And what places of RendezVous are appointed
for the new Missions; And the like Circumstances of the Practique; I may not
do it; Neither is it much to your desire. But thus you see, we maintain a
Trade, not for Gold, Silver, or Jewels; Nor for Silks; Nor for Spices; Nor any
other Commodity of Matter; But only for GODS first Creature, which was Light:
To have Light (I say) of the Growth of all Parts of the World. And when he had
said this, he was silent; And so were we all. For indeed we were all
astonished, to hear so strange things so probably told. And he perceiving,
that we were willing to say somewhat, but had it not ready, in great Courtesy
took us off, and descended to ask us Questions of our Voyage and Fortunes,
and in the end concluded, that we might do well, to think with our selves,
what Time of stay we would demand of the State; And bad us not to scant our
selves; For he would procure such time as we desired. Whereupon we all rose
up, and presented our selves to kiss the skirt of his Tippet; But he would
not suffer us; and so took his leave. But when it came once amongst our
People, that the State used to offer Conditions to Strangers, that would stay,
we had Work enough to get any of our Men to look to our Shipp; And to keep
them from going presently to the Governor, to crave Conditions. But with much
ado we refrained them, till we might agree what Course to take.

We took our selves now for free men, seeing there was no danger of our utter
Perdition; And lived most joyfully, going abroad, and seeing what was to be
seen, in the City, and places adjacent, within our Tedder; And obtaining
Acquaintance with many of the City, not of the meanest Quallity; At whose
hands we found such Humanity, and such a Freedom and desire, to take
Strangers, as it were, into their Bosom, as was enough to make us forget all
that was dear to us, in our own Countries: And continually we met with many
things, right worthy of Observation, and Relation: As indeed, if there be a
Mirror in the World, worthy to hold Men's Eyes, it is that Country. One day
there were two of our Company bidden to a Feast of the Family, as they call it.
A most Natural, Pious, and Reverend Custom it is, showing that Nation to be
compounded of all Goodness. This is the manner of it. It is granted to any Man,
that shall live to see thirty Persons, descended of his Body, alive together,
and all above 3. years old, to make this Feast, which is done at the Cost of
the State. The Father of the Family, whom they call the Tirsan, two days
before the Feast, takes to him three of such Friends as he likes to choose;
And is assisted also by the Governor of the City, or Place, where the Feast
is celebrated; And all the Persons of the Family, of both Sexes, are summoned
to attend him. These two days the Tirsan sits in Consultation, concerning
the good Estate of the Family. There, if there be any Discord or suits between
any of the Family, they are compounded and appeased. There, if any of the Family
be Distressed or Decayed, order is taken for their Relief, and competent
means to live. There, if any be subject to vice, or take ill Courses, they are
reproved and Censured. So likewise, Direction is given touching Marriages, and
the Courses of life, which any of them should take, with diverse other the like
Orders and Aduises. The Governor assisteth, to the end, to put in Execution,
by his Public Authority, the Decrees and Orders of the Tirsan, if they should
be disobeyed; Though that seldom needs; Such Reverence and Obedience they
give; to the Order of Nature. The Tirsan does also then, ever choose one Man
from amongst his Sons, to live in House with him; Who is called, ever after,
the Son of the Vine. The Reason will hereafter appear. On the Feast day, the
Father or Tirsan comes forth after Divine Service, into a large Room, where
the Feast is celebrated; which Room has an Halfe-Pace at the upper end.
Against the wall, in the middle of the halfe-pace, is a Chair placed for him,
with a Table and Carpet before it. Over the Chair is a State, made Round or
Ouall, and it is of Iuy; An Iuy somewhat whiter then ours, like the Leaf of a
Silver Aspe, but more shining; For it is green all Winter. And the State is
curiously wrought with Silver and Silk of diverse Colors, broyding or binding
in the Iuy; And is ever of the work, of some of the Daughters of the Family;
And veiled over at the Topp, with a fine Nett of Silk and Silver. But the
Substance of it, is true Iuy; whereof, after it is taken down, the Friends of
the Family, are desirous to have some Leaf or Sprigg to keep. The Tirsan
comes forth with all his Generation or Lineage, the Males before him, and the
Females following him; And if there be a Mother, from whose Body the whole
Lineage is descended, there is a Trauerse placed in a Lost above, on the right
hand of the Chair, with a privy Door, and a carved Window of Glass, leaded
with Gold and blew; Where she sits, but is not seen. When the Tirsan is
come forth, he sits down in the Chair; And all the Lineage place themselves
against the wall both at his back, and upon the Return of the Halfe-pace, in
Order of their years, without difference of Sex, and stand upon their Feet.
When he is set, the Room being always full of Company, but well kept and
without Disorder, after some pause, there comes in from the lower end of the
Room, a Taratan, (which is as much as an Herald; And on either side of him two
young Lads; Whereof one carries a Scrowle of their shining yellow Parchment;
And the other a Cluster of Grapes of Gold, with a long Foot or Stalk. The
Herald, and Children, are clothed with Mantles of Seawater green Satin; But
the Heralds Mantle is streamed with Gold, and has a Train. Then the Herald
with three Courtesies, or rather Inclinations, comes up as far as the
Halfe-pace; And there first takes into his Hand the Scrowle. This Scrowle is
the Kings Charter, containing Gift of Reuenew, and manany Privileges,
Exemptions, and Points of Honor, granted to the Father of the Family; And it
is ever styled and directed; To such an one, Our well-beloved Friend and
Creditour: Which is a Title proper only to this Case. For they sa^, the King
is Debtor to no Man, but for Propagation of his Subjects, The Seal set to the
Kings Charter, is the Kings Image, Imbossed or molded in Gold; And though such
Charters be expedited of Course, and as of Right, yet they are varied by
discretion, according to the Number and Dignity of the Family. This Charter
the Herald reads aloud; And while it is read, the Father or Tirsan, stands
up, supported by two of his Sons, such as he chooses. Then the Herald
mounteth the HalfPace, and delivers the Charter into his Hand; And with that
there is an Acclamation, by all that are present, in their Language, which is
thus much; Happy are the people of Bensalem. Then the Herald takes into his
Hand from the other Child the Cluster of Grapes, which is of Gold; Both the
Stalk, and the Grapes. But the Grapes are daintely enamelled; And if the Males
of the Family be the greater number, the Grapes are enamelled Purple, with a
little Sun fett on the Topp; If the Females, then they are enamelled into a
greenish yellow, with a Cressant on the Topp. The Grapes are in number as many
as there are Descendents of the Family. This Golden Cluster, the Herald
delivers also to the Tirsan; Who presently delivers it over, to that Son,
that he had formerly chosen, to be in House with him; Who bears it before
his Father, as an Ensign of Honor, when he goes in public ever after; And
is thereupon called the Son of the Vine. After this Ceremony ended, the
Father or Tirsan retireth; And after some time comes forth again to Dinner,
where he sits alone under the State, as before; And none of his Descendants
sit with him, of what Degree or Dignity soever, except he hap to be of
Salomons House. He is served only by his own Children, such as are Male; who
perform unto him all service of the Table upon the knee; And the Women only
stand about him, leaning against the wall. The Room below the Halfe-pace,
has Tables on the sides for the Ghests that are bidden; Who are served with
great and comely order; And toward the end of Dinner (which in the greatest
Feasts with them, lasts never above an Hour and an half) there is an Hymn
sung, varied according to the Invention of him that composeth it, (for they
have excellent Poesy;) But the Subject of it is, (always,) the praises of
Adam, and Noah, and Abraham; Whereof the former two Peopled the World, and the
last was the Father of the Faithful: Concluding ever with a Thanksgiving for
the Nativity of our Savior, in whose Birth, the Births of all are only
Blessed. Dinner being done, the Tirsan retireth again; And having withdrawn
himself alone into a place; where he makes some private Prayers, he comes
forth the third time, to give the Blessing; with all his Descendants, who
stand about him, as at the first. Then he calls them forth by one and by one,
by name, as he pleases, though seldom the Order of Age be inuerted. The
person that is called, (the Table being before removed,) kneeleth down before
the Chair, and the Father lays his Hand, upon his Head, or her Head, and
gives the Blessing in these Words; Son of Bensalem, (or Daughter of
Bensalem,) thy Father says it; The Man by whom thou have Breath and Life
speaks the word; The Blessing of the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace,
and the Holy Dove, be upon thee, and make the days of thy Pilgrimage, good,
and many. This he says to every of them; And that done, if there be any of his
Sons, of eminent Meritt and Virtue, (so they be not above two,) he calls
for them again; And says, laying his Arm over their shoulders, they
standing; Sons, it is well ye are borne, give God the praise, and persevere
to the end. And withal delivers to either of them a Jewel, made in the
Figure of an Ear of Wheat, which they ever after wear in the front of their
Turban, or Hat. This done, they fall to Music and dances, And other
Recreations, after their manner, for the rest of the day. This is the full
order of that Feast.

By that time, six or seven Days were spent, I was fallen into straight
Acquaintance, with a Merchant of that City, whose Name was Ioabin He was a
Jew and Circumcised: For they have some few Stirps of Jews, yet remaining
amongst them, whom they leave to their own Religion. Which they may the better
do, because they are of a far differing Disposition from the Jews in other
Parts. For whereas they hate the Name of CHRIST; And have a secret inbred
Rancour against the People amongst whom they live; These (contrariwise) give
unto our SAVIOVR many high Attributes, and love the Nation of Bensalem,
extremely. Surely this Man, of whom I speak, would ever acknowledge, that
CHRIST was borne of a Virgin; And that he was more then a Man; And he would
tell how GOD made him Ruler of the Seraphims, which guard his Throane; And they
call him also the Milken Way, and the Eliah of the Messiah; And many other High
Names; which though they be inferior to his Divine Majesty, Yet they are
far from the Language of other Jews. And for the Country of Bensalem, this
Man would make no end of commending it. Being desirous by Tradition amongst the
Jews there, to have it believed, that the People thereof were of the
Generations of Abraham, by another Son, whom they call Nachorans; And that
Moses by a secret Cabala ordained the Laws of Bensalem which they now use; And
that when the Messiah should come, and sit in his Throne at Jerusalem, the
King of Bensalem, should sit at his feet, whereas other Kings should keep a
great distance. But yet setting aside these Jewish Dreams, the Man was a wise
Man, and learned, and of great Policy, and excellently seen in the Laws and
Customs of that Nation. Amongst other Discourses, one day, I told him, I was
much affected with the Relation I had, from some of the Company, of their
Custom, in holding the Feast of the Family; For that (me thought) I had never
heard of a Solemnity, wherein Nature did so much preside. And because
Propagation of Families, proceeds from the Nuptial Copulation, I desired to
know of him, what Laws and Customs they had concerning Marriage; And whether
they kept Marriage well; And whether they were tied to one Wife; For that where
Population is so much affected, and such as with them it seemed to be, there is
commonly Permision of Plurality of Wives. To this he said; You have Reason for
to commend that excellent Institution of the Feast of the Family. And indeed
we have Experience, that those Families, that are partakers of that Blessing
of that Feast, do flurkish and prosper ever after, in an extraordinary manner.
But hear me now, and I will tell you what I know. You shall understand, that
there is not under the Heavens, so chaste a Nation, as this of Bensalem; Nor so
free from all Pollution, or foulness. It is the Virgin of the World. I
remember, I have redd in one of your Europaean Books, of an holy Hermit
amongst you, that desired to see the Spirit of Fornication, and there appeared
to him, a little foul ugly Aethiope. But if he head desired to see the Spirit
of Chastity of Bensalem, it would have appeared to him, in the likeness of a
fair beautiful Cherubin. For there is nothing, amongst Mortal Men, more
fair and admirable, then the Chaste Minds of this People. Know therefore, that
with them there are no Stews, no dissolute Houses, no Curtisans, nor any thing
of that kind. Nay they wonder (with detestation) at you in Europe, which permit
such things. They say ye have put Marriage out of office: For Marriage is
ordained a Remedy for unlawful Concupiscence; And Natural Concupiscence
seems as a spurr to Marriage. But when Men have at hand a Remedy, more
agreeable to their corrupt will, Marriage is almost expulsed. And therefore
that are with you seen infinite Men, that marry not, but choose rather a
libertine and impure single Life, then to be yoaked in Marriage; And many that
do marry, marry late, when the Prime and Stength of their Years is past. And
when they do marry, what is Marriage to them, but a very Bargain; Wherein is
sought Alliance, or Portion, or Reputation, with some desire (almost
indifferent) of Issue; And not the faithful Nuptial Union of Man and Wife,
that was first instituted. Neither is it possible, that those that have cast
away so basely, so much of their Strength, should greatly esteem Children,
(being of the same Matter,) as Chaste Men do. So Likewise during Marriage is
the Case much amended* as it ought to be if those things were tolerated only
for necessity? No, but they remain still as a very Affront to Marriage. The
Haunting of those dissolute places, or resort to Curtizans, are no more
punished in Married Men, then in Batchellers, And the depraved Custom of
change, and the Delight in Meretricious Embracements, (where sin is turned
into Art,) makes Marriage a dull thing, and a kind of Imposition, or Tax.
They hear you defend these things, as done to avoid greater Evils; As
Aduoutries, Deflouring of Virgins, Unnatural lust, and the like. But they say
this is a preposterous Wisdom; And they call it Lot's offer, who to save his
Guests from abusing, Offered his Daughters: Nay they say further, That there is
little gained in this; For that the same Vices and Appetites, do still remain
and abound Unlawful Lust being like a Furnace, that if you stopp the Flames
altogether, it will quench; But if you give it any vent, it will rage. As for
Masculine Love, they have no touch of it, And yet there are not, so faithful
and inuiolate Freindshipps, in the world again, as are there: And to speak
generally, (as I said before,) I have not read of any such Chastity, in any
People, as theirs: And their usual saying is, That whosoever is unchaste
cannnot reverence himself: And they say; That the Reverence of a Man's self,
is, next Religion, the chiefest Bridle of all Vices. And when he had faid
this, the good Jew paused a little; Whereupon, I far more willing to hear him
speak on, then to speak my self; yet thinking it decent, that upon his pause
of Speech, I should not be altogether silent, said only this; That I would say
to him, as the Widow of Sarepta said to Elias; that he was come to bring to
Memory our Sins; And that I confess the Righteousness of Bensalem, was
greater then the Righteousness of Europe. At which speech he bowed his Head,
and went on in this manner. They have also many wise and excellent Laws
touching Marriage. They allow no Polygamy. They have ordained that none do
intermarry or contract, until a Month he past from their first Inter view.
Marriage without consent of Parents they do not make void, but they mulct it
in the Inheritours: For the Children of such Marriages, are not admitted to
inherit, above a third Part of their Parents Inheritance. I have read in a
Book of one of your Men, of a Feigned Commonwealth, where the Married Couple
are permitted, before they Contract, to see one another Naked. This they
dislike: For they think it a Scorn, to give a Refusal after so Familiar
Knowledge: But because of many hidden Defects in Men and Women's Bodies, they
have a more civil Way: For they have near every Town, a Couple of Pooles,
(which they call Adam and Eues Pooles,) where it is permitted to one of the
Friends of the Man, and another of the friends of the Woman, to see them
severally bath Naked.

And as we were thus in Conference, there came one that seemed to be a
Messenger, in a rich Huke, that spoke with the Jew: Whereupon he turned to
me, and said; You will pardon me, for I am commanded away in have. The next
Morning he came to me again, joyful as it seemed, and said; There is word
come to the Governor of the City, that one of the Fathers of Salomons House,
will be here this day Seuen-night: We have seen none of them this Dozen
Years. His Coming is in State; But the Cause of his coming is secret. I will
provide you, and your Fellows, of a good Standing, to see his Entry. I thanked
him, and told him; I was most glad of the News. The Day being come he made is
Entry. He was a Man of middle Stature, and Age, comely of Person, and had an
Aspect as if he pitied Men. He was clothed in a Roabe of fine black Cloth,
with wide Sleeves, and a Cape. His under Garment was of excellent white Linen,
down to the Foot, girt with a Girdle of the same; And a Sindon or Tipett pett
of the same about his Neck. He had Gloves, that were curious, and set with
Stone; And Shoes of Peach-coloured Velvet. His Neck was bare to the Shoulders.
His Hatt was like a Helmett, or Spanish Montera; And his Locks curled below it
decently: They were of Color brown. His Beard was cut round, and of the same
color with his Hair, somewhat lighter. He was carried in a rich Chariott,
without Wheels, Litter-wise; With two Horses at either end, richly trapped in
blew Veluett Embroydered; and two Footmen on each side in the like Atire. The
Chariott was all of Cedar, gilt, and adorned with Crystal; Save that the
Fore-end had Pannells of Saphires, set in Borders of Gold; And the Hinder end
the like of Emerauds of the Peru Color. There was also a Sunn of Gold, Radiant,
upon the Topp, in the Midst; And on the Topp before, a small Cherub of Gold,
with Wings displayed. The Chariott was covered with Cloth of Gold tissued upon
Blew. He had before him fifty Attendants, young Men all, in white Satin loose
Coats to the Mid Leg; And Stockins of white Silk; And Shoes of blew Velvet;
And Hatts of blew Veluett; with fine Plumes of diverse Colors, set round like
Hat-bands. Next before the Chariott, went two Men, bare headed, in Linen
Garments down to the Foot, girt, and Shoes of blew Veluett; Who carried, the
one a Crosier, the other a Pastoral Staff like a Sheephooke: Neither of them
of Metal, but the Crosier of Balme-wood, the Pastoral Staff of Cedar.
Horsemen he had none, neither before, nor behind his Chariott: As it seems
to anoyd all Tumult and Trouble. Behind his Chariott, went all the Officers
and Principalls of the Companies of the City. He sat alone, upon Cushions, of
a kind of excellent Plush, blew; And under his Foot curious Carpetts of Silk
of diverse Colors, like the Persian, but far finer. He held up his bare Hand,
as he went, as blessing the People, but in Silence. The Street was wonderfully
well kept; So that there was never any Army had their Men stand in better
Battell-Array, then the People stood. The Windows likewise were not crowded,
but every one stood in them, as if they had been placed. When the show was
past, the Jew said to me; I shall not be able to attend you as I would, in
regard of some charge the City has laid upon me, for the Entertaining of
this Great Person. Three days after the Jew came to me again, and said; Ye
are happy Men; for the Father of Salomons House takes knowledge of your Being
here, and commanded me to tell you, that he will admit all your Company to his
presence, and have private Conference with one of you, that ye shall choose:
And for this has appointed the next day after too Morrow. And because he
means to give you his Blessing, he has appointed it in the Forenoone. We
came at our Day, and Hour, and I was chosen by my Fellows for the private
Access. We found him in a fair Chamber, richly hanged, and carpetted under
Foot, without any Degrees to the State. He was set upon a Low Throne richly
adorned, and a rich Cloth of State over his Head, of blew Satin Embroidered.
He was alone, save that he had two Pages of Honor, on either Hand one, finely
attired in White. His Under Garments were the like that we saw him wear in the
Chariott; but in stead of his Gown, he had on him a Mantle with a Cape, of the
same fine Black, fastened about him. When we came in, as we were taught, we
bowed Low at our first Entrance; And when we were come near his Chair, he
stood up, holding forth his Hand vngloued, and in Posture of Blessing; And we
every one of us stooped down, and kissed the Hemme of his Tippett. That done,
the rest departed, and I remained. Then he warned the Pages forth of the
Room, and caused me to sit down beside him, and spoke to me thus in the
Spanish Tongue.

GOD bless thee, my Son; I will give thee the greatest Jewel I have: For I
will impart unto thee, for the Love of GOD and Men, a Relation of the true
State of Salomons House. Son, to make you know the true state of Salomons
House, I will keep this order. First I will set forth unto you the End of our
Foundation. Secondly, the Preparations and Instruments we have for our Works.
Thirdly, the several Employments and Functions whereto our Fellows are
assigned. And fourthly, the Ordinances and Rites which we observe.

The End of our Foundation is the Knowledge of Causes, and Secrett Motions of
Things; And the Enlarging of the bounds of Humane Empire, to the Effecting of
all Things possible.

The Preparations and Instruments are these. We have large and deep Causes of
several Depths: The deepest are sunk 600. Fathom: And some of them are
dug and made under great Hills and Mountains: So that if you reckon
together the Depth of the Hill, and the Depth of the Cave, they are (some of
them) above three Miles deep. For we find, that the Depth of a Hill, and the
Depth of a Cave from the Flat, is the same Thing; Both remote alike, from the
Sunn and Heavens Beams, and from the Open Air. These Caves we call the Lower
Region; And we use them for all Coagulations, Indurations, Refrigerations, and
Conseruations of Bodies. We use them likewise for the Imitation of Natural
Mines; And the Producing also of New Artificial Mettalls, by Compositions and
Materials which we use, and lay there for many years. We use them also
sometimes, (which may seem strange,) for Curing of some Diseases, and for
Prolongation of Life, in some Hermits that choose to live there, well
accommodated of all things necessary, and indeed live very long; By whom also
we learn many things.

We have Burialls in several Earths, where we put diverse Cements, as the
Chinese do their Porcellane. But we have them in greater Variety, and some
of them more fine. We have also great variety of Composts, and Soiles, for the
Making of the Earth Fruitful.

We have High Towers; The Highest about half a Mile in Height; And some of
them likewise set upon High Mountains: So that the Vantage of the Hill with
the Tower, is in the highest of them three Miles at least. And these Places we
call the Upper Region; Accounting the Air between the High Places, and the
Low, as a Middle Region. We use these Towers, according to their several
Heights, and Situations, for Insolation, Refrigeration, Conservation; And for
the View of diverse Meteors, As Winds, Rain, Snow, Hail; And some of the
Fiery Meteors also. And upon them, in some Places, are Dwellings of Hermits,
whom we visit sometimes, and instruct what to observe.

We have great Lakes, both Salt, and Fresh; whereof we have use for the Fish,
and Foul. We use them also for Burialls of some Natural Bodies: For we find
a Difference in Things buried in Earth, or in Air below the Earth; and things
buried Water. We have also Pooles, of which some do strain Fresh Water out
of Salt; And others by Art do turn Fresh Water into Salt. We have also some
Rocks in the Midst of the Sea; And some Bays upon the Shore for some Works,
wherein is required the Air and Vapor of the Sea. We have likewise Violent
Streams and Cataracts, which serve us for many Motions: And likewise Engines
for Multiplying and Enforcing of VVindes, to set also on going diverse Motions.

We have also a Number of Artificial Wels, and Fountains, made in Imitation
of the Natural Sources and Baths; As tincted upon Vitrioll, Sulphur, Steel,
Brass, Lead, Nitre, and other Mineralls. And again we have little Wells for
Infusions of many Things, where the Waters take the Virtue quicker and better,
then in Vessels, or Basins. And amongst them we have a Water, which we call
Water of Paradise, being, by that we do to it, made very Sovereign for
Health, and Prolongation of Life.

We have also Great and Spacious Houses, where we imitate and demonstrate
Meteors; As Snow, Hail, Rain, some Artificial Raines of Bodies, and not of
Water, Thunders, Lightnings; Also Generations of Bodies in Air; As Froggs,
Flies, and diverse Others.

We have also certain Chambers, which we call Chambers of Health, where we
qualify the Air as we think good and proper for the Cure of diverse
Diseases, and Preservation of Health.

We have also fair and large Baths, of several Mixtures, for the Cure of
Diseases, and the Restoring of Man's Body from Arefaction: And Others for the
Confirming of it in Strength of Sinnewes, Vital Parts, and the very Juice and
Substance of the Body.

We have also large and various Orchards, and Gardens; Wherein we do not so much
respect Beauty, as Variety of Ground and Soil, proper for diverse Trees, and
Herbs: And some very spacious, where Trees, and Berries are set, whereof we make
diverse Kinds of Drinks, besides the Vine-yards. In these we practice likewise
all Conclusions of Grafting, and Inoculating, as well of VVilde-Trees, as
Fruit Trees, which produces many Effects. And we make (by Art) in the same
Orchards, and Gardens, Trees and Flowers, to come earlier, or later, then their
Seasons; And to come up and bear more speedily then by their Natural Course
they do. We make them also by Art greater much then their Nature; And their
Fruit greater, and sweeter, and of differing Taste, Smell, Color, and Figure,
from their Nature. And many of them we so Order as they become of Medicinal
Use.

We have also Means to make diverse Plants, rise by Mixtures of Earths
without Seeds; And likewise to make diverse New Plants, differing from the
Vulgar; and to make one Tree or Plant turn into another.

We have also Parks, and Enclosures of all Sorts, of Beasts, and Birds; which
we use not only for View or Rareness, but likewise for Dissections, and
Trialls; That thereby we may take light, what may be wrought upon the Body of
Man. Wherein we find many strange Effects; As Continuing Life in them, though
diverse Parts, which you acount Vital, be perished, and taken forth;
Resussitating of some that seem Dead in Appearance; And the like. We try also
all Poisons, and other Medicines upon them, as well of Chyrurgery, as Physic.
By Art likewise, we make them Greater, or Taller, then their Kind is; And
contrary-wise Dwarf them and stay their Grouth: We make them more Fruitful,
and Bearing then their Kind is; And contrary-wise Barren and not Generatiue.
Also we make them differ in Color, Shape, Actiuity, many ways. We find
Means to make Commixtures and Copulations of diverse Kinds; which have
produced many New Kinds, and them not Barren, as the general Opinion is. We
make a Number of Kinds, of Serpents, Worms, Flies, Fishes, of Putrefaction;
Whereof some are advanced (in effect) to be Perfect Creatures, like Beasts or
Birds; And have Sexes, and do Propagate. Neither do we this by Chance, but
we know before hand, of what Matter and Commixture, what Kind of those
Creatures will arise.

We have also Particular Pooles, where we make Trialls upon Fishes, as we have
said before of Beasts, and Birds.

We have also Places for Breed and Generation of those Kinds of Worms, and
Flies, which are of Special Use; Such as are with you your Silkwormes, and
Bees.

I will not hold you long with recounting of our Brew-Howses, Bake-Howses, and
Kitchins, where are made diverse Drinks, Breads, and Meats, Rare, and of
special effects. Wines we have of Grapes; And Drinks of other Juice, of
Fruits, of Grains, and of Roots; And of Mixtures with Honey, Sugar, Manna,
and Fruits dried, and decocted: Also of the Tears or Woundings, of Trees; And
of the Pulp of Canes. And these Drinks are of several Ages, some to the Age
or Last of forty years. We have Drinks also brewed with several Herbs, and
Roots, and Spices; Yea with several Fleshes, and WhiteMeates; Whereof some of
the Drinks are such, as they are in effect Meat and Drink both: So that
Diverse, especially in Age, do desire to live with them, with little or no
Meat, or Bread. And above all we strive to have Drinks of Extreme Thin
Parts, to insinuate into the Body, and yet without all Biting, Sharpness, or
Fretting; Insomuch as some of them, put upon the Back of your Hand, will, with
a little stay, pass through to the Palm, and yet taste Mild to the Mouth.
We have also Waters, which we ripen in that fashion, as they become
Nourishing; So that they are indeed excellent Drink; And Many will use no
other. Breads we have of several Grains, Roots, and Kernells; Yea and some of
Flesh, and Fish, Dried; With diverse kinds of Leauenings, and Seasonings: So
that some do extremely move Appetites; Some do Nourish so, as diverse do
live of them, without any other Meat; Who live very long. So for Meats, we
have some of them so beaten, and made tender, and mortified, yet without all
Corrupting, as a VVeake Heat of the Stomach will turn them into good Chylus;
As well as a Strong Heat would Meat otherwise prepared. We have some Meats
also, and Breads, and Drinks, which taken by Men, enable them to Fast long
after; And some other, that used make the very Flesh of Men's Bodies, sensibly,
more Hard and Tough; And their Strength far greater, then otherwise it would
be.

We have Dispensatories, or Shops of Medicines. Wherein you may easily think,
if we have such Variety of Plants, and Living Creatures, more then you have in
Europe, (for we know what you have,) the Simples, Druggs, and Ingredients of
Medicines, must likewise be in so much the greater Variety. We have them
likewise of diverse Ages, and long Fermentations. And for their Preparations,
we have not only all Manner of Exquisite Distillations, and Separations, and
especially by Gentle Heates, and Percolations through diverse Strainers, yea
and Substances; But also exact Forms of Composition, whereby they incorporate
almost, as they were Natural Simples.

We have also diverse Mechanical Arts, which you have not; And Stuffes made
by them; As Papers, Linen, Silks, Tissues; dainty Works of Feathers of
wonderful Luster; excellent Dies, and many others: And Shops likewise, as well
for such as are not brought into Vulgar use amongst us, as for those that are.
For you must know, that of the Things before recited, many of them are grown
into use throughout the Kingdom; But yet, if they did flow from our Invention,
we have of them also for Patterns and Principalls.

We have also Fournaces of great Diversities, and that keep great Diversity
of Heates: Fierce and Quick; Strong and Constant; Soft and Mild; Blown,
Quiet, Dry, Moist; And the like. But above all we have Heates, in Imitation of
the Suns and Heavenly Bodies Heates, that pass diverse Inequalities, and (as
it were) Orbs, Progresses, and Returns, whereby we produce admirable effects.
Besides we have Heates of Dungs; and of Bellies and Mawes of Living Creatures,
and of their Bloods, and Bodies; and of Hayes and Herbs laid up moist; of Lime
unquenched; and such like. Instruments also which generate Heat only by
Motion. And further, Places for Strong Insolations; And again Places under the
Earth, which by Nature, or Art, yield Heat. These diverse Heates we use, As
the Nature of the Operation, which we intend, requires.

We have also Perspectiue-Houses, where we make Demonstrations of all Lights,
and Radiations: And of all Colors: And out of Things vncoloured and
Transparent, we can represent unto you all several Colors; Not in
RaineBowes, (as it is in Gemms, and Prismes,) but of themselves Single. We
represent also all Multiplications of Light, which we carry to great Distance,
and make so Sharp, as to discern small Points and Lines. Also all Colourations
of Light; All Delusions and Deceits of the Sight, in Figures, Magnitudes,
Motions, Colors: All Demonstrations of Shadows. We find also diverse Means
yet unknown to you, of Producing of Light, originally, from diverse Bodies.
We procure means of Seeing Objects a-farr off; As in the Heaven, and Remote
Places: And represent Things Near; as A-farr off; And Things A-farr off as
Near; Making Feigned Distances. We have also Helps for the Sight, far above
Spectacles and Glasses in use. We have also Glasses and Means, to see Small
and Minute Bodies, perfectly and distinctly; As the Shapes and Colors of Small
Flies and Worms, Grains and Flawes in Gemmes which cannot otherwise be seen,
Observations in Urine and Blood not otherwise to be seen. We make Artificial
Raine-Bowes, Halo's, and Circles about Light. We represent also all manner of
Reflections, Refractions, and Multiplications of Visuall Beams of Objects.

We have also Precious Stones of all kinds, many of them of great Beauty, and
to you unknown: Crystalls likewise; And Glasses of diverse kinds; And amongst
them some of Metals Vitrificated, and other Materials, besides those of which
you make Glass. Also a Number of Fossiles, and Imperfect Mineralls, which you
have not. Likewise Loadstones of Prodigious Virtue: And other rare Stones, both
Natural, and Artificial.

We have also Sound-Houses, where we practice and demonstrate all Sounds, and
their Generation. We have Harmonies which you have not, of Quarter-Sounds, and
lesser Slides of Sounds. Diverse Instruments of Music likewise to you
unknown, some sweeter then any you have; Together with Bells and Rings that
are dainty and sweet. We represent Small Sounds as Great and Deep; Likewise
Great Sounds, Extenuate and Sharp; We make diverse Tremblings and Warblings
of Sounds, which in their Original are Entire. We represent and imitate all
Articulate Sounds and Letters, and the Voices and Notes of Beasts and Birds.
We have certain Helps, which set to the Ear do further the Hearing
greatly. We have also diverse, Strange and Artificial Eccho's, Reflecting the
Voice many times, and as it were Tossing it: And some that give back the Voice
Louder then it came; some Shriller, and some Deeper; Yea some rendering the
Voice, Differing in the Letters or Articulate Sound, from that they receive.
We have also means to convey Sounds in Trunks and Pipes, in strange Lines,
and Distances.

We have also Perfume-Houses; wherewith we join also Practices of Taste. We
Multiply Smells, which may seem strange. We Imitate Smells, making all Smells
to breath out of other Mixtures then those that give them. We make diverse
Imitations of Taste likewise ^ so that they will deceive any Man's Taste. And in
this House we contain also a Confiture-House, where we make all Sweetmeats,
Dry and Moist; And diverse pleasant Wines, Milks, Broaths, and Sallets, far in
greater variety, then you have.

We have also Engine-Houses, where are prepared Engines and Instruments for all
Sorts of Motions. There we imitate and practice to make Swifter Motions, then
any you have, either out of your Musketts, or any Engine that you have: And to
Make them, and Multiply them more Easily, and with Small Force, by Wheels,
and other Means: And to make them Stronger, and more Violent, then yours are;
Exceeding your greatest Cannons, and Basilisks. We represent also Ordnance and
Instruments of War, and Engines of all Kinds: And likewise New Mixtures and
Compositions of Gunpowder, Wilde-Fires burning in Water, and Unquenchable.
Also Fire-workes of all Variety, both for Pleasure, and Use. We imitate also
Flights of Birds; We have some Degrees of Flying in the Air. We have Ships
and Boats for Going under Water, and Brooking of Seas; Also Swimming-Girdles
and Supporters. We have diverse curious Clocks; And other like Motions of
Return: And some Perpetual Motions. We imitate also Motions of Living
Creatures, by Images, of Men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Serpents. We have
also a great Number of other Various Motions, strange for Equality, Finenesse,
and Subtilty.

We have also a Mathematical House, where are represented all Instruments, as
well of Geometry, as Astronomy, exquisitely made.

We have also Houses of Deceits of the Senses; where we represent all manner of
Feats of Iugling, False Apparitions, Impostures, and Illusions: And their
Fallaces. And surely you will easily believe, that we, that have so many
Things truly Natural, which induce Admiration, could in a World of
Particulars deceive the Senses, if we would disguise those Things, and labor
to make them seem more Miraculous. But we do hate all Impostures, and Lies:
Insomuch as we have severely forbidden it to all our Fellows, under pain of
Ignominy and Eines, that they do not show any Natural work or Thing, Adorned
or Swelling; but only Pure as it is, and without all Affectation of
Strangeness.

These are (my Son) the Riches of Salomons House.

For the several Employments and Offices of our Fellows; We have Twelve that
Sail into Foreign Countries, under the Names of other Nations, (for our own
we conceal;) Who bring us the Books, and Abstracts, and Patterns of
Experiments of all other Parts. These we call Merchants of Light.

We have Three that Collect the Experiments which are in all Books. These we
call Depredatours.

We have Three that Collect the Experiments of all Mechanical Arts; And also
of Liberal Sciences; And also of Practices which are not Brought into Arts.
These we call Mystery-Men.

We have Three that try New Experiments, such as themselves think good. These
we call Pioners or Miners.

We have Three that Draw the Experiments of the Former Four into Titles, and
Tables, to give the better light, for the drawing of Observations and Axioms
out of them. These we call Compilers.

We have Three that bend themselves, Looking into the Experiments of their
Fellows, and cast about how to draw out of them Things of Use, and Practice
for Man's life, and Knowledge as well for Works, as for Plain Demonstration
of Causes, Means of Natural Diuinations, and the easy and clear Discovery,
of the Virtues and Parts of Bodies. These we call Dowry-men or Benefactours.

Then after diverse Meetings and Consults of our whole Number, to consider of
the former Labors and Collections, we have Three that take care, out of them,
to Direct New Experiments, of a Higher Light, more Penetrating into Nature then
the Former. These we call Lamps.

We have Three others that do Execute the Experiments so Directed, and Report
them. These we call Inoculatours.

Lastly, we have Three that raise the former Discoueries by Experiments, into
Greater Observations, Axioms, and Aphorisms. These we call Interpreters of
Nature.

We have also, as you must think, Nouices and Apprentices, that the
Succession of the former Employed Men do not fail; Besides, a great Number of
Servants and Attendants, Men and Women. And this we do also: We have
Consultations, which of the Inventions and Experiences, which we have
discovered, shall be Published, and which not: And take all an Oath of Secrecy,
for the Concealing of those which we think fit to keep Secrett: Though some
of those we do reuease sometimes to the State, and some not.

For our Ordinances and Rites: We have two very Long, and Fair Galleries: In
one of these we place Patterns and Samples of all manner of the more Rare and
Excellent Inventions: In the other we place the Statuas of all Principal
Inuentours. These we have the Statua of your Columbus, that discovered the
West Indies: Also the Inuentour of Ships: Your Monk that was the Inuentour of
Ordnance, and of Gunpowder: The Inuentour of Music: The Inuentour of Letters;
The Inuentour of Printing: The Inuentour of Observations of Astronomy: The
Inuentour of Works in Metal: The Inuentour of Glass: The Inuentour of Silk
of the Worn: The Inuentour of Wine: The Inuentour of Corn and Bread: The
Inuentour of Sugars: And all these, by more certain Tradition, then you have.
Then have we diverse Inuentours of our Own, of Excellent Works: Which since
you have not seen, it were too long to make Descriptions of them; And besides,
in the right Understanding of those Descriptions, you might easily err. For
upon every Invention of Value, we erect a Statua to the Inuentour, and give
him a Liberal and Honorable Reward. These Statua's are, some of Brass; some
of Marble and Touchstone; some of Cedar and other special VVoods guilt and
adorned; some of Iron; some of Silver; Some of Gold.

We have certain Hymns and Services, which we say daily, of Laud and Thanks
to GOD, for his Marueillous Works: And Forms of Prayers imploring his Aid
and Blessing, for the Illumination of our Labors, and the Turning of them into
Good and Holy Uses.

Lastly, we have Circuites or Visits of diverse Principal Cities of the
Kingdom; where, as it comes to pass, we do publish such New Profitable
Inventions, as we think good. And we do also declare Natural Diuinations
of Diseases, Plagues, Swarms of Hurtful Creatures, Scarcety, Tempests,
Earthquakes, Great Inundations, Cometts, Temperature of the Year, and diverse
other Things; And we give Counsel thereupon, what the People shall do, for
the Prevention and Remedy of them.

And when He had said this, He stood up: And I, as I had been taught,
kneeled down, and He laid his Right Hand upon my Head, and said; GOD bless
thee, my Son; And GOD bless this Relation, which I have made. I give thee
leave to Publish it, for the Good of other Nations; For we here are in GODS
Bosom, a Land unknown. And so he left me; Having assigned a Value about two
Thousand Ducats, for a Bounty to me and my Fellows. For they give great
Largesses, they come, upon all occasions.

The rest was not Perfected.
MAGNALIA NATVRAE, PRAECIPVE QVOAD VSVS HVMANOS.
THe Prolongation of Life. The Restitution of Youth in some Degree. The
Retardation of Age. The Curing of Diseases counted Incurable. The Mitigation of
Pain. More Easy and less Loathsome Purgings. The Increasing of Strength and
Actiuity. The Increasing of Ability to suffer Torture or Pain. The Altering of
Complexions: And Fatness, and Leanness. The Altering of Statures. The
Altering of Features. The Increasing and Exalting of the Intellectual Parts.
Versions of Bodies into other Bodies. Making of New Species. Transplanting of
one Species into another. Instruments of Destruction, as of War, and Poison.
Exhilaration of the Spirits, and Putting them in good Disposition. Force of the
Imagination, either upon another Body, or upon the Body it self. Acceleration
of Time in Maturations. Acceleration of Time in Clasifications. Acceleration of
Putrefaction. Acceleration of Decoction. Acceleration of Germination. Making
Rich Composts for the Earth. Impressions of the Air, and Raising of Tempests.
Great Alteration; As in Induration, Emollition, etc. Turning Crude and Watery
Substances into Oily and Unctious Substances. Drawing of New Foodes out of
Substances not now in Use. Making New Threads for Apparel; And New Stuffes;
Such as are Paper, Glass, etc. Natural Diuinations. Deceptions of the Senses.
Greater Pleasures of the Senses. Artificial Mineralls and Cements.
FINIS.
In the New Atlantis Page 28. lin. 27. for both read bath. Page 36. lin. 6. for
procueed read produced.


