This Book does treat all of the best waters Artyfycialles / and the virtues
and properties of the same / much profitable for the poor sick, set forth,
by sir Roger Becon Freere.



THe which treatise I have wylled to write or a good and a loving zele pytie
and compassyon of godly dysposicion would that every person being dyseased /
by the grace of god and of such medicines as herafter in this little treatise
more plainly shall be declared, may the sooner find remedy to be cured and heled
of all bodily infyrmityes and syckenesses trusting than that al those i^ this
wise recoueryng their health shall purchase such force and strength spiritual
that they shall daily augmente their merit and virtue to the laud and praise
of God, where through at their departing their souls may be except to be of
the nombre of those yt shall be saved / now pray I unto almyghtie God, that he
give me grace well to write and to compyle this little treatise, and that it
may be executed after a good purpose, and so may appear. And for asmoche that
Gold is the most noble metal that is, I shall begin first to advise unto ye
water of Gold, the which is made after the manner that hereafter follows.

In nomine dei Amen.
TAke wedges of fine gold, well warmed in the Fire, and quench it.xlii. times
within the water of a good well or Fountain. And the water strayned and kept
clenly in a vyoll of glass, and let the dyseased person drink it with wine or
good ale after as the pacient it requires, the virtue and property of that
water of gold is such that it is good unto ye people that be hoole, and also
for the^ that be sick of the syckenes, that me^ called, cardia pastio, for it
exalts and comfort the heart merueylously it illumineth the spirits, and
consumes ye superfluyte, and comfort the virtue contained in all the
members within forth, and much it avails unto the flux of the womb, more
than the water wherein iron is put, it avails much unto the leprous, and unto
them the which ben ill dysposed. Men make this water of gold, by science of
Arquimie. But I put it not here for that, but that manner of making is much
harder, but I will speak no more of it at this time.

The water of the Flowers of Rosemarye.
This water is of great, and merueylouse virtue and has many great properties
in bodies humaines and sycknesses cold? it ratifieth the appetite and
recomforteth the spirit and the hete natural, because of her good odor,
wherein the soul takes pleasure and gathers the virtue of the members
together, it comfort specially the brain, and all the members synewed, and
if a man wasshe his face with it, it makes it fair, and if a man wash his
here is it reteyneth them and keeps them from falling and multiplyeth them, and
the continuance and use of this water preserves a man from the botche, and
from all ill syckenesse it comfort the substance of the heart, and also
consumes the fleume, and melancoly, and makes youth to pourge, and who so
shall continue this water wtinforth and wtoutforth he shall be preserved long
without corrupcyon, and to wasshe his mouth often with water ratifyeth the
teth and the gu^mes? it heleth the Ca^ker, and of the fystures and ratifyeth
the ill wounds and dries the^, it vaileth unto the Cardiacle passion that is
to say, tremblyng of the heart and prohibiteth the vomytynge, and it is good
unto the flux of the womb and unto those yt be beno^med, as unto people the
which tremble in their body, and unto relexacion of worms, and dryueth away
all venom, as tryacle and also aydeth unto the mother of the belly of women and
them preserves of their Flowers, and the bayne aydeth much to consceyue, and
who so baineth him right often in the decocktion of this flower, he renews
his youth as an aygler yt is a thing right secret and right meruaylous, and
who so shall make it in the manner and fasshyon the which follows. Fill ye a
great vyoll or glass of the Flowers of Rosemarye and stop it above and
afterward bery it deep with in the bank of the sea, and let it lie thereby
half a year in the season and time the whether is most hotest, and abide there
the space of a month, and afterward it shall be turned in to water the which
water must be strongly strayned, and put in to another vyoll in the son, by
the time or space of xl. days, this water shall sprinkle and have the scence
as baulme, it auaylleth much to comfort the heart, and the brain and all the
body, vayleth again the dibilyte and wekenes of the synewes and takes away
the spots of the vysage and keeps the man in good state of youth and
avails against the syckenes and tears of the eyes to put within them.ii.
drops at a time, it ratyfyeth the membre slepy and benommed, and also it
heleth of the Fystula, and also of the Canker where the other remedies
profyteth nothing, and who so should make of the water brennynge of wine of the
decocktion with these flowers yt should be a right excellent thing for the
syckenesses abouesayde.

The water of red Roses.
This water comfort the heart and all the members to dyssolue, and they well
dyssolued, it restores them and because of her good odoure aromatyque, and
specially it comforts the spirits, and the hete natural it prohybyteth the
putrefaction in dyssentery and lyentery the which ben fluxes of the womb
bledyng, it comfort ye virtue retentyue and it is good unto the feblenesse
of the heart and vometynge and again the sweet dyafortique, it makes sweet
and comfort the go^mes and makes to have good odor in the mouth and
makes to have ferme Flesh who so wassheth him often with it, and puts it
with in his eyes with a little wine for ye mondyfyeth and dries, it comfort
the humodyte, and moystnes superflue of the eyes, and in especyall when a man
puts therein a little of thuthie p^pared or a little of aloes and fine sugar,
yet the said water with Sugar Candye put within the eyes cleanses and
mondifieth the substance without pain.

The water of Betayne.
This has many great properties for it breketh the stone in the bledder and in
the raynes, it mondifyeth the breast and the lyghtes, and heleth of the
Epylence, and dryueth away the venom, and avails unto the bytynge of a beast
venomous, it avails unto the strangulyon, and purges the fleume of the
stomach downewarde or by vometynge, and it avails to the eructacyon ayger,
it provoke ye vryne and loses the womb, it helps much the pain of the
mylte, it comfort the stomach and aydeth unto ye dysgestion, and vayleth
against the encreasynge of the blood, and against the pain of the Chynke, and
of the raines, and also of the bledder and against the cold dropsye, it is good
to cleanse the wounds of the head, and to draw the bones broken out of the
wounds, it is good for the pain of the teeth, and for the darkness of the eyes
corcosyue, and unto the difficult of children, it keeps from dronkenes and
takes away the fa^tasyes of the people the which sourdeth of syckenes, it is
good for the pain of the womb, and for the pain podagre, and takes away
the venom of Dogs enraged, it is good for the pain of the ears, and for
people that be deaf in what manner so ever it be, and for ronning eyes, and for
the flux of blood of veins, and unto people the which sythe^ for the sycknes
of the stomach for vometynge, and for the pain of the stomach and bytynges,
and avails to drink unto people weary of the fever quarteine, it is good for
the paralysye sownynge, and trembling of the members, and avails much unto
the pain of the womb, and for the swellynge.

The water of plantayne
This water is much abster, dry and incarnatyue, and it is very good for
wounds corrosyues, it is good for the stoppynge, it is good for the ronnynge
out of the belly and fleyng of the guts in drinking, it works the
opylacions of the liver and of the mylt making clean and kylleth the
inflamacion of the blood and incarneth the Fistules and the other wou^des, and
preserves from emoroides and it is good unto the vlceracion of the mouth and
unto the pain of the teeth unto the bytynge of a dog and unto the brennynge
of the Fire, and of hot water for the vlceratio^ of the lyghtes and unto the
spyttynge and unto the fever tarcian.

The water of lettys and of Endyue.
This water is aparatiue of veins, and comfort the liver, and makes warm,
and in especial it is good for the hot Apostumes, and unto flumes and makes
a man to sleep and it is good for ye pollucion i^ the night it is good for the
Iaundes, and unto the opelacion of the lunges, and the milk of Endyue makes
clean the wou^des that been in the raines of the back it avails much
against the colere ye which is within ye stomach

The water of Fumetory.
This water fortifieth the stomach and it mondifieth and provoke the urine
and avails against the scab and infection, it pourgeth the colere and
mondyfyeth the blood of the humors adustes.

The water of balm.
This water is very good for the s^omake cold and moist and aydeth unto the
digestion and disgesteth the mete, it comfort the heart and the brain and
takes away the ill thoughts and pouxes the which proceeds of melancholy and
humors adustes and avails against the bytynge of a dog and Scorpion, and
is good for the ache of the teeth, and suffocacion in dreams and unto
extorcion of the belly, and resolves the lunges.

The water of Elder.
The water of the leaves, flowers and rotes of elder altogether comfort the
heart of the man, and merueylouslye it mondifieth and makes clean the blood
and takes away the melancoly, and it heleth the brain the which is infect of
humors melancolyes, and it endures and heleth the foles enraged in the
contynuaunce and it is good to hele the scab and of the lepre.

The water of Elder and of Buglose.
The water of Elder and of buglose made by egall parties is much merueylouse
unto people melancolyous and unto people the which has tre^blynge of the heart
and the brennyng of the geder, it takes away the heaviness and gives gladness
and makes the man to be of good reason and of good understanding, but in this
cause he should put the flowers of buglose and of elder, and red roses, myngled
together, asmoch of the one as of the other.

The water of Garlyke.
This water opens the opelacyons of the liver, and of the mylt, and of the
raines, and preserves the man from the passion colleryke and ventouse it
takes away the blakynge of the stomach and ratifyeth the disgestion, it
encreseth the deed unto norysshes, and takes away the pain of the raynes,
caused of Uentosytie, and purges the grauel, and makes the pain suddenly to
cease, and it makes good color unto those that does use it.

The water of red soddes called Archangell mountain.
This water has many great properties to provoke the man, and to mondifie and
make clean the raynes and the bledder of the grauel, and it avails unto the
vlceracions of the raynes, unto people the which pysse blood.

The water of hertes tongue cycore endyue, all together by egall porcions with
the root of peccylle.
This water is much marvelous unto the opelacion of the liver, and of the
mylt, and heleth the iaunders when a man will drink of it, him behooves to
put thereto of fine sugar and it may be droncke with wine at his repastes, and
it is proved.

The water of Fenell.
The water of Fenell is given unto the obscurite and darkness of the eyes unto
the dropsye, and unto the lytarge, and it avails against venom, and purges
the raynes and the bledder of gravel, it provoke the man and makes the
flowers come unto the woman, it subtilieth the fat humors, and provoke the
deed unto women, and unto man the sperme, and also it takes away the will to
vomete, and helps the stomach.

The water of Cuffrurie montayne.
This water is meruaylouse good, to comfort the sight and to recover it if it
be possible and in especial unto people flumatyques, and unto aged people, the
which it shall compose together with Ueruene, Rewe, Roses, and Celydoyne. This
shall be a right merueilouse good water, to conserve to comfort, and to repair
the sight.

The water of Ysop dry.
The water of Ysop dry makes clean the raynes, and the breaste, and the
longes of the matter gross Fleumatyque, and vystose is much good unto the
coughe the which proceeds of the coldenes, and of moystnes, it clarifieth the
voice, and avails much unto those the which falls of the falling evil, and
it is called in latin aperylentia.

The water of horuid.
This water heleth of the strangurye, and profyteth much for to gendre, and
multyplye the people.

The water of sauge.
This water is good unto all syckenesses cold, of the synewes, as ben the
Palsy, the tremblyng of the me^bres swolunynge, epilensye and such like
sycknesses, and it is good unto the Reuolucion of the gommes, and of the pain
of the teth, and when they chellen, and it is good unto the sycknes of the
stomach cold, and unto the mother of ye womb, as is suffocacion of the
mother, and also this water may be used within forth in drinking, and without
forth i^ washyng and by other manners the which ben after the dyscrecion of him,
or of her, the which does use it.

The water of the roots and leaves of Bresyll and of fire.
This water lowseth the womb and opens the opylacions of the mylte and
heleth the dropsye, yposarque and takes away the swellynge of the feet.

The water strong is in laten inchium.
This water strong is of right great and meruaylous virtue, excellentlye
above all the other. For it kylleth the worms and dyssolueth the work,
co^sumeth the rotten humors within the body, in the places and co^duites
secrets, and because of some virtue written, it comfort where ben the
rotonesses, and it is openyng and comfortynge the stomach, and it cleanses the
ordures, and opens the opylacions of the mylte and of the liver, and it
avails to recover the speech, and against the venom, it comfort the
syghte, warmeth the stomach, and refreshes the liver it provoke the vryne,
and the flowers unto women, and resysteth unto the venym of oputhe bayci, and
of iusquiauim, and of all other of this nature, and it is good unto people death
wou^^ed wha^ the surgiens wassheth their wounds they keep it for enfestrynge
and engendring of ill flesh it avails against the epydymye, and against
eyres pestilencial it takes away the will to vomet, and avails unto
swellynges, and pains of the members, and unto the palsye, and takes away the
fleellynge from the tongue, and delyuereth in making gargarisme.

The water of Quyns Appels and of red Roses.
This water drunk with good red wine comfort the stomach affirms the
womb.

The water of Malous.
This water of cold and moist, and makes soft the womb and is alteratyue of
these opostumes hot, and it makes soft the durter, it provoke the flux
unto women.

The water of Scabiouse.
This water is co^sumptyue and dissolutyue, and is good unto the scab, or
brekynge out, or lepre, and serpigine impectigne, and unto the dredefull and
unto the amoureus.

The water of Saxifrage.
This water breketh the stone in the raynes and in the bledder, and provoke
the urine, and is good unto pensyfenes and thought.

The water of myntes.
This water is much consumptyue dyssolutyue, and comfortatyue, and avails
much against the opylacions of the liver, and of the mylt, and of the
conduytes of the vryne, and unto the stynkynge of the mouth, and of the gommes
and prycketh the appetite to eat and to vomet and is good unto the faylyng of
the heart, it mondyfyeth the mother of the womb, and it dissolueth the milk
quayled in the breasts, it avails against the veno^ and sleyth the worms,
and is good against the coughe, the muries cold and tenme cold, it provoke
the vryne, and prohybyteth the cold of ^^entes drouke^ one hour before with
good tryacle.

The water of Radesshe.
This water is subtylatyue, appertyue, abstersyue mondyfycatyue, and
prouocatyue of the vryne, and avails against the storgyne, ympectygiue, and
takes away the humor from the members, modyfyed of the breast, and makes
clear the voice and subtyleth ye gross humors the which ben in the breast,
and in the longes, it is good unto the bityng of the Scorpion, and sleeth the
Scorpions and avails unto Fever quartayne and unto the Dropsye, and unto the
Iaundes, it breketh the stone, and avails against the bytynge venomous,
resolves the humors, the which ben in the corner of the eye, and takes
away the pympylles from the bysage, it resolves les quantytie and the
syuellynge of the mylt, it provoke the flowers unto women, and is good unto
them the which has eaten fruytes venymous.

The water of purslane.
This water is vyscose and contractyue of the flux of the belly, it takes away
the styngynge of the teeth and avails unto the stynkinge blood, and apostumes
hoote, and unto the burning of the stomach, and upon the calefacion of the
liver, and of the alteracion of the guts, and unto the flux of the mother, it
weketh ye sight and lettynges above the head, and prohibyteth the frenasye.

The water of howsleke.
This water is much cold and repercustiue of apostumes hot of abulatyues, it
swageth the pain of the podagre hot, and avails much unto the brennynge of
fire with oil rosat, and unto the pain of the heed and sleyeth the nyttes,
and is much good unto the flux of the womb and unto the vlceracions of the
guts, and prohybyteth the frenasye.

The water of Bursa pastoris.
This water is stytyque, and repercusyue, and avails much unto apostumes
hot at the beginning, it consolydeth, and incarneth the wou^des fresshe and
bledynge, and it avails much unto the pain of the ears, and dries the
fylth of the ears, and avails much unto the vlceracions of the guts, and
unto the flux of the neze, and to the flux of blood of what place soever it
springs out it prohybyteth the frenasye.

The water of the flourdelyce and of the leaves.
This water is much aftersi^e, and much mondificatyue, and avails much unto
serpygne, and ympertygyne melled with honye, and it makes the vysage fair and
clear, and hands in washyng them, it makes also the vysage much roddy, and
takes away the spots from the vysage, it provoke ye fleures unto the
women, and takes away the hardness of the mother from the bellye, it incarneth
the wou^des that been rotte and avails unto the brennynge of the fire, and
bytynge venymous.

The water of Lylyes.
This water ereuoketh the sleep and consumes the shakynges, and dybylytie of
the members, and wastes, and takes away the polucions noctournes, and is good
for the coughe, and weepynge eyes, it makes soft the womb and avails unto
the Flux of the womb ancyan, and unto the vlceracions of the guts, it
resolves the Apostumes of the mylte and avails much unto nosu^^ whyghte.

This is all one.
This water is dyssolutyue, and subtylatyue, and avails much unto ye scalle
and scab of the head, and keeps the heeres from falling, it makes clean the
breast, and the lyghtes, from great humors, and breketh the stone, and is good
for the Iaundyse, and it dyssolueth the estrophules and makes clean the
stomach, and guts of the superfluytes, and colerykes.

The water for the Gout.
Take the flesh of a fox, and cut it right small, and dystylle it in a
stylletory, and rub ye the sick body there with, for it is a sovereign remedy.

The water of the grain of Geneper.
This water is much subtylatyue apertiue, and mondyfycatiue, and avails
much to make clean the ulcers sordibus, it provoke the vryne, and the
fleures unto women, and makes the enfante deed within the womb of the mother,
to avoid out and chaseth away the venom, and the beast venomous, bayneth
them in the decockcion of ye seed of brom it avails much unto the pain of
the mother of the womb and atricion of worms.

For to please, and for to make these women to seem more fayrer, and younger
unto their husbands, and for to keep them from going in to fornycacion, and
aduoutre, it is suffered to use of some waters the which makes the vysage fair
and white, and of these waters, I shall put here the which ben called symples
and of other composed and made.
These simple waters ben of the ^^oures of be^es, waters of the seed of melos,
waters of the flower of elder, water of the flower delyce, water of the rote of
Yris, and of Dragontyne and of the rote of sygilon salmonis.

Thus ends these waters.
The Table of this present Book.
The Prologue. primo. In nomme dei. Amen. ii. The water of the flowers of
Roosemarye. iii. The water of red rooses. iiii. The water of Betayne. v. The
water of Plantayne. vi. The water of lettis and endive. vii. The water of
Fumetory. viii. The water of Balm. ix. The water of Elder. x. The water of
elder and buglose. xi. The water of Garlyke. xii. The water of red soddes
called archangell mountain. xiii. The water of hearts tongue cycore Endyue all
together by egall porcions with the rote of percylle. xiiii. The water of Fenell.
xv. The wa. of cuffrurie mountain. xvi. The water of Ysop dry. xvii. The
water of Horuid. xviii. The water of Sauge. xix. The water of the rotes and
leaves of Bresyll and offyrre. xx. The water strong is in latin inchium. xxi.
The water of Quyns Apples and of red Rooses. xxij. The water of Malous. xxiii.
The water of scabyoule. xxiiii. The water of Saxifrage. xxv. The water of
Myntes. xxvi. The water of Radesshe. xxvii. The water of purslane. xxviii. The
water of howselyke. xxix. The water of bursa pastores. xxx. The water of ye
flourdelyce. xxxi. The water of Lylyes. xxxii. The water for the gout. xxxiii.
The water of the grain of Geneper. xxxiiii.
Thus ends the xxxiiii. waters Artificials.
Imprinted by me Robert ^^^^r


