A WOMAN'S Worth, defended against all the men in the world.

Proouing them to be more perfect, excellent and absolute in all virtuous
actions, then any man of what quality soever.

Written by one that has heard much, seen much, but knows a great deal more.

Patere aut abstine.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near the Exchange. 1599.

To the Right Honorable Lady, Elizabeth, Countess of South-hampton.
Truly honored Lady, and by me (for many your great favors) to be ever
(more) then honored: As some testimony of my dutiful remembrance, to answer
by humble thankfulness, what all other means utterly dis-able me of, some
part of such your especial open handed graces received; I offer you a
translated Apology of women's fair virtues, written in French by a Lord of
great reckoning, given by him to a very honorable Duchess: since, translated
by a fellow and friend of mine now absent, who gave me trust to see it should
not wander in the world unregarded, or deprived of that beatitude which makes
books respected, whereto animated beside by diverse my good friends: I have
(noble Lady) the rather thus presumed. If either then for the subject, my
self, or my friends sake, it may seem any way pleasing to you: the French
Lord never thought his labor half so graced, as I will continually confess
our fortunes honored.

Your Honors ever obliged. ANTHONY GIBSON.

To the Right Honorable the Countess of South-hampton.
THe love (most honored Lady) that I owe
To your high virtues, cannot be confined
In words or phrases: nor can paper show
The obiect-lesse endeavors of my mind.
How then shall any (though the purest spirit,
That sucks the seau'n-fold flower of art) express
The genuine glories of your Angell-merit,
Which shine the more, in that you make them less?
Now could I wish, I had a plenteous brain*
That thence (as from Inventions clearest flood)
Those forms might flow, composd in a rich vain:
That crown your noblesse, and enrich your blood.
The^ would my zeal break forth like mornings fire
That now lies spent in sparks of my defier.
To the worthy Ladies, and virtuous Maids of Honor, to her royal Majesty:
Mistress Anne Russell, Mistress Margaret Ratcliffe, Mistress Mary Fitten and
the rest, etc.
Virtuous Ladies, and Right Honorable Maids, attending on the only virtuous
Lady and Maid in the world: the duteous affection I bear ye, and the
invaluable respected graces received from you severally, is the only advocate
must plead for my present boldness; what he can say for me, is but return of
humble thankfulness; what he expectes from you, is but excuse from
presumption and favorable acceptaunce: both which meeting in no misinterpreted
co^struction, you shall remain for ever honored, and I in my suit right fully
satisfied.

A friend and fellow servant with me to her Majesty having left in trust with
me this little treatise, being a Paradoxe Apologicall of women's virtues, written
in French by an honorable person, and Dedicated by him to a worthy Duchess:
knowing my friends intent to suit with mine, that on you (rather then any
other) the same should be bestowed, as only true Ideas of virtue, and glories
of your sex: In his absence, (though yet in his hearts meaning I know) I offer
both his good will and mine thus jointly together.

If you give it but good looks, it is all I desire, but if it may gain your
very least good word, his labor and my love are most highly answered. In which
hope (as to hope otherwise from so true spirits, were well worthy reproof:) I
humbly commit this translation to your favorable perusing, and my very
uttermost travails to beat your commanding.

Yours ever most devoted. ANTHONY GIBSON.

To the Honorable Mistress Anne Russell.
LAdy to whom my true devoted love,
Has been engadgd, in more then wit can pay,
Which to discharge, the more I still have strove,
The more in deep arrearedge every day.
So much from me, unto your self is due,
That all my thoughts, unto the debt must run,
Yet is there more remaining unto you,
And as these crosd, so others are begun.
Dearest of dearest: take in thankful part,
This sacrifice, which may my will approve:
Upon the Altar of a faithful heart,
Consumed in the flames of zeal and love.
True honorable Virgin, ever live,
In all that art, that time, that fame can give.
To the Honorable Mistress Margaret Ratcliffe.
TO you (dear Nymph) whose wit, and form, enflames
A world of spirits, with wonder of your graces,
That (in their strength) pursew no higher ames,
Then how to give your bounties sovereign places.
I here am bold, to make extent of will,
Though not of power. Pardon my first essay:
I go by night, now to the Muses hill:
But I may live, to drink there, at Midday.
O then: my soul shall flow through my clear veins,
And (taking light from your bright virtues sphere)
Pay richer duties, in farre-sweeter strains,
Tuned to your worth, and set to every ear.
Had I a Spencers spirit, a Daniels powers:
Th'extracted quintessence were only yours.
To the Honorable Mistress Fitten.
THis testimony of my true hearts zeal,
Fair, and (for ever honored) virtuous maid:
To your kind favor humbly does appeal,
That in construction nothing be mis-saide.
Those fiery spirits of high temperd wit,
That drink the dew of heaven continually:
They could have graced you with terms more fit,
Then can my lowly, poor, weak ingenie.
Let not my love (yet) slightly pass respect,
Devoted only to your excellence:
Wink worthy Virgin at my lines defect,
Let will extenuate what ere offense.
It is no bounty that is given from store,
Who gives his heart, what gift can he give more?
FINIS.
To all the Honorable Ladies, and Gentlewomen of England.
LAdies (and most perfect Ideas of all virtues,) I have so many times admired
your rare perfections, brought from the Theater of the very best assemblies
through Europe: that having combated with mine own natural affections, which
till then had no matter of marvel offered them; of necessity now must needs
(by right confess) that you are the only wonders of time and eternity. And
that I am not misse-led herein, Mercurius Trismegistus stands forth in your
cause, and thus defends ye against all your enemies.

A soul enclosed within a body, purely celestial, where the notes of
whatsoever disanulling, are not to be discerned, because their period can alter
no part of a true nature: For no way are her ordinary functions weakened, but
only in strengthening the virtue of the mind. So that she is no way to be
dissolved, but may well change into a form more conuenable, and agreeing with
the quality of her Demon.

Ladies, you are such as Sappho describes ye to be.

With child of Honor, rich in all good grace,
Splendant in virtue, which them both surpass,
A piercing eye, and carried with such state:
As the worlds Torch may light it self thereat.
Even as Apollo from Auroraes looks,
Gildes all this goodly round, and darkest nookes.
And to give you certain assurance, that such is mine opinion, I have roughly
hewn out this discourse, extracted from the virtues of your sex: to the end,
that by the histories of many women, every man whatsoever may perfectly
perceive, that the gifts and graces of women are infinite, and where they can
allege any doubt in the religion of your deserts: being herein resolved,
you may remain so much the more admired.

I might call it a Paradoxe, because some men (vainly transported) no doubt
will term it so: Notwithstanding, I hold it for a truth, and will defend it
against all sorts of men, let them be of what metal soever; being fully
persuaded, that if I had no other argument for proof of my sayings, then the
very mere subject of your choice perfections: I should finish my desseignes
with no mean honor, and make them perfect beyond all other human
enterprises.

Receive then this gadge of mine humble duty, or rather of the virtue of your
own deseruings: and I shall bind all my hability to a further employment,
either of enlarging this, or any thing else wherein I may do you service.

Yours in all duty, Anonimus.

To the Reader.
Friend, or foe, I care not whether, I offer thee this Treatise of truth, which
may stand more in doubt of envy, then censure: Notwithstanding I will take all
in good part from thee, even till thou have run thy malice out of breath: yet
this shall be the honor of my pains, that thou can not rank me among
common spirits, for I have borrowed nothing of any, who have writ on this
subject; well deserving to be sung in a higher key, then my disabled voice
either has, or can reach unto.

Yet this is a comfort to me, that though as scant fledge it flies thus from
me, some royal Bird may protect her from greedy Cormorantes, and defend it
under the shaddowe of her wings: for I will always buy the abatement of mine
own honor, with the rich price of women's true glory.

From what Authors this little labor received his original.
Aelianus. Aeschilus. Aeschines. Anaxagoras. Anacreon. Alcmeon. Anacharsis.
Antimachus. Appolonius. Aristotle. Aristophanes. S. Augustine. Archimedes.
Auerroes. Auicen. Biblia sacra. S. Bernard. Bandello. Boccace. Du Bartas.
Boisteau de Launay. Cornelius Tacitus. Clearchus. Cicero. Ctesias. Diogenes
Laertius. Demosthenes. Dionisius Milesianus. Ennius. Empedocles. Frederick
d'Aste. Galen. Guicchiardine. Herodotus. Hesiodus. Hippocrates. Homer.
Hortensius. Isocrates. Ithiobaldus of Corfue. Licras. Linus. Lycosthenes.
Manethon. Martial. Mercurius Trismegistus. Menander. Memnon Ephesians. Musaeus.
Nicholas de Nicholai. Origin. Orpheus. Ovid. Papinian. Plato. Pindarus.
Plutarch. Pithagoras. Pliny. Possidonius. Propertius. Rasis Arab. Socrates.
Stesichorus. Sapho. Salust. Sanazar Neap. Timaeus Scicillianus. Thales.
Torquato Tasso. Theophrastus. Vigo. Virgillius. Xenophon.
FINIS.
A Woman's worth, defended against all the men in the world.
AS (according to Anaxagoras) the body of Nature is heaven, and the influence
thereof her soul: even so, the body of a woman is the heaven of humane
perfections, and her soul the treasury of celestial and divine virtues. That
it must needs be so, the ancient Philosophers, as well moral as natural,
the speculatiue Astronomers, Poets, the interpreters of holy things, and
masters of the best approved manners, chimerique Painters, and namely ^he
professors of divinity, do consent and maint^ine: that the fairest sciences,
the ra^est ^^^tues, the inimitable graces, ought to be represented in the form
and figure of women, as it may be seen in Hesiodus, who speaks thus.

Fair Virtues face, with beauty honored,
Looks like a field in April diapred.
Or as the difference of enammeld flowers,
Which natures daughter forth in ple^tie powers.
In like manner, the formal understanding of things that are, or may be, is
signified to us by the feminine virtue, whereof Rasis Arabe thus discourses.

As Eleborus, of one and the self same substance brings forth diverse effects
for the heads diseases: Even so a woman qualifies diverse manner of tempests,
which wandering through a man's brains, do weaken his stronger powers, until
this lawful and natural medicine be thereto applied. Timaeus the Scicillian
reports, that the Lions of Lybia loose their force and fury, if they have
never so little sight of a maidens eyes. And Bandello witnesses to us in his
histories, that a Lord of Scandia, being by nature dull and blockish; at the
very first sight and regard of a Lady of Vicensa, became discreetlie wise and
well governed. Reason it self (according to Homer) is figured to us by the
person of Minerua, who flew out armed from the brains of Jupiter: and Bacchus,
that is the angry faculty, being painted in the form of a man, had no other
birthe then from his thigh. Whereupon, Aristophanes the comicall Poet of the
Athenians, thought good to set down this description.

Virtue in man does not abide,
She Is washed away with furies tide.
But in fair women kind she rests,
For mildenes harbors in their breasts.
And did not women make men wise:
How many harms would them surprise?
Aristotle, that profound Occean of Philosophy, and second author of Nature,
acknowledged so much of women's merits: that he sacrificed (as it had bin to the
gods) a million of times to his beautiful Hermia, according to the report of
Origin, and this which the Siracusane Poet says: No greater love did
Aristotle bear
To Thebane Hermia his souls soueraignesse:
But far beyond that love (if more there were)
Hold I to Tyna my fair Sheepheardesse.


Divine Plato, of whom Saint Augustine that Eagle of the Doctors, delivers a
most singular testimony: so highlye commended the virtues of Archanessa, as he
not only served her like a slave, but composed diverse himnes in praise of her,
comparing her qualities to be celestial and supernatural, as Diogenes
Laertius truly records. What shall I say of Socrates, the ornament of men,
the ground of Oracles, glory of the Greeks, splendoure of the Athenians, and
flood of divine pluralities? did he not desire to make all posterities know,
that man is somewhat less then a woman? yea, and that in sound earnest, when to
the great scandale of believing them of his own kind, in contempt of the
critique Philosophers, overthrow of the presumptuous, debasing the Athenians,
and contrary to the opinion of all the Greeks: he preferred one only Aspasia
(as Clearchus recites) before a million of men, for her knowledge in all kind
of learning, and deep skill, not only in those things that best might serve,
but enriching beside all human society.

The marvel of Cos, Hippocrates has taught us, that the most perfect bodies
are those, which have less heat then moisture. Whereupon, the great son of
kings, Prince of Arabia, three times together reproved Galen, who held, that
heat is cheifest in the building of all things, as maintaining, that moisture
is only fomented and seasoned by the heat. Divine Homer likewise instructs
us, that the estate of all things is drawn from the Occean, and that it is the
cheifest of the elements: wherein the Citizen of Millet Thales does second
him, and likewise Pindarus in this Ode.

The Sea above all elements,
Has the cheifest ornaments.
Even as gold does luster bright,
Like to a sacred flame in sight,
And shines more fair then all mettalls,
Dispersed in the mineralles.
Now as women are much more moist then men, so in like manner may we discern
in them, that frenzies and furiousnes is not so familiar with them as men: in
regard they will never run mad for love, or any other worldly desire.
Whereas men from time to time, make themselves as in a public Theater, the
subject of very tragical follies, such as the like can scant be imagined, yet
customablie used in assembly of their friends, agreeing with the oppinion of
the Poet Antimachus.

The Cadmeane city brought forth cruelty,
Those German twins pale Death and Envy*
Which more inhumaine then an angry Bear,
Depriving life, leaves yet a world of fear.
I will begin by state affairs to approve, alleging thereto sufficient
witnesses, that the virtue feminine has bin of greater efficacy then men, not
only in this subject but any other whatsoever, especially the matter here
alleged: for it consists much more of debating cases, and the faculty
imaginatiue, which indeed are the happiest functions of the soul, then any
other desseignes that we can deal withal. And so does Xenophon testify,
that the party which is apt for the managing of public occasions, whereon
many welfares consist, even infinite as it were: is endued with some particular
gift of nature, or blessed from the heavens beyond many other. All the great
Monarchies were instituted by the council of women. Sbithea Sister to Nimrod,
enstructed him in the course of government, according as Manethon reports.
Presigithes a Sheepheardesse did the like to Cyrus. Dydo first founded the
common wealth of Carthage. Semiramis reserved the Empire to her Son, albeit
he was thereof incapable: and Fauna brought together the people of Italy
dispersed here and there, before she went to Cassino in Cassina, for agreeing
of the one with the other; as it is recorded in certain fragments of the Poet
Ennius.

Fauna the Goddess Vestaes woman priest,
First taught the Latins civil government:
And when in fields they wandered where they list,
She brought them into Cities regiment.
Tomyris Queen of the Scithians; appointing to them the laws of Anacharsis
the Philosopher: assured them to be more holy and better then those of the
Athenians. She restored her Empire, being half bruised by the Soldiers of
Ariartsanes the Captain, and the death of her own Son, who suffered himself
to be fondly surprised, and afterward cruelly slain: notwithstanding, she
valiantly triumphed over Cyrus, the universal Monarche of the East.

Penthesilea knowing that it would be hard to squander the Greeks in
Hellespont, by reason of their multitude, being well near numberless:
attended them on the frontiers of Misia, and there overthrew Hippoclus,
conducter of the back bands of all the Grecian people. Hippolita dissipated
the troops of great Theseus, dismounting himself in the fight, yet afterward
(on mere grace) made him her husband.

The Siracusan women were cause of their Cities preservation, being before
abandoned by their husbands, whence arose the proverb of Venus armed, as
Menander describes in one of his Comedies.

Let none himself so much abuse,
As offer to take Syracuse*
For women have it in respect,
And Venus does them safe protect.
Good were it then the God of war,
Should lend to her his Cemiter.
Cyrus vanquished by the common flight of his Soldiers, and his own proper
fault: thus delivered the victory to his enemy by this only exhortation,
that they but came to fight with women. The Romans surprised by the Sabines,
and other people near neighbors to them: were warrented from death and utter
destruction of their City, by the means of women, who knew how to quench
the anger justly enflamed in their fathers against their husbands. Parysatis,
daughter to Cyrus, and mother to Artaxerxes, was so well enstructed in the
state affairs: as she made Asia tryumphe of the Greeks liberty, compassing
by her government the loss of all the allied common weal, and stealing by
her gifts, the most liberal courages of her Empires enemies, which was (in
show) ruled by her son, but in very deed maintained by her self. The mother
of Coriolanus saved the city of Rome, even from the cradle to her glorious
height, using so many great maxims of and for the state, to her son being
then the cities enemy: as all the Xenophons, Tacitusses, Machiauels, yea,
whatsoever Councellers to the Princes of Europe, may justly learn example by
those noble resolutions, and admit them amongst the very cheifest desseignes.
Cloelia gave freedom to six score young men of her City, by admiration of
her fair enterprise courageously effected: which made Ennius the Poet thus
write thereof. What virtue male may with thy worth contend,
Can men h^pe any way to do as much
By their best means? Alas, it is to no end,
In like affairs their haps were never such.
And elsewhere.

Young Romans feeble are your minds,
Your glory of the least esteem:
When Cloelia passage for you finds,
And must with honor you redeem.
Rhea knew so well to temper the prodigious cruelty and tyranny of Saturn,
who not only would disinherit her sons, but devour them, to assuage his
more then brutish hunger: that as Orpheus rehearses in his Songs.

Jupiter from blame had not been free,
If Rheas prudence had not been of might:
To sheeld him from the spightfull iealosie.
Her tyrant husband used both day and night.
Vesta delivered the Hetrurians from the besiegings of Alsichoris. Medea made
victorious Jason conquer the golden Isles, and defended the Argonautes from
strange ambuscadoes, which were preparde for them in the Isle of Colchos.
A^alanta knew how to enfranchise the Curetes, from their ordinary tributes to
the Princes of Achaia, even till the day she triumphed over them in the race.

Debora, Judith and Hester, wrought meruailes for conservation of their people,
even to the enterprise of so high actions, as the issue of them could not be
apprehended, their beginnings were so dreadful, their effects beyond
comparison, and their virtue bounded within no equality, to the confusion of
men, amazement of the Gods, and perpetual memory of the feminine sex.

Thus much for state affairs, although this is not the hundredth part of that I
could produce to maintain this subject, which might be handled by Angels, and
sufficient for my senses to stand and wonder at. Yet have I here made no
mention of the Amazones in general, nor of the Cipriotes, nor of the
Sydonians, and many other sundry countries, who both in common and particular,
have gotten so much glory by armies of women: as me^ durst hope no otherwise,
but in the mere fables they have written of themselves, boasting of victories
gotten over their equalles, and one while against Lions, then Bears, and some
Tigers, with other of like strength and violence, wherein women have done as
much, or rather more then they.

They were wont to triumph over Ladies reputation, making vauntes of some
things wherein their merits were unequal, finding their courage to be either
to feeble, or not answerable: whereupon divine Sapho complained in this sort.

Diverse there be have heard men say*
That over women they bear sway,
Making their triumph of our hearts,
As vanquished by their deserts.
All which is nothing but a dream,
And folly out of course extreme.
I have known diverse, who but admitted to the sight of a Ladies sleeue,
presently have made their vauntes of her maidenheades victory, when (God knows)
they durst not entreat so much favor as a kiss.

Constancy follows so near to the virtuous exercise of stare affairs, and
occasions of war, as being the organe of fairest desseignes, and only
perfection of most commendable strength: that as I might here (on men's behalf)
present to your sight the same severally in Sceuola, Regulus, Marius, Cato
Vtican, Scipio Affricanus, and Paulus Aemillius among the Romans; so like
wise for the Grecianes, Antigonas, surnamed the wise Anaxagoras, Socrates,
Xantippa, Anaxarcus, Aristides, and Phocion: like wise out of holy Scripture,
Eliazer, Tobias, the Machabees, all which are but as vassailes and mean
servants, in respect of the just and lawful constancy of women: who in this as
all things else worthy to be commended, have so far out-gone the courage of
men, as the Suns glorious bryghtnesse excels all the candles of the night:
I call them just, because I shall never be persuaded, but that such as have
been enforced to the abandoning of overmuch sadness, and thence have made
choice of voluntary deaths, more for obedience to reason then despair: well
deserved to be called constant or magnanimous, considering that no defect of
courage, or fear of great punishment any jot dismayed them, but rather (to
speak more properly) gladly subjected them to this funeral resolution.

Soclaris, daughter to Cibaris Governor of Athens, first Prince of Morea,
sometimes called Peloponnesus, after the conquest of Combly, was delivered into
the hands of Selim, to use at his pleasure, according to the barbarous custom
of his predecessors, who were more unjust in their victories, then the
vanquished miserable in their overthrow: and having her at his disposing, he
commanded the Bathe to be prepared, which is the critique signal of the
Eastern luxuries. The young Princess, who to the Catastrophe of this Greekish
tragedy, would give beginning to a new History, drawn rather from the
despoyle of her own life, then delight to loose her inviolable chastity;
spoke in this manner to the Prince of the East.

MY Lord, until this very instant I was persuaded, that the wrath of God,
justly dispersed among our family, would serve it self with matters familiar,
and ordinary to afflict us withal, as being doubtless guilty of some far
greater punishment, then ever we felt under your victorious hand: and being
carried away with these sweet oppinions, I drew my comfort from mine own
proper ill, as only hoping of remedy in your grace and favor. But at this
present, your Majesty being rapte with what fury I know not, wherein royal
virtue is not to be discerned: I cannot believe, that heaven has limited
your thoughts to such an abominable course, or rather a most prodigious
violence, the beginning whereof I behold, by the end of my life, trained
through mine own default, along the torrent of solasciuious an enterprise.
Then showing him a little needle: See here (quoth she) what arms are
prepared as guardians of my virginity, behold the innocent organe of such
vengeance, as I mean to take on my offending eyes, that wounded you so against
the will of my soul, which from my mouth pronounces sentence of death against
them, and you shall see execution immediately performed.

The great Monarch, touched to the quick with extraordinary compassion, made a
sudden change of his love to a perpetual admiration, and his over fond
command took ending with a most maiesticall respect, returning these or the
like words to the Princess.

MAdame, if Kings could as well triumph over loves passions, as they can cherish
mercy* and give pardon to the faulty, even against the first object of their
own unruly motions, which figure in their courage a tempestious sea of
vengeance, yet notwithstanding, becomes calm by a natural inclynation of
embracing mildness: rather then pursuing the ouer-swift current of choler:)
I should have somewhat to complain of to you, for grafting the trophies of my
desires, on the firm rock of your chaste desseignes, which teach me the
science of good life in so holy a School.

It follows therefore, that I must confess the destinies to be unjust, for
showing that freedom to the body, wherewith the soul no way can be forced.

Accuse love then, who armed himself for you here in my house, where your
beauties prisoners are become Princesses of my heart, entyrely enthralled: And
never conceive, that I am only he, that desires the fruit of his victory, on
a subject of such merit, the enjoying whereof is more to be coueted, then
adverse Fortune is to be credited.

Considering, that in prosecution of my good haps, until this present, I have
been always armed with reason, not enterprising any thing to disadvantage of
the vanquished, otherwise then the securitye of mine own estate did teach me.
The proofs whereof remain evident to be seen, in that I have not made your
countries mishaps greater, then the inconstancy of Fortune yielded unto: where
I have set down my rest, giving lymits to my just ambition, which else had
extended it self over the common liberty of Greece, if servitude were not
called an exchange of state* rather happening by the providence of heaven, who
would have but one sole Monarch in the universal world, for general
administration of his justice, rather then any insatiable desire in my self of
Soueraignety, which contains mine actions where they are only appropriate.

But if I have trespassed, in requesting that of you, which my Kingdoms laws
cannot deny me, neither may be termed as an offense, but only that your will
does so hold and esteem it: then custom is more to be blamed then I am, for
she inuites me to take possession, of that which freely is reckoned mine own.

Therefore Lady, that you may see I will not deserve a Tyrants name, especially
in the simple practice of victory, wherein vsuallye more rygour is expected,
then in the government of a peaceable estate: I will compel mine unlawful
passions, to yield unto your iuster desires, entreating you to rest thus
contented, that in repentance for offending you, I do wrong to the nature of
mine own power, disarming my heart of that prerogative, which the very meanest
men most covet in their special Fortunes, namely, to triumph in commanding
of their own.

Demand of me those self same things, which you could not hope for in your
former condition: and I will satisfy them with as much willingness, as there
is worth and desert in your Princelye constancye. Such end had the great
Turks love, if the name of great be worthy enough to dignifie his virtues,
which in greatness did exceed his Empire.

The history of Tenora, taken prisoner in the City of Modon, and enfranchised
for her constancy, best known to Bascha Ariaden, who gladly would have married
her: might here be avouched to the great scandale of men, and perpetual
honor of the female sex: but in regard of the l^ngth, let me refer ye to
I^^^obaldus of Corfue, a most sound and faithful expresser thereof.

The height of courage in three Spaniardes, who offered their chaste breasts to
their miserable father* constrained to grant them so unpleasing an execution,
for shielding them from the shameful servitude prepared for them: is of such
efficacy, as men (for preservation of their renown) had never the heart to
endure so extreme a remedy. For reading of which excellent discourse, I must
leave ye to Nicholas de Nicholai, his voyage of Constantinople, in the
historye of the seidge of Trypoly.

I have very much wherewith to enlarge my labor, as the maruaylous constancy
of Joan the Pucel, whose life the Englishmen had gladly saved, if she would
simply have said, that she was helped by charms, extraordinary means, and
supernatural power in execution of her perilous enterprises: but she
preferred her honor before life, yielding her conscience to tormenters, and her
tormenters to leasings, as loving rather to suffer a bodily hell, then making
hellish the freedom of her own courage, in a purpose not beseeming the
greatness of her deeds, nor the true oppinion justly conceived of her
behavior, the principal organs of her valor, which made France more famous
then ever it had been before, yea, more then at this day it has attainde
unto: For though she be now troubled with some four or five Spaniards in her
liver vain; yet she then drew a million of Englishmen out of her entrails.

I will not go seek out an Arbecha on Danubie, nor Gertrude on the Rheine,
nor Flotensa on Tanais, seeing the histories of the North have no other honor,
then only of the subject drawn from their constancies. Less cause shall I
have to produce Polixena, whose death made the life of the Grecians infamous,
and their victory insolent, even the utter overthrow of all their renown. The
constancy of Antigone, described by Antimachus and Euripides, is of such
merit, as all men together cannot boast of any thing to come near it: her
piety is of such commendation, as the most religious of our Aheistical age have
just cause to complain, that christianity as yet never conceived the like. The
constant patience of Grisilda, written by Frederick of Ast the Pied-montese, is
inevitable, and almost exceeding belief, in our weak souls so little inured
to sufferancy. That of Virginia, Portia and Sophonisba, the ornament of
Affricke and terror of Room, is so great, as she could endure more, then art
is able to describe. Oh cowardly men, what shall become of ye? or rather, what
are you among so many gallant women, that have abid the violent assaults of
death, even of death undeserved, and much less expected? you are no way firm,
but in looks: constant, but in words: dreadlesse, but in security: without
corruption, but in fear to be made known to others. Better is it for you go
learn to spin, the^ to prefer your selves before women: as your graund
Hercules came capable of that occupation, by the enstruction of his Mistress
Dianeira. Sampson was glad to reele hy his Dalila: Achilles sowed by his
Brisis: king Demetrius did the like by his Latmia. Hesiodus acknowledged this
imperfection in men of his time, saying.

You that are Natures infamy,
And to your sex do injury.
Showing your selves imperfect men,
By actions not beseeming men.
One sits, and by his Mistress sowes,
Another, like a Goddess goes.
Other, missled by jealousy,
Must wear his garments to his knee,
Yet all makes vaunts of Fortunes bliss,
When she most wretched to them is.
My paper is unworthy to bear my p^n, in ^escribing my immaginations, (...)
the high merit of holy Virgins, what contempt and disdain they made of the
most barbarous cruelties, that could be invented by the enemies of the
Christian faith, for defense whereof, they have bin delivered over to the
fearful rage of persecuters, who have been more weary of tormenting them,
then they (any jot dismaided) at the several sorts of violence inflicted on
their bodies; by nature soft and tender, and more worthy to be admired, then so
bloodyly murdered. Like matter could never men set down of themselves, albeit
themselves were Authors of the legends: for their martirologe contains so few
of them (making comparison with that of women) as the very wisest term theyrs
but a mere vanity, dispearsed among the verity of the Saints sufferings. The
Church it self is resembled to a woman without spot or blemish, such as
Solomon describes the Princess of Egypt, a figure of the Church. In the new
Testament ye may note the three Mary's, and the Chananean, who were so
constant in their holy resolutions, as the blessed spirit (being speaker of the
sacred history) has left them a spectacle to all posterities. The mother of
the seven Martires, whereof description is made in the Machabees, delivered
such witness of her truly tearmd celestial confidence, as that only act
might beautify the history of virtuous women, more then men can gleane glory,
from the constant resolution of Abraham, Moses or Job: all which deserve not
the title of constant, because a little detection did in some sort touch them.

As first to begin with Abraham for a leasing, who said that his wife was his
Sister, only for a little fear of death, much more suspected, then any way
prepared. Next for distrust, as when Moses said to the Lord: How may it be,
that I should present my self before Pharaoh, seeing J can hardly abstain
from stammering? Js it possible that I should deliver this message? Then for
murmuring, as Job, who stood expostulating with the eternal. Which mind never
came near the Virgin of Virgins, for she said: I am the servant of the Lord,
be it unto me according to his word. Abraham, Moises and Job, were but weak
in resolution, if one should compare them with that virtuous woman, mother to
these 7. Martires who suffered as many pains, as she saw diversity of torments
applied, to ruinate and overthrow the constancy of her Sons: yea, she did
sollace her self in such sort among the rigours of their martyrdom, with such
behavior and speeches in contempt of death, and assurance of better condition
in the life succeeding; as they all were even sorry they could dye but once. In
sooth I must needs say, that the very greatest matter among me^, neither is or
can be, but the remainder and overplus of this one woman's glory, who practiced
the same in her self, which she had taught to her Sons: for she dyed so
constantly, that Antiochus (the very abomination of Kings) became enraged (as
it were) to see a simple woman mock him and all his angry threatenings, no way
able to enforce her from the service of God, after which she sighed and longed,
even to the latest office of her vital powers. The daughter of Jeptah shall
give end to this discourse, because she concluded the rash vow of her Father
with such resolution, as the sacrafice of her own life: for which, I had rather
commit ye to read the history in the Judges, for better sight of her death,
then drown my paper in just tears, which fresh revived pity of so ancient a
marvel, would forcibly compel to fall from mine eyes, so to conceal by weeping,
what I could not set down in writing, Thus much remembered for women's
co^stancy, which makes me stand in doubt, whether I should erect the same on
any other collom or no, then their own greatness and deserts, as more needing
imitation, then any witness, and therefore more requiring to be followed, then
can be by words witnessed effectually: For me^ (maliciously jealous of women's
honor) have buried (as much as in them lay) the most commendable deeds of such,
to whom themselves were no otherwise then Apes, nay worse imitators, if worse
may be. He that (of Poets) has best written amongst the Grecia^s, is Homere,
yet not so much for his learning, as for ye subject, where he makes men and the
Gods co^bate together, those are his Jlliades, a work in sooth praise worthy
for his time, and not for any other consideration. Yet the Athenians made the^
be publikly burned, by reason of the impiety wherewith they are furnished, eue^
as it were a shop of Atheism, irreligio^, and imodesty, making the Gods to be
vanquished by me^, and establishing a contempt of royalty, duty and obeisance,
in the person of Achillis (a mere brothell hunter) who preferred a brutish
kind of affection, before the love of his Country, and his own peculiar hate
before the general welfare of his followers. He makes a dog of Agamemnon; a
kitching fellow of Patrocles; a mad man of Hector; a bawd of Jris; a drunkerd
of Vulcane; a Cony-catcher of Mercury; a Lacky of Appollo; a rauisher of
Neptune; a paltry companion of Mars; a witch of Minerua; a Woolfe of Venus; a
Megera of Juno, a dream of a man, and himself a contemner of the Gods, as
Licras speaks in this manner.

Curious Antiquity,
Made Homere a deity,
For his book, a mere fable,
Against the Gods abominable,
Where all men that were vicious,
Have praise before the virtuous.
Among Latin Poets, we may speak of Virgill: in the Hierarchy of
Philosophers, who but Aristotle? among Physicians, Hippocrates: amongst the
ancient divines, Mercurius Trismegistus: in our latter times, S. Augustine: of
Astronomers, Anaxagoras: of Mathematicians, Archimedes: of Ciuillians,
Papinian: all which had (even then living) two, nay three or four women in
their own Arts, to whom I will send them severally to school, for
apprehension of the chiefest principles in their sciences. Homere was taught by
Clorinda the Samian, in the City of Argos, and to her has bin attributed that
so famous work of the Illiads: and would ye but compare his Odisseaes
therewith, you should find such a large difference in one style, so much
rebated in the discourse of Ulysses: as you would be constrained to confess,
that either the first is none of his, or else he made neither the one nor
other. Fair Sapho help him at a need, for changing the arms of Glaucus and
Diomede, where it evidently appears that he dealt scarce honestly: as also in
his comparison of Ajax to an Ass, where he played the grinder too apparently.
She likewise corrected the works of Pindarus, as ye shall find it set down in
Plutarch. Carmenta was so learned in poesy, as she surpassed all the men of her
time, and had indeed such a general name, as not any to this day did ever
attain the like, no ordinary matter among our me^ Poets whosoever: And she
enstructed Pithagoras himself (true Prince of the very best Philosophy among
the Pagans.) Aristotle searching the causes, whence the ebbing and flowing of
the sea should proceed: had his resolution from Sostrata the Lesbian, by a
similitude taken from women's infirmity, as also from sweat: Nor did he drown
himself, (as some bawling curres would make us believe) in the Ocean sea,
wherinto he should headlong cast himself. Hippocrates learned the curing of
the Hemeroides, of Dorothea Abderita, as it was found written in Ephesus, in
the Temple of Diana, as also the other at Eleusina. Mercurius Trismegistus is
not only the first or chiefest, of the celebrate and most commendable Divines
of antiquity: but (I dare say) of al men, be it that we speak of Solomon, or
were it possible to find a wiser; his life did truly answer his doctrine, and
his doctrine is both the school of virtue, and study of true piety.

Yet notwithstanding, he is not to be extolled beyond the Sibilles, all which
prophesied of the true Messiah the Son of God so evidently, as there is not a
text in the old Testament, more express then their prophetical writings
were. Wherein, it pleased the holy Ghost to serve himself by them, for
confusion of the Pagane incredulity, and to give these devout women, as their
Judges, being faithful Trumpets of the coming of Christ Jesus, as also of his
death and resurrection.

I may equal Marcella the virgin with S. Augustine, as well for her excellent
writings, full of all erudition, as for her sanctity: she only being the cause
of the Hungars co^uerssion. Which good hap did never befall S. Augustine, who
long time held very heretical opinions and far from the universal belief:
where contrariwise this woman, never had her thoughts touched with any other
consideration, then the community of Christians in the primative Church, which
being snarled at in her time, and not as then known in the Northern parts:
she reduced from old ruins, and made it favored in the most barbarous spirits:
yea, they that were least capable of understanding in Europe. The roots of her
piety stretched themselves so far as Albania, even to the City of Ragusa, held
then in subjection by Cyarsin the Sclanonian: whom she not only made a
christian, but companion likewise of her devout e^terprises, and that in such
sort, as he came with a maine army so far as Danuby, and there adua^ced the
glorious standard of the euangelical truth. I could say, that Frenchmen had not
been Christians, but by the especial virtue of Clotilda, whom God ordained to
inspire the heart of Clouis, only made a Christian by her charitable
admonitions and faithful enstructions: who* by the loss of many battles,
could not else be so resolved. When shall it be said, that men have been so
soudious in like number of sovereign exercises and sanctity? that our God
(the just electer of purest souls, for communicating of his very dearest
perfections) has made more redound to his glory under the persons of women,
then ever it pleased him to do the like by men.

Anaxagoras was as ignorant in the reason of the Seas ebbing and flowing, as
Aristotle, until he had some enstruction therein, by Dyoris the wife of one
Barquerot of Pyrea: she showed him the original of the Isles engirting near
to the firm land, where the borrowing waves seemed to enlarge their way by
some violent means.

He learned the causes of conjunction of the great Planets, and their times, of
a woman Gardener of Smirna: by whom likewise he came acquainted with the
deepest secrets of the Meteores. Archimedes was mocked by Tyanea the
Syracusaine, for having rudely said, that all bodies were superficial: which
she showed to be false, by the Atomies and coullers in the air. Lachis of
Athens, daughter to Megesteus, ordained laws to the people of Attica, which
were so venerable and commodious: as the Romans received them naturally for
their own limitting them unto twelve tables, wherein there was contained more
justice and piety, then in all the volumes of Papinian.

I was too blaine (in this serious purpose) to forget Orators, such as were
Demosthenes, Aeschines, Jsocrates, and many other among the Grecians; Cicero,
Hortensius, Mark Anthony, etc. of the Romans.

Most true is it, that this my forgetfulness had been infinitely aduantageable
for men, who likewise herein are not exempt from their natural imperfection,
being over much weak in eloquence to women.

Demosthenes, of whom it is written, that if the Gods would speak Greek in
Orations, they could no way amend the sweet elocution of this Orator: yet
was he so confounded, hearing Lais discourse of men and women's particular
affections, as he cried out; that the Athenians did but stammer in their
Schools, and women at Corinthe spoke Oratours-like in their familiar
conferences.

To confirm this, Nature teaches us, that women are or may be most eloquent,
considering the organes and instruments of their voice is more mylde and
gentle, then those in men, whose pronunciation is very rough, sharp and
coorsely shapte, by reason of the abundance of choler, which (with their
words) drives forth so much vehemency of spirit, as they are well near
choakt therewith, or break their wind in uttering of their speech: yet we
must confess, that melancholy men are softer in words, then the swarthie and
sanguine, such several qualities remain in men.

The nature of a woman being inclined to sadness, discouers wisdom, makes her
prudent and apprehensiue: whereas men are commonly rash and unruly, because
diverse appetites transport them, to many frivolous and fleeting considerations,
which mighty fault you shall find few women, or none at all infected with.
In like manner, your high and sovereign Courts, are nothing else but filled
with men's continual tumults, whence ensue injurious offenses to their betters:
and that in matters of so mean reckoning, as women's modesty are ashamed
thereof, and their height of spirit holds it in most deep disdain.

Oh most happy sex, if it were lawful for me to speak, as Plato did, who
thanked the Gods for making him a man, and not a beast: so could I have wished,
that I had been created a woman, having attained to such knowledge of feminine
perfections, which is in every respect accomplished, beyond all that can be
termed perfect in human defects.

But return we to our Orators, leaving the Ass, ears and all, to them that
persuade themselves to be more eloquent then women: from whom the sweet
Nightingale first learned her notes, as Pyes, Crows and Ravens took theyrs
from men, into which shapes they have likewise been transformed, as the only
best form the Greek and Latin Poets could give them. You shall many times
read, that the Gods have made complaint to Jupiter, either of men, or their bad
conditions, and could never gain accomplishment of their desires; so gross
and absurd were they in their Orations, in regard of the Goddesses, who were
never sent back but fully satisfied, even in those things which human
justice made a conscience of granting; so much well-speaking women have
prevailed, above the unsavory barking of rude men. Which wise Pithagoras well
perceiving, forbad his Scholars to speak, to keep unseen the great defect
in nature, which is much more in men then women* Cornelia the mother of
Gracchus, was so eloquent, as the Romans erected her an Altar, and sacrificed
to her in the Temple of Pitho, which Pitho was the Goddess of eloquence, and
surpassed both Gods and men in that virtue. Mercury thus complained, as says
one of the Greeks.

Alas, what helps it me to be,
Ambassador to Jove
My father, and each day to see,
the roundnesse from above:
Of earth, and heaven all conuayd
within my wings fair flight:
When as my Godhead it missayed,
and robbed of his right?
Sweet speaking Pytho calls me
abortiue, basely borne:
Because my speech is harsh to hers,
and held as common scorn.
A Goddess I confess she is,
yet may she not like me,
Sit at that board of highest bliss,
where but twelve Gods may be.
All which the heavens do control,
and one of them am I:
Yet thus she sings from her soul,
my endless obloquie.
I shall never have done with this endless piece of work, which by infinite
pluralities do offer themselves, for justifying of the feminine eloquence, the
use whereof would God I might borrowe a while, as nothing more appropriate to
this theme, for what else can make it so perfect as it deserves? but only the
divine eloquence of those celestial creatures, and therefore had need to be
addorned with the excellency of their nature, which of it self is so
singular, as nothing can be more. Oh might I be inspired but with the least of
those perfections, which as the bodies shaddowe wayteth duly upon women, an
accident inseparable from the first substance of their heaven borne essence,
that stands exempt from bad thinking, much less blunt speaking: then should
this discourse appear in more excellent manner, witness that which the Greek
makes Calipso speak to Ulysses.

It Was not of me thou learndst such bitter breath
Against stout Ajax, who did seek to escape
Thy injury, by prompt and present death,
Or to revenge him on thy Cowards shape.
Nor, to the Ithacanes (unapt, to lead,)
Learndst thou of thy too faint hearted flight,
When as on heaps Sarpedon dung down dead
The Argines which their vessels had in sight,
My words with infamy did nere take truce,
Or my fair soul endure base fears abuse,
Nor had thou there that day beheld my land,
Which on all sides the Sea does counterband.
If Painting were not reckoned among mechanical Arts, I would approve women
to merit the very best trophee thereof: But as Nature evermore delights to
create those things which to her self are most pleasing and conformable, and
makes herself exercise in those matters, that do describe her cheifest
perfections; so may I say of women, who should too much wrong themselves by
taking pleasure in painting, considering it is a matter impossible for them, to
make such a rare representation, as their just beauties do require, becoming
much less by Painting, then the divine graces wherewith they are most richlye
accompanied, builded only upon inimitable liniaments of their behavior, the
very only models of the angels beauties, which were never fourmed but by the
absolute (...).

Great Apostles, in his ordinary painting of the Gods, very well knew how to
figure Jupiter, Mars, Mercury or Saturn: but when he went about to set down
the form of Venus; he found his skill to be of such woonderous weakness,
as he was compeld to leave his labor imperfect, testifying to all
posterities, that his art altered it self into ignorance, when he went
about to set down the singularity of women; among whom, Love it self sought
to be looked on, as in a public Theater, where her majesty received much
more luster, then in any other subject possible to be heard of or chosen. And
this was the reason that kind Leander thus spoke to Hero.

Hero my most dear Princess,
Love her self lives in thine eyes:
The Graces, and their youthfulness,
Abide in thee as in the skies.
Who is it can thy shape depainte,
Or who can justly (...)
Exce^^ (...)
^
^
^
^
^
Vulcane, as (...) ^eaded as he was, yet could he use these words to Venus.

The thunder well I wot to make,
And stout Aegides menacer:
The tempest that all earth does shake,
And through the air is wanderer.
Battles fair figures I can frame,
All formal combats I can plot:
The height of walls, and whence they came,
Nor have! Soldiers heat forg^t.
But should I offer to set down,
Thy beauties worth and sovereignty:
Then heaven it self on me would frown,
For passing my capacity.
As for Music, among women it is so familiare, as their very voice is
naturally a hermonie. Aelianus recounteth, that there was a woman Musician in
Room so excellent, as every one imagined she help her self by Magique: so
rarely could she ravish by the ear the minds of them that heard her; yea, it
grew to such effect, as many frantique people were thereby recovered from
their furye. Most certain is it, that Philliada the Tiriane invented the Lute,
whence rose the proverb: The Harp of Idumea, and the Lute of Phoenicia, and
the testimony hereof is drawn from others, by the Lord of Bartas. The
cunning Tirianes, who on bark of trees,
Did first set down the voices hermonies.
And a Grecian, thus. Inuentresse was Philliada,
Of Lutes in fair Phoenicia.
She first gave spirit and quick life
To dead dull wood, and made so rife
The several sweetes of Hermonie,
By her rare wit and industry.


When Alexander the great had conquered the kingdom of Darius, he found so
skillful a woman Musician in the city of Susa, as could accomodate the
varieties of her voice, to the several noates of all kind of birds, and that
with such exceeding dexterity, as they which saw her not, could make no
difference from the very thing it self. Great Caesar likewise was wont to
say, that men's tunes were learnde from the Birds chattering on trees: but the
voice of women came from the Gods themselves. The Sirens, so much described by
the Grecians, had songs so wonderful sweet and mellodious: as they could
out-eare the winds, and rob all mouths of their natural offices. The Greeks
returning from the wars of Troy, rested themselves a long while in the Isles
where they inhabited, little caring for return home into their own country,
by being rapt, or rather charmed with such an hermonious delight.

Perhaps some one will say unto me, that the Tritons are very excellent
Musicians, but he must withal confess, that they never had like powet and
virtue as the Sirens have, of whom they learned their very deepest knowledge,
albeit their Music stretche no further then the sound of a Trumpet. Which
Misenus the Trompetter to Aeneas well perceiving, provoked them to sound, to
try whether he could go beyond them or no: marie he lost his life therefore,
if this narration be of any certainty.

But whilst his Trompet he did sound,
with glory indiscreetes
Upon the marble of the waves,
the Tritons notes to meet.
They jealous to be so defied,
in their own pleasing art:
In anger threw him in the waves,
and so his life did part.
Istrina, the mother to Ariphita king of Scithia, was of such estimation in
Music: as the Poets have feygned, that the Seas would never be calm, but
when this Lady stood exchanging her sweet Zephires with the Northern guskes,
which blew very bitterly upon them continually. The Astronomers do hold, that
Venus is the patroness of Music, and that the influence of her Planet,
brings most special felicity to such as deal in that faculty.

Let us admit, that Thespion the priest of the Gymnosophists, Zoroastes of the
Persians, Hermes of the Aegiptians, Buda of the Chaldeans, Abbares of the
Scithians, and Zalmosis of the Thracians, excelled no less in Music, then in
piety and knowledge of sacred matters: yet notwithstanding, they were but
simple admirers of fair Clora, daughter to God Anubis, who could charm the
Crocadils of Nylus, as also them of hot Cyrena, by the benefit of her voice
reputed incomparable, which Lycosthenes reports such wonders of, as they seem
to move more astonishment then belief. Enough has been said concerning
sciences, and the glory which women have gotten thereby, ouer-far beyond men:
it remains for me now to speak of the moral virtues, which serve
perticulerly to the guiding of life and sanctity. In which course (me thinks)
Temperance deserves to have the first place, as being that, which according to
Hyppocrates and Galen, is the dearest friend and favorite of Nature. Euripides
was not ignorant thereof, when he said.

Temperaunce makes men to live,
And beside does freedom give,
From death, who soonest does them smite,
With a deceiving appetite,
The Greek and Latin histories are grown gross with millions of examples,
which witness the rare sobriety of women, and excess of men in all things
whatsoever, according as it is said in Exodus: Men rose up to play, after they
had long time wallowed in drunkenness. Homer has described this insolence
unto us, in the persons of Penelopes Courtiers, who continued blameless,
notwithstanding all their great immodestie. Hence is it, why Dioclea could not
endure the lascivious behavior and dishonestie of the Tyrant Phalaris, and
therefore threw her self down from a window, of which fall she dyed very
soon after, speaking these verses of Menander.

She that is in the grace of heavens happiness,
Lives not long in this worlds wretchedness.
And when an Epicure said to her, that there was no other life after this
should be finished, she answered him out of Pindarus in this sort.

When as the night locks up the day,
Yet heaven bideth at one stay.
Our souls are then in those fair fields,
That dainty coullerd Roses yields,
Couerd with Trees perfumde and pure,
And balmes that have the richest cure.
Upon whose branches fruits of gold,
Do hang most glorious to behold.
There, diverse walk deliciouslie,
Some ride on horses cheerfully.
Others to musiques hermonie,
Of instruments make mellodie.
There is a thousand thousand flowers,
Of different smell to sent the powers.
There a many Altars fume,
With Mirrhe and other sweet perfume.
And there is seen a shining fire,
In this rare place which souls desire.
She likewise rehearsed this sentence of Euripides.

That which by name we do entitle life,
Is in effect but a continual strife.
Indeed I well remember, that men have been famous for some rare qualities; as
inuenting the sundry idle plays at Dice and Cards, with other such like
exercises beside: Whereupon, Saint Bernard shaping his course to the young men
of his time, said. You follow idleness, to shun idleness: you apply your
selves to play, even until ye fall into Deaths danger. Job in like manner
cried out against men, that they consumed their days in vain delights, and so
in the end were dispossessed of their lives. Good old Sara, having care of a
holy conscience, discoursed in this sort with the Eternal: I have not
frequented to these players, neither had access to vain persons. Well then,
we may say, that men are artezanes and continual laborers, in things
altogether apperteining to folly, as in superfluous tempering of meats, or in
delicacies, the only companion of inconstancy, the goade to luxury and
birthe of death, and from whence he receives his only conception.

Oh vile gourmandise, the only pestilence to humane kind, by good reason
ought thou to live amongst men, who naturally are enemies to their own
selves. Thou art he which troublest the brain, impeachest reason, prophanest
chaste ears, misorderest the behavior of them thou possessest, thou beggerest
them that inherit thee, thou layest ambuscadoes for chaste thoughts, thou
loadest the spirits with lasciuiousnes; thou art he that did murder our
first father, and so brought an universal death upon all mankind, thou
souldest Esaues birthright; thou massacredst the people in the deferr: in
brief, thou art the only instrument, wherewith are erected all circumuentions
that work violence to our souls, and especially in the persons of men, the
ordinary ministers of thy pernicious practices.

We read enough concerning intemperance, of Heliogabalus, of Caracalla,
Caligula, Lucullus, Phaon, Xerxes, Aristippus, Mile of Crotona, and of
Philoxenus, who entreated Jupiter to grant him the neck of a Crane, to taste
with more leisure the sweetness of his delicate viands: likewise of Candaules
of Lidia, of Hermagoras, of Alexander, Darius, Mark Anthony, with many other
among the Pagans. We read beside in holy Scripture, of Holophernes the enemy
to God, a most dissolute man, of David in some sort, of Ammon his son, the
Beniamites, the old accusers of Susanna, the Gomorrhists and Sodomits: but of
intemperate women, you shall very hardly find any that can be spoken of.
Vesta was so sober in her life, that the Painters figured Fasting by her, as
Exercise by Diana, Majesty by Juno, and Prudence by Minerua. I will refer to
your own judgment, that (seeing these virtues could be no way better
signified, for in me^ they would have appeared most monstrous) if women's
natures must not needs be celestial, yea even in their ordinary and customarie
functions.

Search through all Germany, which is the empire of all drunkenness and
servitude of the sober: ye shall not find one woman, but she is not only
free from being taxed with that beastliness, but likewise if she have once
over drunk; it is sufficient for her ever after. Where contrariwise the men,
they hardly respect any other exercise, then tossing and emptying of the
pottes, which is more shameful to the insatiable, then the Wine they disgorge
can be to them healthful. But perhaps you will say unto me, it is not seemly
for a woman to drink much, and therefore that folly may be tolerated in men.
Let me return ye this answer, evil doing is no more permitted to men then
women, the rather in this respect; because men make vaunts of being their
superiors, and that women's primacie consists not in commanding* but in
obeying. Alas, this excellence is not in the degree, but in such behavior as
makes them worthy thereof: yet they will approve that good in themselves, which
they think bad and condemn in women, as if vice and virtue were limited by
their desseignes, and as though by their manner of life and demeanor, they were
no way subject either to one or other. Wherein they declare, how much they
dissent from nature, who never ordained to the subject where she appointed
moving, but what was apt and convenient for it, or else such rest as should not
be unprofitable, like a faithful Oeconomie of graces, and mother of all
Hierarchy. Nay more, these profane men would bind the feminine sex to such
laws as themselves are not able to observe, laws drawn from their own
iealosie, their suspicion, their weakness, their avarice, their depraved
conscience, their pride, thinking it good to prohibit others, such things as
themselves could never effect: wherein they have regard to their own
particular imperfection* and not the law of nature: who measures the
constrainte of her will; her will by the inclination; her inclination by that
which is most proper; and the most propper by that which is most common, and
most necessary for the conservation of her kind.

Let us now speak of Liberality, which is as worthy noting in her own
subject, as any other virtue in the world beside, so royal and seemly is
she in all fair minds whatsoever. More familiar is she with women, then
men, for they are naturally full of pity, mercy and diuinest charity. They
use continually to visit Hospitalles, Prisons, and other places of wants, to
give assistance to the miseries of men, who fill the air with their wretched
lamentations: yea, those places that commonly have been infected with their
bad savor, women have not spared to make their usual access unto. Mausolus
monument, builded by a Woman in remembrance of her husband, is a matter of such
especial estimation, as the very richest Sepultures of Kings do thence
derive their names, as from the fountain of all honor and excellence.

Sarteshkia wife to Arphaxed, gave instruction for building the proud and
incomparable walls of Elchatana, as you may at large read in Memnon of
Ephesus. Parisatis Queen of Persia, caused all the Monarchs of Asia to be
buried in pure gold, and instituted a sacrafice to Cyrus, the expense whereof
amounted yearly to a thousand Affricke tallentes, according to the report of
Dionisius Milesianus.

Olympias, mother to Alexander, employed seven hundred thousand crowns, in
erecting an Alter to Jupiter Hammon, upon the coast of Accium. Cleopatra
redeemed five thousand Romans, for two millions of gold and thirty crowns,
which she (...) in a perpetual April of their time.

Diana gave chastity, diligence, and honest care of household affairs. So that
but for the liberality of these before named: the Gods had had no Altars, and
men had bin deprived of all understanding.

Juno placed Hercules among the Gods number: Pallas Ulysses, Venus Aeneas,
Thetis Achilles, Diana Hippolitus, Vesta Romulus, Isis Pompilius, Calipso was
so liberal, notwithstanding the ingratitude of Ulysses: as she would have made
him immortal, which he refused, through a base desire, of seeing once again
the chymneys smoke of Ithaca or Cassina, which caused Sapho to cry out in this
sort.

Men through foolish malice led,
Esteem base vice in virtues steed,
And do conceit iniquity,
In their rash brains a Diety.
To women they obliged be,
For shielding them from infamy,
Because they make them gracious,
And change their Fortunes ominous,
By perfection of their kind,
To best good haps that they can find.
Plato in like manner affirms, that women's society has made civil the most
outrageous condition of men's lives: yea, such as naturally have been barbarous,
and enemies to their own kind: as Caine was to his brother Abell: one of
Noah's sons to his own Father: Absalom to David, and many others beside in
the Holy Scripture.

Amongst the profane they have so exceeded, as there is not now so many women
living, as we can number men reclaymed, only by the discreet counsel of
their company, and brought into the perfect path of wisdom: so especially it
pleased Heaven to bestow these graces, upon this sex so divine and bountiful
in all virtues: as my uttermost praises comes far too short of their
exceeding merits.

Empedocles, that great searcher and friend to nature, was wont to say: that
woman was her mere renewed Image, and her very least consideration in the
subject of things natural, extended it self much more near to truth, then
the deepest search or curiosity of man could reach unto. The Aegiptian
Hieroglificques figured the Heavens by a woman, having her eyes covered, and
laden with many mountains on her back: meaning hereby, that those divine
creatures saw all things, even they which were to come, as them present, and
withal, supported the misdeedes of men with a forgetful remission; signified
by the burdens so far from their regard, as al men's defects whatsoever, were
cast behind their backs.

It now remains for me to show, how Historyes do abound with examples of
men prodigiously rich, as David himself witnesses in this verse: Men are so
insatiable, as they think themselves poor, even when they possess riches in
greatest abundance.

Holy writ lets us see in this apparel, the wealthy Naball: whose extreme
avarice was approved by the second King of Israel, even with the perrill of
his life almost.

It shows us Achab likewise, taking away the goods of Naboth: And in the new
Testament, we may look upon Simon Magus.

In profane stories, we behold Midas, Croesus, Septimilius, Dionisius,
Chrisophilus, Tantalus, Lycaon.

Jugurth cried out (as Salust records) that the Empire of Rome being to be
sold: Fortune too much injured him; in letting him know it, and not admytting
him the means to compass the wonderful riches which belonged to the Primates
of the Romain common wealth.

Virgill, and (before him) Appolonius and Ctesias, depainted to us Polimnestor
of Thrace, a man so carried away with avarice, as he violated all the rights of
hospitality, and wickedly murdered Polidore, son to King Priam his neighbor.

I might have a world of work, if I should here set down the Geraudes of
Thylos, who sold their Sister to the Lappyans: Joseph's brethren, who offended
in like sort: the King of Persia, that caused the tomb of Cyrus to be opened,
within which this inscription was to be read.

Thou man insatiate, covetous,
Cruel, unkind and barbarous,
This Tomb by thee had not been open,
But that thy covetous extreme,
Here to have found a Diadem,
Gave thy thoughts that greedy scope.
Thy coming I right well did know,
For heaven did the same fore-shew,
And thy fruitless hope beside:
Here get'st thou nothing for thy pain,
But this poor carcass frail and vain,
To speedy death thy present guide.
I have made mention sufficient of women's liberality, as also the auaritious
nature of men: it is now high time, that by humility (wherewith they are much
more endued then men their adversaries:) I should cleuate them them so high, as
the heavens may be discerned under them, and that they serve to addorne heaven
as virtues, or rather, that all virtues are (as it were) their servants,

Trismegistus the Prince of ancient Theology, names humility to be the guide
of the soul, and only regent of all our actions.

It is she that moderates violence, and yet is violent upon immodesty,
compelling it to an abatement of such heat, as many times makes itself too
much acquainted with men, which very quickly carries them from a perswasiue
kind of pride, to incredible forgetfulness of themselves.

The holy Bible offers the examples of Sara, Hester; and beyond all other, the
new Testament (which is the perfection of witness to the Prophets) delivers us
the humility of the Saint above all Saints, the blessed Virgin Marie, so
humble both in apparaunce and effect, as it pleased God to make choice of her,
for the birth of his only Son our Lord Christ Jesus.

Contrariwise, ye cannot but read of the ambition of Caine, of Nimrod, Cirus,
Absolon, Haman, Rehoboam, and many others besides.

In histories likewise ye shall find the presumption of Alexander, naming
himself the Son of Jupiter: of Pirrhus the Epirote: of Menecrates, who
called himself a God: of Caliphanes, Xerxes, Romulus, Caligula, Caesar,
Senecion, Patricius, and Mark Anthony.

Amongst our modern men, of Borgi^, Leo, Boniface, Caraffa, Baldwin the
imposture, and so many more beside: as I my self should seem ambitious of a
very vain matter, if I would make recital of them; producing withal, what is
said of Hanniball, of Nicanor, of Salmoneus, of the Aloides, Prometheus:
Icarus, Tiphon, Phaeton, the Giants in general, and in brief, a whole bedrole
of the like: but especially such as S^esichorus speaks of in his Odes. Mad men
who in their proper praise,
Will crown themselves with laurel bays,
While other seek effectually,
Into the bottom of the grave.
For that whereby they honor have,
And thereby live in memory.
And Musaeus in his songs.

Those that were of Lesbos Isle,
Gave themselves an honored style.
Which was indeed but villiany,
Like to an aged Ravens noate,
Into some withred Elm being got,
To tell the world her hermony,
The Sea they do resemble well,
Which sinckes as if it were to hell.
Though to the clouds it often arise,
Or like the Seaman, that would break,
A huge rock with his Oars too weak,
When fond conceit thus dimmes his eyes.
Where can be read a matter more insupportable, then the insolence of Caine,
who answered his Lord and creator: Have thou given Abell my brother to my
custody; or am I to yield account of him?

Contrariwise, where can be heard of a more humble creature, then the Cananite,
who having not offended at all, held her self not only faulty in the fact of
her religion: but comparing her self to the brute beasts, combated against
the rigor of Jesus Disciples, and that with such mighty modesty, as had not
the holy Scripture expressly reported it, it would have exceeded belief: yea,
all histories else in the world beside. Mary Magdaleins humility cannot be
equalled in comparison, by the very humblest submission of men ingenerall or
particular, wyping our Saviors feet with the hair of her head, being as then
but scantly known unto her.

But if ye will commend the insolence of a man, it is to be noted at that very
instant, when one cried out: What loss commits this Woman at this present?
Such odours might have been sold at a very good rate, and afterward bestowed
upon the poor.

But let us leave divine authorityes, and look into histories, Hippolita the
Amazone was so humble and lowly to Theseus, that he having received a hurt with
the Bulls horn of Praxila on his right shoulder: she used often times to lick
the wound with her tongue; whereas even Chiron the Centaure grew offended.

This is not thy chiefest glory,
Nor thy Fortunes fairest story,
Oh Theseus, to have conquered,
The mighty Bull of Praxila,
Whose wounding thee that very day,
Might full well have done thee dead,
But to have fair Hippolita,
So worthy noting every way,
In thy house to wait on thee,
And destinies to grace her so,
When else thy life thou must forgo,
Then she to give thee remedy.
As goodness, honesty and virtue, are only principal among the perfections
of the mind, so in that only subject would I conclude here my discourse:
but that I cannot well do it, unless thereby I give men to understand, that
whatsoever goodness abides in them, is only but borrowed, and the very maine
goodness of the whole world consists in women, who (to speak no more then
truth) are as a soul to the whole vniuersse, and the especial procurers of
all celestial blessings.

The Romans amongst all their conquestes, made an intermingling of strange
Gods, and caused Altars to be erected unto them, yet notwithstanding, in the
despoyle of so many nations, they could never get any one God that bare the
title of good, so rare was this qualitye amongst them which were figured in the
shapes of men. And yet in the very cradle of their Empire, they had a Goddess
of goodness, named Vesta, so highly eternized for her deserts, as at one time
she was honored with seven hundred crowns of pure gold, and never could men
have the credit to enter her Temple* Ennius the Poet renowneth her in this
manner.

Vesta (good Goddess) is sole guardiane,
Of our great Capitole, and people Roman,
All other Gods are feeble in their might,
But she and Pallas, who gives wisdoms sight.
The goodness of Juno is noted of every one, and far to exceed the malice
of Jupiter, for though she had good cause to procure his overthrow, for being
so long time tied by the heels to one Mil-stone, against all laws of equity
and reason: yet did she not forbear to discover to him, the secret trains
laid for him by the other Gods, who were grown weary of his tyranie and
oppression; which made the Greek thus to speak of her.

Juno, the goodness over rare,
Made thee too kind and debounaire,
To thy ungrateful husband still,
When fastened to his clog too long,
He vexed the Gods, and did thee wrong,
Yet did thou always shield his ill.
The goodness of Sirua of Corinthe, was excessive, if excess be to be found
in such a virtue, for being forsaken by her husband, a man beyond all measure
dissolute, and wisely learning how he spent his time: to wit, in the stews
which was the most infamous in all Greece, where he had utterly wasted and
consumed himself: She yet appointed him an annual pension, that having
wherewithal to diffray his charges, he might in time learn to leave that
wicked kind of life.

Plutarch makes mention of a Courtezane so kind and affable, that she gave a
golden Crown of maruailous value, the very sum of all her riches consisting
therein: to a young man, who had refused her for another, to whom he gave the
very same crown, with the will and consent of her, who had bin his before first
Mistress and lover. Oh worthy courtezane, the history does thee wrong in
giving thee that name, for by this one deed thou have raised so many virtuous
opinions of thee, and set down such a memory of thy worth: as they that shall
defame thee, will be but infamous, those that accuse thee, but snarling
detractours, and he that refused thee, well worthy the name of a wretch and
unthankful.

Who can but marvel at the goodness of Proserpine, she having been stolen
from the Theater of men: yea, from her mothers lap, the terrestrial Paradise
of her contentment, and hurried into a place of darkness, horror and
despair, by a Tyrant, more covetous of her beauty, then matrymoniall
conjunction: did nevertheless make Jupiters intent known to Pluto, to the
heavens great scandale, and perpetual praise of the nether regions, where she
was confined, to prevent a second subuerssion of the world, which would have
ensued upon her rape again, as witnesses that which Pluto himself said.

Ere the loud thunder make me let her go,
I Will burn the heavens, so does her beauty move,
Dear care to keep a Jewel gotten so,
Despite my brothers force, she is my love,
And sooner shall the Suns bright golden torch,
Be saffrond in these dim and nether nookes,
Ire she be carried forth of Plutoes portch,
That gives me life and essence by her looks.
Empedocles, Aristotle and Pliny have affirmed, that the best kind of beasts
are those which most use to weep: if it be so, there is nothing more facile
in a woman then tears, nay, it is a thing so naturally given unto them, as I
have noted many Ladies, not to loose one iotte of their perfection thereby, but
rather to increase it much more by their tears, as especially proceeding from
a spring or sourse of grace; how strange then is the savage nature of men, who
never weep but only through chollor? But Al^meon yeeldes the reason thereof,
in this manner.

A woman being of her self more apprehensiue then man, cannot easily alter
from her first conception, which makes her sooner to weep then a man, who
takes longer time in seeking remedy for his grief.

But this is most certain, tears only proceed from an exceeding good nature,
and all those beasts (most capable of enstruction) are subject thereto.

Lions, Bears and Tigers never weep, says Auerroes, because rage is so
familier with them, as they cannot be taught to shun their own harms. But
horses and Elephantes use to weep, as some men do, not so much for their
natural humiditie, as a certain feeling of inward sadness, for the Heart
(altogether hot) weeps oftentimes, being pursued and taynted: and after this
manner is the weeping of men: but beyond all, the woman is subject to tears,
especially she, in whom most sweetness and tenderness is found. It seems the
Comic Menander knew somewhat in this case, when he said.

For women do weep, for harms may them befall,
Mean while their barbarous husbands sit and joy
Never fore thinking on their illes at all,
When desperate hazard of most sharp annoy,
With hurly burly through the City flies,
Despoilde and widdowed of her liberties,
This foolish courage women do despise,
And by their tears express themselves more wise.
Andromache the wife of Hector, was endued with such goodness, as her servants
were in her house as in a Temple: yea, she took care and pains for managing
her husbands horses, he himself never having so much courage, as she had
virtues. I may refer thee for further proof hereof, to Homere where the
Lackies of Paris terms her a Pithagorician for this cause.

It is strange to hear how some bawle against this text, for they talk of
Metempsichosis, which we call transauimation, the passage of souls from one
body to another: and then will not stick withal to swear, that the Author
hereby means some deceit: but herein they resemble little children, who
imagine belles to sound all that they sing.

Iulia Censorina having heard, that sentence of death was pronounced against
her husband, disguised him so suddenly, as the Iaylor imagined him to be her,
so she remained prisoner in his habit, while he escaped with safety of life.

They threatened her with torments to reveal where he was: but she replied,
never make spare of me, for I have done no more then a woman ought to do.

There is no true historian, that ever did set down like example of a man. I
know very well that some will obiecte unto me, how Divine Orpheus descended
into hell, there to demand his fair wife of Pluto: but if he did so, it was
more because he could not live without her, then for any especial goodness
remaining in himself, considering he was a perpetual enemy to women.

Likewise he behaved himself so ill, if Aeschilus say true.

As he encurd the high disgrace,
Of all the beauteous dames of Thrace*
And being thus dishonored,
Lost first his harp and then his head*
I would not advise men to shed any tears for him, because happily they have
too few for themselves. The general history of nations tells us, that an
infinite number of good women vowed themselves to their husbands graves, as not
desiring any longer life after them.

Wise Solomon, has figured forth a good woman to us, and though she come short
of many especial qualities due to such perfection: yet has he described in
her more excellent matters, then can be in a man, whom he esteems not
capable of any praise. For says he: A good woman is an inestimable treasure.

In this Song of Songs, he sings nothing else then of the virtuous woman.

Plato held, that she is no less to be desired in a familye, then a just
Magistrate in a common wealth: this made them paynt Venus standing on a
Tortuse, to show, that a woman ought necessarilye to keep at home. Possidonius
names a woman, the eye of necessity, meaning thereby, that her foresight
being as a Sun of grace, a house is waste and desolate without her beams, and
men can never clearly see into their household affairs, but only by the wary
eye of their wives.

There is such superaboundaunce of goodness in women, as we may grieve to see
them deceived by the bold malice of men, who make no reckoning at all of
their treasons and treacheries: for, while they weep like Crocadiles, they will
swear by Heaven and Earth, that their affections are loyal, their words
faithful, their behaui^^ (...) yet for all this, in (...), they are (...) the
Hiena, (...) ^^en vipers* more inconstant men the Polipe fish, more (...) men
Tigers, and less worthy love then Hornets. Aristophanes shall take my part,
although he was an Athenian, to wit, gadding minded and uncertain, like many
other of his companions.

To seduce fair women kind,
Pretending loyalty of mind,
And yet not love but for a while:
Or else for base desire of gain,
A grief that many may complain,
When plain appearance shows the guyle*
It is a most unworthy part,
Far different from the high desert*
That to women does belong,
Who being debounaire and mild,
Never think men to be so vilde
As to requite them with such wrong.
If ye will have some of this good stuff out of men's storehouse, look then
on detestable and ungrateful Theseus, on Paris the liar and periurde wretch,
on inconstant Hercules, and disloyal Jason, who all most falselye deceived
their friends, after they had triumphed by their means and credit, I will not
say on their honors: for these men (none worse that ever were) could not any
way wound the happy and laudable reputation, of these their fair fosterers
and dearest friends, which made them (indeed) more enemies to themselves, then
they could be to the renown of these Ladies, whose virtues may perhaps be
touched with some slander, but their innocent natures stand free from injury,
and their good carriage from all base suspicion. Yet let us consider
heerewithall, that a woman can have no greater enemy then a man, who is like
unto a ravenous Lion, continuallye seeking to devour new spoil. Oh sex
abominable, thou art too much affected to thy self, to know rightly indeed
how to use women kind, especially in these days, wherein, as says the
Italian Poet.

Th'abortiues of this city in a flame,
Do at their countries woes but make a game.
And an other: A Coridon, a Coridon gapes after gain,
And nothing pleases him but women's pain.


Not many months since, a Gascoigne Gentleman became amorous of a young and
virtuous maiden, and raisde up such a scandale to men's reputation, who spare
not to fault in the like offense: as enforces me to set down the history,
not so much to make them the more infamous, as to make known the just
vengeance, which this honest Virgin took on the ingratitude of her feygned and
dissembling friend.

He, after a million of pursuites, filled full of services, complains, tears
and promises, yet not able to compass his unlawful desires: forgot him self
so far, as to publish abroad with no silly protestations, that he was not
meanly interested into the Maidens best favors. She having no other supporte
for her innocence, then the true witness of her soul, unattained and free
from so vile an infamy; raisde up her spirits with such rightful disdain,
against the unjust rauisher of her reputation, as she spared not to kill him in
the midst of a very honorable assembly, where she waited long for the
effecting of such a worthy enterprise, which (under correction of better
judgment) in my mind deserved rather pardon and recompense, then any ill
reproach, scandale or punishment. For Patience importun'de does convert to
hate,
And who so quitteth not an offered blame:
Waits but a second blemish of his name.


Nevertheless, in the Parliament at Bordeaux, she was condemned to loose her
head, men did so earnestlye pursue the cause. But after their rigor became
somewhat more moderate, she was confyned unto perpetual prison, wherout I
would very willingly deliver her, if I could convert my self into a shower of
gold, as sometime did the Son of Saturn.

If Love deny to open me the gate,
By other means I will get in thereat:
Her guardians cruelty I mean to bend,
Even by those beauteous looks which her defend
That way to make them mylde and debonaire.
No more to fright me from so sweet a fair.
Then on the house I Will rain a shower of gold,
To glut their eyes, while Love makes me more bold.
When Juno would have borrowed a favor of Aeolus, she esteemed no recompense
worthy of such grace, but the offer of one of her Nymphs: where to the God so
well lent his ear, as he effected that, which before he would by no means
yield to promise. (...) will not admit thee to mollify their furies, witness
that which Linus says.

Men of their fury would be much ashamde,
And their behavior mightily be blamde,
Did they but see the wood Nymphs golden life,
So sweet, so pleasing, and so void of strife.
Pharaohs daughter had more goodness in her, then all the Egiptians beside
could be stoard with malice, she was more kind and affable, then her father
was rigorous, let me not say cruel: for that great Captain and law
deliverer Moses, did she save from shipwreck, yea the gulf of death,
auouching him for her own son in a time most dangerous, so that it may
(under reverence) be said, it pleased God to make her do him service, as well
as Moses in such a need, and all for the deliverance of his people.

Heredotus the father of histories, (be it spoake in no dispraise to Plutarch,)
makes rehearsal of a Spartane woman, who let escape a prisoner from her house,
that had in earnest smitten her: and because her husband should not kill him
for it, she saved his life, by sending him to Thebes. Ye shall hardly find
the like quality in men, by nature addicted to cruelty, and more inclined to
offend their friends, then pardon any that have done them injury.

Homer makes mention of Pallas, who quallified the rage of the fiery God of
war, that but for her would have made a general destruction, when he
understood the death of his son. The fugitive Aeneas, might long enough have
wanted human succor, yea, life and all had utterly miscaryed: if (as a
help unexpected) he had not happened to the good Queen Dydo, where he found
a blessed haven after so many mishaps, and much better was entertained then his
base treachery deserved. Thrasilla saved Phorybus, who scaled her house to rob
her treasury, and as the neighbors would have slain him, she said: Let him
alone, he is but a fool, and has done no harm but to my window nails.
Hersilia seeing Melanthus in the Temple at Delphos, and that he would have
stolen a Crown thence, which Perseus had caused there to be sacred: excused
him to the Priests, who had likewise perceived him, telling them, that he was
a Goldsmith of Athens, and her husbands host, who came not thither with any
ill intent, but only had a curious desire after workemanshipe, which she
always had known him addicted unto. All the french had miscarried at the
Scicilian Vespres, except such as saved themselves in Sperlinga: but that they
were advertised by a Nursse, who served the Podesta of the I Will, whereon was
written: Sperlinga only shall not burn,
Else all the Isle to havoc turn.


And else where.

A pitying Nurse did many French preserve,
That in Sperlinga sundry months did serve.
When the Thebanes recovered their liberty from them of Sparta, and that the
tirannie of Charondas was utterly extinguished: the women of Thebes prevailed
so well with the two Captains Pelopidas and Epaminondas, justly displeased
against them of Lacedemon; as there were but very few put to the sword, albeit
they had been so iniuriouslye handled, as the remembrance thereof could not
but be irksome to them, and bloody revenge no more then lawful. When
Prometheus stole the fire from heaven, and Jupiter bound him to the mount
Caucasus, where a vulture glutted her self continually on his entrayles: the
Goddess Iris rayned down a shower of Nectar on this ouer-hardy man's breast,
till Hercules at length became his deliverer by Iunos appointment, who grew
into pity of his hard extremity, notwithstanding at one instant he had
committed two mighty offenses: the one by his great ingratitude to Jupiter,
the other by his execrable theft, according to that which Aeschilus says.

None more ingracefull then Prometheus was,
Who from the high and vaulty house of heaven:
Stole holy fire, and thence away would pass,
Having had gentle entertainment given,
By all the greatest Gods in seemly sort,
Yea, Jupiter received him in his Court.
Theoderita, the wife to John Paleologus, seeing that her husband would needs
have five slaves hanged for a small offense, and that she durst not beg their
lives, because he was so furious: gave a sum of money to a County their
keeper, who fled away with them, and were afterward never heard of. On the
day of Saint Bartholmew (when the French show themselves the most barbarous
that can be imagined) there was a good and hardy woman, near to whom a man
had withdrawn himself, as if it had been to a sanctuary of assurance, from
the rage of those brute beasts who forciblie followed him: she caught a
dizeuier by the collar, and would not let him go, albeit she were halde and
pulled by the garments, until she judged the man pursued to be in sound
safety, as indeed by her means it came so to pass. If such a notable deed
might not too much displease the conditions of men, especially the French
executioners of their own fellow Citizens: I would bring such a rank (among
them that I could name) as strange histories should have cause to complain,
that their subjects give them not leave once to rehearse matter so memorable.

Sophronia returning from Church, and seeing two young men come led as
prisoners, laden with garments which they had stolen from her house, when she
was told by the officers, they had robde her of all, and left just nothing,
she answered: That what they had done, was by her own consent, and they took
these things but as a pledge of a certain sum of money, which in her
necessity she had borrowed of them, and so they had no other punishment then
fear only.

He that would take upon him to number the stars, should not find himself
so confounded by their infinity in his sight: as I am dazeled with
multiplicitie of matter, delivered only upon this subject, which going beyond
admiration, astonisheth my senses, rauisheth my spirits, wearies my hand, and
by weariness dispossesseth me of all hope, to get out of this boundless
Oceane: but that the very goodness it self of this matter I handle, supplies
my defects, as contented with a little in so unable a person.

I have said sufficient, concerning the happy qualities of women, which (to
speak truly) triumphs over men in all chief glory of perfections, that can
be affoorded by heaven and nature, who ordinarily makes her self more admired
in the feminine sex, then any subject else whatsoever: nevertheless, me
thinks I am justly to condemn my self in all I have done, because it has
not carried the weighty style it deserves; much more then am I to be affraide,
if I should dare to make entrance among their divine graces, the celestial
form of their Angelical beauties, with what spirit I should proceed in so
high an employment.

Apelles that skillful and absolute Painter, when he should figure the graces
of Venus, found him self to be in such a strange confusion, as he was
compelled to cry out: That he was the only enemy to his fame and credit,
that did set him about such a difficult matter. I refer it to your
judgments, seeing Thimantes could not portraite Agamemnons tears, for the
sacrifising of his only daughter: whether it be possible or no, to describe
the most sweet attractions of a young Lady, who in one instant can cause both
life and death, not only in men of homely metal, but even the very
resolutest person in the world, you may behold (without any art to help) a
hayrie tufte, daintily floating upon a front largely extended, where two eyes
(or rather two Suns) make resplendaunce with such a temperate fire: as our
senses forget their condition, our spirits their judgment, our hearts their
freedom, and our souls all conceit, as carried away with entire consideration
of so many meruailes. Neapolitane Sanazar aptly discourses thereon.

Beauty to the Lilly like,
Pleases with her dainty white:
Plaited into radiant curlles,
Which about sweet liking hurlles*
By so rare and pleasing couller,
Raising up a second honor,
Beauty like the waters fall,
Running with a gentle braule.
In a channel silver hewde,
All the herbs enammeled,
As it does her tresses spread,
By the standers by are viewd.
It is lovely, like the Rose,
That in mornings does unclose,
When fair heaven has distilde,
On Auroraes cradle bed,
Which the Gangian worshipped,
Her pearled drops through the f^eld.
I can hardly think, that men should be so misgouerned, as to presume to have
any grace above that of women* seeing at all times by this fair ornament of
nature (which I dare call the cheifest gift of heaven) there has been such
woonders wrought thereby: as Tyrants have been made to forget their rigor;
Judges have altered their settled determinations; stern people have been
pacified, and the very wisest circumuented, as by a very necessary
transportance of the mind.

By this gracious endowment, fair Hester gave conclusion to the Kings of
Persiaes custom, constrayning Ahasuerus to offer her his royal rod, as well
when he seemed to be most moved with choler, as in the time of more pleasing
acceptance. By this means Juno, as Homer records, knew how to lull a sleep
her husband, for the Grecians advantage, and ruin of the Troyans. Prince
Menelaus justly offended with Helen his wife, perceived her accompanied with so
many graces, when she came into his presence with Diophoebus: as he durst do
nothing against so rare a beauty, but became even then to be more amourous,
then he was before on the day of his nuptials. The graces of Cleopatra, coming
for trial before Mark Anthony: the Judge himself became sollicitour.

Augustus intending to destroy Alexandria; was put from his purpose by the very
sight of Therinda, being but the daughter to a poor Shipmaister. Aelianus
rehearses, that on the Sea coasts of Liguria, certain marine monsters have
been seen, bearing some show of human shape: that would stand gazing on
the country damsels, as they went for water to the neighboring Fountains.
Lycosthenes, and after him Boisteau de Launay, declares, that a Triton was so
ravished with the graces of a country maid, as he forsook the Sea, and
followed so far after her, that he was taken by the Village-dwellers,
whereupon he dyed afterward with sorrow.

That part of the body, where this gracious jewel receives most splendoure,
is in the eye, the chief and principal piece of Natures woorkemanship.

In like manner does Aristotle call it, the only ornament of the body: it is
the messenger of the Soul; and also it is the Paynter of our affections, and
the faithful speaker of all our desires. Hence is it, that the eye of a woman
is naturally so sweet: that if all the salt in Pequay or Bronage might touch
but one of the lids, it would immediately convert into the purest Sugar. Homer
and Pindarus had such sound knowledge of the eyes excellence, as for one word
they strove to give diverse epithites, and by one body, to make consideration of
all women's perfections, so to be discerned as in a mirror of Crystal.

Alexander the Great, so well apprehended the eyes of the Emperor of Perisiaes
daughters his enemy, as afterward he would not so much as look on them,
fearing to loose his liberty in the most happy prison of the world: whereupon he
married one of them, to the end that this legittimate alliance, might keep him
within the bounds of perpetual modesty and charity.

Mahomet the second, drew such admiration from the eye of an Armenian woman
slave, as (in favor of her) he caused him to be hanged up that had taken her:
which made her to complain of his cruelty, albeit he requested not any thing
prejudicial to her honor. Selim, who was the very rudest enemy to
Christendom, having seen a young Damsel in the kingdom of Bosleua named
Isina, became in such sort attached: as he swore never to take any rest, till
he had conquered the whole province, where a creature so rare and precious
first received life. Never did he kiss but her eyes only, and afterward
married her to Horruccio Barbarossa, the father to the kings of Argire.

But how now? may not I seem foolish and indiscreet (or rather unworthy of
any favor) in presuming to discourse of things so little agreeing with my
conceits, as that I dare be seen in the glorious Theater of so fair
resplendance? Oh pardon me, fair eyes, for I imagined, that the refexion of so
many graces as flow from you, as from the source of glory and Majesty; would
give such ornament to my words, as else could not choose but want, and such
life to my lines, as might make them immortal. It seems that Martial was of
my mind.

Your eyes, the Well-springs of fair light,
That chaseth hence the sable night:
Begets brightness perfectly,
Where none (till then) had memory.
Vigo has written in his practice of medicine, that the eyes of a dead maiden
are of such virtue, against charms and enchauntments, as if one but lay the
apple of the eye under a Candlestick of Brass; immediately all visions and
apparitions shall vanish away and not be seen. Many diseases have been cured,
by the very behoulding of Women that came to visit the parties. When the air
and Sun is obscured from the Tartares, as it is a case that often befalles
them: they tear forth the eyes of some woman slave, thereby to overcome the
first charm of darkness, and so to have the Sun seen again in their
Horizon. It is very true, that they never use this but on great necessities, as
when they seek after gain, or when they have lost some battle: and thence
forward is that slave made free, and maintained at the charges of the common
pursse.

The Persians so mightily feared the graces hid in their women's eyes, as when
any Lady or other should come before their Judges; they would turn their
backs, and not look upon them.

When Philocus was reproched by Demetrius, for his overmuch folly in loouing
Latmia; he answered him* If thou thy self had but once beheld her eyes,
thou would chide me, and say, I love her not sufficiently. For this cause,
the Italians will never suffer their wives to go with their faces uncovered: so
much they stand in fear, least others should love them better then they
themselves do. Wherefore, even as the brain is the seat of the soul, and the
throne of love is placed in a woman's eye: so may we call it the bright burning
beacon, or rather the perfect load-starre, to direct the way, in the Sea of our
inconstant hearts and cogitations. By this window did Mars become amorous of
Venus, according to the testimony of Ovid.

Mars saw her, and by sight increast such fire,
As afterward gave light to gain desire.
Why then hereby I may conclude, that even as the Sun has more light in his
unity, then all the stars in number have together: so the very eye of a
woman contains more graces in it, then is to be found or imagined. (I speak
upon sound knowledge) in all men's perfections which (to write uprightly) could
neither be gracious, courteous or civil, but only by the society of women. In
this case I may likewise say, that as the Opall represents the color of all
precious stones: so a woman's face, is the true lively figure of all graces
celestial and human, and that God endued it only with perfections above all
other creatures.

The goodly heavens might not compare with the ornament and graces of a woman,
if nature had not made the^ of longer continuance: but by her death she does so
much the more enrich their beauty* increasing their fairness, in no mean
measure, and yet to our unspeakable loss. It is now high time I should speak
of beauty, the faithful companion of all those graces which I place foremost in
the hyerarchy of things that seem to be, or are corporal, albeit the mind
have the greater part thereof.

Bodily beauty is a continued proportion of the parts with their whole in
perfect substance: This is the common definition of beauty, which only
respects the nature of the thing, and not the accidents. Plato holds, that
beauty is an Idea of perfection, which we attrybute to the subject that best
likes us.

And hereupon, being demanded what was the very fairest thing in the world:
he answered, Love. Now it is most certain, that this Love is a Woman; for as
nothing can burn but the fire, or that which is of fiery nature: so can we
love nothing but a woman, I mean in this Theater of human affairs, except
we will build up again the walls of Sodom. Oh would to God it pleased him,
that some two or three, who make a practice of such a horrible sin, yea, even
to the great scandale of France, had bin but employed in this business, (which
especially I undertook on so grievous an occasion:) the kingdom could not
then but be much more flourishing, and the wrath of God in less measure
follow us. Well be it so then, that beauty only appertains to a woman,
according as Anacreon testifies.

Nature on Bulls did horns bestow,
And tallents to the Birds she gave,
Hoofes to the horse, and well we know
Swiftnes to Hares their lives to save.
Fishes she made glide through the stream*
Teeth to the Lion was her gift:
But as for man, his hap extreme,
Was to be witless, void of thrift.
When woman came, then did she joy,
And gave such beauty to her face:
As worlds of hearts it should destroy,
And no power else have greater grace*
Yet am not I of the vulgares opinion, who subject beauty to some certain
rules, which cannot support the fair in any subject, without doing iniurye to
a Myllion of beautyes, rare and extraordinary, who nevertheless, have
manytimes none of those curious notes of antiquity: for a little woman may be
fair: a low forehead may be so too: a black hayrde woman, a mouth somewhat
large, and other such like parts, less to be wondered at then Apelles Venus,
in whom it was said nothing to be wanting. For Beauty best we learn to know,
By looks not over swift nor slow:
And when behavior does agree,
The body straight, well shapt to see.


But tell me, will not you judge the woman to be most fair, that writ to
her Lover in this manner?

My Love, I am a little black,
But say that I were much more black.
Mine eyes brown, my face like brown,
Admit my neck and breasts more brown,
My hair and skin all black to be,
Saving my teeth of Iuory:
Environed with a curroll fence,
Which breaths more sweet then frankincense
That might delight both Gods and men,
Much more thy self, what say thou then?
Must I for this my lovely brown,
Have my Love on me to frown?
Are not mine eyes as piercing still,
And able Marble hearts to kill?
Or can my Love be ere the less,
My mind being made of gentleness?
Why night is duskie, sable black,
Yet no beauti^us stars do lock:
When the Moon with silver light,
Gallops through the thick faced night.
Venus does love nights brownest hours,
The darkest nookes are her safe bowers,
Thickets and Forrestes most obscure.
Yea, where no haunt has been in ure,
Thither does she most repair,
Sooner then to a garden fair.
There may be seen the lively spark,
That's best discerned in the dark:
The ball that in a bright black eye,
Shines like a Meteor in the sky.
There brown and fair are both as one,
When two sweet souls are so alone:
Tell me then (Love) in such a night,
Would thou not think the brownest white?
In truth, it is not lawful for any upright judgment to persuade it self,
that beauty has any particular color, a proportion definite, or a grace
imaginary: for nature (the sovereign worke-mistresse of all beauties, has
made an Ethiopian or Moore perfectly black, to be as fair as the whitest in
our Europe. And the reason is, as Auicen affirms, because she would have no
monster in nature, but the very thing that her self should abhor: for to see a
dog with six feet, a calfe with two heads, a man of two natures, or a
woman with two splenes: this is no monstrousnes, but rather an excellence of
the first heat, which would build up many things in that mood, but often
times sets down her rest upon one, and yet at some other time falls to
plurality.

Monsters then are framed of things dissemblable to their kind, and sometimes
in the imagination, or a depraved appetite, which ever more is contrary to
nature. Empedocles says thus thereof.

The monster takes original,
From seed of quite contrary kind*
To that it should agree withal,
When it planting first did find.
I may well-say, with a million of our elders, that there is six and thirty
several beauties in one woman, and hardly any one in a man: for he is the true
anotomy of natures imperfection, yea, the very Image of her weakness, as a
woman may justly term her self, the perfect mirror of her virtues: whereof
Plutarch was not ignorant when he said.

If nature wish her self to see,
A woman then her glass may be.
Propertius was of the same opinion.

Is women not a miracle?
Her voice a perfect oracle?
Nay, is she not a deity,
By beauty of such majesty?
Men being naturally composed of all corruption take no delight but in
dessimulation. The reason is, because Love and Venus withdrawing once from men's
assembly, knowing the malice which daily frequented them: left them even so to
their fraudulent complexions, and gave them the gift to be singular in
deceiving. The report of Anacreon testifies as much. Behold the Dolphins how
they play,
And on their silver finnes convey:
Love and Venus naked both,
To shield them from the great untroth
Of men most flattering and untrue,
Let still deceit false hearts pursue.
Although a woman were endued with any other perfection, then being beautiful,
or admit she had but this ornament only: yet that alone may exalt her above all
men, who neither are fair, well favored or good, nor indeed (to speak the
truth) can they any way be capable of apprehending these qualities, they are in
such plenty bestowed upon women. The holy scripture holds womanhood in such
account; as it teaches us, that nothing can sooner put sadness from afflicted
minds, then the sight of a good woman: even as one should say, for a
celestial remedy, because a husband can indeed have greater comfort in his
cares, The Prophet David, even in the coldest winter of his age, hoped for such
consolation by beauty, as he made choice thereof, and age indeed can have no
better corasiue.

Timeus, Sticillianus rehearses a maruailous history, of a Shepherdess of
Africa, who in the days chiefest heat, casting off her garments, that she
might bath in the river well shadowed from the Sun: a Lion coming that way,
for the space of three hours stood gazing upon her, and seemed as surprised
with exceeding contentment.

The poor Virgin was in wonderful fear, and durst not come to her clothes,
least the Lion should devour her: but growing to better courage in the end,
hearing the noise of certain Cammell driuers not far off: betook her self
to flight, naked as she was, not taking so much as her smock with her; which
the Lion getting up in his teeth, followed withal, and laid it mildely at her
feet, fetching afterward all her other garments, and then as making a sign of
obeisance, left her and returned among the woods, to her no little joy,
finding such service in so unaccustomed a lover. Admetus wife was of such
admirable beauty, as the Swannes of Meander would leave the river to follow
her, and perch many times upon her shoulders. A matter very strange, the like
never happening to any man whatsoever: as also the inconvenience of her death,
only for deliverance of her husband, has more note of honor; piety and
meritte, then all the men in the world can brag of any virtue, in those things
which most may make for their advantage. For she sacrificed her self
willingly, to redeem her hasbandes life, which lessened every day by mortal
langour of an ulcer, that poured forth more loathsome and filthy stench, then
Augeus stable (cleansed by Hercules) could compare withal. All which
notwithstanding, he no sooner slept, but she sucked forth the venom, paying
the ransom for him, who could not else live, but by loss of her life.

Cambles the Prince of Sardys, being one day drunk, would needs kill his
household servants, and proceeding so far in this rude determination, as he
had compassed the issue of his merciless rage, either by fire, sword, or some
other means.

But beautiful Soclea, being so fair as any woman possible could be,
presented her self before him, and sweetly taking him by the hand, made him on
a sudden become so tractable, and not only he desisted from further assayling
them, but forgot likewise that he had been in any such fury, submitting
himself mildely and gently to her, both being thus recovered of his drunkenness
and fury.

Women's beauty then is above all else most marvelous: It is the excellency of
the Divine workmanship, or rather the chiefest thing of his heavenly labor:
It is the model, not only of things that beautify the world, but the very
especial of all forms: It is the table of the celestial powers: the gadge of
natures alliance with the world, and the only mirror of perfect Ideaes:
briefly, it is that which I cannot worthily enough admire, and therefore am the
more unable to describe.

The man that will enter but into consideration thereof, shall in that one book
read all perfections whatsoever, and censuring of them by this little, or
rather no part thereof at all: will unfeignedly confess, that the body of a
woman is a true Temple, and her soul the very image of God, or figure of his
blessing.

He will say, himself is made but of slime and dung, whereas woman was formed
of a matter otherwise prepared, finished in a happy and well ordered substance,
with all qualities beseeming a most perfect creation. He will like wise
confess, that woman was given him for his eternal good, and the house is not
blessed where she wants.

By her is this huge mass subsisted, commonweals made immortal, cities
peopled, Realms strengthened, Kings assured, and subjects maintained. By her
it is, that we live again in our children, posterity have knowledge of us, and
our memory is continued. It is by her, that we remember our houses, and respect
our families. By her we learn to grow heedfull, she makes us quick and
ready, she ripens our lawful actions, and draws us from the world to live in
her company: as in a school of piety, modesty, and just apprehension of
following accidents, wherein (else) we should but little differ from brute
beasts. It was she that had her birthe in the terrestrial Paradise, and not
man. Last of all, she is our means of comfort to God the Father, the cause of
his blessings to us in this life, and by her we are made sure of all happiness
in the life to come.

FINIS.
An other defense of women's virtues, written by an Honorable personage, of
great reckoning in France, and therefore thought meet to be joined with the
former discourse.
That a VVomans excellence is much greater then a man's.
MAny things brought forth by Nature, are often times made but slender account
of, through want of diligent knowledge, as also search into the excellency of
them: which being a matter vulgar and common, caryeth the less price and
estimation with every one.

Omitting other circumstances, whose number might grow well near infinite, I
find the rare and invaluable virtues of women too much neglected, and their
worth not looked into as their merits justly challenge: but though some
(through overmuch familiarity) have bin bolder with them then beseemed: yet let
me thus far stand in their defense, that whosoever) with impartial
judgment) will but see into their excellencies, shall find them to be of no
mean esteem, but will give them more right then hitherto they have done.

And me thinks, their detractours sayings are not receiueable, alleging a
bed role of faults found in their sex; which yet (by their own confession)
are not so marke-able as those in men: for admit they have some few, and
those but pretty little ones, let men but lay their hands on their hearts,
ransacke their muddy thoughts, and continual bad cogitations, they shall
perceive, that women's singularityes both in mind and body, do far out go
whatsoever perfections in men; whom yet I will grant to go beyond women in
frailty. And to resolve ye herein, I take my first proof from the woman's
first forming, who was not made of any unclean, loathsome or base matter, as
the body of man was: but even of his purity and most refined part, as may
appear by her face, representing a very sweet and gracious complexion, without
any ougly hairs disfiguring, which sufficiently declares her to be the only
piece of work, extracted from the fountain of al excelling beauty.

Beside, the exquisite proportion of sweet feminine bodies, is much more rare
composed then those of men are, by judgment of the very best masters in depth
of skill: not making denial of any one part, but that all do abundantly
express the true celestial measures.

What shall I say of their singular spirit, which ordinarily shows it self
most constant in adversity, most gracious and favorable in felicity, and
far beyond all ability remaining in men? How often times (if the ancient
and modern histories are of any truth) have they been the cause of exceeding
victories? How many times have they courageously resisted against the troops
and feeble squadrons of men's virtues, whom they have not only overthrown, and
broken their disseignes, but likewise compelled most shamfully to flight? Where
is he that can produce the Captain of any nation, who in valor, prowess and
council, might be equalled with the victorious Volscian Queen Camilla, or the
magnanimous Penthesilea? what diligence or sagacitie so admirable, can ye
produce to compare with that of Semiramis? was ever any virtue spoken of, to
be noted in truer shape, then in Zenobia, Valasca, and many other famous
Ladies of elder times, so royally flourishing in all excellencies and
perfections whatsoever? Name but one that surmounted them (or to speak more
properly) that was not (indeed) greatly inferior to them in fidelity and
constancy.

For mine own part, I have turned over and over the leaves of Histories, as
well of my native, as of most languages beside, and I have observed them with
the greatest care I could: yet find I not in them any examples of more
weighty and illustrate virtues, then those which by Ladies have been taught at
all times. How many of them (to maintain their entire faith and fervent love)
have opposed themselves against a thousand dangers of wars: and never were
their friends or esteemed thrust into exile, but (with infinite greefes) they
have gladly changed both name and habit, only through pure affection borne to
their husbands, beloved by the^ more dearly then life, and more honored then
ought else could be by them.

As for humanity and courtesy, ye shall not find any man equal to them. Ye
are not able to comprehend the number of noble Dames, who for relief of
hospitals, aid of poor beggars, building of Churches, founding of Chapels,
and redemption of prisoners, have employed and consumed al their temporal
goods, preferring the honor of God and care of Christians, before base love to
such corruptible trash. Yea, they have done this with such affection and zeal,
as (let men take it how they will) I never heard of any man, how noble or
valiant soever he was: that ever did but half so much, as a woman has bin
known in his time to have done, being more renowned and honored therefore, then
he with all his best attemptes could compass.

What think ye of the noble woman's mind, that deigned to receive all the
Roman host in her own land: with so great and bountiful liberality beside,
as the memory thereof continues to this present day? Why should we forget the
noble and kind disposition of Phryne, who offered to build again the whole
compass of Thebes walls? without demanding any other recompense of the
Citizens, but only to show her so much favor, as her name (for memories
sake) might be engraven on the building: think what manner of City Thebes
was, that contained an hundred several gates in the circuit thereof.

I let a number pass my pen, whose memory and fame are of such ample record,
as there are none of so mean knowledge but do very well remember.

As good Tabitha, whose charity was reputed so great and memorable, that for
the present relief of poor afflicted Widows, succor of Orphans and needy
souls, she scantly left to serve her own weak necessity.

Such charity was never heard of in any man, and therefore the more worthy to
live for ever. The like has been done by diverse other women, sufficientlye
to be known by observed writings, which are ordinarilye read in many places
of the world.

But to answer certain grievous objections, which women's adversaries have
falsely alleged, as hoping that way to overthrow women's honor; albeit those
points (as I have already approved) makes nothing at all against their
excellence, which far surmounteth all the slanders invented against them:
Nevertheless, to show I am not unprovided of an answer, I will evidently
make it known, that the frailties against Women affirmed, are much more great
and notorious in men then women, which proves them so much the rather
superior, then any way subject or inferior to men.

One says, that for money (which is a vile and servile thing) they sometimes
part with that, which they ought to esteem dearer then their proper lives.
Now let us regard, whether this promptitude be caused by the sweetness of
their noble blood and affection: or rather the kind gentleness of their
hearts, which makes them yield so easily to the entreats of their favorites.
But go we a little further on, and then we shall find, that this fault ought
rather to be imputed to the troublesome opportunities of men, their lascivious
eye-glaunces, their ambushes, threats and deceipts, which daily (without any
care of conscience) they practice and procure against so noble a sex. As for my
self, I never heard or knew, that any woman voluntarily gave her self to a
man, without his traynes and crafty sollicitings used before.

But I have evermore well noted, in such as labored most to detect them,
first, a show of long service, urged on with feigned and dissembled tears,
intermingled with a million of counterfeit sighs, beside infinite ingenious
tromperies, which men have at command to attend upon them.

Moreover, I have sometimes observed, that when by all these means they could
not attain their purpose: they have sought by violence to compass it,
furthering their attempts by hateful treasons, or the present villainy of some
subtle servant, whom such masters are woonte to recompense very largely, for
such an honest and serviceable piece of work.

See to what kinds of excellency, the minds of men are daily addicted, and
yet they will be Lords and controullers over women, when basest infamy does
thus command over themselves. Truly, the conceits of women are far
otherwise, and (if it be true that Aristotle says) that the parties composed
of most noble and delicate flesh, are of a higher and better spirit then the
other: then none are so simple to doubt, but the flesh of women is much more
soft and tender, then men's: do we not likewise behold by experience, that in
all ingenious inventions, their spirits do exceed the greatest eminence of
men's?

Look in the catalogue of inuenters of things, if they have not been the
inuentresses of many excellent and incomparable works: especially of good
letters, which at this day make men seem so rare and excellent. Why then this
serves to show ye, that even as men are borne of them; so likewise are the
sciences which we call human. For proof hereof, the virtuous Lady Carmenta
first of all invented them, by means whereof it happened, that the skillful
Leontia, confuted and woone (by reason in disputation) the victory over
learned Theophrastus. Sappho invented the verses, which (after her name) are
called Sapphicks; and had great contention with many excellent Poets in her
time, confuting all of them in the end, as the like (not without singular
praise) did fair Corinna.

If we would speak of our time, where is the Italian Poet so hardy, and so
sure in his composition, as to compare with the Lady Marquess of Pescara, or
Veronica of Gambara, or gentle Armilla Angosciole? In Spain and Germany ye
shall find whole Legions, that kept Schools of all Sciences, especially of
good language, and purest writing, excelling the very skilfullest men in those
countries.

How many is there in the Court of France, whom the learned in the land (I
say not in divinity) but in human sciences, dare not deal withal or
contradict? And as for them in Cities, we may remember the sweet Gentlewoman
Elisena, Morella, Robertet the Bayli^esse of Touraine, young fair Moyfa^ct,
beside infinite others whom I leave, able to instruct a right good secretary,
how skillful soever he be, to couche in writing any case of invention, be it
either in rhyme or prose. As for recluse women, most certain is it, that neither
Valeria Proba, nor Paula, nor Eustochium, who lived in the time of S. Hierom,
excelled them that now are at this present day. For breuities sake I am
constrained to let them pass, because their singularity shall the more
commend them, by such works as shall make them live perpetually renowned: yet
therein they beg not applause as men baselie do, who will not be a little
offended, if men report not of them to the uttermost.

I could wade very long in this discourse, and run far to assemble by brief
recital, diverse noble and ingenious women more: were it not, that even as
Hesiodus and Plutarch, have largely written their virtues of elder time: so for
our modern dames, Master John Boccace and others have honestly discharged
their consciences, so that no further proof need to be produced in this place.

If ye will urge me to confirm this case, by extraordinary privileges
granted to women: I need go no further then the old Testament, where God
commanded Abraham, that he should do what his good wife Sara willed him.
Moreover we find, that our Savior (after his holy resurrection) did first of
all appear to women, Mereurius Trismegistus, who (of men) woorthily may be
termed excellent, knowing the merueilous perfections and virtues of women;
left written in his books, that the man who had not a wife ought especially to
be avoided, considering, that from the woman (as from a most abundant
fountain,) flowed all gifts of bounty and goodness: and the houses where no
women were, ought to be esteemed as vast Deserts, or untilled lands.

Where is true policy, if not in a household? where is perfect honesty, if
not where women are? Saint Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, when he would
produce the example of peoples faithfulness, to be kept and observed between
each other: did he not allege that of Rahab? But because it is a common
matter in the most part of men, to object against women, that they are of weak
courage, and so consequently, very niggardly and covetous: I would demand of
them, were not women in ancient time called Dames, because of their readiness
and francknesse in giving? I have not so many hayres on my head, as I have
known honest women, not only prompt to give most courteous and amiable
presents; but withal, to offer such a zealous heart and affection, as
witnessed they could never be sufficiently requited again: yet done without
expecting public glory and applause, as men do, who are ambitious and
covetous of vain reports.

Seeing women then have shown themselves so virtuous and excellent, it may be
thought a matter not without great reason, that the virtuous Grecians retained
Women's names among them, and not men's: as well knowing by their first
detracters, that Women were singular friends to honor and virtue.

I could (to this effect) allege infinite other reasons and examples, for
confirmation of Women's excellency: but because I have referred ye to
Histories, I will give end to this well employed labor. Yet let me first
entreat ye, to make reverend regard of that you shall find in approved
good Authors: which if ye do, the height and dignity of women will be so
engraven in your minds, as no malignitie whatsoever can prevail against them,
and your selves will truly confess, that the most I can devise to write, can
never reach to the least part of their especial deserving virtues, and most
excellent graces wherewith they are decked and adorned.

And this I can assure ye beside, that the most part of excellent and
virtuous men, have attributed all tytles of honor to Women, daily becoming
their servants in heart, yea, even humble in prostration (as it were) to adore
them, as if in some sort they took part with the highest divinity.

Then let us not fail henceforth to love them hartilye, by example of our
wise and discreet elders, yielding our selves voluntarily as subject to them:
never regarding venomous spightfull tongues, that have not spared to speak
their uttermost against them.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near unto the Exchange.

1599.


