The Remedy of Reason: Not so comfortable for matter, as compendious for
memory.

Wherein the ignorant may gather instruction, the learned confirmation, all men
consolation.

By Charles Gibbon.

Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a Reason of
the hope that is in you, etc. 1. Peter 3.15, 16.

If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought
to know. 1. Cor. 8.2.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin.

1589.

To the right Worshipful Sir Robert Iarmin Knight: And to the Worshipful
Master Henry Blagge Esquier: perfect fruition of infinite felicity.
Solomon, that most renowned and royal King, waying the wretchedness of this
world by the weight of his wonderful wisdom, could no less but redouble his
words, and say: Vanitas vanitatum, Math. 7.33.
vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas. Which seeing it is so (Right
Worshipful) it behooves every one of us, not so much to avoid the causes that
may provoke us to vanity, as to practice all the means that may procure us
to piety; and to walk with such foresight in this terrestrial pilgrimage, as
we may have fruition of felicity in the celestial Paradise; according to
the counsel of our Savior Christ, who wills us first to seek the kingdom
of GOD and his righteousness; Colos. 3 2.
and not dissenting from the saying of the Apostle, Eccle. 1.2.
who persuades us to set our affections on things that are above, and not on
things that are on the earth. Insomuch, as all our knowledge is but vain that
is seduced with vanity; all our wisdom is but mere folly that is carried
away with earthly cogitations; yea, all our doings detestable that tend only
to temporal dispositions: for there is none to be deemed wise indeed, that
will not bestow his talent in the treasure of Gods word, considering it is so
precious that it ought more to be desired than gold, yea than much fine gold;
Psalm. 19 10. Psalm 119.97.
and it is so delectable, that in sweetness it exceeds the honey and the honey
comb; wherein David did oppose his whole delight. And it is so expedient for
us to profit therein, as he that has much may yield somewhat, sithence he
that has less shall not be excused with nothing. The Lord will look for
ten talents where he left five, Matthew. 25.22.
and will punish him that makes no profit where he bestowed one. Hereof it is
I have proceeded in this enterprise, and bestowed my time to the benefit of
others; which although it be not comparable to any commendable work, yet
that is not excusable for any to detract his duty, seeing God will accept a
mite of a willing mind; neither ought to be contemptible amongst others though
all be not current, for the building is furthered by inferior helps though
it be framed by finer heads. Again, the world is now grown into his last age,
wherein sects, schisms, and errors do spread, and sin and iniquity
abounds; insomuch as (I fear me) it is with many of us in England, as it was
with the people of Israel, Exodus 16.
they loathed Manna that fell from heaven for the sustenance of their bodies,
and too too many of us do little regard that spiritual Manna (the word of God)
that is sent for the succor of our souls. Hereof it is I have made choice of
your good Worships, and presented my labors to your godly patronage, assuring
my self that as you be favorers and followers of Gods word, so you will be
defenders of the fruits of the same, and rather be preferrers than defacers of
a forward action: not doubting but your Worships will well accept of it, as a
work importing and proceeding of good will, by the consideration of that
excellent example of the poor widow, preferring the simplicity of the giver
before the sufficiency of the gift; knowing that the imperfection of the
present may be covered by the presumption of the Poet; and I may say in the
want of well doing, Est voluisse satis. Thus being loath to be too tedious in
my Epistle, having observed brevity in all the whole book, I refer the
consideration thereof to your grave censures, submitting my self to your good
courtesies, and committing your Worships to the protection of the Almighty.

Your Worships to command, Charles Gibbon.

To the Christian and courteous Reader.
HE that does publish a matter to the judgment of many, the same requires to
be done, not lightly but deliberatlie; considering it is subject to sundry
Censures, and in reading and judging all are not Candidi Lectores. In regard
whereof, (good Christian Reader) I have published my pains to thy profit, and
presented the liking of it to thy looking over, having (as nigh as I may) not
only cut off all such occasions, as might cause cauillation; but also
ministered such matter as concerns our consolation: and although it be not
polished preciselie for the expectation of the curious, yet it is finished
plainly for the information of the simple. Now it may be, there be many that
will use objections against the triple form of this treatise; because no Art
has reduced all things (and rightly) to Dicotomies. True; but wisdom may
contriue much compendiously, and yet profitablie: besides although I have
framed it as an easy entrance for the erudition of the ignorant, J have not
excluded what may further be added by the consideration of the learned: and
albeit much more might be inserted in many places for prolixitie, yet much
less I fear me is observed of the most part for their utility. Some will
require a more direct placing of things in their order. Certes that is well
placed that is well applied; and those that do more respect the manner of
placing than the matter it self, may be noted in the number of those, who
would have the Psalms of David to precede, and not to follow the book of Job;
making a scrupulous question without cause, when we all know they are both
included in the Scriptures, and contain comfortable matter for our salvation.
Some will not like so many diverse sorts of sundry things congest together in
one heap, other will require more perspicuitie, some one thing, some another.
Insomuch, as he that expects to please the opinions of all people, must
either refrain from open publication of any thing, or refer himself to
their general dispositions in judgment: and this is the common success of
acceptance; many will commend it, most will mislike it, few will follow it.
But as my meaning was to profit the simple by the setting forth of it, so I
shall persuade the godly to a good liking of it: and as for the froward I will
not refell their foolish questions in disputation about it, knowing what the
Apostle Paul says, that foolish and unlearned questions engender strife. So,
2. Tim. 2.23.
wishing all to measure others by the met they would receive themselves, and so
to report as they expect in any enterprise, I both submit my self to
reprehension, so it be pertinent; and commit every one to his own liking, so
it be indifferent. Vale. Bury S. Edmond.

Yours in the Lord, Charles Gibbon.

O Lord
Advance thy glorious Gospel here: Amen.
No papal parts may once appear. Amen.
Give peace and plenty always there: Amen.
Let not the foe procure our fear. Amen.
Enlarge her life whereby we stay, Amen.
And make us thankful every day. Amen.
The remedy of Reason.
Every man's knowledge ought to be reasonable appliable toward God, to
himself, Romans 12.3. That according to his knowledge he show the same in his
life and conversation; or else his great knowledge will co^demn him: Lu. 12.48.
That as he has received the gift, he minister the same to others. 1. Peter
4.10.
to others,
profitable
his precepts. Luther. his promises. Luther. his threatenings. Luther.
by the revelation of his word, by the creation of the world, by the
consideration of al his works.
of Daniel in the lions den. Dan. 6.16. of Jonas in the whales belly. Jonas.
1.15. of the three Children in the fiery oven.
by means: without means: For meat is a mean to serve his providence for the
preservation of health and life here: he that contemns to eat, because his
providence is certain and infallible, does contemn his providence. For if it
were so that meat could not be had, the^ should we not tie his providence to
this mean; for without meat God can help and give health and life here. For
his power and wisdom is infinite, and therefore we should depend upon his
providence, even when al is clean against us.
against means:
By the miraculous examples of compassion. By the manifold words of
consolation. By the death of his only son for our propitiation.
He that mistrusts the mercy of God, denies him to be Love, Truth, Power,
Because of his great love he sent his only son to suffer death for the
remission of our sins. Because he promised for the love of his son, pardon
to all poor sinners so often as they require it in faith, with a co^trite heart.
Because he is as true of his promises, as he is able to perform them; and as
he is of power, so will he do whatsoever pleases him.


for our Redemption. for our Justification. for our Sanctification.
the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, the heart cannot conceive.
1. Cor. 2.9 a God, of God, Is to believe he is the only true and almighty
God; this faith is Historical, for so the diuelles believe as well as the
wicked. Is to believe all is true that he says in the Scriptures of him; and
so do the evil Christians as well as the good, unless they be Heretics. Is
to love him, and to trust in his goodness, and in believing to join our
selves to him by love and obedience; this faith is Evangelical, only proper
to the elect (who live by faith).
in God,
know God, love God, fear God,
unless we keep his commandments. 1. Ioh. 2 mercy, judgment, wherein
consists our salvation. wherewith he punishes the wicked. whereby he
preserves the godly.
justice,
Iere. 9.24 etc. God oftentimes crosses and punishes man upon earth for his
own glory, for example to others, for trial of his faith,
by the blindman. Ioh. 9.3. by the Galileans. Luke 13.3. by Job that patient
man.
by Dreams. by Visions. by Revelations.
GOD has appointed three places for all persons. The joys of heaven The
pains of hell for the wicked; for both.
The use of the earth
GOD is worthelie said to be rich in mercy, mighty in justice, bountiful in
grace,
respects the humble freely. judges the wicked justly. saves sinners
pitifully. Barnard.
Fear. Obedience. Love.
Deuteronomy. 10.12. with all our hearts, with all our souls, with all our strength.
Deuteronomy. 10.12.
All things work for the best to the^ that love GOD. Romans 8.28. entirely,
orderly, pretiouslie. In having a good will to him, rejoicing greatly he is
such a one as he is. In referring ourselves and all that we have to him, in
such manner and measure as he wills. In loving him so dearly that for no
cause, we would loose him or his love, but wish rather to lose our living,
life, and the love of all the world.

Tim. 1.5. Love cannot be without a good conscience. A good conscience cannot
be without faith. Faith cannot be without the word of God.
of him through him for him
are all things. Romans 11.36. True thankfulness consists in these three things.
Comemoration, Abiection, Narration. David did, which made him in feruencie of
spirit burst forth with these speeches: What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon me? Psalm 116.12, 13, 14. Because if we measure
the multitude of Gods benefits with our deserts, we shall find our selves not
worthy of the least, but in respect of our imperfections we are no better than
Abiects, which we should not only acknowledge, and say with the same
Prophet, Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him? Psalm. 144.3. But
also in regard thereof say (with him) I will not die but live (to this end) to
declare the works and goodness of God he has done for me. Psalm. 118.17. Because
it is not enough for us to receive Gods benefits and be mindful thereof, but
also we are bound to make others to profit thereby and praise God, as the same
Psalmograph did. Come (says he) and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will
tell you what he has done to my soul. Psalm. 66.16.

because it is the beginning of wisdom. Pro. 9.10. because it causes us to
depart from all evil. Pro. 19.23. because his mercy is on such from
generation to generation. Luke 1.50
It was the treasure of Hezekiah. Esai. 33.6. childlie fear, servile fear,
natural fear, This appertains to the godly, who fear God only for his
goodness, without any sinister respects. Acts 9.31. This is proper to the
wicked, who fear God only for his punishment. 2. King. 17.3. This is common
to both, for faith oftentimes fails the very elect. Matthew. 14.26.

Barnard says) is The water of wholesome wisdom. The Well of life. The
beginning of knowledge.
He that has this fear before his eyes, his ways are beautiful. his paths
are peaceable. his footsteps are immovable.
because he is said to be terrible, and a God of revenge. Exodus 23. because his
house shall be soon overthrown that fears him not Eccle. 27.3. because he is
such a one as is able to cast both body and soul into hell fire. Matthew. 10.28.
That he had made man on the earth. Genesis 6.6. That he had made Saul King. 1.
Sam. 15.11. That he had sent evil to the Israelites. 2. Sa. 24
Because his eternal counsel is immutable. Hose 13.14. Because he is not man
that he should repent. 1. Sa. 15. Because all his works are exceeding good.
Ec. 39.16
GOD ought to be worshipped of us with our hearts with our mouths with our
works sincerely; boldly; accordingly; To. 10.10. Because with the mouth he
confesses unto salvation. Romans 10.10. Because by works he shows the
fruits of his faith and profession. Iam. 2.17.


If we acknowledge him in our hearts, and deny him with our mouths, or any of
our members, he will deny us; and this is no better than idolatry. Luke 12.9.
If we draw nie him with our lips, and are far from him with our hearts, he
will not hear us; for this is mere hypocrisy. Psalm. 18 41. If we do
works, and they be done without faith, he will not accept them, for it is
but iniquity. To. 14.23.
Phil. 4.6. For although he knows our want before we ask, yet we must
pray: Because he has commanded we should. Luke 21.39. Because we
continually want that grace which he has promised to give. Because the devil
is busy. Least we fall into temptation. Luke 22.40.
fatherly providence, infallible power, infinite goodness, By the which he
continually watches over us. By the which he sustaineth and succoureth our
weakness, being every moment ready to perish. By the which he receives us
into favor being miserably laden with sin.

at all times; in all places; for all persons, Because the Lord has promised
to hear us at what time soever we call upon him faithfully. Ezekiel. 18.19.
Because he is every where, whether shall I go from thy spirit (says David.)
Psalm 139.6. Because it is our duty to pray one for another. Iam. 5.16.

In our prayer we are to consider in whose presence we stand, to whom we
speak, what we desire, Eccl. 18.22. That seeing we intercomo^ with him that
knows the secrets of our hearts, (before who^ nothing is more odious than
hypocrisy) we call upon him in truth, least he reject our suites. That seeing
prayers at adventure are unprofitable (which proceed more of custom from the
lips, than of zeal from the heart) we ask those things which be most to the
glory of God, and the comfort of our consciences, least we ask and eceiue not.
Iam. 4.2.

faithfully without doubting; charitablie without wrath; Because the Lord has
not promised to grant, but only to such as believe to obtain: and therefore
he says, Whatsoever you desire when you pray, believe that you shall have it
and it shall be done unto you. Mar. 11.24. Because we cannot be assured of
Gods favor, unless we forgive (which is after the manner of a Sacrament unto us)
Hereof says our Savior Christ When you pray forgive that your father may
forgive you. Mar. 11.25. Because the Lord requires perseverance in our
prayers, according to that same saying of S. Paul. In due season we shall
reap if we faint not. Gala. 6.9.
incessantly without fainting,
to any idol; to any earthly man; For it is abomination in the sight of God.
Deuteronomy. 27.15. For cursed is he that puts his trust in man. Ier. 17.5. For
Christ is our only Mediator. John 17.3.
to any heavenly Saint;
Our prayers must be used and offered to God by Christ Jesus. John. 5.22.
Because in him the father is well pleased. Matthew. 3 17. Because without him we
can do nothing. Ioh. 15.5.
He that offers an effectual prayer, must have a lively feeling faith. Psalm.
145 peace and love with his neibour. Mat. 6. a life answerable to this faith.
1. Ioh 3.
hindered. 1. Pet. 3. not regarded. Mat. 6. turned into sin. Psalm. 109.
For he was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God.
2. Cor. 5.21. For to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Rom 4.5. For we being
justified through faith, have peace toward GOD through him. Romans 5.1.
our eye; our mouth; Because by him we see the father. Because by him we
speak to the father. Because by him we offer to the father.
our hand.
Because he will try our faith and patience. Hereof says David, I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my cry. Psalm. 40.1.
Because they are impertinent: For we know not what to pray as we ought. Romans
8.26. And therefore we ask and have not, because we ask amiss. Iam. 4.3.
Because they accord not with his pleasure: For this assurance we have, if we
ask according to his will he hears us. 1. John 5.14.
our eyes, our hands, That they may not incline or be carried away with
vanity. Hereof says David, Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity.
Psalm. 119.37. That we should remember our selves to be far off from GOD,
unless we lift up our hearts also on hie and therefore says the same Prophet,
To thee have I lift up my soul. Psalm. 25.1. That thereby we should know, if our
hearts be not far from terrestrial cogitations, we shall hardly receive any
celestial consolations.
our hearts,
Because we should thereby know that he is the author and giver thereof, and
should not only be thankful to him for it, but thereby to seek, love and
worship him. Because we should be persuaded of his good providence toward us,
in that he has not only promised, he will never fail us. Ios. 7. but also
has an outstretched hand to help them that call upon him. Because our faith
of reconciliation and remission of sins, should be exercised through the
asking of these corporal things.
At Moses prayer the plague ceased. Exodus 8. Helias caused great plenty of
rain. 1. King. 17. Queen Hester delivered her and her people. Hest. 14.
of Christ, of David, when he was crucified without cause by the Jews. Mat.
26.4. when he was dispossessed of his kingdom by his son. 2. Sa. 15.26. when
he was afflicted most grieuouslie by Satan. Job. 2.7. and 13.
of Job,
Faith. Hope. Charity. The chiefest of these is Love; because it serves here
and in the world to come. 1. Cor. 13.13

things past: things present: We believe the death of Christ is past. We
believe at this present he sits at the right hand of his father. We
believe that Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
things to come: August.
By the hearing of the word of God preached: By the reverent receiving of the
Sacraments: Because it lays before our eyes the promises which God in his
Gospel has made unto us in his Son. Because they being right lie received
of us, are as pledges and seals of the promises of GOD, made unto us, in his
word. Because God has made an especial promise to us thereby, that he will
hear us whatsoever we ask according to his will.
By prayer and invocation.
simple sound constant in believing in defending in following The word of God
without inquiring or searching in Gods mystical matters, by humane reasons. The
truth thereof without inclining or leaning to the erroneous opinions of the
adversaries of the same. The same word without doubting, for any reason of
man's brain that seems contrary, nor to be drawn away from it by
temptations, promises, or thretnings either of torment or of death.


Such as will know whether they have an effectual faith, must consider The
fruits of it The trial of it The end of it
is good works: affliction salvation Iam. 2.17 For it is not sufficient for us
to believe in christ but also to suffer for his sake. Philip. 1.29. For he that
continues to the end (has this comfort) shall be saved. Mat. 24.

It brings forth fruits. Mat. 7.18. Iam. 3.18. It works by love. Galat.
5.6. It apprehends Gods mercy offered in Christ.
things present: things past: As when I hope I am in Gods favor. As when I
hope my sins be forgiven me. As when I hope to have eternal life.
things to come
Cor. 13. Faith: Knowledge: Martyrdom: It avails little though it move
mountains. It profits little though I speak with tongues of men and Angels.
It helps little though I offer my body to be burned.

Because it is the effect and fulfilling of the Commandment or whole Law. 1.
Tim. 1.5. Because it is a testimony unto us of our translation from death to
life, whereby we are made the children of God and heirs in heaven. 1. Ioh.
3.14. Because it works the cause in us, that God dwells in us, for God is
love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God and God in him. 1. Ioh. 4.8.
Works of superarrogation are very frivolous, for our works are in no wise
auailable to save us, by reason of Their imperfection: Gods election: Christ's
passion. Esai. 64.6. Because we should then chose God rather by our works,
than he should elect us of his mere grace, and then grace were no grace. Romans
11.6. Because his Son should have suffered in vain, if we had any
sufficiency of our selves.

That thereby God may be glorified. Matthew. 5.16. That by their good example
others may be won to the word. 1. Pet. 3.1. That by them they may make their
election sure. 2. Pet. 1.10.
David numbreth three degrees of our salvation. Psalm. 40.10, etc. Gods mercy,
His righteousness, whereby he fatherly pitieth us. whereby he continually
protecteth us. whereby appears his constant favor toward us.
His truth,
efficient cause, material cause, GOD the Father is the beginning of our
salvation. Christ Jesus is he, in whom our righteousness is resident. Faith is
the mean whereby we apprehend the same.
isntrumental cause,
Paul approves the formal cause of our salvation to be the free mercy of
God: for whom he predestinate he callerh, whom he calls he justifies, whom
he justifies he glorifieth. Romans 8.30.
By grace ye are saved through faith. Ephesians. 2.8. By the holy Ghost, which
testifies with our spirit that we are the children of GOD. Romans 8.15. By the
fruits of the Spirit, in having good works, or will to do well. By remorse
of conscience, joined with the lothing of sin, and love of righteousness.
Beza. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11. Faith is gathered by sanctification, and by according
to the truth. Truth is gathered by calling, through the preaching of the
Gospel. The Gospel assures us of a certain hope of glorification.
That the only will and purpose of God; is the chief cause of both. That his
free mercy in Christ, is an inferior cause of salvation. That the hardening of
the heart, is an inferior cause of damnation.
Every one is elected or eiected at the beginning. Every one is an
unprofitable servant when he has done his best. Every one shall have reward
according to his work.
We ought not to condemn or judge any to be reprobate; (albeit to be without
fear of GOD, and reverence of man, are signs of reprobation. Psalm. 64. verse.
4. etc.) Judge not, that ye be not judged. Matthew. 7.1. Iam. 4.12. Because the
Lord is not so merciful in forgiving, as he is miraculous in calling; making of
a persecutor an Apostle, as he did by Paul. Acts. 9.3. Because the very godly
have been greatly ouergone in this matter, as (that great Prophet of the Lord)
Elias, in judging the people of Israel. 1. King. 19.10.
Barn. The dissembling of our weakness. The ignorance of our wretchedness. The
excusing and perseuering in our wickedness.
That we might know the will of God and follow it. That we might believe
that Jesus is Christ the Son of God. Ioh. 20.31. That in believing we might
have life through his name. Ioh. 20.31.
Bar. Law. Prophets Gospel. The Law The Gospel

consist in doing. in believing.
Bib. The secret testimony of the holy Ghost in our hearts, which causes us
to consent thereto. The incomprehensible Majesty of God appearing in the
simple and sincere doctrine therein. The godly agreement of all parts
together, with the orderly disposition, certainty, and success thereof.
The frailty of man, and his prone inclination to evil. The justice of God,
and his severe punishment appointed for obstinate transgressors. The mercy of
God, and his free pardon; promised to penitent sinners.
Every one ought effectually to know and search the holy Scriptures, for
Knowledge; Confirmation; Consolation. Because we must believe nothing, but
that which is approved by them. Acts. 17.11. Because in them is contained
eternal life.

We may gather knowledge in the Scriptures three manner of ways. By diligent
reading of the same with understanding. By continual conference with such as
can open the^. Act. 8.30.
Bib. When it is so preached and heard, as we understand and learn what is
taught thereby. When we receive thankfully that which is given, promised, and
assured therein. When we be moved with desire and diligence, to do that which
it commands.
Preached truly. Believed faithfully. Followed effectually.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? 1. Pet. 4.8. Every unfaithful shall die in his unfaithfulness, says
Esdras. 2. Esdr. 15.4. Every unbeliever is condemned already. John 3.18. and
shall be punished with everlasting perdition. 2. These. 1.
For that which may be known of God is made manifest unto us. Romans 1.19. For
those that know not the law shall perish without the law. Romans 2.12. For the
offering for ignorant sins in the Leueticall law, argues no excuse to be
admitted. Leuit. 4.2.
Matthew. 13. Such a one as hears it and understands it not, by reason the
evil one comes and catches it away out of his heart. Such a one as hears
it and receives it presently with great joy, but when persecution or
tribulation comes, by reason of the word he is offended. Such a one as
hears it, but the cares of this world and the deceiptfulnes of riches choke
it, and the same is made unfruitful.
We ought to resort to the Church of God, Because we may be united and coupled
together by receiving the Sacraments. Because if the Lord has promised to
grant our requests, where two or three be gathered together in his name, how
much more will he be mindful of a multitude that so assemble themselves.
Preaching. Prayer. Sacraments. Preaching inge^dreth faith. Prayer increases
it. Sacraments confirm it.

The Church or Congregation ought to pray for all men, without any difference
of Nation, kind, age, or order: Beza. 1. Tim. 2.3, 4. Because God should not
else be manifested to be the only God of all me^, unless he should show his
goodness in saving of al sorts of men. Because his Son Christ Jesus should not
be seen to be the only Mediator between God and of all sorts of men, by
having taken upon him that nature of man, which is common to al men, unless he
had satisfied for all sorts of men, and made intercession for all.
Signs or badges of christianity: Seals or pledges of our faith: Assurances
of our salvation.
whereof there be 2. Baptism. The Lords Supper.
Bib. Teaches us to put on Christ, that his righteousness may cover our
sinfulnes. Galat. 3.27. Assures us we are so grafted into Christ, that all
our corruption is clean washed away. Ephesians. 5.26.27. Charge us to mortify,
and die to sin, that we may become his servants, and live in mutual amity.
Bib. Shows us, that the body and blood of Christ crucified, is the only
food for the regenerate. Assures us, that Christ is wholly ours, and that by
faith our souls are fed and nourished in him unto life everlasting. Requires
a thankful remembrance of his death, with unity amongst brethren.
when we receive it only by the visible sign, without regard of the
invisible grace. when we receive it more of custom than good consideration,
or more for fear than good affection. when we receive it disorderly, (being
dronken) or with a corrupted conscience (continuing in malice or enmity).
received reverently: eaten effectually: digested thankfully.
therefore let every one try and examine his knowledge. his faith. his
repentance.
Articl. Religio. 26. Because they do it in Christ his name, and not in their
own. Because their wickedness cannot take away the effect of the ordinance.
Because of Christ's institution and promise, so it be received rightly by faith
These three things are to to be noted (whereof heretofore there has arrise
some question) concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. By whom we receive
it. with who^ we receive it. How often we receive it. Artic. pe. we may
communicate with every one, so they be not such as are notoriously known to
be dronkards, adulterers, and such like: for that is prohibited. 1. Cor. 5.11.
we may receive at al times, so our faith and conformity be fit for the same;
otherwise it will turn to our condemnation (says Paul.) 1. Cor. 11.27.

It is a pitiful, nay rather a pestiferous thing, to see such placed in the
Ministry, as be Ignorant Negligent Impudent in learning: in their calling: in
their living: Prouer. 29.18. For they are accursed that do the work of GOD
negligentlie. Ier. 48.10. For their lewdnes makes the word of God worse liked
of 1. Sam. 2.17.


blind watchmen. Esa. 56.9. domme dogs. Esa. 56.10. subtle foxes. Eze. 13.4.
who destroy Gods vine for their own advantage. of the sincerity of their
doctrine, of the integrity of their lives, of all their whole actions,
that it be agreeable to the word of God. they be comfortable to the same
word. they be profitable to the example of others.
careful; watchful; fearful; Because they must one day yield an account of
their stewardship. Because his blood shall be required at their hands that dies
in his iniquity through their negligence. Ezekiel. 33.6. Because an hard judgment
shall try him that bears rule. Wisd. 6.5.

accepted loved obeyed for their office sake, for their works sake, for
commandment sake, Because they represent the person of God. Luke 9.41. Mar.
10.41. Because they dispose his secrets and mysteries. 1. These. 5.13. Because
they are appointed overseers and watchers for our souls, as those that must
yield account for them. Heb. 13.17.


Peter wills preachets, pastors, and such like, to feed their flock, caring
for it: 1. Peter 5.2. Not by constraint, but willingly. Not for filthy lucre,
but of a ready mind. Not as though they were lords over Gods heritage, but as
examples to them.
S. Paul showed a most worthy example to preachers and such like, by his
duetifulnes painfulnes contentment in preaching: in laboring: in living: Acts
20.31. For he wrought with his own hands to minister to his necessities, not
only because he would be chargeable to none, but also to help to relieve
others. 1. Cor. 4.12. For although his living was little, yet he well accepted
of all estates, without coveting any man's silver, gold, or apparel Acts 20.33.


Preachers must teach the word of God, whether the people regard it, or no:
Deuteronomy. 18.19. Because the Lord will use the means of his servants to make the
wicked more faulty to prove his. Iere. 7.27, etc. Because it is their duty
to be instant in season and out of season. 2. Tim. 4.2.
Caiphas John 11.51. Saul. 1. Sam. 10.10. Judas the Apostle.
therefore we must try the spirits whether they be of God. 1. Ioh. 4 1.
Plowmen from the fields to be Prophets. 1. King. 19.19, 20. Shepherds from the
folds to be zealous professors. Psalm. 78.7. Fisherme^ from their nets to be
followers of him. Mat. 4.18.
Lot that ancient Patriarch, became incestuous. Genesis 19.30. David that
excellent Prophet, committed homicid. 2. Sam. 11.25, 26 Peter that good
Apostle, proved perjured. John 18.27.
Iezabel did threaten the death of Eliah; yet he lived and was taken up into
heaven, when she died, and was eaten of dogs. 2. King. 19.35, 36. Saul
intended the death of David; yet he escaped and became King, but Saul procured
his own death most desperately. 1. Sa. 31.4. 2. Sa. 1.9, 15. Herod put to
death John Baptist; but as his deeds were detestable before God, so his end
was ignominious to the world, for he was eaten to death with worms. Acts 12.13.
Because Satan by policy, procures many to a disdain of their persons, as a
mean to induce them to a disliking of their doctrine. Because the Spirits of
error are now spread abroad which will deceive the hearts of many, and cause them
to become cursed speakers, (especially against Gods ministers. 2. Tim. 3.2
Because these are those perilous days wherein it was long sithence prophesied,
that many should be despisers of the^ which are good. 2 Timothy 3
Peter was three times commanded to feed his flock: which is expounded 3.
ways. with sound doctrine. with honest life. with good hospitality.
Bar. Ich. 21. This word (behold) does commonly import some great admiration
unto us, as it is used concerning Christ at his Nativity: Passion: Second
coming: Luke 2.10. Behold, (at his yielding up of the ghost) the veil of the
Temple was rent in twain, the earth shaked, stones were cloven, the graves
opened, etc. Math. 27.51. Behold, (says our Savior Christ) I come shortly,
and my reward is with me to give to every man as his work shall be. Apoc.
22.12.

Not as a Judge, but as a Physician. Not as a destroyer, but as a Savior. Not
to call the just, but sinners to repentance.
Of the seed of Abraham. Of the tribe of Judah. Of the stock of David.
Beth-lehem brought him forth. Nazareth brought him up. Capernaum was his
dwelling place.

Theoph. was transfigured upon Mount Thabor. Matthew. 17.1. was crucified at
Jerusalem. Heb. 13.12. was taken into heaven at Bethania. Luke 24.50.
He lives upon the earth before his passion 33. years. after his resurrection.
40. days Acts 1.8.
Godhead, Soul, Body,
who as touching his humanity had no father. as concerning his divinity had
no mother.
That the Scriptures might be fulfilled. Matthew. 26.56. That he might bruise the
Serpents head. Genesis 3.15. That we might have life through him. 1. Ioh. 4.9.
generally, specially, valiantly, for all the world. 1. Tim. 2.6. for those
that believe. Heb. 9.12. for that he overcame death.

Judas betrayed him, Peter forsware him. All the rest forsook him.
And a great multitude followed him to his death: Some to hurt him. Many to
mock him. All to see the end of him.
He reconciled us to his father. Colo. 1.20. 1. Ioh. 2.2. He redeemed us from
the curse of the law. Gal. 3.13. He showed us an easier way to heaven. Matthew.
11.30.
Curse, Sin, Servile,
considering The quality of his death Deuteronomy. 21.23. The integrity of his life.
Esau. 53.9. The equality of his estate. Phi. 2
Because he foreshewed it to his Apostle. Matthew. 17.9. Because his flesh might
not see corruption. Acts 2.31. Because we might be justified through him. Romans
4.25.
That he might be fully glorified. Ioh. 7.39. That he might send down the
Comforter. Ioh. 16.7. That he might become our Mediator. Ioh. 17.3.
Sin. Righteousness: Because they believe not in him. John 16.8. Because he is
gone to his father, etc. verse. 9. Because the prince of this world is judged.
10.
Judgment.
Christ has shown us a worthy and wonderful good example, of Patience:
Humility: Esa. 53.7. Because he took upon him the shape of a servant being
equal with his father. Phil. 2.7. Because he laid down his own life for us,
than this what love can be greater?
Love:
Priest: King: Because by his only sacrifice he appeased his fathers wrath.
Because he reigns over all. Ioh. 5.22. Because he declared his fathers will.
Acts. 7.37.
Prophet:
the Father, the Word, who sent his Son. which became flesh. which proceeds
from both.
the Holy Ghost,
2. Ioh. 57. Spirit. Water. Blood.
This assures us of our Adoption Romans 8.16. Regeneration. John 3.5.
Redemption. Ephesians. 1.7.
follow after him: pass through him: draw near him. because he is the
truth. because he is the way. because he is the life.

the truth, the way, the life,
manifests to us his Beza. Nature: Will: Office:
So that in him we must begin. continue. end.
deny himself. take up his Cross. follow him.
wherein is laid before us, Bondage, Baseness, In denying himself. In taking up
the Cross. In following Christ.
Hardness,
Barn. By his sound doctrine. By his strange miracles. By his mild answers.
Articl. Relig. 3. Psalm. 16.10. John 20.17. Ephe. 4 9.
For so we confess in the Creed of Nicene. Athanasius. The Apostles.
His speech to the thief upon the Cross, this day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. His yielding up the ghost when he said, It is finished. Luke 23.43.
His agony in the garden, in sweting drops of blood and water.
For in hell is no redemption Luke 26.26. Because by seeing, they should see
and not perceive. Because by hearing, they should hear and not understand.
Because it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Matthew. 13.35.
Mat. 13.13. To show the great power, glory, and goodness of his father.
Matthew. 15.31. To approve himself the son of God. Acts 2.22. And that he was
sent of him. Ioh. 11.42. To confirm the authority and excellence of his
doctrine, to win the unbelievers to it. John 2.23.
Beza. Hebr. 2.4. Signs: Wonders: Signs, because they appear one thing, and
represent another. Wonders, because they import some strange and vnaccustomable
thing. Virtues, because they give us a glimse of Gods power.
Virtues.
the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, He sent his son for our
reconciliation. His righteousness is ours by imputation. This proceeds from
both, for our sanctification.

yet all one union. he has done: he still does: Because he did not only
sacrifice himself upon the cross for our sakes, but also satisfied his
fathers wrath for our sins. Because he did not only suffer for us, but became
also a continual intercessor for us. Because he has not only saved us, but
shall also come to judge us.
he will do:
Math. 24.36. Mark. 13.32. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 1.
For it is not for us to know the times and the seasons the Father has put in
his own power. Acts 1.12. Unto men. Into men. Unto men, in the flesh. Ioh.
1.14. Into men, by his spirit. Ioh 14.18. Against men, in judgment. Apoc.
22.12.
Against men.
Every man's end is imminent and uncertain. Iam. 4.14. Every man's death is
his latter day. Hebr. 9.27. Every man as he dies shall be judged. Eccle: 11.3.
fearful joyful to the wicked; to the godly; Because that day is to them
the beginning of their woe. Because it is to them the full fruition of their
felicity. Because of the sudden alteration of all things.
to both;
wonderful
the Figtree: charity: Because it florisheth. Mat. 24.33. Because it waxes
cold. Ma. 24 Because it abounds. Ma. 24
iniquity:
As a woman travailing with child. As lightning from the East. In the hour we
think not.
Be sober and watch: for happy are those servants, which the Lord when he
comes shall find waking. Luk 12.37 The day of the Lord is at hand, and yet the
world endure: we must not suppose those words to be frivolous or frustrate: for
thereby the Lord does make manifest unto us his infinite wisdom his exceeding
mercy in computation of years: in delaying of the day. Because he does not
recko^ or record the time according to our knowledge or reason: for one day is
with him as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. Psalm 90.4.
Because he would not have us perish, but would all men to come to repentance.
2. Pet. 3.9. Because we do not use the bountifulnes of his patience and long
sufferance accordingly To. 2.4
in consideration thereof.
our impendent misery
cogitation. communication: action. Our thoughts shall either accuse or excuse
us. Romans 2.15. Our words shall either justify or condemn us. Matthew. 12.37.
Our works shall then have their due reward. Hebr. 9.27.

the law: the devil: our conscience:
besides that We shall stand belples before so many Judges, as have excelled
us in good works. We shall be cast by so many evidences, as have given us
example of good life. We shall be convinced with (...) witnesses, as have
admonished us with wholesome counsel, and by their virtuous deeds, have been
patterns for us to imitate.
He will be the supreme of all the world, exempting himself from al
obedience to any earthly prince, or reverence to any people when Christ was
content to acknowledge the authority of the Magistrate in paying toll, yea,
even to such as were enemies to Religion. Matthew. 17.27. He gives out his feet
to be kissed of men, even of Kings and Emperors, when Christ did never so lay
forth his feet, but that he washed and wiped his poor Disciples feet; and
that because they should do, as he had done to them. Ioh. 13.5, 15. He does of
pity free one, or other, every day from the parties of Purgatory, when our
Savior Christ did free none at all from those hellish pains.
The soul of Lazarus received into Abraham's bosom. Luke. 16.22. The soul of
the thief ascending into Paradise. Lu. 23.33. The soul of the rich man
descending into hell. Luke. 16.23.
The secrets of God are unsearchable. The joys of heaven are unspeakable. The
pains of hell are intolerable.
Prudentlie, Penitentlie, Prouidentlie, To dispose and order things present. To
consider his misdeedes past. To provide and forsee for things to come.

S Paul divides man into; parts. Spirit. Soul. Body.
for then is man fully sanctified, when his mind thinks nothing when his
will couets nothing. when his body executes nothing.
contrary to the will of GOD. These. 5.23. Barnard. Soberlie. Justly. Godly.
concerning himself, concerning his neighbor. concerning God. That he deal
plainly, uprightly, and charitablie, without dissimulation. That he presume not
too much of himself, but refer all to Gods good pleasure and providence.


Augustine: If forgetfulness confound not his memory. If error obscure not his
understanding. If iniquity deprave not his will.
by creation by fall and sin by regeneration he was made like to the image of
God, which image is expounded here Ephesians. 4.24. he became slave unto Satan,
and so procured the same thraldom to al posterities. he is ingrafted into
christ by faith, and in him has recovered his former right.

Rejoice in adversity. Bear all crosses patiently. Lament his sin
sorowfullie.
following the example of Paul. 2. Cor. 11.30. Job. 1. verse 1. Peter. Luke.
22.62.
Creation: Conversation: Dissolution: Because he is dust, and to dust he shall
return. Genesis 3. Because he must one day yield account of his living. Eccle.
12.24. Because his end is uncertain; and as he falls, such judgment follows.
Eccl. 11.3.

To fear him To love him To keep his commandments for his justice: for his
goodness: to confirm it. Because it is horrible to fall into his hands. Heb.
10.31. Because he loved us first. 1. Ioh 4.19. Because those that love him
will keep his commandments. 2. Ioh. 5.3.


James wills every man to be Swift to hear. Slow to speak. Slow to wrath.
James. 1.19. By Substance, By Nature, By Knowledge, he was made of the dust.
Genesis 3.7. he is the child of wrath. Ephe. 2.3. he is but a beast. Ier. 10.14.

Vanity: Arrogancy: Iniquity: Because of himself he cannot think a good
thought, much less do a good deed, 2. Cor. 3.5. Because he attributes that
to himself which is proper to GOD: for every good and perfect gift comes
from above. Iam. 1.17. Because he does not acknowledge the giver thankfully:
for all praise and glory is to be given to God. Colos. 3.17. Herod by
abridging God of his glory came to a most miserable end. Acts. 12.23.

His birth being sinful. Eccl. 10.9 His life being miserable. Eccl. 10.9 His
body being worms meat. Eccl. 10.9
Because GOD has commanded he should labor six days. Exo. 20.9. Because he
is worse than an infidel that provides not for his household. 1. Tim. 5.8.
Because he may avoid the inconvenience of idleness. 2. Thessa. 3.10. which
brings much evil. Prouer. 12.11.
Wise. Simple. Foolish. wise, unto that which is good. Romans 16.19. simple,
concerning evil. Romans 16.19. foolish, in respect of this world. 1. Cor. 1.20.

Their condition: Their corruption: The season: Because they think it not
enough to err and do evil themselves, except they draw others with them, as
appears in Esa. 30.10. Wisd. 14.21. Because by continuance they will defile
many. Hebr. 12.15. For a little leaven leaueneth the whole lu^pe. 1. Cor. 5.7.
Because in these latter times many shall give heed to Spirits of error, and
doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4.1.

to thorns; to chafe; to tares; Because they be as pricks to procure hurt to
the godly. Because as the wind does scatter the chafe, so shall they be
soon cut off from the face of the earth. Because as tares are to be bound in
bundels and burnt, so shall they be in hell fire.

to Foxes; to Dogs; to beasts; Because they are subtle in undermining, and
doing of mischief: in so much as the Church requires to have the foxes taken
away. Cant. 2.15. Because they are currish in controlling, and barking against
all goodness. Hereof Paul wills the Phillip. to beware of dogs. Phil. 3.2
Because they are profane in their lives, and degenerate from their kind worse
than beasts. So Paul complains that he fought with beasts at Ephesus after
the manner of men. 1. Cor. 15.32.

Supported purposelie: Accompanied willingly: Condemned utterly: Because it
is abomination before God to justify the wicked. Prouer. 17.15. Because it is
dangerous, for he that touches pitch shall be defiled. Eccle. 13.1. Because
the Lord will have mercy on whom he will, and when he please. Rom 9.15.

The face of the Lord is against him. 2. Pet. 3.12. Tribulation and anguish
shall be upon his soul. Romans 2.9. There shall be no end of plagues to him.
Prouer. 24.20.
By the devil, who watches to work our overthrow. By our own concupiscence
to consent to his suggestions. By vicious company and ill persuasions of
others when we be seduced.
Barn. He talks with us wittily. He eggeth us cunningly. He deceives us
craftelie.
whom if we resist by faith, the Lord will Ouerlook us fighting. Succor us
fainting. Crown us ouercomming.
They believe there is a God, and fear and tremble. Iam. 2.19. They can plead
Scripture for their own purpose. Matthew. 4.6. They acknowledge Christ's coming
to judgment. Matthew. 8.29.
Subtle Strong Cruel as a Serpent: as a Lion: as a Tiger: For he can
transform himself into many shapes (yea into an Angel of light) and use
many shifts to deceive withal. For he is not so busy in seeking daily for
his pray, as he is forcible to resist where he assaulteth. For where he has
any entrance at all, he will never rest until he brings to confusion.


To distrust in God. To the desire of riches and honor. To a vain confidence of
himself.
Beza. Mat. 20. We have 3. cruel foes that fight against the spirit in this
life, the Flesh. World. Devil.
Faith. Prayer. the word of God.
Beza. 1. Pet. 2.11. Because those lusts although they flatter us, yet they
cease not to fight against our salvation. 2. Cor. 10.3. Because we are citizens
in heaven, and therefore ought to lead our lives thereafter, although we be
strangers here. Because the glory of God is greatly set forth by that
means, whilst by example of our honest life, even the most profane men are
brought unto God, and submit themselves unto him.
Paul.) Phil 3.19. Whose God is their belly. Whose glory is their shame.
Whose end is damnation.
The whole world lies in wickedness 2. Ioh. 5.19. The wretchedness of this
world, made Solomon say Job say Paul say Eccle. 7 3. My soul is cut off
though I live. Job. 10.1. I desire to be loosed from this life. Phil. 1.23.

The fashion of it goes away. 1. Cor. 7.31. The wisdom of it is mere
foolishnes. Job. 37 The amity of it is enmity with God. Ia. 4.4
Use this world as though you used it not, says Paul? 1. Cor. 7. The
wretchedness of his life. The grieuousnes of his sins. The greatness of his
account. because it is but a continual temptation and full of misery. because
they will more increase by continuance. because it will be the more fearful at
the yielding up.

Because it is variable and nothing but vanity. Because of the innumerable
evils they are subject to. Because they long to be clothed with the heavenly
habit.
David doubting of evil dealing, fained himself mad to save his life. 1. Sam.
21.13.14. Paul perceiving their cruelty that would kill him, had rather in
the night be let down in a basket, than abide. Acts 9.25. Peter fearing
death, did forswear his master. John. 18.27.
Fight, Faint, Fall,
by reason of their Adversary. Infidelity. Infirmity.
Yet they shall not be cast away. Psalm. 37.24. He that lives best does daily
sin. He is happy that has grace to repent. He is blessed to whom God
imputes no sin.
of Ignorance, of Infirmity, of Malice, as Paul did. 1. Tim. 1.13. as David
did. 2. Sam. 11.2. etc. as Nebuchad-nezzer did. Dan. 3.1.

Every sinner must beware of these three things, of procrastination,
presumption, provocation, Matthew. 24.50 In sinning still upon hope. Romans 6.1. In
sinning obstinatlie against the holy Ghost.

Sin is nothing else, but A sweet poison. A flattering death. A destruction of
the soul.
Original. Actual.
Adam did further his fall, and increase his sin in the garden three ways.
By ambition, By hypocrisy, By impenitencie, Genesis 3.6. because he hid the
cause of his nakedness, which was the breach of Gods commandments. Genesis 3.10.
because he was so far from acknowledging his transgression, that he burdened
God with his fault, in that he had given him a wife. Genesis 3.12.

It appears by this that sin is Excerable, Detestable, Intolerable, Genesis
6.6. because he destroys dumme creatures for our cause. Zephan. 1. verse. 3.
because he would not spare his only son for our sins.

That God is as well a father as a Lord. That Christ is as well a Savior as a
Judge That the Scripture include as well a Gospel as a Law.
By his readiness in calling, By his worthiness in sparing, By his unwillingness
in striking, before they cry (says the Lord) I will answer, and whilst they
are yet thinking what to speak I will hear. Esa. 65.24. he makes as though
he saw not the sins of men, because they should amend. Wisd. 11.20. he takes
no pleasure in the destruction, but in the conversion of sinners. Ezekiel. 18.23.

Ask and ye shall have. Seek and ye shall find. Knock and it shall be opened
unto you.
I stand at the door and knock, etc. Apoc. 3.20. Must acknowledge his sins
sorowfullie with the prodigal son. Must show a hearty contrition for the
same, and loath them. Must do good works worthy amendment afterward. Asts.
26.20.
He that is fully persuaded of the forgiveness of his sins, it behooves him
to remember these three things. the mercy of God. the subtlety of Satan. the
frailty of himself. That he watch and pray continually, for the devil
goes about like a roaring Lion seeking who^ he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.8.
That seeing his own infirmities he may the rather depend upon God, and crave
his mercy to increase his faith and strengthen his weakness, or else he shall not
be able to withstand the opposite evils, he is subject to.

God shows himself to all his people. Merciful Good Just to the elect, to
the reprobat, to both of them Albeit they cannot feel the sweet comfort of
the same. In giving judgment.


Of the time. Of the manner. Of the end. For the Lord will not be found at all
times, but requires opportunity. Hereof faith the Prophet Esai, seek the Lord
while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nere Esai. 55.6. The five
foolish virgins coming too late were excluded. Matthew. 25.12. For the Lord will
not only have such as call upon him depart from iniquity, but will also have
their prayers proceed from the very heart. Then shall thou call (says the same
Prophet to the hypocrites) and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry and he
shall say, here I am. Esai. 58.9. For God requires not only importunity of us
in asking; as appears by the woman of Canaan. Matthew. 15.28. but also
respects the end of our requests, in asking according to his will, otherwise
we may ask and receive not, because we ask amiss to consume it on our
lusts. Iam. 4.3.

Acts. 3.13, 14, 15, 17, 29. Demonstration of the matter. Reprehension of the
offense. Exhortation to the sinner. In showing him (by the word of God) it is a
sin, that it may so appear unto him: whereby he may the better acknowledge
it before God. In reproouing him (by the judgments of GOD pronounced against
the same) that he may both hear the punishment he has worthelie deserved,
and also thereby be the more terrified from attempting evil. In persuading him
(by the promises of Gods mercy) that he may not only be driven from
despair, but also by that means be drawn to amendment.

Manasses in his conversion, does minister singular matter to every Sinner,
wherein he may note three special causes for his comfort. 1. That GOD will
punish the wicked that he intends to save: that by this means they may seek
him by repentance, according to that same saying of the Psalmist. When he slew
them, they sought him, and returned and sought God early. Psalm. 78.34. 2. That
the mercy of GOD is very great, who although he will not suffer sin to
pass unpunished, yet he is ready to forgive, though it be very grievous, as
he has promised by the Prophet Esaias to such as heartily repent. Esai. 5.7,
8, 9. 3. That those whom GOD has thus called, are not to return to their
sins, as the dog to his vomit, but as becomes new borne children, to
live in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. Luke. 1.75.
For the glory of himself: For the good of them: For the profit of others:
Because he will have his power known to prevail above his Creatures, that it
is he that can make them rise and fall at his good pleasure. Because he will
have their own imperfections and infirmities appear unto them, what they are
of themselves, if he does fail them but a little, to the end they should
not presume of themselves, but altogether depend upon his providence and
mercy. Because such as be almost drowned in the deapth of their sins,
should not fall into desperation, considering the very elect have offended
most horribly, but that they should be encouraged thereby to call for grace:
seeing his hand is not yet shortened, but that he can help others as he did
those. Esai. 59.1.

That women might minister the Sacraments, because Zipporah did circumcise her
son Exodus 4 25. That we ought to pray for the dead, because Judas did so 2.
Mac. 12.44. That we may desperately kill our selves, because Razis did so
(who^ the author of the Maccha. much commends.) 2. Maccha. 14.41.
That they should not be puffed up with any presumption of themselves. That
they may be made perfect by that continual exercise. 1. Cor 12.9. That they
ought the more earnestly to be instant in prayer.
By prosperity, By poverty, By persecution To see if they will repose more
felicity in their goods, than in him that gave them, as he did by Abraham in
offering his son. Genesis 22.1.2. To see if they will not as patiently depart
from their goods, as he was willing to bestow them: as he did by Job, by taking
away all he had. Job. 1. To see if they will rather deny him, than die in his
defense: as he did by many Prophets, Apostles, and godly Martirs.

That they may not be too proud with prosperity. That by this means they may
the better fee their own misery. That thereby they may the rather depend on
his mercy.
Do nothing Say nothing Think nothing
that may make To the glory of God. To the comfort of themselves. To the
edifying of others.
a Confirmation of Gods love. a Probatio^ of their faith and patience. a
Purgatio^ of their lives: Because he will not suffer them to be condemned with
the world, and therefore he chastises those he loves. Hebr. 12.6. Job. 5.17.
Because he will see if they will stand as strict to him now, as they promised
in prosperity; not that God is ignorant of the issue, but because he would
have it appear to others, that he does crown such with his glory as continue
constant. Mat. 24.13. Because he uses these crosses to make them remember
their miserable estate, that by these means they may be made perfect against
the day of restoration.

Romans 5.3. Tribulation brings forth patience. Patience, experience:
Experience, hope:
and hope makes not ashamed. Beza. 1. Pet. 4 Because the godly communicate
with Christ in their afflictions, and therefore shall in time also be partakers
of his glory. Because in suffering these crosses, their adoption is sealed in
them by the spirit of GOD, although the infidels think far otherwise, who in
afflicting the godly blaspheme God. Because they are not afflicted for their
evil doings, but for righteousness sake, which ministers unspeakable joy to
them.
That he will lay no more upon them than he will make them able to bear. 1.
Cor. 10.13. That he will deliver them out of their troubles in a good time.
That he will give them a Crown of life in the end. Apoc. 2.10.
We must by many afflictions enter the kingdom of heaven. Acts. 14.22. All
that live godly in Christ shall suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3. All the
afflictions in this life are not counted worthy the glory of the life to
come. Romans 8.18.
Beza. Iam. 1.3.4 Because their faith is tried through afflictions, which ought
to be most pure, for so it is behouable for them. Psalm. ^^ Because patience a
far passing and more excellent virtue is by this means engendered in them.
Because the Cross is as it were the instrument wherewith God does polish and
fine them: therefore the work and effect of afflictions, is the perfecting of
them in Christ.
That by it their faith may be confirmed. Phil. 4.5. That thereby they may be
made perfect and entire. Iam. 1.4. That after they have done the will of God,
they might receive the promise. Heb. 10.36
of Christ himself, the only pattern of patience. of Job, whose patience
ye have heard of. Ia^. 5 10. of the Prophets, whose patient examples appear
unto us.
That their talk be godly. That Gods law be in their heart. That their life be
upright.
Psalm. 37.30.31. etc. Prosperity of themselves: of the wicked:
Extremity of affliction: Because it makes them to forget God. Hereof, says
David, I said in my prosperity I should not be moved. Psalm. 30.6. Because it
makes the^ dispute with God, thinking he does not rightly consider of them:
as the same Prophet did. Psalm. 73.13. Because it makes them despair of God,
thinking be would destroy them utterly. In so much as the same Psalmist
burst forth with these sayings. Stay thine anger from me, that I may recover
my strength before I go hence, and be not. Psalm. 39.13.

Cornelius was called a devout man in 3. respects. Act. 10.2 He feared God,
with all his household. He gave much alms to the people He prayed to God
continually.
Job a just man likewise in 3. respects. He feared God. Job. 1. He eschewed
evil Job. 1. He did good works. Job. 31.16.
Just in word. Upright in deed. Undefiled in thought.
Barnard. Because thereby God shows himself Judge of the world, and by this
means continues his honor and glory. Psalm. 94.2. Because hereby he shows
he has care over his children, in that he punishes their enemies. Psalm.
41.11. Because by their example others may fear, and be reformed, in some
measure. Deuteronomy. 17.13.2. These. 3.14.
Because Christ himself did so; whose example we ought to imitate. Luke 3.24.
Because it is not praise worthy, to love where we are beloved; for so do the
hypocrites and publicans. Matthew. 5.46. Because it is our duty not only to
suffer injury, but also to do good Romans 12.17.20.
Their prayers are unprofitable, if they ask mercy and forgive not Mark.
11.25. The Lords Supper is profaned, if they receive it unworthily. 1. Cor.
11.27. They themselves are but manslaiers, if they live not in charity. 1.
John 3.13, 15.
Syracke) my soul loves. Unity of brethren. Love of neighbors. Agreement of
man and wife.
Eccle 25.1. A mutual friend, A malicious foe, A manifest sinner, in God: for
the love of God: for humanity sake. because in loving otherwise he shall
offend GOD: for he that loves father or mother, (much less a common friend)
more than me (says our Savior Christ) is not worthy of me. Matthew 10.37.
because he cannot love God whom he has not seen, if he loves not his
brother that he has seen. 2. John. 4.20. because we ought to have a
consideration of his soul, though we have a detestation of his sins:
according to the counsel of the Apostle, who wills us to count such a one,
not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.


To envy their estate: To rejoice at their fall: To render evil for evil:
because envy turns to a man's own evil in the end, according as it is
written, no envious persons or such like shall enter heaven. Gala. 5.21.
because it is dangerous, lest the Lord see it (as Solomon says) and it
displease him, and he turn his wrath from him, to be avenged on thee. Prouer
24.18. because it is the part of a good Christian, not to use the means to
further a mischief, but to overcome evil with good. To. 12.20.

David being both a Prince and a Prophet, shows wherein a Kings charge
stands. To provide faithfully for his people. To guide them by counsel. To
defend them by power.
Psalm. 78.72. etc. Men of courage, fearing God. Exodus 18.21. Men dealing
truly, hating covetousness. Exodus 18.21. Men of wisdom, and understanding
Deuteronomie 1.13.
David having but privily cut off the lap of King Saul's garment, was touched
vehemently in heart for it 1. Sam. 24.5, 6. Absalom having betrayed King David
his father, came to an untimely death, for he was hanged by the hair of his
head upon an Oak. 2. Sam. 18.14. Achitophel being a Coadiutor, in preferring
the lewd practices of Absalom against his father; when he perceived his
counsel prevailed not, he went desperately and hong himself. 2. Sam. 17.23.
in thinking evil: in uttering evil: in committing evil: for the soul of
the heaven shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall declare the
matter. Eccle. 10.20. for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the
Ruler of thy people. Exodus 22.28. for if the Lord does detest the evil intent,
and forbid filthy speeches, how much more does he abhor the act of evil,
and will punish the malefactors.

To have the favor of the people. To procure their wealth. To be gentle and
loving toward them.
Ester. 10.3. etc Conscience: Fear: Necessity: Because they are ordained of
GOD: whose will is, they should be obeyed. Romans 13.5. Because they are his
ministers, to take vengeance on all that do evil. Romans 13 4. Because where no
rule is, all things go to ruin Judge. 16.6.

To defend and preserve the godly. 1. Pet. 2.14. To bridle and punish the
wicked. 1. Pet. 2.14. To judge righteouslie between both. Deuteronomy. 16.18.
That the higher they are placed, the sorer is their trial. Wisd. 6.8. That
their negligence in suffering evil is their iniquity. That the ill example of
themselves is a double sin.
Partiality Cruelty Briberie in respecting persons: in ministering justice: in
detayning right: for that is abomination in the sight of GOD. Leu. 19.15. Deuteronomy.
1.17. for such measure as they mete, shall be met to the^ again. Matthew. 4.24.
for fire shall consume the houses of bribes Job. 15.


Wife. Children. Servants
and how to use them being well disposed. evil inclined.
To know the state of his flock. Pro. 27.23. To instruct them in the fear of
God. Psalm. 78.5. To provide carefully for his family. 1. Tim. 5.8.
Because she comes of his own flesh: and therefore, who will be bitter to
his own body. Because they are the weaker vessels, and therefore who will not
bear with their infirmities. Because she was made as a comforter to man. and
therefore he is worse than a beast that will be cruel to her.
The prioritie of man's creation. The superiority of his placing. The
iniquity, of the woman's procuring. because Adam was first formed, then Eve
afterward for his sake. 1. Tim. 2.13. because man was made to bear rule:
whereunto Paul very well alludeth and says: that as Christ is the head of
the Church, so is the man of the woman. Ephesians. 5.23. because the man was
deceived by the woman, whereupon God enjoined her, (amongst other) this
punishment of subjection. 1 Timothy 2.14. Genesis 3.16.

That they bring them up carefully in the information of God, least they grow
graceles. Ephe. 6.4. That they bridle them discretly, while they are young,
least they grieve them when they are old. Prouer. 22.6. That they provoke the^
not too rigorously at any time, least they discourage them. Col. 3.21.
They shall live long upon the earth. Ephe. 6.1, 2, 3. They shall prosper in
all their proceedings. Ephe. 6.1, 2, 3. They shall have joy of their own
children. Eccle. 3.6.
by the law of God. by the course of Nature by the rule of Reason.
So it be in the Lord. Mat. 10.^7. Masters should continually remember, That
they shall receive for the wrong they offer, of him who respects no persons.
That they be as careful to redress their own faults, as ready to reprove
their servants escapes.
To obey their masters in the Lord, without murmuring. To do their duty in
singlenes of heart, without eye service. Ephe. 6.6. To suffer patiently
rebukes and chastisements, without resisting.
Impiety: Security: Misery.
As appears by the parable of The young man. Mar. 10.22 The rich man. Luke. 12.
Dives and Lazarus. Luke 16
Amos. 6. verse. 1. Esai. 65. verse. 13. Iam. 5. verse. 1.
A rich man shall hardly enter the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 20. They gather
them for such (as Solomon says) as will be good to the poor. Prouer. 28.8.
The rust of their gold and silver (as James faith) shall be a witness against
them, and eat their flesh as it were fire. Iam. 5.3. They lie in grave like
sheep (as David says) and death gnaweth upon them. Psalm. 49.14.
Gold and silver to be colored earth; yea but dung. Phil. 3.8. Worldly wealth
and voluptuous feeding, to be filth and famine. Dignity and delight, to be
smoke which the air consumes suddenly.
If we can use and bestow them to that end they are given us. If we can as
willingly leave them, as receive them. If we set not our hearts on them, as
they increase. Psalm. 62.10.
It is a vain thing for a man to hunt so greedily after worldly goods, or
take such great delight in gathering: Psalm. 49.17. Because he cannot prolong
his life with them, though he has abundance. Luke 12.15. Because they will not
avail him in the day of wrath. Prouer. 11.4.
Because it is a plague to a rich man to want a liberal heart. Eccle. 6.2,
etc. Because it is the root of al evil. 1. Tim. 6.10. Because it will be their
own destruction in the end. Ephe. 5.5.
Because he is but his steward over the^ for a time. Because he can impouerish
him as he did Job. 1.12. Because he can punish him, as he did Herod. Acts
12.23.
Foolish things to confound the wise. 1. Cor. 1.27. Weak things to confound
the mighty. 1. Cor. 1.27. Vile things, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are. 1. Cor. 1.27.
For he that despises them, despises him that made them. Pro. 17.5. For God
has made them as his instruments for the trial of our hearts and charity.
Deuteronomy. 25.21. For God has chosen the poor in this world, that they should be
rich in faith and heirs of his kingdom. Ia. 2.5
For trial of our faith, For amendme^t of our lives, For neglect of our
vocation
it appear. by Job, whose satietie of substance was taken away. Job. 1. by the
prodigal son, who by these crosses was reclaimed. by Salomons saying: Love
not sleep, lest thou come unto poverty. Pro. 20 13.
For the glory and honor of God Prouer. 8.9. For good example to others,
Matthew. 5.16. For a sign of the sincerity of our profession. Iam. 2.18.
Give for Commandment sake. Necessity sake. Nature sake.
If a good man will have pity on his beast, how much more ought we to respect
a Christian. Prouer. 12.10. If we ought to lay down our lives for our
brethren, how much more ought we to relieve the with our goods 1. Ioh. 3.16. If
a factor ought to dispose his goods where his temporal master pleases, how
much more ought we to distribute the^ where our eternal master appoints.
Secretly, Liberally, Cheerfully, without ostentation. Mat. 6.2. according
to his ability. To. 12.8 without grudging. Eccle. 35.10.

He lends to the Lord. Prouer. 19.17. He shall not lack. Prouer. 28.27. He
shall not want his reward. Matthew. 25.40.
because such have most need. Mat. 25. because they can make no recompense.
Mat. 25. because it is most acceptable to God. Mat. 25.
In remembrance of Gods benefits. Nehe. 8 For the maintenance of mutual
friendship. Nehe. 8 Toward the relief of the poor. Nehe. 8
We would be more mindful of the poor, if we did but remember how dangerous
it is To hide our eyes from them. To stop our ears at their cry. To show no
mercy at all.
have many curses. Pro. 28.27. cry and not be heard. Prouer. 21.13. have
merciles condemnation. Iam. 2.13.
To visit the fatherles and widows in adversity. Barnard. To follow the
example of Christ. Barnard. To keep thy self unspotted of the world. Barnard.
Hot, Cold, Lukewarm.
but zealous professors. Revel. 3.19. because it greatly offends God, who is
the author of truth. because it defraudeth a man's neighbor with a show of
honest meaning. because it destroieth the deceiuer in the end. Pro. 19
God. Death. the Devil. For he sees their secrets, and will one day reveal
all. For he comes of a sudden, and will destroy them with all. For he
waits for their souls to reward them for all.

Barn. A Sheep in skin. A Fox in subtlety. A Wolf in cruelty. He talks
smoothly. He intends craftelie. He attempteth villainy.

We be to you hypocrites. Honored. Embraced: Advanced: because it overcomes
all things. because it defends all things. because it in dureth for ever.

A^^^or of it. Evil of it. End of it. I^ is a ^led of the devils sowing. It is
abomination before the Lord. It procures sorrow to his own soul at last.

When one does accustom it he shall seldom leave it. When he says troth, he
shall hardly be believed. When he is known to be such a one, the better sort
will abhor him.
to Gods majesty: to his brothers frailty: to his own safety: because it is
fearful to fall into his hands. Hebr. 10.13. because it is the easiest thing
of a thousand to offend him. because he must give account of every idle word.

For the glory and worship of God. Esai. 19. For confirmation of truth and
equity. Heb. 6.16. For discharge of our conscience, being lawfully called.
Justice: Judgment: Truth:
but we ought not to swear vainlie, lightly, rashly, when there is no cause
at all. upon every small occasion. without good consideration.

Who shall inherit heaven (says David.) He that has clean hands and a pure
heart. He that has not lift up his mind to vanity. He that has not sworn to
deceive his neighbor.
Psalm. 24. Barn. At first it tickleth the flesh with touching. Afterward it
poysoneth the mind with filthy delights. And last of al by co^senting to
sin, and willingness to work wickedness withal, both body and soul are
overcome.
Because it hurts both body and soul. Because he was never touched with it,
being a spirit and no body. Because it brings on a heap of other sins
withal.
with the heat of the harlot. with the pain of his hurt. with the worm of
his own conscience.
Syracke says there are 3. things which his soul hates. A poor man that is
proud. A rich man that is a lier. An old adulterer that doteth.
Eccle. 25. Beza. 1. Cor. 6.18. Because it defiles the body with a peculiar
kind of filthiness. Because a fornicator is sacriligious, for that our bodies
are consecrated to God. Because we ought both in body and soul to serve him,
who has saved us.
This briefly is to be observed in a whore. Prouer. 5. She brings a man to a
morsel of bread. She hunts for the precious life of him. She leads him the
hie way to hell.
to a dog. to a sow. to dung.
Eccle. 26. Because God has forbidden any such to be suffered. Deuteronomy. 23.17.
Because she increases the transgressors among men. Pro. 23.28. Because she
enuieth honest and virtuous women. 2 Esd. 16.42.
The precept God has set down. The positive law of this land. The importable
judgment to come.
that is, Thou shall not steal. Exodus 20. Death of body. Destruction both of
body and soul.
He displeases God, He hurts his neighbor. He hates his own soul, by
breaking his commandment. by taking away his right. by following sin. Pro. 29.

When one is rooted in it, it will hardly be removed. When he has the end of
his lust it will be most loathsome. When he is so idle the devil is most occupied.
A man of war that suffers poverty. Men of understanding that are not set
by. When one departs from righteousness to sin.
Eccle. 26.29. War, Famine, Pestilence,
and where he blesses, there follows 3. benefits, Peace. Plenty.
Salubritie.
The shield of faith The helmet of hope. The sword of the spirit.
Ephe. 6. The lewd affections of themselves. Iam. 4.1. The evil prouocations
of the pleope. The daily suggestions of Satan.
Ephe. 6.12. He that was betrothed to a maid. Deuteronomy. 20.7. He that was but new
married. Deu. 24.5. He that was faint hearted. Deuteronomy. 20.8.
To punish man. To profit the earth. To declare his favor toward man.
Job. 37.13. etc. without scruple or doubting. without offense of our brother.
without breach of godly orders.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4.4. Beza. 1. Tim. 4.5. Because we
confess and acknowledge that God is the maker and giver of those creatures
which we use. Because we are of the number of those, who through Christ's
benefit, have recovered that right over all creatures, which Adam lost by his
fall. Because by our prayers, we crave of the Lord that we may use those meats
with a good conscience which we receive at his hands.
Beza. Because the teachers of them make laws of things which are not their
own: for GOD created the meats. Because they overthrow with their decrees
the end wherefore they were made of GOD, to wit, that we should use them.
Because by this means they rob GOD of his glory, who will be honored in
the use of them.
To our better, reverently. To our equal, lovingly. To our underling, lowly.
We ought to call our elder, father. our younger brother. Every man, our neibor.
For a remedy against incontinencie. For the propagation of children. For the
consolation of man and woman.
It is allowed of the Patriarchs. commended by the Prophets. followed of the
Apostles.
Men are made chaste three manner of ways. Matthew. 19.12. by Nature, by Art, by
Grace, Such as are so borne of their mothers belly. Such as be made chaste by
men. Such as have made themselves chaste for heaven.

Because Christ has made easy unto us, that importable yoke they were subject
too. Matthew. 11.31. Because he has brought us the glad tidings of salvation,
which they longed to see. Romans 16.17. Because many Prophets and righteous men
have desired to see these days. Matthew. 13.17.
Vain: Wicked: Dangerous: because such mirth shall be mingled with mourning,
and the end of such joy is lamentation. because thereby we clean forget the
means that should make us remember our misery. Eccle. 7.4. because our Savior
Christ says, woe be to them that now laugh, for they shall wail and weep.
Luke 6.25.

Such as are naturally borne without wit, and those those (as Solomon says)
are a grief to the father, and a heaviness to her that bare them. Pro. 17.21,
25. Such as become fools, and are so contented to be counted in this world,
that they may be wise in the world to come. 1. Cor. 3.18. Such as are given
over to their own lusts, and follow al kind of filthiness; these are they whom
David calls fools, who lewdlie say in their hearts (as they falsely think)
there is no God. Psalm. 53.1.
By discreet silence: By modest speech: By sober life: Solomon says) a fool
by holding his peace is counted wise Prouer. 27.28. not that any should be
restrained of speech: but that they should observe opportunity in speaking.
Hereof says the Philosopher, Qui nescit tacere, nescit loqui. For it is proper
to fools to be full of frivolous talk: but he that has knowledge (says
the Wise man) spares his words. Prouer. 17.27. For he that is heavenly wise
indeed, will (as S. James says) show by conversation his works in meeknes of
wisdom. Iam. 3.13.

Because thereby he is put in mind of his own frailty. Eccle. 7.4. Because
thereby he shall be better incited to call upon God. 2. King. 20.2. Because
it is a testimony unto him of the love of God. Hebr. 12 6.
Unnatural: Unwise: Wretched: because he so little desires to be at home with
his heavenly father, considering he is here but as a stranger and a pilgrim.
Hebr. 11.13. because he takes felicity in the vanity of this world,
considering the fashion of it goes away. 1. Cor. 7.13. because he had rather
still live to augment his misery, than frame himself by a godly end, to
embrace eternal blessedness.

To seek to God to purge our sins, which are the chief cause of all our
diseases. To use the help of the Physician, as a mean by whom God works. To
dispose our temporal goods, where they may make most to his glory that gave
them.
Lawful; Godly; Necessary; because the Lord willed Hezekiah to put his house
in order before he died 2. King, 20.1. because his mind being quiet in
worldly matters, he shall the better apply it to heavenly motions. because a
good stay being made, it shall cut off occasion of contention that may happen
afterward

He that did well, offended some, and yet was an Apostle. Paul. 2. Cor. 11.24.
He that did worse, pleased many, and yet was but a Beast. Herod. Acts. 12.22.
He that did best of all, could not please al, and yet was a God. Christ. Ioh.
10.20.
England has 3. especial causes to be continually thankful to God for, The
free passage of the Gospel: The blessed time of Peace: The godly Governor
thereof.
which Passage Peace, Prince,
the Lord for his mercy sake still prosper. preserve. protect.
Amen.
FINIS.

