A RELATION OF THE FEAREFVLL ESTATE OF Francis Spira, in the year, 1548.

The backeslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14. 14.
LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Phil. Stephens, and Christoph. Meredith, at the
golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

A Preface.
FOR truth of this History ensuing, besides circumstances of place, person,
time, occasion, so exactly observed; I refer my self to the Relation of
those Godly men, who in several languages have manifested to the world the
several passages thereof: and although I am not ignorant, that at the first
they were not only not credited, but also discredited and slandered, by such as
found them to be a Blur to the Roman Profession, yet they lost not their
luster thereby, but being acquitted by many Compurgators of several Nations,
and some of the Romish Religion, being all of them spectators of this Tragedy.
It occasioned not only a further manifestation and confirmation of the truth,
but also a large and more frequent confluence, to see that which they had
formerly only heard of. This partly appears out of the succeeding Story; but
more fully out of an Apology written by Vergerius Bishop of Iustinople, who was
accused for dispersing the fame of this Example to the stain of Popery, in
which Apology to N. Rottan, Suffragen of Padua, is shortly and plainly
declared, what was said, what was done, and who were present. If that it be
demanded, what moved me to compile this Treatise; Spira -- tell them that it
should teach fear and reverence, and indeed among all those that come to see
him, few or none returns unshaken. Vergerius in his first Epistle says; I
would feign go see him again, but I exceedingly fear and tremble, and in his
Apology says, it is such a rare example, as I would willingly go to the
furthest parts of the world to hear or see the like. The Lady Jane to her
Fathers Chaplain (that had fallen into Spira's sin) says, remember the
lamentable estate of Spira. I acknowledge that there has been formerly a
Book published in our Mother tongue, concerning this subject, but as far as
I can learn (for I could never yet obtain to see any one of them) it was
nothing so large and various as this present Treatise, and as I have heard, a
translation of only one of the Tractates, from whence I have gathered this
present Discourse in part. Concerning my care and fidelity in this business,
it is such as I may truly say without changing of color, that there is not
one sentence of all this Work attributed unto the person of Spira, but it has
it warrant, either from the Epistles of Vergerius and Gribaldus, Professors of
the Law in Padua, or from the Discourses of Henry Scringer a Scottish man,
Sigismund Gelons a Transilvanian, and Martin Bocha a Divine of Basil: neither
have I taken any other Liberty then as a Relation to weave the aforesaid
Discourses one within another, so as those which under several Writers, were
before counted several, are now by my endeavors reduced into one entire
History, connexed by due succession of time and occasion, as punctually as
could be aimed at, by the circumstances noted in the Writings of those holy and
learned men before named.

N. B. Imprimatur Tho: Wykes.
April. 5. 1638.
A RELATION OF the fearful estate of FRANCIS SPIRA.
IN the year 1548. when the glorious Sun of the Gospel was but newly risen
in Europe; in the days of the reign of Edward the Sixth of that name King of
England: In the Territory, and under the Jurisdiction of the City of Venice,
being the very border of Italy, in the town of Cittadella, lived one Francis
Spira, a Civil Lawyer, an Advocate of great rank and esteem, being of known
learning, and eloquence? of great experience; of carriage circumspect and
severe; his speech grave and composed, his countenance sharp and austere;
every way befitting that authority whereunto he was advanced; endowed with
outward blessings, of wife, and eleven children, and wealth in abundance: what
his worst parts were, I have no other warrant, then his own words, which (if
not tainted overmuch, with the bitterness of a desperate mind, and bearing the
countenance rather of passion, then of sober confession) may seem to add a
period to all further commendations.

I was (said he) excessively covetous of money, and accordingly I applied my
self to get by injustice, corrupting justice by deceit, inventing tricks to
delude justice: good causes I either defended deceitfully, or sold them to the
adversary perfidiously; ill causes I maintained with all my might; I wittingly
opposed the known truth, and the trust committed unto me, I either betrayed or
perverted. Thus having worn out forty four years, or there abouts, and the
news of the new, or rather newly revived opinions of Luther coming into those
parts, represented an object of noveltie unto him; who being as desirous to
know as he was famous for knowledge; suffered not these wandering opinions to
pass unexamined, but searching into the Scriptures, and into all books of
Controversy that he could get, both old and new; and finding more then fame
or opinion, he began to taste their nature so well, as he entertaines, loves,
and ownes them at length; and with such zeal, as he became a professor; yea a
teacher of them, first to his wife, children, and family, and after to his
friends, and familiar acquaintance; and in comparison, seemed to neglect all
other affairs; intending ever to press this maine point, that We must wholly,
and only to depend on the free, and unchangeable love of God in the death of
Christ, as the only sure way to salvation: and this was the sum of all his
discourse, and this continued for the space of six years, or there abouts;
even so long as this fire could keep it self within private walls; but at
length it brake forth into public meetings; so as the whole Province of Padua
dawned by the luster thereof. The Clergy finding the trade of their pardons to
decay; and their Purgatory to wax cold, began to bestirre themselves; glosing
their actions first with calumnious aspersions upon the whole profession, then
more plainly striking at Spira with grievous accusatio^s: And to effect their
purpose, some promise labor, others favor, some advice, others maintenance;
all join to divide, either his soul from his body, or both from God.

Now was John Casa the Popes Legate resident at Venice, being by birth a
Florentine; and one that wanted neither malice against those of this way, nor
craftines to effect his malicious purposes: To him these men repair with
outcries against Spira; that he was the man that condemned the received rites
of the Church; deluded the Ecclesiastical power, and scandalized the policy
thereof; one of no mean rank; being a man of Account and authority, and
thereunto, learned in the Scriptures, elegant in speech; and in one word, a
dangerous Lutheran; having also many disciples, and therefore not to be
despised.

At this began the Legate to cast his eye on the terrible alteration that
lately had happened in Germany; where, by the means of one only Luther, the
Romish Religion had suffered such a blow, as that it could neither be cured by
dissimulation, nor defended by power; but the Clergy must either mend their
manners, or lose their dignities: on the other side, when he saw how propense
the common people inhabiting in the bordering countries of Italy were to
entertain those new opinions, he now thought it no time to dispute, or
persuade, but with speed repaires to the Senate, and procures authority from
them to send for Spira.

Spira by this time had considered with himself of the nature of his
carriage, how evident and notorious it was, and therefore subject to be
envied by such, as neither liked his person nor Religion, he perceived that
his opinions were neither retired nor speculative, but such as aimed at the
overthrow of the Romish Faction, and at change of Policy, wherein at the
best, he could expect but a bloody victory, and that his enemies vvanted
neither power nor occasion to call him to account in public, when he must
either Apostatize, and shamefully give his former life, yea his own conscience
the lie, or endure the utmost malice of his deadly enemies, or forsake his
wife, children, friends, goods, authority; yea, his dear Country; and betake
himself to a foreign people, there to endure a thousand miseries, that do
continually wait upon a voluntary exile. Being thus distracted, and tossed in
the restless waves of doubt, without guide to trust to, or haven to fly to for
succor; on the sudden Gods Spirit assisting, he felt a calm, and began to
discourse with himself in this manner:

Why wandrest thou thus in uncertainties, unhappy man; cast away fear, put on
thy shield, the shield of faith; Where is thy wonted courage, thy goodness,
thy constancy? remember that Christ's glory lies at the stake, suffer thou
without fear, and he will defend thee, he will tell thee what thou shall
answer; he can beat down all danger, bring thee out of prison, raise thee
from the dead; consider Peter in the dungeon, the Martyrs in the fire, if thou
make a good confession, thou may indeed go to prison, or death, but an
eternal reward in heaven remains for thee; What have thou in this world
comparable to eternal life, to everlasting happiness? if thou do otherwise,
think of the scandal; (common people live by example, thinking what ever is
done, is well done) fear the loss of peace and joy, fear hell, death, and
eternal wrath; or if thy flesh be so strong, as to cause thee to doubt of the
issue, fly thy Country; get thee away, though never so far, rather then deny
the Lord of Life.

Now was Spira in reasonable quiet, being resolved to yield to these weighty
reasons; yet holding it wisdom to examine all things, he consults also with
flesh and blood; thus the battle does renew, and the flesh begins in this
manner: Be well advised, fond man, consider reasons on both sides, and then
judge: how can thou thus overweene thine own sufficiency, as thou neither
regardest the examples of thy Progenitors; nor the judgment of the whole
Church; do thou not consider what misery this thy rashness will bring thee
unto? thou shall lose thy substance, gotten with so much care and travel, thou
shall undergo the most exquisite torments that malice it self can devise,
thou shall be counted an heretic of all: and to close up all, thou shall die
shamefully. What think thou of the loathsome stinking dungeon, the bloody
axe, the burning faggot, are they delightful? Be wise at length, and keep thy
life and honor, thou may live to do much good to good men, as God commands
thee, thou may be an ornament to thy Country; and put case thy Countries
loss would be of small esteem with thee; Will thou bring thy friends also
into danger? thou have begotten children, will thou now cut their throats, and
inhumanely butcher them, which may in time bring honor to their Country,
glory to God, help and furtherance to his Church: go to the Legate weak
man, freely confess thy fault, and help all these miseries. Thus did the
cares of this world, and the deceitfullnesse of riches, choke the good Seed
that was formerly sown; so as fearing, he faints, and yields unto the
allurements of this present world, and being thus blinded, he goes to the
Legate at Venice, and salutes him with this news.

Having for these diverse years entertained an opinion concerning some Articles
of faith, contrary to the Orthodox and received judgment of the Church; and
uttered many things against the authority of the Church of Rome, and the
universal Bishop: I humbly acknowledge my fault and error, and my folly in
misleading others: I therefore yield my self in all obedience to the Supreme
Bishop, into the bosom of the Church of Rome; never to depart again from the
Traditions and Decrees of the holy See: I am heartily sorry for what is past;
and I humbly beg pardon forso great an offense.

The Legate perceiving Spira to faint, he pursues him to the utmost; he
causes a recitation of all his Errors to be drawn in writing, together with
the Confession annexed to it, and commands Spira to subscribe his name there,
which accordingly he did; then the Legate commands him to return to his own
Town; and there to declare this Confession of his, and to acknowledge the whole
Doctrine of the Church of Rome to be holy, and true; and to abjure the Opinions
of Luther, and other such Teachers, as false, and heretical: Man knows the
beginnings of sin, but who bounds the issues thereof? Spira having once lost
footing, goes down amain, he cannot stay, nor gainsay the Legate; but
promises to accomplish his whole will and pleasure; he soon addresseth
himself for his Journey, and being onward in the way, bethinks himself of
large spoils he had brought away from the Conflict with the Legate: what
glorious testimony he had given of his great faith, and constancy in Christ's
cause: and to be plain, how impiously he had denied Christ, and his Gospel
at Venice; and what he promised to do further in his own Country; and thus
partly with fear, and partly with shame being confounded; he thought he heard
a voice speaking unto him in this manner.

Spira, What do thou here? whither go thou? have thou unhappy man, given
thy handwriting to the Legate at Venice; yet see thou do not seal it in
thine own Country: do thou indeed think eternal life so mean, as that
thou preferrest this present life before it? do thou well in preferring wife
and children before Christ? is the windy applause of the people, better indeed
then the glory of God; and the possession of this worlds good more dear to
thee, then the salvation of thine own Soul? is the small use of a moment of
time more desirable, then eternal wrath is dreadful? Think with thy self
what Christ endured for thy sake; is it not equal thou should suffer
somewhat for him? Remember, man, that the sufferings of this present life, are
not comparable to the glory that shall be revealed: if thou suffer with
him, thou shall also reign with him: thou can not answer for what thou have
already done; nevertheless, the gate of mercy is not quite shut, take heed
that thou heapest not sin upon sin, lest thou repent when it will be too
late.

Now was Spira in a wilderness of doubts, not knowing which way to turn him,
nor what to do, yet being arrived in his own Country, and amongst his
friends, with shame enough he relates what he had done, and what he had
further promised to do; and how the terrors of God on the one side, and the
terror of this world on the other side, did continually rack him; and
therefore he desired of them advise in this so doubtful a case: his friends
upon small deliberation answered; that it was requisite he should take heed
that he did not in any wise betray his wife and children, and all his friends
into danger, seeing that by so small a matter as the reciting of a little
Schedule, which might be done in less space then half an hour, he might both
free himself from present danger, and preserve many that depended upon him;
adding moreover, that he could get no Credit in relenting from that which he
had already in greatest part performed before the Legate at Venice, and that in
the perfect accomplishing thereof, little or no discredit could arise, more
then what by the former action already he had sustained: on the other side, if
he did not perform his promise made to the Legate, he could neither
discharge himself of the shame which he had already incurred; nor avoid far
more heavy and insupportable injuries, then probably he should have endured, if
he had persisted obstinately in his former Opinions.

This was the last blow of the battle, and Spira utterly overcome, goes to
the Praetor, and proffers to perform his foresaid promise made to the Legate,
who in the mean time had taken order to have all things ready, and had sent
the instrument of abjuration signed by Spira, to the Praetor, by the hands of a
certain Priest. All that night the miserable man ware out with restless
cares, without any minute of rest; the next morning being come, he gets up, and
being ready, he desperately enters into the public Congregation, where Mass
being finished, in the presence of friends and enemies, and of the whole
Assembly; being by estimation near two thousand people; yea, and of Heaven it
self, he recites that infamous abjuration, word for word, as it was written:
it being done, he was fined at thirty pieces of gold, which he presently paid:
five whereof were given to the Priest that brought the abjuration, the other
twenty five were employed toward the making of a Shryne to put the Eucharist
in; then was he sent home restored to his Dignities; goods, wife, and children:
No sooner was he departed, but he thought he heard a direful voice, saying
to him; thou wicked wretch, thou haste denied me, thou have renounced the
covenant of thy obedience, thou have broken thy vow, hence Apostate, bear with
thee the sentence of thy eternal damnation: he trembling and quaking in body
and mind, fell down in a swoune; relief was at hand for the body, but from
that time forwards, he never found any (...) mind* but (...) in uncessant
torment (...) professed that he was captived under the revenging hand of the
great God: that he heard continually that fearful sentence of Christ that
just Judge* that he knew he was utterly undone: that he could neither hope for
grace, nor Christ's intercession with God the Father in his behalf: thus was his
fault ever heavy on his heart, and ever his Judgment before his eyes.

Now began his friends some of them to repent too late of their rash counsel;
others not looking so high as the Judgment of God, laid all the blame upon his
Melancholicke constitution; that overshadowing his judgment, wrought in him a
kind of madness: every on censured as his fancy led him, yet for remedy all
agreed in this, to use both the wholesome help of Physicians, and the pious
advise of Divines, and therefore thought it meet to convey him to Padua, an
University of note, where plenty of all manner of means was to be had: this
they accordingly did, both with his wife, children, and whole family; others
also of his friends accompanying him: and being arrived at the house of one
James Ardin, in Saint Leonards, Parish, they sent for three Physicians of most
note, who upon due observation of the effects, and of other Symptoms of his
disease, and some private conference one with another, among themselves,
returned their verdict in this manner, viz. That they could not discern that
his body was afflicted with any danger or distemper originally from it self,
by reason of the overruling of any humor; but that this Malady of his did
arise from some grief, or passion of his mind, which being overburthened, did
so oppress the spirits, as they wanting free passage, stirred up many ill
humors, whereof the body of man is full; and these ascending up into the
brain, troubled the fancy; shadowed the seat of the judgment, and so
corrupted it: this was the state of his disease, and that outward part that was
visible to the eye of nature, this they endeavored to reform by purgation,
either to consume, or at least to divert the course of those humors from the
brain; but all their skill effected nothing, which Spira noting, said: Alas
poor men, how far wide are you; do you think that this disease is to be
cured by potions; believe me there must be another manner of medicine, it is
neither potions, plasters, nor drugs, that can help a fainting soul cast
down with sense of sin, and the wrath of God; it is only Christ that must
be the Physician, and the Gospel the sole Antidote.

The Physicians easily believed him, after they had understood the whole truth
of the matter, and therefore they wished him to seek some spiritual comfort.
By this time the fame of this man was spread over all Padua, and the neighbor
Country, partly for that he was a man of Esteem, partly because as the
disease, so the occasion was especially remarkable; for this was not done in
a corner: so as daily there came multitudes of all sorts to see him: some out
of curiosity only to see and discourse: some out of a pious desire to try all
means that might reduce him to comfort again, or at least to benefit
themselves, by such a spectacle of misery, and of the justice of God. Amongst
these, Paulus Vergerius Bishop of Iustinopolis, and Mattheus Gribauldus,
deserve especially to be named, as the most principal laborers for this man's
comfort. They find him now about fifty years of age, neither affected with
the dotage of old age, nor with the unconstant headstrong passion of youth, but
in the strength of his experience and judgment; in a burning heat calling
excessively for drink; yet his understanding active, quick of apprehension,
witty in discourse above his ordinary manner, and judiciously opposite: his
friends labored him by all fair means to receive some nourishment, which he
obstinately gaine-saying, they forcibly infused some liquid sustenance into his
mouth, most of which he spit out again; exceedingly chafing, and in this
fretting mood of his, said: As it is true that all things work for the best to
those that love God; Romans 8. 28.
so to the wicked all are contrary: for whereas a plentiful offspring is the
blessing of God, and his reward, being a stay to the weak estate of their aged
parents; to me they are a cause of bitterness and vexation; they do strive to
make me tire out this misery; I would feign be at an end; I deserve not this
dealing at their hands; O that I were gone from hence, that some body would let
out this weary Soul.

His friends saluted him, and asked him, what he conceived to be the cause of
his disease; forthwith he brake out into a lamentable discourse of the passages
formerly related, and that with such passionate Elocution, that he caused many
to weep and most to tremble. They contrarily to comfort him, propounded many of
Gods promises recorded in the Scripture; and many examples of Gods mercy: My
sin (said he) is greater then the mercy of God. Nay, answered they, the mercy
of God is above all sin; God would have all men to be saved: It is true (quoth
he) he would have all that he has elected, ^bee s^aved; he would not have
damned reprobates to be saved; I am one of that number; I know it, for I
willingly, and against my knowledge denied Christ; and I feel that he
hardens, and will not suffer me to hope.

After some silence, one asked him whether he did not believe that Doctrine
(to be true) for which he was accused before the Legate; he answered; I did
believe it when I denied it, but now I neither believe that, nor the Doctrine
of the Roman Church; I believe nothing, I have no faith, no trust, no hope; I
am a Reprobate like Cain, or Judas, who casting away all hope of mercy, fell
into despair; and my friends do me great wrong, that they suffer me not to
go to the place of unbeleevers as I justly deserve.

Here they began sharply to rebuke him; requiring, and charging him that in
any wise he did not violate the mercy of God; to which he answered: The mercy
of God is exceeding large and extends to all the elect; but not to me, or any
like to me, who are sealed up to wrath: Romans 2. 15.
I tell you I deserve it, my own conscience condemns me; what needs any
other Judge. Christ came (said they) to take away sin, and calling for a
book, they read unto him the passion of Christ, and coming to his nayling to
the Cross, Spira said: This indeed is comfortable to such as are elected, but
as for me wretch, they are nothing but grief and torment, because I contemned
them. Thus roaring for grief, and tossing himself up and down upon the bed as
he lay, he entreated them to read no more: As Gribauldus was coming to see
him, Vergerius said to Spira, dear Sir here is Doctor Gribauldus, a godly and
faithful friend of yours, come to see you: He is welcome (said he) but he
shall find me ill: Gribauldus replied, Sir, this is but an illusion of the
devil, who does what he can to vex you; but turn you to God with your whole
heart, and he is ready to show you mercy; the earth you know is full of his
mercy; it is He that has said, Ps. 119.
that as often as a sinner repents of his sin, he will remember his sins
no more. Consider this in the example of Peter that was Christ's familiar, and
an Apostle; and yet denied him thrice with an oath, and yet God was merciful
unto him: consider the thief that spent his whole life in wickedness, and for
all that, did not God graciously respect him in the last minute of his life? Is
the Lords hand now shortened that it cannot save? to this Spira answered; Luke
27. 61.
If Peter grieved and repented, it was because Christ beheld him with a
merciful eye; and in that he was pardoned, it was not because he wept, but
because God was gracious to him: but God respects not me, and therefore I am a
reprobate: I feel no comfort can enter into my heart, there is no place there
but only for torments and vexings of spirit: I tell you my case is properly
mine own; no man ever was in the like plight, and therefore my estate is
fearful.

Then roaring out in the bitterness of his spirit, said: It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God: the violence of his passion and
action suitable, did amaze many of the beholders; insomuch as some of them said
with a whispering voice, that he was possessed; he over-hearing it, said: Do
you doubt it? I have a whole Legion of devils that take up their dwellings
within me, and possess me as their own; and justly too, for I have denied
Christ. Whether did you that willingly or not (said they) That is nothing to
the purpose (said Spira) Christ says, whosoever denies me before men, Matt.
10. 33.
him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven: Christ will not be
denied, no not in word; and therefore it is enough, though in heart I never
denied him.

They observing his distemper to arise from the sense and horror of the pains
of hell, asked him whether he thought there were worse pains then what he
endured for the present; he said, that he knew there were far worse pains then
those that he then suffered: Psalm. 1.
for the wicked shall rise to their judgment, but they shall not stand in
Judgment: this I tremble to think of: yet do I desire nothing more, then
that I might come to that place, where I may be sure to feel the worst, and
to be freed from fear of worse to come.

I but you are to consider (said one) that those opinions for which you were
accused before the Legate were impious; and therefore you are not to think you
denied Christ, but rather that you confessed him, acknowledging the infallible
truth of the Catholic Church. Truly (said he) when I did deny those opinions,
I did think them to be true, and yet I did deny them.

Go to (said others) now then believe that they are not. Now I cannot (said
he) God will not suffer me to believe them, nor trust in his mercy: What
would you have me do? I would feign attain to this power, but cannot, though
I should presently be burnt for it. But why do you (said the other) esteem
this so grievous a sin, when as the learned Legate constrained you to it,
which he surely would not have done, if your former opinions had not been
Erroneous: no, good Francis, the devil besets thee, let not therefore the
grievousnesse of thy sin, (if any such be) amaze thee. You say right ( replied
he) the devil has possessed me, and God has left me to his power; for I find
I can neither believe the Gospel, nor trust in Gods mercy; I have sinned
against the holy Ghost; and God by his immutable Decree, has bound me over to
perpetual punishment, without any hope of pardon; Romans 9. 11. and Romans 4.
It is true that the greatness of sin, or the multitude of them, cannot bind
Gods mercy: all those many sins that in the former part of my life I have
committed, then did not so much trouble me, for I trusted that God would not
lay them to my charge: but now having sinned against the holy Ghost, God has
taken away from me all power of repentance, and now brings all my sins to
remembrance, Iam. 2. 10.
and thus guilty of one, guilty of all. And therefore it is no matter whether
my sins be great or small, few or many; they are such as Christ's blood, nor
Gods mercy belongs to me: Romans 9. 18.
God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he
hardneth; this is it that gnaws my heart, he has hardened me; and I find
that he daily more and more does harden me; and therefore I am out of hope: I
feel it, and therefore cannot but despair: I tell you, there was never such a
monster as I am; never was man alive a spectacle of so exceeding misery: I knew
that justification is to be expected by Christ; and I denied, and abjured it;
to the end I might keep this frail life from adversity, and my children from
poverty; and now behold, how bitter this life is to me; and God only knows,
what shall become of this my family; but surely no good is likely to betide it,
but rather daily worse and worse; and such a ruin at the length as that one
stone shall not be left on another.

But why should you (said Gribauldus) conceit so deeply of your sin, seeing
you cannot but know that many have denied Christ, yet never fell into
despair? Well ( said he) I can see no ground of comfort for such, neither can
I warrant them from Gods reve^ging hand in wrath; though it pleases God yet to
suffer such to be in peace: and besides, there will a time of change come, and
then they shall be thoroughly tried: and if it were not so, yet God is just in
making me an Example to others; and I cannot justly complain: there is no
punishment so great but I have deserved it, for this so heinous offense: I
assure you it is no small matter to deny Christ; and yet it is more ordinary
then commonly men do conceive of: it is not a denial made before a Magistrate
as it is with me; for as often as a Christian does dissemble the known truth,
as often as he approves of false worship, by presenting himself at it, so
often as he does not things worthy of his calling, or such things as are
unworthy of his calling: so often he denies Christ: thus did I, and therefore
am justly punished for it.

Your estate (quoth Gribauldus) is not so strange as you make it; Job was so
far gone, that he complained God had set him as a mark against him: and
David that was a man after Gods own heart, complained often that God had
forsaken him, and was become his enemy; yet both received comfort again
comfort your self therefore, God will come at length, though he now seem
far off.

O Brother ( answered Spira) I believe all this; the devils believe and
tremble; but David was ever elected and dearly beloved of God; and though he
fell, yet God took not utterly away his holy Spirit; and therefore was heard
when he prayed, Lord take not thy holy Spirit from me: but I am in another
case, being ever accursed from the presence of God: neither can I pray as he
did, because his holy Spirit is quite gone, and cannot be recalled; and
therefore I know I shall live in continual hardness so long as I live: O that
I might feel but the least sense of the love of God to me, though but for one
small moment, as I now feel his heavy wrath that burns like the torments of
hell within me, and afflicts my Conscience with pangs unutterable; verily
desperation is hell it self.

Here Gribauldus said, I do verily believe, Spira, that God having so
severely chastised you in this life, corrects you in mercy here, that he
may spare you hereafter, and that he has mercies sealed up for you in time to
to come.

Nay ( said Spira) hence do I know that I am a reprobate, because he
afflicts me with hardness of heart: Oh that my body had suffered all my
life long, so that he would be pleased to release my soul, and ease my
Conscience, this burdened Conscience.

Gribauldus being desirous to ease his mind from the continual meditation of
his sin; as also to sound how for the present he stood affected to the Romish
Church; asked him what he thought became of the souls of men so soon as they
departed out of the body, to which he answered.

Although this be not so fully revealed in Scripture; yet I verily believe
that the souls of the Elect go presently to the Kingdom of glory; and not
that sleep with the body as some do imagine.

Very well; said one of the spectators, why do the Scriptures then say, that
God brings down to hell, 1 Samuel 2. 6.
and raises up; seeing it cannot be meant of the estate of the soul after
death, which as thou say, either goes to heaven without change, or to hell
without redemption: it must be understood of the estate of the soul in this
life; like that wherein thou art at this present: and oftentimes we see that
God suffers men to fall into the jaws of despair, and yet raises them up
again, and therefore despair not, but hope; it shall be even thus with thee
in his good time.

This is the work, ( quoth Spira) this the labor; for I tell you, when I at
Venice did first abjure my profession, and so, as it were, drew an Indenture,
the Spirit of God often admonisht me; and when at Cittadella, I did, as it
were, set to my seal; the Spirit of God often suggested to me, Do not write
Spira, do not seal; yet I resisted the Holy Ghost, and did both; and at that
very present I did evidently feel a wound inflicted in my very will, so
although I can say, I would believe; yet can I not say I will believe; God has
denied me the power of will; and it befalls me in this my miserable estate,
as with one that is fast in irons, and his friends coming to see him, do
pity his estate, and do persuade him to shake off his setters, and to come
out of his bonds; which God knows he would feign do, but cannot, this is my
very case; you persuade me to believe: how feign would I do it, but cannot? O
now I cannot. Then violently grasping his hands together, and raising himself
up: Behold ( said he) I am strong, yet by little and little I decay and
consume, and my servants would feign preserve this weary life; but at length
the will of God must be done, and I shall perish miserably as I deserve:
rejoice ye righteous in the Lord; Psalm. 32. 11.
blessed are you whose hearts the Lord has mollified.

Then after some pause; It is wonderful, I earnestly desire to pray to God
with my heart, yet I cannot; I see my damnation, and I know my remedy is only
in Christ, yet I cannot set my self to lay hold on it; such are the
punishments of the damned; they confess what I confess, they repent of their
loss of heaven, they envy the Elect, yet their repentance does them no good,
for they cannot mend their ways.

As he was thus speaking, he observed diverse flies that came about him, and
some lighted on him: Behold ( said he) now also Signifies the god of flies.
Beelzebub comes to his banquet, you shall shortly see my end, and in me an
example to many of the justice and judgment of God.

About this time came in two Bishops with diverse Scholars of the University,
one of them being Paulus Vergerius, having observed Spira more then any other,
being continually conversant with him, told him his estate was such, as rather
stood in need of Prayer then advice; and therefore desired him to pray with him
in the Lords Prayer; Spira consented, and he began.

Our Father which art in heaven,) then breaking forth into tears, he stopped;
but they said, it is well, your grief is a good sign: I bewail (said he) my
misery, for I perceive I am forsaken of God, and cannot call to him from my
heart, as I was wont to do; yet let us go on, said Vergerius.

Thy Kingdom come;) O Lord (said Spira) bring me also into this Kingdom; I
beseech thee shut me not out. Then coming to those words; Give us this day
our daily bread; he added; O Lord, I have enough and abundance to feed this
carkeise of mine; but there is another bread, I humbly beg the bread of thy
grace; without which, I know I am but a dead man.

Lead us not into temptation;) seeing Lord that I am brought into temptation,
help me Lord that I may escape; the enemy has overcome; help me, I
beseech thee, to overcome this cruel Tyrant.

These things he spoke with a mournful voice, the tears trickling down
abundantly; and expressing such affection and passion, as turned the bowels of
those there present, with grief and compunction; they then turning to Spira,
said: You know that none can call Christ Jesus the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost: you must therefore think of your self according to that soft affection,
which you express in your prayers, inferring thereby that God has not wholly
cast you off; or bereaved you of his Spirit utterly.

I perceive (said Spira) that I call on him to my eternal damnation; for I
tell you again, it is a new and unheard of example that you find in me: If
Iu, das (said they) had but outlived his days, which by nature he might have
done; he might have repented, and Christ would have received him to mercy;
and yet he sinned most grievously against his Master, which did so esteem of
him, as to honor him with the dignity of an Apostle, and did maintain and
feed him: He answered, Christ did also feed and honor me, neither yet is my
fault one jot less then that of his; because it is not more honor to be
personally present with Christ in the flesh, then to be in his presence now by
illumination of his holy Spirit: and besides, I deny that ever Judas could
have repented, how long soever he had lived; for grace was quite taken from
him, as it is now from me.

O Spira (said they) you know you are in a spiritual desertion; you must
therefore not believe what Satan suggests; he was ever a liar from the
beginning, and a mere Impostour, and will cast a thousand lying fancies into
your mind, to beguile you withal; you must rather believe those whom you
judge to be in a good estate, and more able to discern of you then your self;
believe us, and we tell you, that God will be merciful unto you.

O here is the knot ( said Spira) I would I could believe; But I cannot.

Then he began to reckon up what fearful dreams and visions, he was
continually troubled withal; that he saw the devils come flocking into his
Chamber, and about his bed, terrifying him with strange noises; that these were
not fancies, but that he saw them as really as the standers by; and that
besides these outward terrors, he felt continually, a racking torture of his
mind, and a continual butchery of his conscience, being the very proper pangs
of the damned wights in hell.

Cast these fancies (said Gribauldus) these are but illusions, humble your
self in the presence of God, and praise him.

The dead praise not the Lord (answered he) nor they that go down into the
pit: Psalm. 6. 5.
we that are drowned in despair, are dead and are already gone down into the
pit: what hell can there be worse then desperation; or what greater punishment?
the gnawing worm, unquenchable fire, horror; confusion, and (which is worse
then all) desperation it self continually tortures me; and now I count my
present estate worse then if my soul (separated from my body) were with Judas
and the rest of the damned; and therefore, I now desire rather to be there,
then thus to live in the body.

One being present, repeated certain words out of the Psalms: Psalm. 89. 30.
If thy children forsake my law and walk not in my judgments; I will visit
their transgressions with rods, and their iniquities with stripes;
nevertheless my loving kindness I will not utterly take from them, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail: Mark this, O Spira, my Covenant I will not break.

These promises ( said Spira) belong only to the elect, which if tempted, may
fall into sin, but are again lifted up and recovered out: as the Prophet
says, though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
uphouldeth him: Therefore Peter could rise, for he was Elected, but the
reprobate when they fall cannot rise again, as appears in Cain, Saul, and
Judas: God deals one way with the Elect, and another way with Reprobates.

The next day he prayed with them in the Latin tongue, and that with
excellent affection, as outwardly appeared, blessed be God (said Vergerius)
these are no signs of eternal reprobation: you must not O Spira, seek out
the secret counsels of Gods election and reprobation, for no man can know so
long as he lives, whether by his good or bad deeds, he be worthy of Gods
love or anger: Eccles. 9. 1. Psalm. 88. 14.
do you not know that the Prophet David complained, that God had cast off his
Soul.

I know all this ( quoth Spira) I know the mercies of God are infinite, and do
surpass the sins of the whole world, and that they are effectual to all
that believe, but this faith, and this hope, is the gift of God; O that he
would give it me; but it is as impossible as to drink up the Sea at a
draught: as for that of Solomon, if he had ever tried that which I feel by
woeful experience; he would never have spoken as he did; but the truth is,
never had mortal man, such an evident experience of Gods anger and hatred
against him, as I have; you that are in a good estate, think repentance and
faith to be works of great facility, and therefore you think it an easy
matter to persuade a man to believe; the whole need not the Physician; and he
that is well, can soon give counsel to such as are ill; but this is the hell
to me, my heart is hardened, I cannot believe; many are called, but few are
chosen.

Upon what grounds (said they) do you conceive so ill an opinion of your self?

I once did know God to be my Father, not only by creation; but by
regeneration, I knew him by his beloved Son, the author and finisher of our
Salvation; I could pray to him, and hope for pardon of sins from him; I had a
taste of his sweetness, peace, and comfort: now contrarily, I know God not as
a Father but as an enemy; what more? my heart hates God, and seeks to get
above him: I have nothing else to fly to but terror and despair.

Belike you think then (said they) that those who have the earnest and first
fruits of Gods Spirit, may notwithstanding fall away?

The judgments of God are a deep abisse, ( said he) we are soon drowned if
we enter into them; he that thinks he stands, let him take heed lest he
fall: as for my self, I know I am fallen back; and that I once did know the
truth; though it may be not so thoroughly: I know not what else to say, but that
I am one of that number, which God has threatened to tear in pieces.

Say not so (answered they) for God may come, though at the last hour; keep
hold therefore, at the least by hope.

This ( quoth he) is my case I tell you I cannot, God has deprived me of
hope; this brings terror to my mind, and pines this hodie which now is so
weak, as it cannot perform the several offices thereof: Romans 8. 16.
for as the Elect have the Spirit testifying that they are the sons of God,
so the Reprobates even while they live, do often feel a worm in their
conscience, whereby they are condemned already, and therefore as soon as I
perceived this wound inflicted on my mind and will, I I knew that I wanted the
gifts of saving grace, and that I was utterly undone; 1 Cor. 11. 33.
God chasteneth his children with temporary afflictions, Romans 1. 28.
that they may come as gold out of the fire; but pupunisheth the wicked with
blindness in their understandings, and hardness of heart; and woe be to such,
from whom God takes his holy Spirit.

Here one rebuked him, and told him, he gave too much credit to sense, that he
was not to believe himself, but rather him that was in a good estate, and I
testify to you (said he) that God will be merciful to you.

Nay ( answered he) for because I am in this ill estate; therefore can I believe
nothing but what is contrary to my salvation and comfort; but you that are so
confident of your good state, look that it be true, for it is no such small
matter to be assured of sincerity: a man had need be exceeding strongly
grounded in the Truth, before he can be able to affirm such a matter as you
now do; it is not the performance of a few outward duties, but a mighty
constant labor, with all intention of heart and affection; with full desire
and endeavor, continually to set forth Gods glory; there must be neither
fear of Legates, Inquisitors, Prisons, nor any death whatsoever; many think
themselves happy that are not; it is not every one that says, Lord, Lord;
that shall go to heaven.

They came another day and found him with his eyes shut, as if he had been
drowzie, and very loath to discourse; at which time there came in also a grave
man from Cittadella; who demanded of Spira, if he knew him, Matthew. 7. 22.
or not; he lifting up his eyelids and not suddenly remembering him, the man
said to him; I am Presbiter Antonie Fontanina; I was with you at Venice, some
8. weeks since: O cursed day (said Spira) O cursed day: O that I had never gone
thither, would God I had then died.

Afterward came in a Priest called Bernardinus Sardoneus: bringing with him a
book of Exorcismes, to conjure this devil: whom when Spira saw, shaking his
head he said:

I am verily persuaded indeed, that God has left me to the power of the
devils: but such they are, as are not to be found in your Letanie: neither
will they be cast out by spells: The Priest proceeding in his intended purpose;
with a strange uncouth gesture, and a loud voice, adjured the Spirit to come
into Spira's tongue, and to answer: Spira deriding his fruitless labor, with
a sigh turned from him. A Bishop being there present, said to Spira, brother
God has put virtue into the Word and Sacraments: and we have used the one
means, and find not that effect which we desire: shall we try the efficacy of
the Sacraments, surely if you take it as a true Christian ought to receive, the
body and blood of Christ, it will prove a sovereign medicine for your sick
soul.

This I cannot do (answered he) for they that have no right to the promises,
have no right to the seals: the Eucharist was appointed only for believers:
if we have not faith, we eat and drink judgment to our selves: 1 Cor. 11.
29.
I received it about a month since, but I did not well in so doing, for I
took it by constraint, and so I took it to my deeper condemnation.

Here Vergerius began to importune him earnestly to beware, that he did not
wilfully resist grace, and put himself out of haven: charging him vehemently,
by all the love that was between them: by the love which he bare to his
children, yea to his own soul: that he would set himself seriously, to
return to that faith and hope, which once he had in the death of Christ, with
many such like words: Spira having heard much of the like matter formerlie: and
being somewhat moved, said, You do but repeat Vergerius, what should I hope?
why should I believe? God has taken faith from me: show me then whither I
shall go: show me a haven whereto I shall retire: you tell me of Gods mercy,
when as God has cast me off: you tell me of Christ's intercession, I have
denied him: you command me to believe, I say I cannot: you bring me no
comfort: your command is as impossible for me to obey, as to keep the Moral
Law: if you should persuade one to love God, with all his heart, soul and
strength; and God gives him not the power, can he perform your desire? does
not the church teach us to sing; direct us, O Lord, to love thy commandments:
hypocrites say that they love God with all their heart, but they lie: for my
part, I will not lie, but tell you plainly; such is my case, that though you
should never so much much importune me to hope or believe, though I desire it,
yet I cannot: for God (as a punishment of my wickedness) has taken away from
me all his saving graces; faith, hope, and all: I am not the man therefore that
you take me for: belike you think I delight in this estate; if I could
conceive but the least spark of hope of a better estate hereafter, I would not
refuse to endure the most heavy weight of the wrath of that great God; yea,
for twenty thousand years, so that I might at length attain to the end of that
misery, which I now know will be eternal; but I tell you, my will is wounded:
who longs more to believe then I do? but all the groundwork of my hope is
quite gone; for if the testimonies of holy Scripture be true (as they are most
certainly true) is not this as true: whosoever denies me before men, him (
says Christ) will I deny before my Father which is in heaven? is not this
properly my case, as if it had purposely been intended against this very
person of mine? and I pray you, what shall become of such as Christ denies;
seeing there is no other Name under heaven, whereby you look to be saved?
what says Saint Paul to the Hebrews? Heb. 6.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, if they fall away,
to be renewed to repentance: what can be more plain against me? Is not that
Scripture also; if we sin wilfully after we have received the Knowledge of
the truth, and 10. 26.
there remains no more sacrifice for sin; but a certain looking for of
judgment: the Scripture speaks of me, Saint Paul means me, S. Peter tells me,
Pet. 2. 21.
it had been better I had not known the way of Righteousness, then after I
have known, to turn from the holy commandment: if it had been better I had
not known, and yet then my condemnation had been most certain: do you not
see evidently, that I have wilfully denied the known truth; may justly expect
not only damnation, but worse, if worse may be imagined: God will have me
undergo the just punishment of my sin, and make me an example of his wrath
for your sakes.

The company present, admired his discourse, so grievously accusing himself of
his fore-past life; so gravely and wisely dilating, concerning the judgments
of God, that they then were convinced, that it was not frenzy or madness,
that had possessed him: and being as it were, in admiration of his estate,
Spira proceeded again in this manner, Take heed to your selves, it is no light
or easy matter to be a Christian; it is not baptism, or reading of the
Scriptures, or boasting of faith in Christ (though even these are good) that
can prove one to be an absolute Christian: you know what I said before, there
must be a conformity in life; a Christian must be strong, unconquerable, not
carrying an obscure profession, but resolute; expressing the image of Christ,
and holding out against all opposition to the last breath: he must give all
diligence by righteousness, and holiness, to make his calling and election
sure; many there are that snatch at the promises in the Gospel, as if they
undoubtedly did belong to them, and yet they remain sluggish, and careless,
and being flattered by the things of this present world, they pass in their
course in quietness and security, as if they were the only happy men; whom
nevertheless the Lord in his providence has ordained to eternal wrath; as
you may see in S. Lukes rich man, Luke 16.
thus it was with me, therefore take heed.

Then came one of his Nephews and offered him some sustenance, which he
disdainfully refusing, so moved the youngmans choler, that he charged him with
hypocrisy and dissimulation, or frenzy; to whom Spira gravely answering, said:

You may interpret the matter as you will; but I am sure, I am not only the
Actor, but the argument, and matter of the Tragedy; I would it were frenzy,
either fained or true; for if it were fained, I could put it off at pleasure;
if it were a real frenzy, yet there were some hope left of Gods mercy,
whereas now there is none; for I know that God has pronounced me an enemy,
and guilty of high Treason against his Majesty; I am a castaway, a vassaile
of wrath: yet dare you call it dissembling and frenzy; and can mock at the
formidable example of the heavy wrath of God, that should teach you fear and
terror; but it is natural to the flesh, either out of malice or ignorance, to
speak perversely of the works of God, the natural man discerns not of the
things that are of God, because they are spiritually discerned.

How can this be (said Gribauldus) that you can thus excellently discourse of
the judgments of God, and of the graces of his holy Spirit, that you find
the want of them, and earnestly desire them; and yet you think you are utterly
deprived of them.

Take this for certain ( said he) I want the maine grace of all, and that
which is absolutely necessary; and God does many times extort most true and
strange testimonies of his Majesty's justice and mercy; yea out of the mouths
of very reprobates, for even Judas, after he had betrayed his Master, Mat.
27. 4.
was constrained to confess his sin, and to justify the innocence of
Christ; and therefore if I do the like, it is no new or strange matter: God
has taken faith from me, and left me other common gifts, for my deeper
condemnation; by how much the more I remember what I had, and hear others
discourse of what they have, by so much the more is my torment, in that I know
what I want, and how there is no way to be relieved.

Thus spoke he, the tears all the while trickling down; professing that his
pangs were such, as that the damned wights in hell endure not the like misery;
that his estate was worse, then that of Cain or Judas; and therefore he
desired to die: yet behold (says he) the Scriptures are accomplished in me;
Rev. 9. 6.
they shall desire to die, and death shall fly from them; and verily, he
seemed exceedingly to fear, lest his life should be drawn out to a longer
thread: and finding no ease, or rest, ever and anon cried out: O miserable
wretch; O miserable wretch; then turning to the Company; he besought them in
this manner.

O Brethren, take a diligent heed to your life; make more account of the gifts
of Gods spirit then I have done, learn to beware my misery, think not you are
assured Christians, because you understand something of the Gospel; take heed
you grow not secure on that ground; be constant and immovable in the
maintaining of your profession, confess even until death if you be called
thereto: he that loves father, Luke 14. 26.
mother, brothers, sisters, sons, daughters, kindred, houses, lands, more then
Christ, is not worthy of him.

These words (said they) do not sound like the words of a wicked Reprobate.

I do but herein imitate ( said Spira) the rich Glutton in the Gospel, who
though in hell; yet was careful that his brethren should not come to that
place of torment: and I say to you Brethren, take heed of this miserable estate
wherein I am.

Then turning himself to certain young men that were present, he desired
them to conceive him aright: I do not speak this, to derogate from the
certainty of saving faith, and the promises of the Gospel, for they are most
sure; but take heed of relying on that Faith that works not a holy and
unblameable life, worthy of a believer; credit me, it will fail, I have tried
it: I presumed I had gotten the right faith, I preached it to others, I had all
places of Scripture in memory, that might support it: I thought my self sure,
and in the mean time, living impiously and carelessly, behold, now the
judgments of God have overtaken me, not to correction, but to condemnation;
and now you would have me to believe, but it will not be; for I feel too
late; that good things belong only to such as are good; whose sins are
covered with Christ's death and blood, as with a veil, and guarded with his
righteous merits from the flood of Gods warth, even as with a mighty wall;
left miserable mortals should be swallowed up with the greatness of their
sins: But as for me, I have as it were wilfully with mine hands pulled down
this rampire; behind which I might have rested in safety; and now are the
swelling waters come even to my soul: and I am cast away.

One of his familiar friends chanced to say, that certainly he was overcome
with melancholy; which being overheard, Spira answered:

Well, be it so, seeing you will needs have it so; for thus also is Gods wrath
manifested against me in that he has taken from me the use of mine
understanding and reason, so as I can neither rightly esteem and judge of my
distemper, nor hope of remedy: you see Brethren, what a dangerous thing it is,
to stop or stay in things that concern Gods glory: especially to dissemble
upon any terms: what a fearful thing is it to be near, and almost a
Christian; never was the like example to this of mine: and therefore if you be
wise, you will seriously consider thereof; Oh that God would let loose his hand
from me; that it were with me now, as in times past; I would scorn the threats
of the most cruel Tyrants, bear torments with invincible resolution, and
glory in the outward profession of Christ, till I were choked in the flame,
and my body consumed to ashes.

You say you are desperate, O Spira (said they) why then do you not strive
with some weapon or other, violently to make an end of your life, as desperate
men use to do? Let me have a sword (said Spira) why what would you do with
it (quoth they) I cannot tell you (said he) what this mind would move me to
upon occasion; nor what I would do.

They perceiving small effect of all this their labor; but rather that he grew
worse: for the avoiding of concourse of people; for every day seldom fewer
then 20* continued with him, and to stop the course of fame, which was
continually blown abroad of him; they consult to carry him back again into
his own country: and those his friends that came to comfort him, began to
take their leaves of him: Vergerius among the rest, required that at their
parting they might pray together with him: Spira hardly consented, and as
unwillingly performed: for he said, My heart is estranged from God, I cannot
call him Father from my heart; all good motions are now quite gone, my heart is
full of malediction, hatred, and blasphemy against God; I find I grow more and
more hardened in heart, and cannot stoop nor help my self; your prayers for
me shall turn to your own benefit, they can do me no good.

Vergerius came to take his leave of him, whom Spira embracing, said, Although
I know that nothing can bring any benefit to me a Reprobate; but that every
thing shall tend to my deeper condemnation; yet I give you most hearty thanks,
for your kind office of love and good will; and the Lord return it unto you
with a plentiful increase of all good.

The next day being brought down to his intended Journey, by the way looking
round about him with a ghastly look, he saw a knife lying on a Table, to which
he running hastily snatched hold of; as intending to mischief himself; but
his friends laying hold of him, stopped him in his purpose: whereupon with
indignation, he said, I would I were, above God, for I know he will have no
mercy on me.

Thus went he homewards, often saying, that the envied the condition of Cain
and Judas: he lay about 8. weeks in this case, in a continual burning,
neither desiring, nor receiving any thing but by force, and that without
disgestion: so spent, that he appeared a perfect Anatomy; expressing to the
view, nothing but sinews and bones; vehemently raging for drink; ever pining,
yet fearful to live long; dreadful of hell, yet coveting death; in a
continual torment, yet his own tormentour: and thus consuming himself with
grief and horror, impatience, and despair; like a living man in Hell; he
represented an extraordinary example of the justice and power of God: and thus
(as far as appears) within a few days after his arrival at his own home,
he departed this present life. Yet an occasion to make us remember, that secret
things belong unto the Lord our God; but charity to man, to teach him to hope
all things.

EXtraordinary examples of Divine Justice, God never intended for a nine days
wonder: else would he when he exemplifi'd Lots wife have turned her into a
statue of melting snow, not of lasting salt; which stood as Josephus tells us,
till his age, after the destruction of Jerusalem: and as some Travelers
report, till at this day: ut quoddam hominibus praestaret condimentum quo
sapiant unde illud caveatur exemplum; Aug. de. civit. Dei. lib. 16. c. 30. for
a season against corruption, a preservative against Apostacy. This Tragedy,
when fresh and new, was the conversion and confirmation of sundry Worthies:
Vergerius a daily spectator thereof, forsaking a rich Bishopric of
Iustinopolis, and tents of Antichrist; went to Basil, and dyed a worthy
Protestant: many Nations had Eyewitnesses of their own Students, then in the
University of Padua who penned the Story, the Copies whereof are frequently
revived: our English ones were very defective, and now worn out of shoppes and
hands, sundry manuscripts of this abroad imperfect; which moved me to compare
this labor of a worthy Gentleman (who faithfully translated it out of Italian,
French, and Dutch Letters) with the Latin of Caelius Secundus, Curio, Mattheus
Gribauldus, professors of the Civil Law in Padua: Sigismund Gelous a
Transilvanian, Henricus Scotus, all daily visitors of Spira, and find it
accord with them. Touching Spiraes person, I find (most learned writers) to
incline to the right, and hopeful hand: moved by his sweet, humble, and
charitable speeches: some few desperate ones excepted, that fell from him in
some little agonies, which kept him fasting and watching about six months
space, eating nothing but what was forced down his throat. The sum of Calvin's
and Borrhaus their their counsels (who writ largely of the use of this pattern)
is that all learn to take heed of backe-sliding, which Gods soul abhorres;
and not to dally with Conscience, and hell on earth, if justly incensed; more
to be feared then the Spanish Inquisition, or all the Strappadoes and torments
in the world; and to take heed of Spira's principal Errors; which were to
dispute with Satan over busily in time of weakness: especially to reason, and
conclude from present sense: to Gods past Reprobation, and future Damnation:
both which is hard, if possible for any man to determine in his own, much more
in others cases: so commending thee to his grace who is able to establish thee
to the end: I bid thee farewell, and hope well, while the space of Grace
lasts, Dum spiras spera: so may thou take good and no hurt, by the reading
of this terrible example.

FINIS.
December. 2. 1637.
Imprimatur Tho* Wykes. R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.


