THE COURSE of Christianity: or, As touching the daily Reading and Meditation
of the holy Scriptures: very requisite and necessary for all Christians of what
estate or condition soever: TWO BOOKS.

Translated out of Latin into English, by John Ludham Vicar of Wethersfeld.
1579.

The commandment of God in the old Testament.

Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. These words which I command thee this day shall be in
thine heart: and thou shalt rehearse the^ continually unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou tariest in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way: when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc.

The commandment of God in the nevve Testament.

Joan. 5.39. Search the Scriptures: for they they be that testifye of me.

Printed at London by Henry Bynneman. 1579.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Virtuous, and my very good Lady, the Lady Mary
Wroth, late wife to the right worshipful Sir THOMAS WROTH, Knight, of godly
memory, deceassed: John Ludham wishes continuance of health, and al things
prosperous in Christ Jesus.
WHat great cause there is (right worshipful and my very good L.) why all men
of all sorts should be exhorted, and earnestly excited, to the daily readyng
and meditation of the holy Scriptures: the infinite perilles and calamities,
whereunto we are al of us continually subject, do most plainly and
plentifully declare. For why, who sees not how combersome and perilous a
state they enter into, that take upon the^ to travail in the Wilderness in the
night season, without the help either of Moon or Stars, or any other light
to direct them by? Go they not oftentimes out of the way? Do they not many
times stumble and stagger like men berefte of their senses? Are they not ever
and anon caughte in the Briars, and there pitiously tattred and torn? Be they
not like from time to time to run themselves either against some Rock,
Block, or Tree standing before them? whereby they get one while (perhaps) a
shrewde rushe on the sides, an otherwhile a cursed thwacke ouerthwarte the
shinnes, now and then a sore bounse on the breaste, by and by a dreadefull
duste on the neck and shoulders, straightwayes and odd blow cross the face,
and even immediately an auke rap upon the nose, or some one dash or other in
the eyes, ears, or teeth? But what are these in comparison of the rest? very
fleabitings. For if they escape either with some or with all these hurts and
annoyances which we have now mentioned, they may say (and that truly) they have
played the tall fellows. But over and besides these, they light many times
upon some dangerous quagmire, foregrowne Lake or Pit, wherein they stick
fast, and are not able to wind themselves out again, no not to the death.
What shall I say of the huge multitude of Beasts so fierce and terrible in
their kinds? Are they not like every moment to be devoured of them? How is it
possible they should escape so many roaring Lions, so many ravening Wolves, so
many bloody Bears, boy sterous Bulls, cruel Tygres, Panters, Pardals,
Leopardes, Serpents, Dragons, and such like, and not become a pray unto them?
I say nothing all this while of a danger as great as any other, namely, of
the thieves and robbers, cormorants and caytifes, that lurk in obscure places,
gaping for the spoil of wayfaring men: of whom notwithstanding they are
cruelly rifled, and have oftetimes their throats miserably cut. But who is
able to express all the hard happes and hazardes, which they throw
themselves into, that iourny by night in the Desert (as is aforesaid?) Verily
I suppose not Syluanus himself. Now then if incace the state of these men
be so difficulte and dangerous, that are in hazard only of a bodily death:
how much more perilous and pernicious is the case of all those, that remain
in such continual ieopardy both of body and soul? Such doubtelesse is the
plighte of all Adams children even from the time of their birth to the day of
their death. Such is the case and condition both of high and low, rich and
poor, noble and base, bond and free, Jew and Gentile, al and some, one and
other. For why? so soon as we are borne, we enter into this world as into a
huge Wilderness: where we are eftesoones environed with innumerable straites
of the body, with innumerable perplexities of the soul. As touching the body,
we come naked into the world, without either mantell to cover us, or strength
to defend us, or discretion to guide us, or provision to succor us: in which
behalf the very brute beasts do far-away surmount us. And we be no sooner
crawled forth of our mothers womb, but we set out our throats and cry:
even thereby bewraying both our present misery, and our wretchedness to
come. As we grow up in years, so increase our troubles. Troubles within
us, troubles without us, troubles above us, troubles beneath us, troubles
behind us, troubles before us, troubles on the right hand, troubles on the
left, and every where troubles. Within us, all manner of maladies and
disseases proceedyng of inward causes, which in very deed are so many in
number, as the very Physicians themselves could never as yet find out propre
names enough for them, much less prescribe any sit remedies to heal them.
Without us, all kind of outward crosses, and distresses: as hunger, thirst,
cold, nakedness, wounds, soars, botches, blaynes, blindness, lamenesse,
deafness, dumbness, perils of sword, perilles of fire, perilles of water,
etc. Above us are the Heavens (as ye would say) armed against us, the
Firmament frownyng upon us, the Air distempered, the Winds wrestling, the
Thunders roaring, the Lightnings flashing, the Comettes and blazing Stars
lowting, the Sun eclipsed, the Moon deprived of her light: and all tokens of
calamities unto us.

Beneath us is the earth oftetimes trembling and quaking, many times sindged
and scorched, diverse times overflowed and surrounded, sometimes opening and
swallowing up all that ever is, not seldom times breathing out pestilent
vapors and exhalations, to the destruction of whole Cities and Towns. Behind
us are al troubles unlooked for. Before us, all troubles foreseen. On the
right hand our friends. On the left hand, our foes. Yea, and which way
soever we turn us, troubles upon troubles, trials upon trials, one vexation
upon an other, and even death it self continually pursuing us. And thus
fares it with us as touching our bodies. But as concerning our souls, the
case is so much the more dangerous, as the enemies are pernicious, and
calamities grievous whereunto they are subject. Subject (I say) not by creation,
but by deprauatio^, or rather by original corruption. For in deed if they be
considered according to that excellent nature, wherein they were first created
before the fall of Adam: it will appear, that as in substance spiritual, and
in quality immortal, so were they endued also with singular ornaments and
heavenly virtues, as whereby they resembled the image even of God himself. But
(alas) ever since that fatal ruin and dismal decay of our great unhappy
graundfather Adam, they have not only bin deprived of all those ornaments and
graces which before they had, but also infected with contrary vices and
deformities: so as in stedde of light, they are become dark: in stedde of
pure, they are become obscure: in stedde of holy, they are become profane: in
stedde of vprighte, just, perfect, happy, blessed, the image of the eternal
God, they are become pieuish, perverse, imperfect, unjust, accursed, the Image
of the infernal Satan. And this forsooth generally is the state wherein we
stand both in respect of our souls and bodies. For the more manifest proof
whereof, the Scriptures are plentiful, especially where they painte forth man
in his natural colors, and set him up (as it were) on a stage to be seen.
For they teach, that there is no sound or whole part in him from the crown
of the head to the soale of the foot. For why? Ps. 14.2.3.4. Psalm. 53.4. Ps.
5.10. and 140.2. and 10.7 Prou. 1.16 Iam. 4.8 1. Cor. 1.20 and 2.14. Iere. 9.26
Deuteronomy. 10.16 Eccles. 11.33 Genes. 6.5.11.12. and 8.21. Psalm. 36.1. Esa. 59.3.7
Romans 3.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.
We are all the sort of us corrupt, we have all gone astray, we are all
become abominable, there is none that understands or seeks after God,
there is none that does good, no not one: Our minds are distract within us,
our memories are maimed, our reason unreformed, our understanding imperfect,
our wisdom foolishness, our hearts uncircumcised, our judgments unjust,
our wills waywarde, our thoughts vain, our imaginations wicked, our
conceits carnal, our fancies frustrate, our affections evil, our lusts
unbridled, our throats an open sepulcher, our tongs have used deceit, the
poison of Aspes is under our lips, our mouths are full of cursing and
bitterness, our hands are filled with cruelty, and our fingers with
iniquity, our feet are swifte to shed blood, destruction and calamity are
in our ways, the way of peace we have not known, and there is no fear of
God before our eyes. These and such like are the excellent titles, and
prerogatives wherewith the holy Ghost adorneth us in the Scriptures. These are
in deed the true marks and monuments of our antiquity, the peculiar badges
of our bravery, the right Coat Armor of al Adams offspring. Whereof least any
man should doubt, and pretend I wot not what privileges for himself, as
though he were exe^pted out of the common array of all flesh, the Scripture
deals yet more plainly with us, and tells us, that we are not only
wretched and miserable by nature, as being all conceived of unclean seed,
Psalm. 51.5 Ephesians. 2.1.3.5 Romans 3.9 Galath. 3 22 Romans 2.22. Psalm. 116.11.
and all borne the children of wrath and perdition, but also that we have al
sinned, (where this word (All) is referred to every particular person, whether
he be Jew or Gentile) and are deprived of the glory of God: that we are al
workers of wickedness, al shrinking and rebellious children, liars, Romans 3.4
Esa. 59.5 Deuteronomy. 27 Galath. 3.10 Coloss. 2.13 Ephesians 2.12 Romans 6.23.
and lighter than vanity it self, all hatchers of Cokatrice eggs, and
weauers of the Spiders web (as the Prophet speaks) (and to be short) all
subject to the curse and malediction of God, and so consequentlye to endless
confusion both of soul and body. For, the reward of sin, is death, and
every soul that sins shall dye. says the Lord. These things thus brieflye
premised, although they may seem sufficient to strike (as it were) an Alarm
into al men's consciences, and to make them look about them, if happily they may
espy any remedy: yet over and besides these, if we will weigh and consider
what an unmerciful number of spiritual ennimies we have to deal and
encounter with, how subtly they lie in wait to entrappe us, how incessantly
they assail us, how greedily they gape to devour us, we shall be much
more inflamed (as I think) to prepare our selves to the battle, and to
stand upon our guarde, if (at least) we have either any care of our own
welfare, or dread of our own destruction. For if so be we have not unfitly
compared the world unto a Wilderness, where men wander in the midst of
innumerable dangers and are even subject continually to a thousand deaths:
then may it appear sufficientlye what our lotte and portion is in this life,
and how hardlye we are like to be dealte withal, unless we walk marvelous
warily and circumspectly, and be throughlye fenced and fortified at all
assayes. We have to consider, that as there the ways and paths are very
doubtefull and uncertain by reason of manifold crinkes and turnings: so here
we are to mete with infinite Mazes and Labyrinths of superstitions and false
opinions: so as there is nothing more hard and difficult, than for a man
(amongst them) to keep the straighte course to eternal salvation. Again, as
the desert places are full of horrible dangers, as well in respect of the
wild and fauage beasts, as also of the Thieves and Robbers that lurk in
them: even so are we in this world environed about on every side with far
more grievous enemies, as which (for their cruelty and more than bloody desire
of destroying all that ever come in their ways) do far-awaye exceed the
saluagest beasts and cruellest cut-throates that be. For even amongst us
rangeth that old manqueller the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8
who (as Peter says) goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. And he is not alone, but he has an infinite rabble, and even the
Devil and all of wicked Angels and unclean Spirits to do him service: so as
he is (not without good consideration) called a Potentate, the Prince of
darkness, the Governor of this world, Ephesians. 6.12
the spirit that rules in the Air, etc. to note unto us the wonderful force
and puissance that he is of: Ephesians. 2.2
like as in other places, for his malice and subtilty, he is termed a Serpent,
for his cruelty, a Lion, and for all together, Genes. 3.1 1. Pet. 5.8 Apocal.
12 3
a great red Dragon having seven heads and ten horns, and seven Crowns
upon his heads, etc. There are also belonging to his hellish conduct and
Kingdom, an innumerable sort of wicked doers, which having utterly rejected
all sense of Humanity and Godliness, are degenerated into wild and saluage
beasts. For we may see every where a rank route of leacherous monsters to
grunt like Hogs and Swine: a huge throng of wrathful Termagaunts to yell out
like Bears: a beastly company of Backbiters to bark abroad like Dogs: a
ravening sort of Cormorants to houle out like Wolves: a fierce and frantike
multitude to take on like untamed Tygres: a number to play the parts of the
nimble sighted Lynxes: a sly and subtle sort to fare like Foxes: a tetchy
and kicking kind of Asses to bray: a venomous sight of Serpents to hiss: and
to be short, such a huge rabble of stinking Goats, bellowing Bugles, puffing
Panters, and all manner of unclean Beasts, that a man shall walk much safer
in the Wilderness amongst the wild beasts in deed, than he can do in the
world amongst men of so beastly conditions: neither have we to fear so great
danger from the very Beasts themselves, as we have to doubt and dread those,
that are of the self same nature with us: Insomuch that the old fathers said
not without a cause, One man is become a Wolf to an other. Further, as the
Desert is waste and barren, and besides, ouergrowen with Bushes, Briars and
Thorns: so is this World, manured with no knowledge of God at all, but is
altogether barren and unapt to yield forth any good fruit, nay
contrariwise, scrawleth every where full of the briars of Sins and Vices,
whereby we are so grievously mangled and torn, that (commonly and for the
most part) we keep the scarres of them to our dying day. I might stand
here to show how some of us (nay all in a manner) are choked with the cares
of this world, and with the deceitfulness of riches: some caughte in the
pitfall of Pride and Ambition: some snared with the Thorns of Covetousness:
some over head and ears in the Briars of Voluptuousness: some saped in the
suddes of Sensuality: some smouldered with the smoke of Vanity: some
drenched in the dregs of Drunkenness: some be-smeared with the mudde of
Maliciousness: some imbrued with the blood not of Beasts but of Men: and in
a word, not some, but a great sum stifled in the stench of all Sin and
Wickedness. I might show in like manner, how there is nothing under the
Sun so excellent, no work of God so wonderful, no blessing so bountiful,
no creature so beneficial, wholesome and good, but that (through the malice of
Satan and our own miserable corruption) it is turned clean contrary, unto
our great harm and discommoditie, yea, even into a present poison to infecte
us wythall, and into a Scorpion (as it were) to sting us to death.

As much might be said of our own selves: in whom there is no part nor power
either of soul or body, but that through sin, they are become even so many
deadly enemies to hale us to destruction. And herein forsooth appears by the
way the strangeness, or rather unnaturalness (as I may so say) of our
warfare, clean contrary to the warfare of the world. For whereas worldly
Soldiers take weapon in hand chiefly against forrainers and strangers, but
never against their own persons: we on the other side, must not look so
much what our enemies do abroad, as we must have an eye what traitors are
at home, I mean in our own bosoms, that so letting others go in peace by us,
we may bend all our whole force and artillery to the battery of our own
selves. Not as though it were lawful for any man to cut himself short by
untimely death (as many diuellishe and desperate persons do) but to the
intent to get the mastery over our affections, to bridle our lusts, to
mortify our old man, to kill our concupiscence, to subdue our nature, and
finally, to submit all our will, wisdom, reason, understanding, and all that
ever we have either within us or without us, to the rule and obedience of Gods
holy Word, and to the government and direction of his holy Spirit. But I
fear least I have exceeded already the compass of an Epistle: I will
therefore be as brief as is possible. We have seen then (if I be not
deceived) how woeful our original state and condition is, what infinite perils
and calamities we are subject unto, what mighty and unrestful enemies we
are continuallye matchte wythall, and how little refuge or succoure we have
to look for in this world, or in any thing belonging to the World. For, the
World passes away, and the lust thereof: but he that does the will of
God, abides for ever.

The use of all which things is, to teach every one of us how earnestly we
ought to labor, and contend, every man according to his present necessity,
to learn well the lesson taught unto Nicodemus, namely, to be borne again,
Joan. 3.3 Ephesians. 4.23 1. Pet. 2.2
and to be renewed in the spirit of our mind, so as we may covet the sincere
milk of the word, to the intent to grow thereby: to be removed (I say) from
the love of these earthly things here below, and to stye up by the wings Faith
into Heaven, where Jesus Christ sits on the right hand of God the father:
finally, to purchase the certainty of a better inheritance, and the assurance
of a better Country: by cause (as the Apostle says) We have here no
continuing City, but we seek for one to come. To the obtaining of all which
graces, Hebr. 13.14
as Faith alone in the word and promises of God is sufficient, so attain we
to Faith by no other means than by conceyuing the free mercy of God in Christ
through the reading, hearing, and meditation of the holy Scriptures. The reason
is, because that Jesus Christ being the only object of our faith, and
substance of the whole Scripture, we apprehend in him all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom, and what soever else is necessary to eternal
salvation. For, He is of God made unto us wisdom, ^. Corinth. 1.10
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and even all in all:
as the Apostle speaks. Who sees not then what incomparable treasures (in
comparison whereof all the pomp and glory of the World is nothing but dung
and dross) are comprised in the sacred Scriptures? But I may not stand to
amplify this point (as by occasion otherwise justly I might) considering in
very deed a Preface will not bear it. I must therefore of necessity refer
all this whole matter to the consideration of the godly Reader: who may find
every where in reading, plentiful furniture tending to this purpose. 11. Time.
3.16
Only this I will add by way of conclusion, that for so much as all the holy
Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable (as Paul says) to
teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the
man of God may be absolute and made perfect to al good works: Romans 15.4
and again, that whatsoever things are written aforetime, are written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope: that therefore I say it behooves al sorts and degrees of men and women
whatsoever, (if at leastwise they stand in need to be taught and informed in
the ways of the Lord, if they have need of daily correction and amendment of
life, if they be desirous of continual comfort and consolation, and finally,
of eternal happiness and salvation) to be in love with the holy Scriptures,
to embrace them, to reverence them, to read them, to hear them, to meditate
in them, and above all, to live after the^, and eue^ to express them in their
whole life and conversation. Which godly diligence and endeavor as I wish
unfeignedly from my very heart to be wrought effectually in mine own self: so
make I mine humble prayers unto the Lord, that he would vouchsafe in his great
mercy to kindle and stir up the same in the hearts of all people, to
awaken them out of the sleep of sin and security, to draw them out of the
dirty dregs of Popery and superstition, wherein Satan has of long time, and
yet still keeps a great number to scatter the clouds and mistes as well of
all old as new sprung up heresies from amongst them, and last of al, so to
join and knit them together in one consent of the truth of his holy word and
Sacraments, as may be most of all to the advancement of his glorious kingdom,
and to the utter overthrow of Satan's outrage and Tyranny. To the furtherance
whereof because I was persuaded that this Book of the famous and worthy man
Andrew Hyperius would not a little avail, I thought it not amiss for my good
brethren and Countrimens cause, to turn the same into our common language,
and to publish it in as plain a style and phrase as I possibly could. Which
being attentively read and perused, will minister I am sure, not only
sufficient matter for the godly and Christian Reader to work upon, but also
sound and substantial reasons to the satisfaction of al indifferent minds,
and to the confusion of all scorners and cauillers whatsoever. And forsomuche
as I am not ignorant what great and special blessings of his Spirit the Lord
in mercy has vouchsafed to bestow upon your Ladyship, and upon your
progeny, whereby you are moved again by apparent testimonies, to express the
godly love and zeal which you bear to his infallible truth and Gospel: I
determined with my self amongst many other noble and worthy personages, to
make my special choice of your L. as a meet patroness of this present
work, and of my travel and pains taken therein. Whereunto I was provoked so
much the rather, by cause that as you your self are an earnest traveler in
the holy Scriptures, as well by public hearing as by private reading, so your
example will not a little help both to the commending of this work unto
posterity, and also to the encouraging of many other of your sex and calling
to the following of your steps. Albeit I must confess one other cause there
was of this my doing, which I will by no means conceal from your L. And that
was the great courtesy and friendly affability, which amongst many other
virtues I noted in your L. at what time you used commonly to resort unto our
parish Church, to the exercise there. But then especially appeared your
courtesy most excellent in mine eye, when you of your own accord, to my great
and singular rrioycing, vouchedsafe to visit and adorn my poor house with
your presence, and to take well in worth that simple entertainment, which
then, through Gods goodness, I was able to give you. And even then doubtless
conceived I this imagination with my self, that how soever you should be
forgetful of your friendlinesse offered, yet I for my part could never be
unmindful of your curtesy received: but would testifye the same by one
means or other so soon as time and opportunity should serve.

Thus (Madam) have you heard the principal causes that moved me to put
forth this Book under the title of your name: which, if I may perceive your
L. to take in good part (as I doubt not but you will) then have I reaped the
only guerdon of my desire. In the mean season (to end withal) I commend the
whole success thereof unto the Lord, beseeching him so to multiply his mercies
upon you and upon your whole family, as that you may live many years a
joyful and happy mother in Israel, and finally, reap the end of your hope,
even endless joy and immortality with all the sanctified in Christ Jesus.

AMEN.

Written at VVethersfeld the ninth of June. 1579. Your Ladyships most humble in
the Lord, JOHN LVDHAM.

To the Reader.
I If toys and trifles now adays so well accepted be,
O Of all and every wight in worth, that do them read or see:
H How much more the^ ought godly works well weyed for to bin?
N No doubt the Lord will none excuse that careless be herein.
L Let whose can complain, and say: I want good Books to view:
V Undoubtedly this age of ours, will prove his plainte untrue.
D Did ever any one as yet, like store of books remember?
H Has not the Lord us greatly blessed in these our days? Consider:
A Amongst the rest, this book is one, which if thou rightly read,
M May further thee to godliness, and stand thee in great stead.
I. L.

Gentle Reader, before thou enter into the reading of this discourse, I pray
thee use some pains in correcting with thy pen these faults that have escaped
the Print.
In the Preface, page. 3. line 11. read, of the Psalmist: page 5. line 28. and
29. read, they are they that: page 7. line 2. read, holy Scriptures: ibid.
line 3. read, any nevve matter: page 8. line 3. read, and it shall.

In the Treatise, page 6. line to read, as the insight: page 7. last line,
read, to the contemplation: page 8. line 8. for Clemens, Alexandrnus, read,
Clemens Alexandrinus, ibid. line. 11. for was, read were, page 10. line 24.
for our read one: ibid. line 29. for Jeremy read Jerome: page 14. line 25.
read and function: page 19. line 8. read, vacation: page 20. line 29. read
same: page 21. line 28. read, that every man: page 26. line 11. for unheard
of, read, unheard, of: ibid. line 15. read, in a readiness: page 29. line
31. read, at Thessalonica: page 36. line 1. read numbered page 38.10. read,
more vvitnesses: page 40. line 12. read, in their own houses: page 54. line
22. for where, read which: page 56. lin. 8. read Paulinus: page 58. lin.
26. read, Hedibia: page 64. after the last word bring in these lines
following vz. as touching the palm of knowledge of things spiritual. For
verily, I am o^t at mind that then there was no family etc. page 65. line
19. read, admonished: page 66. line 7. read buying: ibid. line 26. read
Ichoiacim. page 70. line 2. read, meanly: page 74. line 7. read. he
oftentimes: ibidem line 10. read Acts. 18. of Aquila: page 75. line 23. read,
as this: page 77. line 17. read, to set forwards page 78 line 6. read, of
the wholsome ibid. line 25. read, book 10. page 79. line 14. read,
desolate, Mergine line 4. for ought, read might: page 18. line 18. read,
ought not to: page 84. line 14. read united: page 85 line 9. read, begin.
page 86. line. 5. read, a Judge: page 88. line 25. read, all their: page 96.
line 24. leave out the two commas at amplifications, and at threatenings: page
97. line 34 read, derived: page 98. line 14. leave out (good) page 108 line 2.
omit (of) ibid. line 28. read, distinguished: page 111. line. 16 for if, read
of: page 114. line 22. read, he hid: page 120. line 13. read, which being
etc. page 129 line 4. read, comprehend: page 134. line 20 for reading, read,
namely readers of etc. page 135. line 17. for here, read, heard. ibid. line
26. read verity. page 149. for Tullius, read Tullies: page 159. line 21.
read invvrapped: page 160. line 30. for come, read, run page 161 line 6.
read, propounded line 14. read, forbrorne. page 163. line 9. omit (out) page
166. line 1. for excused, read exercised: page 167. line 23. for come, read
came. page 172. line 25. for all books, read, all the books: page 215. line
9. for stammered read staggered. page 218. line 22, for, all the people when,
read, all the people vvepte when etc. page 223. line 25. for all them, read,
and all of them. page 177. line 22. for, conuently, read, conveniently

FINIS.
To the most noble and renoumed Prince Lewis, Duke of Bauier, County Palatine
of the Rhine, etc. his most gracious Lord, Andrew Hyperius sends greeting.
THis is a common guise and practice among Christian Kings and Princes, (most
noble Prince) that in publishing and proclayming their Edictes, and other
monumentes of writing in their Coins, which by their Mintmen they cause to be
coined, and now and then also in their buildings upon statues or images
curiously carved in their painted tables, again, on their clothes of estate,
on their gorgeous hangings of Tapistrie, on their purple robes, on their
Couerlets of Arras, and such like precious ornaments, when they put to their
name and function, they discretely add something, whereby they profess
themselves to have obtained, THROVGH THE GRACE OF GOD, all the honors and
dignities that are befalne them, which custom commonly and every where
received, can never sufficiently be praised and extolled, for it puts them
in mind of most grave and weighty matters, and such as ought always worthily
to be before their eyes. First it teaches them, to confess and acknowledge,
that kingdoms and commonweals are at GODS disposition, that they are most
wisely governed by his providence, and that one while forsooth they flourishe
for the Godlies sake, and another while are subverted, because of the wicked,
as testifye Job Chap. 34. and Solomon Proverb. 28.29. and finally, that
wonderful alterations, far beyond all men's expectation, witnessing Daniell
Chap. 2. are brought to pass in them. Secondly, they are given to understand,
that it is their parts and duties to ascribe all their honors, power, and
happiness, whatsoever be^ideth them on earth, only and alone to GOD, and to
render thanks unto him continually for the same, in as much as of David, a most
dilligent ponderer of GODS judgments, they may all learn, that it is GOD
alone, and none other, that gives happy success and safety unto Kings,
Psalm. 144. with whom his son Solomon in all points agreing, pronounces,
that he only by the benefit of GOD was installed in the sovereign state of
his kingly dignity, 2. Chronic. 1. And in the same place where the same
Solomon craves wisdom to be given him, GOD himself makes answer, That he
would not only give him wisdom, which is a thing very necessary to a happy
government, but also that he would franckly and bountifully adorn him with
riches, power, glory, and magnificence. Moreover, it is meet and conueniente
that they acknowledge GOD to be a most mighty Emperor and Monarch, in whose
power and dominion it is, to punish with horrible pains, or even utterly to
destroy (and that justly) all those that refuse to submit themselves, and to
do his commandments. And for this cause it is, that the said kingly Prophet
David sang, Be wise now therefore ye Kings: be learned ye Judges of the
earth, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in him with trembling. Kiss the
son, least he be angry, and ye perish in the way, if his wrath be kindled
but eue^ a little. To be short, so many Kings and Princes as do advisedly
consider, that they BY THE GRACE OF GOD have obtained the highest degree of
honor, should for many causes endeavor themselves with all their power and
inforcement, to become as like unto GOD as is possible, imitating so far
forth as they may, his goodness, justice, clemency in all points. It is most
truly said of a certain wise man, That a Prince is the image of GOD that
governs all things. Though even this also ought not a little to move them,
that in the holy Scriptures they are not seldom times called GODS, Exodus 22.
Psalm. 82. Now here upon further it follows, that all Kings and Princes,
especially so many as do bear the world in hand, that they know CHRIST, by
whom grace and truth is brought down to us from Heaven, and that they
embrace and kiss him from their hearts, that I may use the word of Psalmist,
ought diligently, and with all dutifulness, to perform and set forward all
those things that tend to the advancement of the glory of our true and
everlasting GOD on earth, who alone is the most mighty King of all Kings, and
Lord of all Lords Apoc. 19. For here unto does ye divine crier inuit all yt
are in authority, Psalm. 29. saying, Give unto the Lord ye sons of the
mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength. And surely, if Kings and
Princes would by any means go about to amplify GODS glory, they cannot do it
any better way, than if they cause as many people as may be, to be brought to
the knowledge and sincere worshipping of GOD ye Father, and of his son JESUS
CHRIST. For why? GOD accompteth this to be his greatest praise and glory,
which also he challenges to himself alone, and will never yield it to any
other, that all men should have the knowledge of his power, goodness,
righteousness: that they should receive his commandments, worship and
call upon him with their whole heart, and finally, from him look for all
good things, and even everlasting salvation. As touching which thing, Moses,
Prince of al Prophets, Deuteronomy. 10. says, And now o Israel, what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul? And Esaias. 43. God himself says, Every one shall be
called by my name, for I have created him for my glory. Again in the same
place, This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my
praise. And Chap. 48. For mine own sake, for mine own sake will I do it,
rather than my name should be polluted, neither will I give my glory to
another. By no small number of such sentences GOD declares, that he then
excels in sound and perfect glory, when as of good me^ he is honored,
praised, and worshipped: but to what end is it to make any longer rehearsal?
Howbeit, least any man should doubt that the chief happiness consists in
ye true knowledge and service of GOD, and that thereby men atteine unto that
place, where with the blessed Saints they shall enjoy everlasting felicity.
Let us hearken unto GOD himself, Jeremy declaring in this sort, Let not the
wise man (says he) glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that gloryeth,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me, for I am the Lord which
show mercy, judgment and righteousness in the earth, and in these things I
delight says ye Lord. And as touching ye knowledge of his son, the same God
Esaias. 53. says, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
and he shall bear their iniquity. But all this matter, our savior CHRIST
dispatcheth very roundly, where he speaks to his father in these words John.
17. This is eternal life, that they know thee to be the only true GOD, and
whom thou have sent JESUS CHRIST. But now remains this thing to be
discussed, will some man say, to wit, from whence we have to fette the
knowledge of GOD the Father, and of his son CHRIST, and from whence we may
readily learn, how GOD will be worshipped of us. This matter is easily
answered and determined. And soothly it is best for us in this behalf to hear
men inspired with the spirit of GOD, rather than any other else whatsoever.
Therefore the author of the 19. Psalm, would have us to flee to the very law,
and testimony uttered by GOD himself: The Law of the Lord, says he is
undefiled, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, and
gives wisdom to the simple. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the
eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of
the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than
gold, yea than much fine gold: sweeter also than honey, and the honey comb.
Moreover by them is thy servant taught, and in keeping of them there is great
reward. Many things spoken to this effect in the 119. Psalm, I purposelye
pass over. In Esaias Chap. 8. Whosoever, by GODS disposition, do offer
themselves unto CHRIST to be taught as being desirous to learn the truth, are
commanded to resort for council to the law and to the testimony. And he,
whose integrity is renoumed in the Sermons of the Prophets and Apostles, I
mean Abraham the common father of all the faithful, Luke. 16. to those that
are careful to provide and foresee, least they fall into endless pains and
torments, gives in charge, that they hear attentively Moses and the
Prophets. Last of all, CHRIST speaks expreselye John. 5. saying: Search the
Scriptures: for they are that testify of me.

Then the matter is brought to this point: that so many Kings and Princes as
are desirous to rouse up men to the purchasing of the knowledge of the true and
euerlyuing GOD, and of his son JESUS CHRIST, and to bring them home to a
sound and sincere religion, have need especially (for many great causes
and considerations) to become authors themselves unto all their subjects, and
even to as many as they may, that they and every of them to the uttermost of
their power may apply their diligence continuallye to the reading, hearing,
examining, and meditating of the holy Scriptures. Other way than this, wherein
a man might walk safely as in respect of knowing the true GOD and of
puchasing salvation, without fear of error or any other danger, can none
be showed. And undoubtedly this business is in it self of such great
excellency and dignity, yt it is a thing well worthy whereof Christian Kings
and Princes should by a special regard make decrees in their public edictes
and acts of Parliament.

Neither in very deed are they ignorant, how it is the most sage and sacred
commandment of GOD himself, that so many as are desirous to be enrolled
and registered in the blessed Common weal and City of GOD, should
continuallye exercise themselves in learning and meditating the law of GOD,
that is to say, the holy Scripture. These words which I command thee this
day (says GOD always our most noble Emperor, Deutronomie. 6.) shall be in
thine heart: and thou shalt rehearse them continually to thy children, and
shalt talk of them, when thou tariest in thy house, and when thou walk by
the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Which decree we find
to be repeated in the 11. Chapter of the same Book, that even hereby it may be
apparent, that it is a matter very earnestly urged of GOD. Wherefore if
Christian Magistrates do at any time make laws for their people, wherein they
shall no less seuerelye than grauelye command, that all and every
householder and governors of familyes shall daily in their several houses
ordinarilye read, hear, and examine from time to time certain Chapters of
the holy new Scriptures: they can not be said to attempt any matter, or
strange from their office and calling: but with all faithful diligence to
propounde, commend, and put in execution the most aun^^ent ordinance and
decree, even of GOD himself, by whose grace and favor they so often confess
themselves to be advanced to their high and most honorable estate. And in
good sooth if Magistrates would duly consider with themselves by how solemn
an oath, and for how many causes they are bound and beholden unto GOD:
again, if they would call to mind, how needful a thing it were,
especially in these days, for all men to be trained up in the doctrine
of true Religion: and besides, how manyfolde commodities might by this most
wholesome enterprise redounde unto all estates: they could by no means abide,
to be counted slack or negligente in this behalf. But rather they would with
all godly care, and so long time put forth Laws touching the reading and
meditation of the Scriptures, until they should see men to be more in love
with Divine matters, than now they are, to profitte somewhat like in the
Doctrine of Faith and Christianity, and to amend their manners which we see
now every where (oh unhappy age of ours) to be ouermuche corrupted, and
plainly abominable.

And questionless, it becomes Magistrates with great courage and constancye
to go forwards in this office: for so much as they understand that it is
even by name enjoined unto them also of GOD, that they should continuallye be
occupied in readyng the sacreed Books. For thus does GOD the supreme
lawgiuer, Deutronomie 17. say unto them: When the king shall sit upon the
throne of his kingdom, then shall he write him a copy of this Law in a book
by the Priests of the Levites: and ye shall be with him, and he shall read
therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
GOD, and to keep all the words of this Law, and these ordinances, for to do
them. That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn
not from the commandment, to the right hand or to the left, but that he
may prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his sons in the midst of
Israel. They then are more grosely deceived, tha^ yt they shall need with any
long process to be confuted, whosoever they be that imagine this commandment
to belong in no wise unto Christian Magistrates. Certain it is, that as well
ye king as all other Magistrates in general are appointed of GOD, whom it
happens at any time to be placed over a multitude, that acknowledges the
law and the Prophets, that is to say, the pure and sincere religion free from
all stain of superstition. And that this precept may rightly be transferred
to all posterity that should at least embrace the selfsame religion, this
may be an Argument, that GOD did then give it forth, when as the common
Wealth of the Hebrews had not as yet any king.

Now this is also out of all question, that laws both may and ought to be
made of Christian Magistrates, which should not only approach most nearly
to the laws of GOD, but also be as proppes and stays always in a readiness,
to aid, help, and assiste by all means possible, men as ye would say
otherwise weak, weary, and almost fainting under their burdens, to the
keeping and observation of them. Wherefore Augustine in his second Book Chap.
58. against the letters of Petilian the Donatist wittily says, If laws of
earthly government take upon them the succor of the Church, which is the
kingdom of heaven, that thing is not to be found fault withal: seeing Paul
the Apostle by the help of man's laws defended himself against his enemies.
No less fitly and to the purpose in his Epistle 48. to Vincentius: yea in
deed, says he, the Kings of the earth do serve CHRIST, when they make laws
for CHRIST. Finally in his Epistle 50. to Boniface the Earl, he says: The
king serves the Lord in fear: but one way in that he is a man, and another
way in that he is a king. In that he is a man, he serves him by living
faithfully: and in that he is a king, he serves him by constituting laws,
commanding just things, and forbidding the contrary. As Ezechias served him,
in distroying the Idol groves and temples, and those hye places which were
erected against the commandments of GOD. As Josias served him, he also by
doing the like. As the king of the Ninevites served him, in compelling the
whole City to pacify the Lord. As Darius served him, in giving the Idol into
the power of Daniell to be broken, and in thrusting his enemies to the Lions As
Nabuchodonosor served him, in forbidding by a terrible law all that were in
his kingdom from blaspheming of GOD. In this therefore do kings serve the
Lord, so farforth as they are kings, when they do those things to serve him,
which none can do but Kings. Thus much says he. That the first and principal
care therefore of Christian kings and Princes ought to be bestowed, in and
about the establishing of laws, which may be of some importance to the
spreading abroad, illustrating, and maintayning of religion, no man though
never so rude and uncivil can deny.

Neither does the Emperor Justinian dissemble this matter, in Nouellis,
constitutione. 6. to Epiphanius the Archbishop and Patriarch of Constantinople,
writing in this manner: The greatest gifts that GOD of his divine clemency
has given unto men, are, the Priesthood and Imperial gouernemente: whereof the
one ministering in divine matters, and the other ruling with diligence in
humayne, either of them proceeding from one and the self same beginning, do
beautifye and adorn man's life. And therefore shall Emperors provide for
nothing so much, as for the honesty of Priests, seeing perdie that they also
do pray always unto GOD for them. For if that truly be blameless on every
side, and faithful toward GOD, and the Empire diligent in adorning the Common
weal committed unto it: then will there be a certain happy harmony betwixt
them, yielding all things profitable unto mankind. And hereupon it comes
that we have so great a care about GODS true religion, and about the
honesty of the Priests. Which if they obtain, we are persuaded that we
thereby shall have great gifts given unto us of GOD: and that those which we
have already, shall be confirmed unto us: and those which as yet we have not,
we shall attain. The^ do al things go well, and happily, when the beginning is
approved and accepted of GOD. And this we trust shall come to pass, if the
holy cannons be duelye observed, which the blessed, prayseworthy, and
reverend beholders and ministers of GOD the Apostles have taught, and the holy
fathers have kept and expounded. We decree therefore, following in all things
the sacred canons, etc. And from hence forsooth it came, that there are found
so many laws decreed by Emperors as touching ye mysteries of our religion: as
by Gratia^, Valentinian, and Theodosius, concerning ye blessed Trinity and the
Catholic Faith: and other (laws) by other (Emperors) which it were ouerlong to
repeat. And they al either ensue the traces of ye holy Scripture, which they
command also as a Theseus thread to be followed in all things: or else like
unto faithful schoolemaisters, by their counsels, exhortations, and now and
then by their threatenings they persuade, and prick forward me^ to ye better
execution of GODS commandments. But as now for our present purpose touching
ye daily reding of ye sacred scriptures, ye law above al other is most fit and
convenient, whereby ye Emperor Justinian constitutione. 146. prescribes in
what tongue ye Jews scattered throughout al nations of ye earth, and sustayning ye
heavy yoke of exile, ought to read ye holy books: We decree, says he, that in
what places so ever the Hebrews are found, it shall be lawful to so many as
will, in their Synagoges to use the Greek tongue, and likewise this country
language, namely the Italian, or any other tongue whatsoever, according as the
alteration of the place requires, wherein they are able with understanding to
read the holy books: to the intent that so much the more by their reading,
they may understand the whole drift and order of the words more plainly, and
frame the tenor of their life and conversation according to the same. And after
a few words: They that read the Greek tongue shall use the interpretation of the
Septuaginta, which is more exact tha^ al other, and contains above the rest
many hidden things. And again: Nevertheless least they should think, that we de
bar the^ from other interpretatio^s, we give the^ leave, to use also the
interpretation of Aquila. Again: Whereupon by this our license granted unto
the^, nether shall they be subject to any penalties that use the Greek tongue and
other tongs, neither shall they be forbidden by any so to do. And a little after:
Therefore have we given the^ free liberty to enjoy the use of al tongs to the
reading of the holy books, to the end that if they all orderly embrace the
knowledge of the^, they may be made more fit to learn better things. Since it is
a plain case, that he is much more apt to discern and entertain better things
that being nousled in reading the sacred books, is not far off from
ame^dement, and to be brought to some thriftinesse, then he that understands
no such matter, but hangs only upon the bare name of religion, and
cleaves thereunto as to a holy ancker, and supposes the knowledge of GOD to
consist only in the bare name of the sect. This law the Emperor commanded to
be openly proclaimed by Ariobindus his Liuetenaunte, and other officers: and so
many as would not obey it, to forfayte all their goods, and to go into exile.
But if this most holy Emperor was careful, to determyne, in what tongue the
Jews (who at that time as touching that matter contended very odiously among
themselves) should read ye holy Scripture: why should not our kings and
Princes provide by Laws, first, that all Christians under their Dominions
may read, then next in what tongue they may read the sacred Bible, not so
much publicly in Churches as priuatelye in their houses? And what shall we
say of ye Emperor Theodosius the second, who (as the report goes) (and no
doubt moved by the commandment of GOD, which is extante as touching Kings,
Deutronomie. 17.) wrote out with his own hand the Books of the New
Testamente, read every morning in his house some part of them, and recyted
customarily certain Psalms and prayers together with his wife (she was
Eudocia the daughter of Leontius a Philosopher of Athens, of whom they say
were written right learned Poems) and with his sisters.

But if I should go about to produce more proves tending to this end, I fear
least I should incur offense, who especially have exceeded already the
compass of an Epistle. Therefore that my speech may draw to an end, I am
persuaded verylye that it will then go well with the Church, and with the
whole common wealth, when as the Kings, Princes, and all other Magistrates of
these our times, seriously turning their minds to the Statutes of the Almighty
and everliving GOD, which were rehearsed even now out of Deuteronomie, and to
the examples of the most noble Emperoures, of whom we have spoken, shall
begin to put forth, and with all godly diligence, to commend unto the
people committed to their charge, laws, as touching the daily and domestical
(and that perdie in their own Country language) reading, hearing, and
meditating of the holy Bible. And as for the reasons wherewith men may be
moved to obey their most wholesome laws and decrees, I have in this volume,
partly out of the most sacred Sermons of the Prophets and Apostles, partly, out
of the Commentaries of the most excellent Doctors, packed together, as ye would
say in one bundle, very many, and the same not to be misliked: so that this
only remains, namely, that with what willingness and desire they are of me
offered, with the self same, all men, whenever they shall read them,
would vouchsafe to receive them. My purpose and scope to dispatche it in a
word, is, to profit at leastwise somewhat by my labor all sorts of men that
are careful for a better life, and for the everlasting salvation of their
souls. But unto your highness most noble Prince, I have thought good to
consecrate this work, as well for sundry causes and considerations, as also
especially for twain, which have in them more force than the rest. The one is,
when I behold and consider the justice, clemency, gentleness, and other
virtues naturally ingenerate in you, together with the notable education and
instruction worthy a most famous Prince, doubtless I am persuaded, that your
Highness may easily be brought to this point, namely, that you will not
only exercise your self daily in the reading of the holy Bible, according to
GODS commandment Deuteronomie. 17. but also provoke and stir up one while
by gentle exhortations, another while by sharp and severe precepts, all the
people and inhabitants of your Dominion (as GOD also has willed,
Deuteronomie, 6. and. 11.) to the doing and practicing of the like. For what
should not I look for at his hands, whose father Friderike, Prince Elector
Palatine, and those twain of the same house, never sufficiently praised,
supplying before him the selfsame honors to their innestimable commendation,
I mean Fridericke, and Otho Henry, have accomplished many difficulte attempts,
for the amplifying of GODS glory, and increase of sincere Religion. Neither
have I any doubt, but that your Highness most noble Father, caused
therefore of late the Books of the Divine Oracles, most clearly, and at his
great charge to be Printed in the vulgar tongue, to the intent, that both
innumerable Copies might be conveyed and spredde over all your Dominions and
other places, and also be deuoutely read of every man for conscience sake in
their private houses. The other cause is, so soon as other Potentates shall
perceive you, whose glory stands aloft on a high and stately place, to give
some onset to the trayning of Christian people to the reading and exercising of
the holy Scriptures: it is very lykely, that immediatelye therevppon many of
them (that are in authority) will stoutely follow in the selfsame rare of
godliness. It happens, I wot not how, that the virtue which proceeds
from Princes and great men, casts forth far and near an incredible
brightenesse, and as ye would say, beams, whereby it both rouzeth up a great
number, and also allureth them to mutation. And even as witty Paynters do
choose out all the welfauouredst bodies they can come by, and do lay to get
Tables that have bin aforehande curiously wroughte by the cunningest Artificers
of their occupation, to the intent they may draw forth and express them
with their pencill and couloures: so likewise, such men as are of a noble
courage, and especially of an honorable stock and Parentage, do much more
willingly and desirously learn virtue of their equals, than of any other
sorts of men besides whatsoever. Wherefore, I most humbly pray and beseech
your Highness, to take well in worth my good will and meaning herein. The
King everlasting, immortal, invisible, and GOD, only wise, unto whom alone
all honor and glory is due, vouchsafe through JESUS CHRIST his son, to
inform your mind with his holy Spirit to good government, and to guide and
defend you to the end. Farewell most noble Prince.

The Ides of March. M.D.LXI.
Of the reading, and daily meditation of the holy Scriptures: very requisite
and necessary for all Christians, of what estate or condition soever.
The first Book.
ALl do agree in this, that Man differs from other Creatures in
understanding and reason. But if we shall proceed further, and enquire wherein
a Christian and Godly man may be discerned from an unchristian and ungodly man,
verily I do not see what fitter answer may be made, than in the knowledge if
GOD, and in the study of accomplishing his will. For as touching the wicked
and ungodly man, either he is altogether ignorante of GOD his maker and
Creator, and utterly void of the knowledge of his will: for else, if he can
give any judgment thereof at all, yet is he moved (in the mean time) with no
desire of perfourming, or accomplishing of it. But (undoubtedly) it is
requisite, that the true Christian do excel in both, that is to say, not
only in knowledge, but also in holy actions of life and conversation, so far
forth as is possible. Howbeit, the knowledge of GOD, and of his divine will, a
Christian man can not from any other where, either more certaynely, or
plentifully atteyne unto, than out of the word of GOD it self, which by the
Prophets and Apostles, is faithfully committed to writing, and so conveyed
over to posterity. For it pleased GOD, that his will being clearly
expressed, should remain extant in a few Books, to the which man, (being
otherwise compassed about on every side with the Clouds of ignorance) so often
as he coueteth to know what is pleasing to GOD, might (as unto a Chest full
of all manner of precious jewels) have recourse, to draw out from thence,
whatsoever is wholesome and profitable for him; for in deed, of the Books of
holy Scripture, it may woorthely be said, that in them are laid up and
contained all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, even so much, and so
manyfolde in effect, as may be had of GOD in this life. Which thing, seeing
it is so, verily I can not but greatly marvel, how it comes to pass, that
where as all Christians are greedily given to hear, yet appear they beyond
measure cold and dull, to read and hear the said Books. For where shall a
man find one amongst a great number, that has those holy Books at home in
his house? and if it be so that some have them, yet how many be there of them
can say, that they have read them over at any time or times in all their
lives? And how shall we believe (I beseech you) that the will of GOD is
diligently accomplished of those men, of whom it is not certaynely known
as yet, whether they ever vouchsafed to learn it out of ye sacred Books or
no? for this cause therefore, I supposed, that I should take upon me a thing
both acceptable to GOD, and also most profitable to men, if I admonished all
Christians, of what estate or condition soever they be, to prepare themselves
to the diligente reading of the holy Scriptures (out of which alone, the will
of GOD is to be known) and daily to read over certain Chapters of them, or
at least, to hear them attentively readde of others. Which parcel of duty
(whatsoever it be) certesse I do interpret my self to owe as well unto GOD,
(to the aduancemente of whose glory upon earth, we ought all the sort of
us to endeavor our selves to the uttermost of our powers) as also unto men,
whom, for so much as we may see now every where to have (as a man would
say) broken in sunder the bars of godliness and honesty, and by that
means, (which is greatly to be lamented) to lead their lives very
dissolutely, and licentiously, it is requisite and necessary for us, by as
many means as we may, to reclayme and bring back to the right way. Now I
have determined to divide this work into two Books, whereof in the former I
will declare, that it belongs to all sorts and degrees of men whatsoever
(which at the least covet the name of Christianity) both to read and hear
with great aduisemente the Books of the holy Bible. In the latter I will
show by what means every man may readily (without let) in a years space,
orderly turn over all the said Books, by reading and pervsing daily certain
Chapters of them.

First and foremost therefore, that we are men, Man is created to the knowledge
of GOD and of his will.
we our selves both confess, and do not a little glory so to be called:
and by this very name, that we are vehemently moved to the searching after
GOD, and the knowledge of his will, it is more clear and manifest, than that
it can be wincked at, or dissembled.

Look (I pray you) upon the body of man, so cunningly and excellently devised
and made, that in it the head (in which as in a high Tower are placed the
organicall powers of the senses) does perpetually of the own accord reach
upward toward heaven, where ye seat of GOD is understood to be. In
consideration whereof, all the old Poetical writers pronounced man to be
happier, and in better case, than the brute beasts; For where all Creatures
else beside (says a certain Latin Poet) that bin of brutish kind, Ovid.
Metamorph. Lib. 1.

Are aye with groueling face, to gaze upon the ground assignde:
To man is given a stately grace, and lofty look, whereby
He may behold the haughty Heavens, and eke the Starrie Sky.


Further, to the body is added the mind, whereby man (so often as he lists)
may surmounte and ouerreach the very Firmamente and Startes, and even there
behold and look upon the Majesty of GOD himself: for why, the mind is the
most noble part of man, given down from GOD, into the body, as into a
Pauilion, or rather gorgeous Temple, by the which, the divine power of GOD
does at all times wonderfully display it self in us. For certesse by the mind
GOD indureth into us all (as the Apostle speaks, Acts. 17) (...), Life and
breath. By the mind through GOD, we move, and have our being. Through the
mind, the Poet Aratus was bold to sing, (...), For we are his offspring or
generation. Now, by the diverse and sundry powers of the mind, as namely,
understanding, reason, memory, and such like, by the direction whereof, man
accomplisheth great and weighty matters, we may perceive evidently, that GOD
is not far from every one of us: as in deed, if we would diligently
search, we might even grope (I gladly use the Apostles words) and find him
out. Neither is any other thing meante by those common sparks of knowledge
naturally engraffed in all men, whereby we believe that there is a GOD, that
all things come to pass and are governed by his providence: moreover that some
actions are honest, and pleasing unto GOD, which we ought to embrace: that
other some are dishonest and displesing unto GOD, which we ought to abhor.
And these and such like impressions of knowledge are so plain and evident, that
there was no man ever found so barbarous or brutishe, yt utterly denied them:
so deep also do they stick printed, and (as it were) seared in our minds,
that they can never altogether be blotted or scraped out. Whereupon the
Apostle-Rom. 2. says: When the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the law, they having not the law, are a law
unto themselves: which show the effect of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing them witness, and their thoughts accusing one
an other, or excusing.

Therefore, what man so ever he be, that is partaker of his right mind, and
feels himself at any time perced with the sting of his own conscience, he
may very well perceive (without the instruction of any other,) that he
carries about with him a number of things enclosed in this small (but yet
very noble) case of his body, which without ceasing do provoke him, to
procure a more plentiful knowledge of GOD and of his will: and which declare,
that he is altogyther unworthy the name of a man, that does not endeauoure
him self with new succoures, and the same revealed by GOD him self, to
illustrate, establishe, and adorn those common lights of knowledge concerning
GOD, by nature engraven in him.

But to the intent that men might of all times aspire to the knowledge and
understanding of the power and will of God, God himself has set forth openly
in the sight of all men, two large and ample books, stuffed and replenished
with manifold doctrine, whereout all things pertaining to the same his divine
power and will, are fully and sufficiently to be learned. The one of them is
all this universal world, which of us is inhabited, and lies open on every
side to the surueyall of our senses: the other is the word of God, comprised
in the books and writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Of which two books
ye dignity and authority is wonderful great: as in which are found the
Oracles and monumentes, that do not only teach and instruct us, but also
after a certain secreate manner prick us forward to the performaunce and
accomplishment of all and every duty whatsoever:

And as touching the former book, Of the former book, which is the whole
world.
that I may here enterlace somewhat, who is he (I beseech you) that in
beholding as well by the eye sight as in the insighte of the mind, this most
noble and glorious frame of the world with all the parts thereof, begins
not by and by to think with himself, that he of necessity is most mighty,
most wise, most excellent, that has so wonderfullye from the beginning
created all these things, and that far more wonderfullye and wiselye
preserves them and keeps them in order? The heavens, says the Hebrewe king
and Prophet Psalm. 19. (for why should we not rather borrowe fit matter
of proof out of the holy Prophets, than out of Cleanthes, of whom Tully
speaks, or out of any other Philosopher beside?) declare the glory of GOD
and the firmament shows his handy work.

Again the things that are underneath these, as namelye the Clouds, Winds,
Raines, the Sea, the Floudes, the Mountains, Valleys, trees, fishes
stickering in the waters, beasts both wild and tame, do vncessauntlye (as in
the Psalm. 104.) praise and magnifye GOD. Now all these things together do
signifye unto men, that there is one certain GOD, whom for his unsearchable
Wisdom, for his righteousness and power, for his goodness, for the benefits
which we daily receive of him, we ought continuallye to reverence, to
fear, to love, to give thanks unto, and finally, for his majesty, (than the
which none can be greater,) to worship him, to call upon him, to glorifye
him, and to pursue him with all manner of divine honors and duties
whatsoever. Which thing also the Apostle Romans 1. concealed not. For as much,
says he, as that which may be known of GOD, is manifest to them: for GOD
has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him, that is, his
eternal power and godheade, are seen by the creation of the world, being
considered in his works, to the intent that they should be without excuse.
And how many and wayghtie points and principles of religion are expressed in
the holy Scriptures, by similitudes, comparisions, and other such like proves
very fitlye derived from the nature and property of things? Truly the whole
Book of Job, a good part of the Psalms, and very many of the Sermons of the
Prophets, of Christ, and the Apostles are full of examples.

Therefore Antonius, an Hermit of the wilderness in Egypt, as we read in the
Tripartite History, book 8. chap. 1. when on a time a certain Philosopher
demanded of him, how he could attain to contemplation of heavenly things,
seeing he was destitute of all furniture of written books? wisely aunsweared:
That all this world, was to him in stead of a Library furnished with all manner
of books, and that this Library was at al times and in all places at hand and
in a readiness, wherein he might read (so often as he would) things heavenly
and divine.

Long before this Antony, Clemens, Alexandrnus, lib. 6. Stromat. defined, that
the creation of the world was the Scripture of GOD: and that the precepts of
the Decalogue was promulgate, and might be read even in the works of nature.
With these agrees Saint Chrysostom in his 7. homily upon the former Epistle
to the Corinthians: again in two other Homilies, whereof the one is entitled Of
fasting, and of the reading of Genesis, the other is accounted the 9. To the
people of Antioche. But it pertayneth not to our purpose at this present, to
use any further entreatye as touching this book: it is enough to have showed
in this order, that al men, at all times when so ever they behold this world
and the most beautiful parts thereof, ought religiously to meditate of GOD and
of things belongyng unto GOD, and so to take occasion both of well thinking and
of well doing. As for those in the mean time, in whom appears a greater
force and sharpness of wit than in others, we both exhort and also
louinglye beseech them, to bestow a further diligence in searching the
natures of things. And that, not only because this kind of Phylosophye
procures a certain honest pleasure and delectation: but much more, for that
when they have once found out the wonderful force and operation of any
thing, they may adore and extol with praise, the great power and Wisdom of
GOD, of whom such things are created: moreover, they may quicken their Faith,
and hope in GOD, considering that all things are created for our behoof, and
that all things necessary for the sustentation of our weakness, shall never
at any time be wanting unto us. Last of al, they may discretely use the things
that are lawful, and give thanks unto GOD for them. Unto these three ends
(as unto a scope or mark to aim at) shall the studious of natural
Phylosophye always have regard: using in the mean season every where this
caution or foresight, namely, that the Creatures be in no wise preferred before
the Creator: In which one point, GOD the Creator (as witnesses the Apostle
Paul Romans 1.) should be dishonored with a most shameful despite. With
this judgment, who so ever shall have studiouslye ensearched the natures and
propertyes of things, he undoubtedly may be esteemed to have (and that not
a little) profited in the Book of Nature, and to have well deserved the praise
and worthy commendation of a diligente Scholar.

As touching the other Book, that is to say, Of the later book, to wit, the
holy Scripture.
the word of GOD, or the holy Scripture, we have especially at this time to
entreat. And that it is rightelye termed a Book, it may appear by this,
that GOD thought it not enough by any kind of way (howsoever it were) to
publishe and proclayme his word: but he provided especially by his wonderful
providence, that the same should be committed to writing, and so commended to
everlasting memory. For GOD him self with his own finger wrote his Law, in
two tables of stone, and then commanded that by Moses and the rest of the
Prophets, his sayings and doings should be put in writing: Exodus.
17.24.34. Deutronomie 6.31. Iosue. 24. Jeremy. 36. Psalm. 102. By these what
things so ever are written, they are called by the name of Scripture. Whereupon
Christ himself by the Scripture, understands the books of Moses, of the
Prophets, and of the Psalms, John 5. Luke. 24. To the same books do the
Apostles and Evangelists will us to have recourse, whylest to the confirmation
of their own assertions, they oftentimes, and that desirouslye, allege the
Testimonies of Scripture. But we must know that even the Books of these
also are accounted (with the rest) in one and the self same order of
Scriptures: whether they bear the name and tittle of Gospels, or Acts, or
Epistles. For it is out of all doubt and controversy, that whatsoever is
comprehended in the whole body of the Canonical books, is the very true and
healthsome word of GOD, published and put forth by his commandment. All
Scripture, says the Apostle. 2. Timoth. 3. is enspired of GOD. And Peter in
his. 2. Epistle. Chap. 1. Prophecy (says he,) came not in old time by the
will of man, but holy men of GOD spoke as they were moved by the holy GHOST.

And like as the writers as well of the Old as of the New Testament, received
a commandment from one and the self same GOD, and our and the self same
spirit enspired their minds, governed their hands and pens, Psalm. 68.
Acts. 2.1. Corinth. ^^. Ephesians. 4. even so all the whole Scripture is (in a
manner) one Book; revealing with wonderful consent things most diverse and
manifold: as Jeremy expounding the 29. Chapter of Esaias, and Saint Augustine
in his preface to the, 150. Psalm do learnedly gather. Which things seeing
they are so, we do with great cause vehementlye speak in the commendation of
this Book, not in respect of the paper or parchmente, and of this or that
tongue, or of one kind of letter or other, or of the Gold or diversity of
color, wherwyth it is garnished and set forth: but even in respect that it
conteyneth the most holy and sacred words of GOD himself: and therefore do
affirm, that out of it men ought to learn both by reading and hearing, what
GOD has decreed of us and of our salvation. For we must know that to this
end especially all Books are written, even that they should diligently be
read, and by often reading over be fullye understood, that so desired fruytes
might redounde to the understanders of them.

Now there be three special causes, why we should bestow more diligence in
pervsing this latter Book, than the former:

FIRST: Greater is the dignity of GODS word, than of the whole world. We
must give more attendaunce to the latter book of the holy Scripture, than to
the former: and that for three causes.
The world in deed was created of the same, that the word came from, which we
so greatly commend: and either Book is indifferentely called the Book of GOD
yet nevertheless the latter excels, for so much as we find recyted in it
the self same word, that GOD used, when he made the world of nothing. For we
read: GOD said, Let there be light, and the light was made. Again: God
said, Let there be a firmamente, and there was made a firmament: and so forth
of other things. And whereas by the former Book, we perceive only that there
is a world: by the latter we may perceive, what was before the world, and
from whence, and by what means the same took beginning. Therefore whether we
were never able to aspire in searching of causes by the conducte of natural
reason, thither are we brought by Faith, which Faith is intentiuelye fixed
on the word of GOD revealed, read, or hard. For Faith comes by hearing of
the word: and by Faith we understand that the world was ordained through
the word of GOD, so that the things which are seen, were made of things that
appeared not. Romans 10. Heb. 11.

SECONDLY: Whatsoever things are necessary to be known as touching the will of
GOD and our salvation, are clearelye and expreslye declared in the written
word of GOD: but how far short should we come, to think that the same are
as apparently represented in the frame of the world? Great is the darkness
of men's minds, and often times, even in those things that are supposed to be
most manifest by Nature, they are more blind than is the Owl in the noone
days. And then do we all commonly most foully ouershoote and deceive our
selves, when we begin once to dispute of GOD and of matters appertayning to
salvation. For proof whereof, are so many and so absurd, fond, and
fantastical, (I will not say ridiculous) opinions, which the Philosophers
devised as touching GOD and their Summum bonum: whereof the number grew (as
Marcus Varro recounteth in Augustine in his Book 19. Chapter. 1. Of the City
of GOD) to a hundred, fourscore and eighte. And Hermias a Christian
Philosopher reconed up some of them, (...).
and laugheth them well fauouredlye to scorn in his book entitled, A deriding
of the profane Philosophers.

But undoubtedly he shall at length be free from all error, and shall gather
to himself substantial knowledge, that never at any time departs from the
footesteppes of the Prophets and Apostles. It were a heinous offense to
determyne any thing of Religion, or of the state of a better life, only by
the direction of Nature, except the censure be given out of the tables of
GODS word, and as well the Scripture it self as nature, be found to sumpe
together in one. And therefore wisely the Prophet Psalm. 19. After discourse
had of the glory of GOD, to be discerned by the workemanshippe of the Heavens
and of the Firmamente, adds immediately a commendation of the Law, and
written word of GOD. The Law of the Lord (says he) is undefiled,
converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, giving wisdom to
the simple: the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the
precepts of the Lord are pure, giving light to the eyes. As though he should
say, we can by no means atteyne to the Sanctuary of the eternal and simple
truth, without the brighte brands of Scripture burning before us. Which thing
(no doubt) was signified by those wise men, who coming from the East parts of
the world, although for a space they rightly followed the Star as the rule
of reason: yet was it needful for them, to the intent they might find out
CHRIST the King, and worship him, to be resolved out of the Oracles of the
Prophets, as concerning the place where he should be borne. Math 2. The
holy man Antonius might in deed say with a safe conscience, that this huge
and unmeasurable World was to him in stead of a Book: for so much^ as he,
without any knowledge of good letters, had both perfitely learned without
Book the holy Scriptures by hearing them read (I use the wards of Saint
Augustine, in the beginning of his work of Christian Doctrine) and also wisely
understood them, by pondering and considering of them: but it were no wisdom
for others that are utterly void of the knowledge of the Scriptures, so to
speak. The sum therefore of the matter is this, that in Nature are seen
only certain pictures, and (as a man would say) counterfettes of things, in
Scripture the thing and truth it self, and therefore, that all opinions as
touching Religion, which are to be accounted firm and stable, ought to be
ratifyed by the warrante and defense of the holy Scriptures.

THIRDELY: III.
Seeing men are to be taught and enstructed, all must needs grant, that the
written Book of GODS WORD is most fit for our understanding and capacity.
For truly, to mark the things that happen in this visible world, to ensearche
the causes thereof. Further, to examine what signification they have as
touching the power, the righteousenesse, and goodness of GOD. Again, what
things ought to be followed and embraced, in undertaking of duties of
functions, is a thing very difficulte, and given to very few men: but since
these and such like things are appararantly discussed in the monumentes of
writers, and that in a simple and known phrase of speaking, it can not be,
but that even the rude and plain readers or hearers, may speedily atteyne
unto them. And for this cause verily it is, why the custom is commonly
received, that the rules of every Art and discipline are of Authoures penned
and written in certain Books. Yea, and Saint Hierome in his Preface to the
waylings of Jeremy, is bold to say, That the doctrine of Books shall no
sooner cease and have an end, than we in a better state of life, shall be
with Christ, and become like unto the Angels. Wherefore, if so be we will
vprightlye weygh and consider these three causes, truly they may worthylie
move us to love, and embrace the Book of holy Scripture, before all other
Books, and even with earnest desire, to be occupied in it day and night.
Admit (if you will) that the Book of the nature of things is wonderful, and
in many respects hyghly to be esteemed: yet no man is ignorante of this,
that among diverse Books offered, that especially is to be preferred before
the rest, which we see to excel both in weyghtynesse of the contents, in
the method and playnenesse of teaching, and for many causes, to be most
expediente for us. Good Scholemaysters are accustomed to propounde and commend
to their hearers such Books as they suppose to be most profitable for them:
and he that is a thriftie Scholar, despises not the judgment of his
Master, but provides them desirously, exercises himself in them, and makes
great account of them, considering, that unless he so do, it will come to
pass, that he shall with shame be thrust out of the Schole, and shall have
his name utterly razed out of the register of the learned.

Tell me therefore, seeing GOD our Scholemayster, both most wise, and also
most desirous of our profiting, does commend unto us (more than can be
uttered in words) the Book of holy Scripture, and we our selves may judge
the same far to surmounte all other Books, shall not grievous punishmente
worthily be allotted unto us, if we neither provide, nor endeavor to read
the holy and sacred Bible?

Wherefore; to the end I may stir up (as with a watchworde, and an alarm
given) all the professors of Christian Religion, to the diligente reading of
this Book, wherein are written the very words of GOD, I will assay to set
down in order certain reasons, as they shall come to hand: having this
especially in my prayers, that so many as is possible, whylest they shall
give themselves to the reading and meditation of the holy Scriptures, may
both become greater favorers of sincere Religion, and also better given in
their lives and conversation. For I am fully persuaded of this, and I covet to
have all men persuaded of the like, that it can not be, that any man should
oftentimes, and attentively read, or hear read the holy Scripture, but that
he shall feel himself daily to go forward, and to profit somewhat in
amendmente of life, and in the exercises of goolinesse. For why, it is not for
nothing that GOD himself in the Prophet Esaias Chap. 55. says, Like as the
rain and the Snow comes down from Heaven, and returns not thither again,
but waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and budde, that it may
give seed to the sower, and bread unto him that eats: even so shall my word
be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I send
it. And truly, experience teaches us, that the matter is even so as the
Prophet says. For as much as we always see for the most part, that out
of the hearts of those that use reuerentlye to read or hear the word of
GOD, wonderful not only flowers, but fruits also of Faith and love do
proceed.

As therefore we showed at the beginning, It behooves all men to read the
word of GOD, in that it is granted to them only to speak and understand.
that all the sort of us ought to learn matters of Divinity, and the will of
GOD, for that we are men created of GOD: so for because it is euidente, that
all that knowledge is to be gotten out of that Book, wherein the words or
Sermons of GOD are described and contained, it is worthily required of man
(to whom alone it is given to utter distinctlye words of signification, to
write the same words, to read the same being written, to hear and
understand, to learn any thing by words and sentences, and again to teach)
it is worthily required (I say) of man, that he should with all possible
diligence be occupied and conversant in the said Book. For truly by the power
of speaking and understanding of words, man excels all other creatures.
Which benefit it is requisite that we acknowledge to be so much the more
notable, by how much more we are all moved by nature to grief, so often as
we look upon any that are endued with the shape of men, and yet void of the
use of communication and reason. For we make accounte of them to be in no
better case than brute beasts, than stocks, stones, or dumb images.
Therefore GOD, who has created all things, by his word, would have man, whom
he made ruler over all creatures, in conceiving of godliness, to be exercised
with a most noble gift, that is to say, speech or vtteraunce of words, and
he himself would teach and enstruct him by words. For this cause GOD the
father (such is the great love he bears to man) is recorded oftentimes to
have talked very lovingly with his elect the Patriarchs, and Prophets. And
GOD the son, who has great delighte to be conversant with the sons of
men, rejoices to be named (...) that is to say, the Word: and the same
preaching without intermission or ceasing, has declared the will of his
heavenly father. Proverb. 8. Joan. 1. Heb. 1. And moreover, amongst the things
that are exercised in the Church, the Word holds the chief place: yea, and
even the very force and dignity of the mystical actions or Sacraments
depends upon the word of GOD. Whereupon it pleased some of the learned
fathers, and especially Augustine upon John, in his Sermon. 80. and against
Faustus book. 19. Cap. 16. to term the same very Sacraments, visible
words. What need any long circumstaunce? GOD by his word opens both
himself and all his benefits and graces unto man: and by faith in the word,
man is joined unto GOD, and made partaker of eternal blessedness. Wherefore
we may most truly avouch, that to read the holy Scripture with a godly
affection, is even all one to talk and confer with GOD, and to hear God
talking and conferring with us. Certes, as often as thou read of precepts,
exhortations, promises, threatenings, judgments, rewards, punishments, and
other things of like sort, so often do thou hear God himself of a truth,
speaking unto thee. Again, as often as thou read of any confession of
sins, craving of pardon, prayer, giving of thanks or any such like, so often
do thou thy self speak unto God. For in these points chiefly do consist
the natural commonings betwixt God and men, and in these things rests the
substance of all sacred sayings and sentences. Wherefore then to go about to
forbid or withholde any man from the reading, hearing, and understanding of
the holy Scriptures, is even as much in effect, as to command him to
dissemble or deny himself to be a man, that so he might be deprived of the
power of speaking, and of the fruit and benefit of reason.

Hierome maruelleth, and stomacketh the matter, and counts it intolerable,
if any man should so presume. For So Much (says he) in the proheme of his
exposition of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Ephesians, as we differ from
all other creatures in this point chieflg, that we are endued with reason, and
have the use of speaking: and al reason and holy speech is contained in the
books of God, by which we both learn to know God, and also to what end we
be created: I marvel greatly at some, who, either giving themselves to
slothfulness and sleep, will not learn the things that are excellent, or else
seek to reprove others, that bend themselves that way. Which men whereas I
might more straightly stop their mouths, and shortly send the^ packing either
eased or pleased, in vouching that it is much better to read the Scriptures,
than to gape so greedily after the increasing and hourding up of riches: I will
content my self only in saying this, which I may obtain even before a
most incompetent Judge, namely, that my vocation from labor, and quiet
solitariness of mind, is more pleasant unto me, than al other solemnities
whatsoever. Hitherto Hierome.

Where, They must especially read the holy Scriptures, which profess
themselves to be Christians.
if so be now it belongs to man's duty, to love and learn the words of
God, declared at large in the holy Scriptures, forasmuch as we have given unto
us of God, the power and use of speaking: how much more ought we wholly to be
addicted unto them, which profess our selves to be Christians? For truly how
honorable the name of Christian is, and what things it puts us in mind of,
it should be good for us oftentimes and deeply in mind to consider. He that
names a Christian, comprehends in one word, whatsoever may be added to the
dignity of a man. He that names a Christian, understands a man to be of the
number of those, whom God himself has pronounced to be a chosen generation,
a kingly Priesthood, a holy Nation, a people freely purchased. Exodus 19.1. Pet.
2. He that names a Christian, signifies a man to be chose^ of God the father,
before the foundations of the world were laid: to be delivered by the son of
God Jesus Christ out of most miserable captivity, and out of the bondage of
most cruel Tirants, the Devil, Sin and Death: to be regenerate by the holy
Ghost into the Church of CHRIST, to be adorned with new Righteousness,
with Faith, Love, and other virtues and spiritual graces: unto whom lastely
is appointetd praise and immortal glory, and also eternal felicity both of
body and soul, bringing with it more bountiful and large benefits than the
eye of any man can see, the ear hear, or the heart be able to conceive.
Ephesians. 1. Romans 8. Esaias. 64.1. Corinth. 2. Such, and so great is the
excellency of a Christian man. But whence (I pray you) takes a Christian
this name? Thou will say, I am sure, of CHRIST. Act. 11. But how then comes
a Christian man by those incomparable benefits, and by everlasting
blessedness? Forsooth even by the knowledge of GOD the father, and of his son
our savior JESUS CHRIST. This is eternal life says our savior Christ
Joan. 17. To know thee the only true GOD, and Jesus Christ whom thou haste
sent. And Peter Act. 4. says: There is no other name given unto men under
Heaven wherein we can be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ Paul in
like manner 1. Corinthians. 1. says: CHRIST became unto us the wisdom of GOD, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. But there is no man that
can distinctly and without ambiguitie know GOD the father, or his son Jesus
Christ, the author and beginner of Christianity, out of that former book
Concerning the nature of things, or out of any inventions of man's wisdom
whatsoever, but only and alone by the reading of the holy Scripture, revealed
from above. Which thing to be true our Savior Christ himself testifyeth
Joan. 5, saying: Search the Scriptures, for they are they that testifye of me.
And to the intents the son our Savior might be the better known of his
Disciples, he interprets many places of the Scriptures, as touching his own
person. The like did the Apostles also, and Evangelists, with great
diligence. Therefore, whosoever he be, that desires to be saluted by the name
of a Christian, and to be accounted among those that know Christ, and that
look for salvation, promised in Christ, him truly it stands upon, to
acquainte himself with the holy Scriptures, and to make them as familiar unto
him as is possible.

As no man can make the Jews believe, that he is of the Jewish sect, which
holds none of the traditions of their Thalmud: and as the Turks will receive
none for a worshipper of Mahomet, that cannot allege at the least some of his
decrees out of their Alcoran: ^o is it not likely, that he in good earnest and
from his heart should be a Christian, that cannot in some measure out of the
books of the Prophets and Apostles declare who Christ is, and what
inestimable benefits he has purchased to mankind. For in very deed to go
about to procure the knowledge of GOD the father, and of his son JESUS
CHRIST, otherwise than by reading and hearing of the holy Scriptures, is no
less fond and absurd, than if a man should undertake in the dark night,
to hale a ship tossed in the midst of a great and tempestuous Sea,
altogether without stern, without sails and oars, without consideration of
Stars or Winds, without direction of Needle, or any such help, safe and
sound, to a certain and sure Haven, lying aloof and a great way off from
him.

But undoubtedly very strange and wonderful are the perverse and preposterous
judgments of a great number of Christians in this behalf. It is a shame for
a Christian to be ignorant of the things that Christ commands.
In every profession we see it carefully looked unto, every man may be
skillful, and that also to some purpose, in the things that are agreeable to
his profession. The Lawiers (forsooth) they must have good sight in the civil
laws, in the ordinances of their elders, in customs, in constitutions, and
in the whole practice of Courtlike matters. The Physician that will practice
Physic in any place, must of necessity be skillful in the rules of his
Science, that is to say, of such as have written and given forth precepts in
that art. Among those that boaste themselves to be Philosophers, whether they
be of the sect of the Stoics, or of the Peripatetickes, or of the
Academickes, look what master every one has sworn and addicted himself
unto, his decrees and assertions he can declare very well, and will defend to ye
uttermost of his power. As touching the arts as well Liberal, as Mechanical,
otherwise called handy crafts, no man is permitted to vaunt himself in the
name and title, either of the one or of the other, unless he has first
given forth some trial of his cunning, and that before such as can judge of
the same. What corruption then and preposterousnesse of judgments is this
that is amongst us (detestable before God and man) when we suppose him to be a
trim Christian, that never knew what Christianity meant, nor ever learned out
of the holy Bible any one jot of those things that CHRIST taught and
commanded to be observed of his Disciples?

Phormio was in his time a notable Philosopher, who in reading diverse and
sundry books, had noted (no doubt) many things as touching the feats of
war, and martial discipline: yet in the mean while as concerning the office
of a good Captain, he could say little or nothing to any purpose:
insomuche, that when on a time he assayed to say somewhat that way, he was
checked of Annibal, a famous and expert Captain, and so shaken off as a
fond and doting old man. If the case stood thus with Phormio, who had read
many things, then I pray you, how shall we believe, that any man can either
truly judge, or fitly speak of Christian religion, that has never so much
as looked upon the outward couers of those books, in which the foundations
of that doctrine are laid? How much more wise and vprighte in this behalf,
than a number of Chrstians, are the wicked and ungodly Jews, The Jews read
the Scriptures painefully,
whom we so greatly detest and abhor, as those that are excluded from the
fellowship of Gods children? They will not suffer any house amongst them to
be without the books of holy Scripture, especially of Moses law, to the
intent, that at certain times appointed, their families may read and peruse
privately some things in them, that may serve to their edifying and
instruction. Neither will they have such as are men grown only, but their
children also to be diligently occupied in learning the Law: supposing (as
who should say) that it makes greatelye for their behoof, that so many as
have received the mark of Circumcision, should even forthwith be nouzeled in
the principles of their Iewishe religion. But I pray you what do we in the
mean time? forsooth even sleep until we snorte again: and casting from us
all shame, commend those for wonderful good Christians, that neither in their
young years, neither in their old age, have ever vouchsafed to taste out of
the holy Scriptures any smacke at all of those things, which it behooved every
good Christian to know as perfectly, as his fingers ends.

Neither is there cause why any should suspecte, God commands in the Law,
the books of holy Scripture to be read and perused of all people.
that ye Jews were by error, curiosity, or superstition accustomed thus to
do: as in deed it is well known, that they do many things very
disorderedly, and without any consideration. For there is extante in
Deuteronomie Cap. 6. as touching this point a most grave and weighty
commandment given by God himself, where he speaks in this wise: And these
words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: and thou shalt
rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of the^ when thou
tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write
them upon the posts of thine house* and upon thy gates. In like number of
words is the self same precept repeated afresh Deuteronomy. 11. Now for this cause
did GOD give a law as touching the books of his holy Oracles, to be had in
every house, to the intent, that all fathers of families might daily out of
them propound somewhat to their wives, children, servant, and handmaides, and
that by this means the heavenly doctrine might both be preserved throughout
all ages without corruption, and also most commodiously spread abroad by
perpetual succession from time to time.

Long agone verily before Moses time the Church was provided for by the labor
and industry of the holy fathers, For what cause and consideration God would
have his doyngs and sayings committed to writing.
who dwelling here and there scattered among the Infidels, never ceased, with
all faithful diligence by a lively sounding voice, and by repetitions of one
and the self same form, to inculke and beat into the heads of housholdes,
and families, sound and wholesome doctrine. But when GOD out of a huge and
numberless people had once fully purposed in his mind by the ministry of
Moses to erect and establishe a noble and renowned Church and common weal, he
foresawe, that it might easilye come to pass, partly by reason of long
iourneys, partly by reason of continual wars, desolations, banishements,
and other grievous misfortunes and common calamities, that not only true
doctrine might be corrupted, but also the usual repetitions thereof fail and
decay, and so in process of time, the ancient and pure religion be utterly
abolished out of the memories of men.

Now God intending to turn away, and in time to prevent so great a
mischief, ordained, that the whole and universal doctrine of the Church
should be committed to written books, which might faithfully conserve all
his sayings and doings, which every man so long as he would, might keep at
home in his house safe and sound from all injury, and oftentimes write them
out to the use and behoof of many ages, and (to be short) turn the^ into
diverse and sundry languages, and finally transport them over without any
business, into Countries and Provinces both far and near. This most
wholesome purpose and advise therefore accomplished, by the wonderful
providence of God, and taken in hand for our incomparable benefit, that man
undoubtedly seems ouermalapartly to despise, that makes not account of the
Books of holy Scripture as he ought to do, and so refuses either to read
them, or hear them.

But as often as I call to remembrance the diligence of the auntiente Fathers,
The Fathers, albeit they were without Books, yet taught they most diligently
the doctrine of religion: then what ought not we to do that have Books
granted unto us.
which lived long before the Books were published by GODS commandment: and
again, consider the great sloth and sluggishnesse of the people of our time,
verily, I am vehementlye moved in mind, and do in a manner wholly quake for
fear. Neither do I see by what force of speech, or with what thundering
words, so great dullness (may I say) of ours, or malice, or rather both joined
together, can sufficiently be dashed and overthrown. The very first masters
and teachers of our Religion, which were Adam, and such as lived in his time,
conceived the divine mysteries alonely by the instiction of the holy GHOST,
and of them were other immediately taught by a lively expressed voice, who
again, by a long continuance of time, as it were from hand to hand, lovingly
imparted the same unto others, and so, whereas they had all of them but memory
only in stead of Books, they nevertheless, for the space of many hundred
years, kept and retained in their families, doctrine polluted with no manner of
blemishes or defilements at all. So feruente a care was in them of Religion, so
great constancy, faithfulness, consent and diligence, both in learning and
teaching. But as for us, we have Books, wherein we may read the selfsame
doctrine both clearly and purely expressed. We have Books Printed and put
forth in the very same tongue that those auntiente Fathers spoke in: we have
Books most faithfully translated into sundry languages: we have the Books not
only of Moses, and the other Prophets, but also of the Apostles and
Evangelists, whereof the one sort were utterly unknown to all that went before
Moses, the other sort altogyther unheard of, as many as were before CHRIST'S
incarnation: we have Books that do most plenteously, and with incredible
perspicuitie, declare whatsoever is necessary to our salvation: we have Books
in all places, and at all times, most easy, and with little cost in such
readiness, and yet notwithstanding, this most excellent and sovereign
benefit of Books, wherewith GOD has enriched, and after a sort blessed us,
before an innumerable multitude of our holy auncesters, we do in no wise
worthelie weigh and consider, yea verily, as though we neither ever heard of
them at any time, nor yet saw them, we do with deaf ears, and blind eyes,
pass over many great commodities: we let slip from us manyfolde occasion
of profiting: we suffer sincere doctrine to shrink and fall down to the
ground. And finally (which the very unworthiness of the thing compels me
to add) a number (but such as are Christians only in name) do utterly
contemn all Religion, scoff at it, speak against it, and even by all
possible means, trample it under their feet, O strange ingratitude, oh
monstrous malice, oh wickedness worthy of GODS hastened vengeance. But what
shall we think a great number of us would do, if so be we had no Books of
holy Scripture at all? verily I believe we would not so much as think of GOD,
or of any thing belonging unto GOD, all our life long: neither should we live
in any better estate, than that wretched Nabuchadnezar, who as we may read in
Daniel. 4. kept company for certain years with brute Beasts, was deprived
of reason and understanding, went groueling upon the ground, and sustained
himself with fodder and grass. But why do we not at the length rouse up our
selves, lay to our ears, open our eyes by the example of the said
Nabuchadnezar, and lift them up to heaven, that being restored to our right
mind, we may more attentively behold the greatness of the benefit whereby
GOD has enriched us with the Books of holy Scripture, and being stirred up
and enlightened with the reading of them, may praise him, give him thanks,
glorifye him, to be short, may religiously use and enjoy the same holy Books,
to all those ends and purposes, where unto it is evident ( GOD so ordeyning)
they are written and put (...)?

Now it may be, that some subtle trifeler, The commandment of God as touching
the reading of the Scriptures, belongs not only to Jews.
seeking the defense as well of his own, as of others slothfulness, and
coveting to undermine the felicity of the faithful, will make exceptions, and
say, that the commandment of God, which a little before was recited out of
Deuteronomie, perteyned only to the Jews, and does in no case bind the
Christians to the observation of it, but such are in no wise to be heard or
hearkened unto: for why, no man is ignorant, that of the precepts of the law,
whereof some are Moral, some Ceremonial, and other some Judicial, the two
later kinds only are abrogate: for the one kind contained nothing else than
types and shadows of things afterward to be accomplished by CHRIST Heb. 10. the
other was given peculiarly to ye nation, for the framing and well ordering of
their common weal. Wherefore, seeing all things long agone shadowed in rites and
Ceremonies, are now thoroughly perfited and finished by CHRIST, and seeing
again, that their whole common wealth is utterly subverted and overthrown,
it follows, that those two kinds of laws likewise are utterly repealed and
taken away. It remains then, that the precepts of the first sort or kind,
I mean as touching manners, are yet still in force, and common to all, as well
Christians as Jews. But that in these, or within the compass of these
commandments, ought to be placed that which we alleged before out of
Deuteronomie, who can deny? yea, and whatsoever is available to the
declaration of our Faith in GOD, and the love toward our neighbor, and
briefly, to the framing of a godly and unblameable life, that whether it be
found discussed in the Books, either of the old or new Testament, let every
Christian man know assuredly to belong also to himself, to the intent he
should wholly keep and observe the same.

But now does our Savior CHRIST himself repeat the selfsame
commandment, Christ also commands us to read the Scriptures
and will have it for ever ratifyed and established, whilst in the fifth of
John he commands us to Search the Scriptures, which do paynte him forth in
their couloures, and declare him to be the Savior and protector of mankind.
Which words if a man would contend, that they were uttered only to the Jews,
and therefore allege, that they agree not unto Christians, that man (as
Saint Augustine does learnedly gather, entreating De verbis Domini sermon
45.) might as well say, that he would neither know Christ, nor be
acknowledged of CHRIST. Wherefore, Saint Peter dealing as an interpreter of
that commandment, speaks thus unto all Christians, We have (says he) a
most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as
unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day
Star arise in your hearts. And the holy Apostle Paul commands,
exhorts, and leaves nothing unattempted, whereby he might allure all men to
love and frequent the wrytings of the Prophets and Apostles. Colossi. 3. Let
the word of Christ, says he, dwell in you plentifully, with all wisdom, and
teach and admonish one another. Last of all, what things soever do offer
themselves in the New Testament to the commendation of the holy Scripture or
word of GOD, the same ought to be taken of us, as precepts and exhortations
inuiting us to the readyng of the sacred books. Therefore it behooves us
patientlye to hear GOD the Father speaking in the old Testamente: CHRIST his
son, Peter, Paul, and so many as follow their steps, speaking in the
New: and as for all false deceyuers and Sophysters persuading the contrary,
let them depart far off, and for ever from the fellowshippe and societye
of the Godly. To follow the advice of wise and honest councillors, and
according to their councels to search and examyne the law of the Lord, that
is to say, the holy Scriptures, with such diligence and devotion as is
requisite, is a point of very great wisdom. Proverbs. 2.4. Jeremy. 9.

But with what alacrity and cheerfulness of mind all true Christians have
even from the beginning obeyed the Apostles, In the Apostles time all the Godly
read the Scriptures most diligently.
so greatelye vrgyng the study of the holy Scriptures, and with what great
feruencie all have endeavored to read the Divine mysteries, the Historye of
the Apostles Acts do^th sufficientlye declare. The noble men of Berea among
those that were it Thessalonica, when they had received the word with all
readiness of mind, searched the scriptures daily, coveting to try, whether
the things which they heard of the Apostles were so or no. Act. 17.11. The
example of the men of Berea admonishes us, that it is not enough for us, to
hear Sermons continually in public assemblies, but also very necessary,
duly to discuss and examine privately with our selves all the things which
we have heard, to the intent we may become the more sure and certain of our
religion. This trial and examination of doctrine is accomplished, by comparing
together of diverse places out of ye holy Scriptures, in which it behooves us
so long time to be occupied, until we may plainly perceive, whether the
things that are spoken of the teacher or of any other, do agree with the
places of Scripture, or no. The Doctrine that men use to put forth, deserves
not to be accounted for sound and Catholic, except it be aunswearable to the
rule and squire of the Prophetical and Apostolic writings. And this manner of
discerning in times paste was common to all hearers, and besides, there was
received in every Church well near a certain public form and pattern
thereof. For proof whereof, make the words of the Apostle 1 Corin. 14. where
he says: As often as ye come together, every one of you has a song, has a
doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation: let all
things be done to edifying. And a little after: Let two or three of the
Prophets speak, and let the residewe determyne. Further, if any thing be
revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace. For ye
may all severally prophecy, that all may learn, and all receive comfort:
and the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. And again, 1.
Thessa. 4. he says: Quench not the Spirit, despise not prophesiying: Try
all things, hold that which is good. Some therefore do privately to their
own comfort and instruction determine of prophesies, and discern the true
and native sense from the false and counterfayte: and othersome, which
especially do excel others in judgment and gifts of the spirit, are
required even in public meetings, that they would louinglye declare their
mind as touching the doctine put forth. And undoubtedly those only can readily
and fruitefullye with commendation do any thing in this behalf, ye have
exercised themselves at home with continual reading of ye scriptures.

The Apostle moreover in ye same place to the Corin. adds another
commandment as concerning the duty of husbands: But if the women will learn
any thing, Let the^ ask, says he, their husbands at home. To the wife
therefore demanding a question, it behooves the husband to make answer and
render a reason out of ye Scriptures, even in like case as every Prophet or
preacher does when he is questioned with of many in open and public place.
Neither did ye goodma^ of ye house in those days perform this duty alonlye
to his wife, but also to all his householde of what age or condition soever
they were: especially when there was good hope, ye so many as should be
instructed in ye word of GOD, might be made modest, sober, vigilant, and much
more faithful and diligent in doing of their business afterward than they were
before. It is evident also, that parents did then nouzel and instruct even
their tender little ones in ye principles of godliness and Christian religion.
Continue thou, says the Apostle in ye 3. Chap. of his 2. Epist. to Timothy. in
the things which thou have learned, and which are committed unto thee, knowing
of who^ thou have learned the^: and that thou have known the holy scriptures of
a child. The holy Ghost is given to the beleuers, to the intent they may learn
and understand the Scriptures*
And in ye 1. Chap. of his 1. Epi. he puts Timothy in remembrance, that he
had received examples of Faith and godliness of life of his mother Eunica, and
of his grandmother Lois.

Neither ought any man to maruayle, when we say that all the believers in that
age did both often and exactlye read the holy Scriptures, and also greatly
profitte by readyng of them. For, as Peter in his Sermon Acts. 2. truly
interprets, that which was long before spoken of the Prophet Joel: it
behooved that the same Prophecy should then be fulfilled, and that the holy
Ghost being powered into the hearts of a great number should by and by so
instruct them, as that they might love and embrace the holy Scriptures, try
and examine them, and finally, with wonderful dexterity expound and declare
the meaning of them. which benefit was afterward made common to all the
Godly, but chiefly to those that feruentlye, faithfullye, and without
staggering, craved true and perfitte Wisdom of GOD the father of lights, as
the Apostle saint James says. For it behooves the promise of of GOD to be
firm and immutable, which is extant in the Prophets, and wonderfully
commended of CHRIST: They shall all, says he, be taught of GOD. And: The
godly are anointed of the holy Ghost. Esaias. 54 Iere. 31. John. 6.1. Joan. 2.
Hebr. 8. Wherefore Chrysostom upon Genesis homely. 35, is bold to say: That
it cannot be, that he which with great care and fervent desire gives
himself to the reading of the holy Scriptures, should always be neglected, or
go without fruit: for as much as albeit we are destitute of man's direction,
yet the Lord himself coming down into our hearts from above, does
illuminate our mind, lighteneth our reason, reuealeth the things that are
hidden, and becomes a teacher of those things that we know not: so as we only
will bring with us, such things as we have. Call no man master, says he, upon
earth. Whenever therefore we take into our hands the book of life, let us,
casting aside all worldly care, bridle our affections: and restrayning our
mind that it wander not hither and thither, let us with great devotion and
attentiveness apply our selves to reading, that so we may be guyded by the
holy ghost to the true understanding of the Scriptures, and receive thereby much
fruit. Thus much Chrysostom.

But what do I stand in recompting the Christians of that age? A number of
the Gentiles, who had neither out of the Law, nor out of the Gospel any
knowledge at all of Christ, Even the Gentiles also in these days used to
read the Scriptures albeit they were extance only in the Greek tongue
gave themselves in those days to the reading of the holy books. All of them
in general were of opinion, that this care especially became them, whosoever
at least were any thing at all desirous of honesty and their own welfare. The
Eunuch, Lieutenaunte of Caudace Queen of the Ethiopians, having (as it is
very likely) not heard any thing as yet of CHRIST, passed his time, not only
at home, when his leisure served him, but also when he travailed abroad, and
was thrown to and fro with the iotting of his Chariot, in reading of the
Prophet Esaias, Act. 8. Which diligence and godly disposition was so well liked
of GOD our heavenly father, who evermore beholds from above all our studies
and actions, that he sent forthwith unto him in very good season Philippe the
Apostle, that he should open unto him the hard places, and set down a
compendious sum of tree Religion of and concerning CHRIST his son. Neither
is it to be doubted, but that GOD would have the Books of holy Scripture long
before translated out of the Hebrewe tongue into the Greek, to the intent
they might afterward be read, not only of the Jews which understood the
Hebrewe speech alone, but also of the Gretians, that is, of all mortal men
whatsoever. For why, that under the names of Jews and Gretians all mankind is
often times comprehended, we may learn out of the Apostle in more than one
place or two. Romans. 1.2.3.10. 1. Corinthians. 1. Galathians. 5. And that the
Greek tongue was in the Apostles time every where known and much set by,
the Historiographers do not obscurely declare. All Asia for the most part
sounded the Greek, having long before felt the force of Greekish conquerours:
and in the self same Country the Jews, loathing (as a man would say) their
Hebrews language, wrote and compiled books in the Greek style, as Josephus,
Philo, and others. In Africa, the cunninger that every one was in the Greek,
the excellenter he was compted, as both the School and Library of,
Alexandria do testifye in Europe, over and besides that a number of Greeks
do inhabit and dwell, even Italy also, and Rome it self, as being very
ambitious and not contented with the furniture of her own Country speech,
has maintained as Strabo reports lib. 4. very many Gretians, and brought
forth such as have written whole books and Commentaries in Greek. So far
forth, that a man might well say, that the Athenienses are free Denizens at
Rome.

But in very deed how much more we marvel at, In these days we have the
holy Scripturs extant in all tongues.
and (as meet it is) extol, the diligence and industry, as well of the
Christians, as of the Gentiles of that age, in reading the books of holy
Scripture, which were found written alonely in the Hebrewe and Greek tongue:
so much the more vehemently ought we openly in the sight of all men to deteste
and abandon the great sloth and negligence of the people of our days. For
least that any man should pretend, that by reason of his ignorance in the
Greek or Hebrewe tongue, he is let front reading the holy Scriptures: We
have all the Books of holy Scripture extant in the Latin tongue, which is
used and frequented of a great number, no less happilye than faithfully
expressed, and that of diverse and the same most learned Interpreters: which
Saint Augustine reports also of his time, entreating De Doctrina Christiana
lib. 2. Cap. 5. And not only in the Latin tongue, but in others also, which
in times past were accounted not without contempt barbarous and uncivil: yea,
and there is in a manner no coaste or province in the whole world, in which
may not be found the holy Bible turned into the same Country language. The
Italians, Germans, Frenchemen, Spaniards, likewise Britains, Danes, Rutters,
Polonians, Swezians, Slauonia^s, to be short, all other Christians whatsoever,
have among them to be sold, and may easily come by the old and new
Testament, translated into the self same phrase and language that they
themselves do understand. Therefore, like as the Apostle acknowledges and
gives thanks unto God for his incomparable benefit, whereby he spoke with
many tongs, 1. Corinthians. 14. so is it meet and requisite likewise, that
Christians be thankful unto God, to every of whom it is granted in their
own proper and peculiar tongue to read the holy and sacred Scriptures. This
only we ought to be careful for, namely, that we be not found slack and
slouthful in reading. When our Lord Jesus Christ shall come at the last day
to judgment, peradventure some of the Gentiles that lived in the Apostles
time, will go about to excuse themselves, that in those days were extant
only the Copies of the Greeks tongue alone, out of which they should have
learned by reading the doctrine of the Law and the Gospel. But who will
auouche that that excuse shall go for payment? That dare no man do as I
think. Then what shall become of the men of our time, that do behold the
self same doctrine expressed in so many tongues at this day, and yet do not
care for it, but reject and abandon it? Truly I am afraid that there will be
left unto them no manner of pretense at all, whereby they may clear or
defend themselves. Where, if so be we imagine, that it will come to pass by
some prerogative, or strange privilege that we alone without the reading
and knowledge of Gods word, shall in time to come be memored with the faithful:
we are far wide (as they say) and do utterly deceive our selves without Christ
there is no passage for any man into Heaven: forasmuch as he is the door, the
way, the truth, and the life: but the way to Christ, the Scripture it self
points forth as it were with ye finger. For truly is it said of Hierom, in
his preface to the first book of his commentaries upon Esai: To be without the
knowledge of the Scriptures, is to be without the knowledge of Christ.

Let us see now, what was done in certain ages following. And after the
Apostles time all the godly serched continualy the Scriptures.
It is the fashion of some of the common sort, when there is any new
doctrine, or manner of teaching, especially in Philosophy, first set
abroache, to flock by and by together by heaps, and to be suddenly inflamed
with a fervent desire of learning: But as soon as they have received any
smacke or taste, fo suffer their heat by little and little to wax cold, and
in continuance of time to be quyte extinct, and as well their doctrine, as their
whole sect (if any were risen) to vanish away: Much like as if a great fire
being kindled, after it has for a certain space shown forth a huge light,
and bin seen a great way off, by little and little ceasseth to cast forth
any spark or flame, and last of all, has nothing left but smoke and ashes,
whereof yet the one goes into the air, and the other are scattered with the
wind. But so must we not judge of the holy Scriptures. For albeit the
Apostles died and were buried, yet was by no means the study Divinity buried
with them. The Jews had an ancient custom among them, namely, throughout
every City, when they come together in their Sinagogues on the Sabbath days,
to recite publicly certain Chapters out of the Law, and the Prophets, which
forthwith some one or other expounded in a familiar kind of order to the
capacity and instruction of the hearers. The self same form of reading and
interpreting was by the Apostles brought into the congregations or assemblies,
which in respect of that time, the faithful were suffered to have: as may
appear Luc. 4. Act. 13 15. 1. Corinthians. 14. That which the Apostles observed in
their time, their successors the Pastors of Churches never suffered to be
intermitted or broken off: no not so much as turn then, when the affairs of
the Christians were brought into great extremities, and Tyrants sought by
all means to work their decay. For they never ceased to have their meetings
and assemblies, as appears even by the testimony of Pliny in his Epistle to
Traiane the Emperor: They use (says he) before day light to come ordinarily
together. What was accustomed to be done in these assemblies, many credible
writer do report. Iustine, who lived in the year of Christ's incarnation.
1^0, in his second Apology which he wrote for the Christians, has these
words: On the day which is called Sunday, all that remain in the towns or
fields, do come together into one place, where the books of the Prophets or
Apostles are read, so long as an hours space will suffer. Then when he which
reads leaves off, he that is chief among us admonishes and exhorts,
that we should diligently follow and embrace those good lessons that are
read: the^ rise we all, and pray together. Clemens Alexandrinus, who flourished
Anno. 200, lib. 7. Stromatum, says, that the sacrifices which they used in
those days, were prayers, and thanksgiuings, and lessons of the Scriptures
which they read before meat. From these Disagreeth not Tertullian, who lived
Anno. 230. Apologetici Cap. 39. We come together (says he) to the reading of
the holy Scriptures, if the quality of the times present enforces us to
forewarne or reknowlege any thing. Forsooth with holy words we feed our faith,
we erect our hope, we establish our trust, and nevertheless with often
repetitions and suggestions, we confirm the discipline of precepts. Dionisius
also, the author of ye Ecclesiastical hierarchy, about the. 300. year of our
Lord, entreating of the mystery of ye Lords supper, says very plainly: By the
office of the Ministers, is orderly recited the lesson of the holy Scriptures.
And a little after: The most sacred songs and readings of the Scriptures, do
minister unto them directions, as touching the government of life, and (which
in order goes before) teaches the amendment of their corrupt affections, and
most pernicious nature: Who would require no witnesses to be produced? And
seeing Iustine lived in Asia, as borne in Nicopolis a town of Palestine, as
Ierom reports, and was conversant at Rome, and else where in Europe,
Tertullian in Africa, Clemens at Alexandria in Egypt (for as touching
Dyonisius we have as yet no certainty.) It is evident hereby, that there was
every where in those days, so far forth as concerned the reading of the holy
Bible, a great and wonderful consent. But when as, after the storms and
tempests of persecutions were once by the singular providence of God appeased
and assuaged, the godly had a time of respite granted unto them, and the
Churches began now to be increased (which came to pass, if not in the time
of Philip the Emprour Anno. 250. whom Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 25. Orosius lib. 7.
cap. 20. do report to have bin the first Christian Prince of any power that
ever was after Christ: yet certes under Constantine, about the year of Grace.
320) thou should have seen, if a man may credit Eusebius, high and stately
temples builded up to the Lord, wherein were practiced the self same things,
that late before were used in private houses. And least that any thing in this
behalf, should at any time be confusedly or negligently done, there were
appointed in all Churches readers, unto whom was enioined by the Bishop, the
office of Reading, who delivered unto them in the presence of all the people,
the holy and sacred Bible. As touching which matter thou may read in the
8. canon of the fourth council of Carthage: and in Gratian distinct. 23.
Moreover, least any other Books than those that are accounted to be
Canonical, should be read, it was provided by the council of Laodicea
(which was held anno. 370. canon. 59. and by the third council of Carthage
canon 47. And that John Chrysostom, and many others, who were afterward of
great authority in the Church, first supplied the office of Readers, before
they aspired to any higher promotions may be avouched very clearly by
Histories. Now the Homilies, that is to say, the Sermons divised and made by
the holy fathers, which are extante even from the time of Origin, to the
Empires of Charles the great, during whose reign, Alcuinus and Beda, two of
the last Authors in a manner of these Sermons flourished, do prove euidentlye,
that the same custom which we spoke of even now, was observed in all
Churches. Read I pray you, but the beginnings only of the homilies of Origin
upon ye books of Moses, and certain others: read likewise the beginnings of
Chrysostom, prefixed before his expositions upon a good part of ye books of
holy Scripture made unto the people: read the diverse and sundry entries of
Sermons of Saint Augustine, especially where he entreats De verbis Domini,
Sermon. 15.33. De verbis Apostoli, Sermon. 1. Again, very many of Maximus the
Bishop, Bid, and other mo^, and even forthwith in the very short exordiums or
beginnings of their Sermons ye shall perceive, how by them (though they were
Doctors of diverse times and places) it is not obscurely signified: first,
that the Books of holy Scripture, were in times paste by Readers from an high
Pulpit, with a clear voice, which all might hear, and in the common tongue,
which all might understand, accustomed to be recited: Secondlye, that by name
were rehearsed Moses, the residue of the Prophets, the Psalms, the Gospels,
the Acts of the Apostles, the Apostolical Epistles: and that for the most
part these books were read through from the beginning to the end: Lastly,
that this order was observed, that the reading went always before, and then
followed a more large declaration of the things that were read by some one
that was excellent in the gift of Prophecy.

In the mean time the godly Doctors and Teachers never ceased to exhort
their godly hearers, that they would daily also read over the holy
Scriptures at home at their own houses, that they would priuatelye call to
mind the things that they had publicly heard, and that by the example of
those of Berea, they would duly weigh and examine them by the ballaunce and
touchstone, of the Scriptures. And of the peoples diligence and profiting at
that time in reading the holy Scriptures, this is no doubtful argument, for
that it was not needful for the Doctors themselves (though some men in these
our days do very weywardly and importunately urge it) to express at all
times the names of the Authors and Chapters of the holy books: In as much as
the people themselves, so soon as they had heard any place alleged and
brought forth, by and by understood in what Author, in what book, and in what
part of the book the same was to be found: as they that were very well
exercised by reason of their daily and domestical reading. Therefore the
things, that in so many ages, and in every place, were with singular care,
great commendation, and with no less fruit, accustomed to be done in sacred
assemblies or meetings, whereunto all Christians of all estates and degrees
whatsoever usually came together: We may judge also to be very seeming and
sitting for all the professors of Christianity in these our days: neither
can we suppose them to be within the compass of Christ's flock or fold,
that shall contemptuously refuse, either to hear the holy Scriptures in the
Church, or to read them oftentimes at home by themselves. Wherefore, if thou
dwell in such a place, where as the Prophetical and Apostolic writings
are not accustomed to be recited in holy public assemblies, then forsooth is
it most requisite and necessary, that thou should prescribe unto thy self
a perpetual and unchangeable Law, as touching the daily reading of them at
home at thy house. But if thou dwell where they are publikelie recited in a
tongue known unto thee, it is well, and thou have good cause to rejoice with thy
self, as one in far more happy estate, than infinite thousands of men,
whom a man may find every where, in Cities, Towns, Villages, and streets,
utterly void and destitute of the knowledge of Heavenly and Spiritual things:
but thou must provide nevertheless, with all possible diligence, that thou
may profit and go forward in the wholesome doctrine of GODS word, not
only in the Lords house or Temple, but also in thine own private house, by
all occasions, and to the uttermost of thy power, according to the holy
admonitions of godly and learned Pastors. For true Christianity consists not
in this, that a man does oftentimes conueygh himself bodily from his House to
the Church: but in that a man, both at home, and in the Church, Exhortations
of the holy Fathers, as touching the reading of the holy Scriptures privately in
houses.
should bend his whole heart and mind to the true understanding of the
mysteries of GODS holy word.

But why do we not allege some of the exhortations that the holy Fathers
used to make to their hearers, when they coueted to stir them up to the
private reading of the sacred Scriptures? forsooth I trust they will no less
profit now a great number, than it is certain they profited in times past. For
they provided their painful works both for us and our whole posterity. And
certes, for m^ne own part I confess, I could not deu^se either more pithy or
profitable exhortations, than th^irs are. Origin.
Orige^ therefore, about the year of our Lord, 230. being a Doctor of the
famous schole and Church of Alexandria, from when his voice sounded into ye
whole world, namely whilst out of his Auditory there came on every side
innumerable wise governors of Churches, whom also Mammea mother of Alexander
Seuerus the Emperor called unto her for a time to Antioch, whilst her desire
was to be instructed of him, the same Orige^, I say, expounding the book of
Leuiticus, in his homily, 9. has these words: For those only does the high
Priest and advocate and propitiator Christ pray, that are the Lords
inheritance, that wait for him before the gates, that depart not from the
temple, but give themselves to fasting and prayer. Do thou think, that
scarcely co^mest to the Church on holy and festiual days, neither give thy
self to hear the word of God, nor applyest thy diligence to keep his
commandments, that the Lords inheritance can light upon thee? Nevertheless
we wish, that by the hearing of these things you would bend your selves not
only in the Church to hearken to the word of God, but also in your own houses
to be exercised and to meditate in the law of the Lord day and night: for
Christ is eue^ there also, and every where present to all those that seek
after him. For therefore is it commanded in the law, that we should think
upon it when we go by the way, and when we sit in the house, and when we ly in
our bed, and when we rise up: and this is in very deed truly to wait before
the doors for the high Priest tarying within in the holy place, and to become
the Lords inheritance. Again in ye self same homily, not much after, he
inueigheth sharply against those, ye when they hear ye Scriptures red, do not
(as they ought to do) give diligent heed unto the^. And at length having
exhorted the^ to bridle the flesh, and to stir up the spirit, he adds
immediatelye these words as touching the hearing and reading of the word of
GOD: If thou co^mest often to the Church, look thou give ear to the hearing of
the holy scriptures, see thou take hold of the meaning of the heavenly
commandments: For as the flesh is nourished with meat and drink, eue^ so is
the spirit strengthened with the lively sense and working of the word of God:
which being made more strong, will enforce the flesh to stoop unto him, and to
be obedient to his laws. The nourishments therefore of the spirit are, the
reading of the Scriptures, continual prayers, teaching and conference of the
word. With these meats it is norished, with these it is stre^gthned, with these
it gets the upper hand. Which things because ye do not, look ye complain
not of the infirmity of your flesh. The same Author upon Cro in his 12.
Homily, chydeth the^ yt when the Scriptures are red and expounded in ye Church,
have not their minds prepared to hear the^, much less to examine the^, or
confer them with others. What is it, says he, to be converted? If we utterly
renounce all the things of the world and of the flesh, and with our whole
study, care, and practice, apply our selves to the word of GOD, and meditate in
his law day and night if forsaking al other things we depend only upon GOD,
and be exercised in his testimones: this is truly to be converted to the Lord.
Thou therefore would have thy son to learn the liberal Sciences (as they call
the^) to be acquainted with the Art of Grammar, or Rhetoric, do thou not rid
him and set him free from all things? Do thou not cause him to omit al other
things and apply himself only to this study? Thou prouidest him tutors,
Schole-maisters, Books, expenses, yea thou suffer him to want nothing,
until he bear away the perfitte price of his purposed study. Which of us
does so convert himself to the study of GODS law? which of us does so apply
our diligence? Which of us does with so great care and industry seek after
heavenly things, as we have sought after earthly? And why then do we complain,
if we be ignorant of the things which we have not learned? Some of you, so
soon as ye have heard recited the things that are redded, by and by depart
your way, making no manner of inquiry one of another of the things that are
spoken, no conference at al, no remembrance of that commandment, wherein Gods
Law does admonish thee: Ask thy fathers, and they shall tell thee: ask thine
elders, and they shall show thee. Other some will not tarry by their good wills,
no not til the lessons be read in the Church. Some again there be, that know
not whether there were any red or no: but in the outleetes of the Church are
occupied about fables, or otherwise entangled about worldly and unprofitable
matters. Of whom I dare be bold to say, that when Moses is red, they have not
now a cover only, but even a certain wall and bulwark also placed over their
hearts. For if he which is present, which hears, and intentiuely marketh,
which canuasseth and examineth the things that he does hear, and that which he
can not atteyne unto, diligently fearcheth out and learneth, can hardly come to
the liberty of knowledge: how can he which of purpose stops his ears,
least he should hear, and turns his back to the face of the Reader, be said
to have a cover over his heart, to whom not so much as the cover it self of
the letter, wherein the sense is wrapped, which is the sound of the voice, has
as yet come? All this has he in that place. Many things mo beside, may thou
find in his Commentaries spoken to the selfsame effect. Upon Leuiticus Homi.
4. he avouches the^ to offer a thankeful sacrifice and memorial unto GOD,
that do day and night meditate in the Law of the Lord, and keep in mind all
the Scriptures: or if they can not do that, yet at least commit to memory the
things that are taught, or recited in the Church: and after they are gone out
of the Church, like unto good sound Beasts, chewing their cud, call back the
same things to remembrance, and so study (finally) to fulfill the co^mandeme^ts
of GOD. In his exposition of the. 12. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans he
affirms flatly, that our senses can not possibly be renewed, but by ye
exercises of wisdom, ye meditation of GODS word, and the spiritual
understanding of his Law, and that by how much a man daily profits by reading
of the Scriptures, and his understanding pierces more deeply into them, by so
much always is he more and more renewed. By and by he adds: I know not
whether the sense or feeling of him that is slothful toward the reading and
hearing of the holy Scriptures, and toward the exercises of spiritual
understanding, whereby he might not only understand those things that are
written, but also apply them more diligently and set them forth, can be
renewed or no. Upon Iosue in his twentieth Homily, he declares in many words,
That the reading of the Scriptures is both allowed of GOD and his Angels, and
also very profitable unto us, albeit we do not perfitely understand them. In
his Prologue ad Canticum Salomonis (which work notwithstanding it pleases
the learned to remove out of Origens Library) he tells that there was a
fashion among the Jews, that All the Scriptures, except the beginning of
Genesis, certain places, in the beginning and ending of the Prophet
Ezechiell, and the canticle of Solomon, should be taught unto their children
by teachers and wise men appointed for that purpose. But how and after what
sort Christian children also were accustomed to learn of their Parents out of
the holy Scriptures the principles of Religion: and again generally, what the
householde study was in old time, in reading and repeating of the Scriptures,
we may in the life of Origin himself, as it is described by Eusebius in the
sixth Book and second Chapter of his Ecclesiastical History, as in a painted
Table behold. Origin (says he) began immediately to be instructed of his
father in the holy Books, who by dropmeale (as it were) between whiles, gave
unto him among the secular studies wherem he was trained in his tender age,
some things also out of our Scriptures to be red. The^ afterward by little and
little, he taught him likewise to prefer these before his sholasticall
exercises And even incontinent he envred the child in like manner (being of
himself not unwilling, but very prompt and ready to learn whatsoever was
taught him) to take forth every day certain lessons in the holy Scriptures, and
to commend the^ to memory. Now he truly, the child, conceruing a wonderful
delectatio^ in reading of these things, seemed not to be content only with a
bare understanding of the^, but would busy his father often times about
questions, touching the sense and meaning of the Scriptures, enquiring of him
diligently what such, and such a thing meant, and amongst other, what the
meaning of that was, where it is said, that The Scripture is enspired by the
holy Ghost? or what divine mystery this simplicity of words might co^teyne?
But he, the father, feined himself for the time ge^tly to rebuke him, and to
forbid him to ask any question beyond the compass of his age: but with
himself notwithstanding, he rejoiced excedingly, giving hearty thanks to
almighty GOD, who had granted him to be the father of such a child. This out
of Eusebius. But with what words (I pray you) may this spectacle of so godly a
Father, conferring with his most dear child, as touching holy and heavenly
matters, be (I say) not only adorned, and set forth, but plainly and
distinctly also declared? Who ca^ express sufficiently ye cheerfulness and
feruencie of ye son, continually reading, and committing many things to
memory, his often questioning and enquiring, and greedy receiving of answers?
Who is able to utter in words ye godly affections of ye father, so gently
applying himself to the capacity of his child, and yet in ye mean time,
privily wondering with himself, and inwardly rejoicing. But it is much better
for you, that are fathers of families, and whom GOD has blessed with dear
children, to cast and consider with your feit^^s, what great say and gladness
should happen unto you, if you might but see your little ones, through your
continual allureme^ts and exhortatio^s, to profit in ye knowledge of GODS word,
after ye same manner ye Origin did. I am sure and certain, that no man could
prosecute in words the superabounding spiritual say of your godly hearts.
Eusebius Bishop of Emisa, Eusebius ^^misenus.
flourished (as some write) about the year of CHRIST'S incarnation. 350. He in
a certain Homily upon the Gospel of ye fourth Sunday after the Epiphanie,
has left in writing as follows, Christians ought to have this custom among
the^, namely, to come daily to the Church, to read daily themselves, or (if
they be not able to do it) to hear others read. As touching which Eusebius,
Georgius Laodicenus reports, yt he was even from his childhod nouzeled in the
sacred Scriptures, after ye custom of his Country, as one borne at Edessa, a
City in Mesopotamia. There passed. 170 years at the least, from the death of
Origin, that is, to the year of our Lord. 400. at what time the Scepters were
in the hands of Honorius and Arcadius Emperors: and behold among, ye Doctors
of ye Church, John Chrisost. Bish. of Consta^ti. held ye chief and sovereign
place, John Chrysostom.
whom it behooves us to acknowledge not to be a Pericles of Greece, upon whose
lips, Pitho, the Lady of eloquence is said to have sitte^, but far more
excellent, tha^ any Pericles ye ever was, seeing that all posterities after
him, even to these our days, by reason of his wonderful grace in speaking and
teaching, do honor him by ye name and title of Chr^sostomos, that is to say,
Golden mouth. How abu^dantly therefore, and with what magnifice^cie, both of
matter and sentence, he was accustomed in Preaching to stir up, and provoke
all sorts of people to ye reading of ye holy Scriptures, innumerable places in
his popular sermons, which are even yet in men's hands, do evidently prove,
which if I would take in hand to set down in order, I should be constreyned
to fill up no small Book or volume. It shall be sufficient therefore to add
only a few of them, out of which, every man may take as it were a taste of the
rest. In his Homily, 9. upon the Epistle to the Colossians, entreating of
these words, Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously. Hearken (says
he) ye men of the world, even so many of you as are here present, and have
the oversight of wives and children, how it is commanded even to you
especially to read the Scriptures, and that also not slightely, nor slackly,
but with great heedefulnesse and diligence. For like as he that is rich in
substance, may well away sometime with loss and hynderance, even so may he
also that is rich in wisdom, take well in worth not only poverty, but all
other calamities likewise whatsoever, and that so much the more easily. And
after a few words, Neither weigh thou (says he) any other teacher. Thou
have the Oracles of GOD, no man can teach thee like unto them. Some other
peradventure may ofttimes, either through vaineglory, or through envy, keep
back many things from thee. Hear I beseech you, all ye worldly men,
purchase to your selves the Bible, as a medicine for your soul: if you will
not be at all that cost, buy at the least the New Testamente, the Acts of the
Apostles, the Gospels and Epistles to be your continual teachers and
instructers. If trouble come, resort hither as to a storehouse of remedies and
medicines: from hence, take unto you the easemente of your grief, the comfort
of your cross, whether it be hurt or hinderance, or death, or loss of goods,
or loss of friends that happen unto you: nay, resort not hither, and look in
only, but turn al things over and over, and conteyne them in your minds. This
finally is the cause of all evils, even the ignorance of the Scriptures. We go
to the battle without weapons, and how can we be safe? Armed men are wont to
get the upper hand, and to save themselves: so are naked men never. Cast not
al things upon our shoulders. Ye are sheep: yet not without reason, but
reasonable: Paul commits many things to you also. They that are sent to
instruct others, rest not always upon this, that they might learn:
otherwise they should not learn well. If thou always be a learner, thou
shalt never be learned. Come not in such order, as thou would always be
taught, for so thou shalt never come to knowledge: but as one that would at
length make an end of learning, and so teach others in the same Art or
Skill. Again, in the same place, to the fathers of housholdes he says: It
behooved you only to be instructed by us, and your wives and children to be
instructed by you. But you leave all things to be accomplished of us: and
therefore sustain we no little grief. Teach (says the Apostle) and
admonish you one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs. Where
he gives us to understand also, that it is the duetye of parents, to teach
their children Psalms and Songs. The same Author expounding publicly to the
people the Book of Genesis, Homily 29. says thus: I pray and beseech you,
that you would repair hither oftentimes, and give diligent heed to the
reading of the holy Scriptures: and that not only when ye come hither, but
at home also at your houses, take the Bible into your hands, and with a
great care and industry receive the profit contained therein. For why,
thereby shall ye reap much gain. For first of all by readyng is the tongue
reformed: then next the soul takes wings, and mounteth alofte, and by the
beams of the Sun of Righteousness is illuminated and made light: and during
all that time, is rid from the enticementes of unclean thoughts, and
enjoys much quietness and tranquillity. Moreover, look what strength
sensible meat gives to the body, the same gives readyng to the soul. For
it is a spiritual nourishment, and makes the soul strong, and constanter,
and more desirous of wisdom: not suffering it to be overtaken with foolysh
cogitations, but making it light and nimble with wings, translateth it, as is
said, into heaven it self. So great a gain therefore, I beseech you, let us
not loose through our negligence: but let us both at home apply our selves to
the reading of the divine Scriptures, and also being here present let us not
spend the time in trifles and unprofitable communications: but weyghing
wherefore we come together, let us give good heed to the things that are read,
that having reaped the greater fruit thereby, we may so depart. And not much
after he adds: That we ought so to give our selves to the studies of holy
Scripture, as that we may have things not only sufficient for our own use,
but what also we may minister unto others, as well, says he, in reforming of
our wives, children, and servants, as also of our neighbors, friends, and
enemies. For such is the nature of spiritual doctrines, that they may be
propounded in common to al, and there is no diversity in them, except it be
when one brings a mind more attentively bente than another, and when one
surmounteth another with a more feruente desire, etc. Neither can I ouerpasse
the chiding speech or expostulation, that the same holy father in his
thirteenth Homily upon the Gospel of John sometime used, although it be
somewhat long and tedious. Let us blushe, says he, and be ashamed: the woman
that had had five husbands, and was a Samaritane, uses so great diligence in
learning, that she could neither in the time of the day, nor by any other
lettes or occasions be withdrawn from the doctrine of Jesus: Whereas we do
not only not enquire after any thing that might tend to our instruction in
heavenly things, but also are very careless in all things and always like
affected, and therefore pass for no manner of thing that good is. Which of us,
I pray you, when he comes home, takes in hand any work worthy of a
Christian? who searches for the meaning of the Scriptures? None truly: but as
for dice and tables, we find them commonly, books very seldom: which yet if
any have, they keep, as though they had them not, close in their Coffers, or
else all their study consistes in setting forth the leaves and couers, and in
making the letters beautiful to the eye: not to the intent to read them,
neither to get any profit by them: but to vaunte of their riches, to show
their ambition, therefore study they in them. So great is their vain glory.
I hear of no ambitious person, that understands his book: but he is in
love only with the glittering gloss of the golden letters. What gain call ye
this I beseech you? The Scriptures are not therefore given us, that we should
have them in books alone, but that we should engraue them in our hearts.
Therefore this outward possession of books is a token of the ambitiousnesse
of the Jews, to whom the commaundeme^ts were given in letters: to us are they
not so given, but in fleshly tables of the heart.

Howbeit I forbid no man to buy books: but I admonish, and with all my
heart desire, that we may buy them: yet so as we may often times ponder both
the letters and their meanings in our minds, and by this means have a pure
mind wrought within us. For if in what house so ever the Gospel be, there the
Devil dare not enter; then how much less power shall the Devil or Sin have
over that soul, that is acquainted with it by continual readings? Sanctify
therefore they soul, san^ctifye thy body: this shall come to pass, if thou
have always the Gospel both in thy heart and tongue. Where, if the
filthiness of thy tongue defyleth the soul, if it call upon Devils it is
evident, that by spiritual reading the same is sanctified, and the grace of
the holy Ghost abundantly powered into it. The Scriptures be (as it were) divine
charms: From them let us fetch a remedy for our grief, and for the maladies
of our soul: the utility whereof if we would consider, we should with
attentiuenes apply our study in them. These things I oftentimes touch: Is it
not a thing very preposterous, that common market men should bear in mind,
the names of Cartars and Dauncers, their kinds, countries, actions, manners, and
tell likewise of the prowess of horses, and what every one could do: and
they that come hither, go their ways knowing nothing at all, no not so much
as the number of the holy Books? Thus much has this most excellent Preacher
(questionless) in that place, who in other places also often times sings the
self same song: as in very deed that song is never thought to be out of
season, which is acceptable to the ears of all men, especially of such as
are skillful in Music, and is of it self very sweet and delectable, for in
his two and fiftith Homily upon John, he again wishes all men to have the
Books of holy Scripture in their houses, and diligently to peruse them
through. In his fourteenth Homily, he requires great diligence to be
bestowed in searching of the Scriptures. And every where in the beginnings of
his Sermons: and likewise in the latter ends or perorations he entreats of
the manifold use of the Scriptures: Upon which occasion he eftesoones
urges, requires, enforces: and pricketh forward all men, that whenever
opportunity shall serve, they would as well at home as abroad, confer
together of the doctrine of godliness: that they would as touching doubtful
places, both ask the opinion of others, and also now and then show their own
judgment: that they would draw this practice as a custom, and perpetually
keep it in ure. But what if ye shoude have heard Chrysostom himself
uttering his own words? for let it be lawful to me, I beseech you, to usurp
the selfsame words of this man, that Aeschines sometimes did of Demosthenes
whom he envied only for desire of glory. Albeit we have this privilege
after a sort granted unto us, even to hear him also, whylest the things
which he most sweetly pronounced in the chief City and seat of a most
mighty Empire, we may read in Authe^tical writing published throughout the
whole world: even in like sort as the edictes and proclamations of kings and
princes are out of one notable place heard a far off, and take effect in all
provinces.

But least any man should suppose, that the Greek writers and Doctors of the
East Churches, whom otherewise some affirm (let them see with what judgment
and with what right they speak it) to disagree and err in many things from
the Latins and west Churches, were only and altogether of this mind: hear I
beseech you, likewise the voices of the Latin writers, as touching the self
same cause. What account make thou of Hierom, what of Augustine? Thou
grauntest them, I am sure, to be of the number of the chief and principal
Divines. Then mark what Hierome has noted upon those words of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, the thirteenth Chapter. Last of al my brethren,
fare ye well, be perfect, be of good comfort. It is to be noted (says he)
that writing to the whole Church, he tells them they ought to be perfect:
and that the Laity ought one to exhort an other. Again upon those words of
Paul to the Colossians Cap. 3. Let the word of Christ dwell in you. Here it is
showed, that the Laity ought to have not only sufficiently, but abundauntly
also, the word of Christ dwelling in them, and that they ought to teach or
admonish one an other. But what? me thinks thou bitest in thy lip, and
covertly mockest me, crying out against me, that there is not so much as one
crumme of Hieroms meaning in those Commentaries. Go to, verily (if thou will)
be it so. But what if we set down other things, which thou never dare to
reject as strange or counterfaite, and yet have the self same meaning, that
the words going before have? Hear what he says, expounding the second
Chapter of the Epistle to Titus: Let the senses be exercised, and the mind
dailye fed with divine readings, and so shall our questions not become
foolish. There is no man in a manner but knows the learned and long Epistle
of Hierome written to Paulinus. In this is contained a huge heap of most
excellent reasons, provoking to the study of the holy Scriptures: where are so
digested and put in order, that the whole Epistle sees not to be written to
Paulinus alone, but generallye also to all Christians. In consideration whereof,
it came to pass also, that our ancestors now for certain ages paste
whoulde have the same as a most profitable instruction, like as it is in very
deed, to be prefixed and set before ye holy Bible. And albeit in the same
Epistle he somewhat sharply inueyeth against ye impudency and rashness of some
men, which take upon the^ to teach ye Scriptures, before they have learned
the^: and co^playneth, that they (to wit ye holy Scriptures) are of every
prattling Gossup, doting old man, babbling Sophister, and finally of all sorts
of people too too irreverently handled and mangled: yet nevertheless intending
to signify, that no man of what state or condition soever ought to be
restrained from the reading of them, he adds immediatelye after: That in
them do therefore appear a certain simplicity and baseness of words, to
the intent the rude and rusticall people might the more easily be instructed:
and not only the learned, but also the unlearned receive profit every one
according to their capacity. And to learn verily it lies al me^ upon
indifferently, to teach not so. But there is moreover in Hieroms judgment,
somewhat (peradventure) that the haters of holy Doctrine will more marvel at.
In as much as he does not only covet to have men to exercise themselves in
reading the holy Books: But also he exhorts, commands, and vehemently
urges, that Virgins, that matrones entangled with the cares of household
matters, that widows would give themselves to the self same studies of holy
scripture. For so he writes to Demetriades, in his Epistle or book De
Viginitate seruanda This one thing O thou daughter of God,
And chiefly (lo) this one
I will thee tell, and often thee warn
The same to think upon:


Namely, that thou occupy thy mind in the love of holy reading: neither suffer
the good ground of thy heart, to be infected with the seed of Darnell and
Tares: Least the goodman of the house being asleep, which is Nous: that is to
say the mind always cleauyng to God, the enemy come and sow Cockle in it,
etc. Again he says: Determine with thy self how many hours thou ought
to bestow in learning the holy Scripture, how much time in reading, not to
wearye thee, but to delighte and instruct thy soul. Straighte after there
follow precepts as touching handye labor, as of Spinning, Weauing, and so
forth. Then in the latter end of the same Epistle: Join (says he) the end
to the beginning: neither am I content once to have admonished thee: love the
holy Scriptures, and Wisdom will love thee: love her, and she will save
thee: honor her, and she will embrace thee. Furthermore, in Epistola ad
Celantiam matronam, which is entitled Of the Institution of a good Huswife
(for whether it be Hieroms, as some think, or of Pautinus doing, as othersome
will have it, I neither now dispute, neither does it greatly skill, seeing it
is agreede upon among all men, that it is both godly and learned, and also
compiled in that age) we read thus: Let thy chief and principal care be, to
know the law of God, by the which thou may (as it were) behold the
present examples of the saints before thine eyes: Learn by the counsel
thereof, what thou ought to do, and what thou ought to leave undone.
For, the greatest furtheraunce to righteousness that can be, is, to replenishe
the heart and soul with the sweet testimonies of the Lord: and that which
thou couetest to execute indeed, always to ponder and meditate in thy mind.
To the people yet rude, and not used to obedience, it is commanded of the
Lord by Moses, that for a token of memory, whereby they might remember the
commandments of the Lord, they should throughout the skirtes of their
garments, have certain ornaments of purple and scarlet color indifferently
meynte, that even when they looked by chance hither and thither, they might
still be put in mind of the heavenly commandments. And straitwayes after
a few words coming between, he says: Seeing thou keep not now the
precepts of the Letter, but of the Spirit, thy mindefulnesse of the divine
commandments, is spiritually to be garnished: whereby thou haste not so
often to record the precepts of the Lord, as always to think upon them.
Let the holy Scriptures therefore be evermore in thy hands, and ponder them
continually in thy mind: think it not enough for thee to keep the
commandments of God in thy mind, and in thy deeds to forgette them. But for
this cause learn to know that thou may do whatsoever thou haste learned to
be done. Again, in the same place: So far forth be careful for thy house, as
thou may notwithstanding bestow some time in caring for thy soul. Choose to
thy self some fit place somewhat removed from the noise of thy family,
whereunto, as unto a Haven, as a man whoulde say out of a huge tempeste of
cares convey thy self, and the waves of thy thoughts that were raised
without, dispose thou within to tranquillity and quietness. See thou bestow
there so much study in holy reading, so often and plentiful prayers, so firm
and precise consideration of things to come, as that thou may easilye by
this occasion make amends for all the lettes of the residue of thy time. Thus
much has he there. Now let us see what Hierome requires of widows in this
behalf, ad Saluinam de viduitate seruanda, he says: Be always occupied in
reading the holy Scriptures, and use so often and fervent prayers, that all the
darts of evil thoughts, wherewith youth is wont to be pierced thoroughe,
may with this shield be beaten back: Likewise to Furia the widow, he
says: When thou go to meat, remember, that by and by thou ought to
pray, and even forthwith also to read. Out of the holy Scriptures have a
certain number of verses fixed in thy mind: this task perform thou to thy
Lord and master. Neither give thy members to rest, before thou haste filled
the hamper of thy breaste with this oufe. And not contented with this
diligence, he wills widows oftentimes to read the commentaries of learned
men, and to ask counsel of learned men. After the holy Scriptures (says he)
read the treatises of learned men, of those especially, whose faith is
known. Thou have need to seek gold in clay: with many precious stones,
purchase one pearl. Stand upright, as Jeremy says, in many ways, that thou
may come to that way that leads unto peace. Transfer the love of collers
and jewels and silken garments, to the knowledge of the holy Scriptures. Again:
Thou have Exuperius of an approved age and Faith, which may oftimes enstruct
thee with his godly admonitions. He comme^deth moreover Furiaes sister, for her
exquisite knowledge in the holy Scriptures: O that thou saw, says he, thy
sister, and might but hear face to face the sweet eloquence of her sacred
mouth, thou should see in a little body what wonderful courage of mind
there were. Thou should hear the plentiful furniture of the old and new
Testament to flame out of her heart. What a number of Epistles (furthermore)
does the same Jerome write to diverse virgins and matrones, and the same
stuffed with manifold doctrine of godliness, with sundry places of Scripture
expounded and declared, and with many pretye knottes and questions dissolved
and loosed? He writes to Laeta, to Demetriades, to Saluina, to Furia, to
Geruntia the widow, to Celantia, to Mercella, to Principia the virgin, to
Eustochium, to Paula, to Theodora, to Brisilla, to Castorina, to Nitia, to
Asella, to Sunia, to Fretela, to Hedibidia, to Algasia, to Vrbica. What may be
said of this moreover, that he dedicateth certain of his works, wherein he
expounds many of the books of holy Scripture, to Paula, to Eustochium, and
Marcella, and rendereth a reason of this his doing in his preface to Sophony
the Prophet? And in all these to who^ he writes, he always for the most
part either prayseth, or accounts praise worthy, partly their love and study
of the holy Scriptures, partlye their knowledge and understanding: or (which
is least of all) to the intent they might endeavor to bring to pass
somethyng worthy of commendation in perceiving the doctrine of religion, he
both beseeches them by commau^dyng, and commands them by beseeching. In
many other places besides, when occasion serves, he handles the selfsame
cause. In the proeme of his third book of Commentaries upon the Epistle to
the Ephesians, and even incontinentlye in the enarration it self, again in
the tenth Chapter of Ecclesiastes, he says: that al ought to get wisdom by
daily reading of the Scriptures, and to meditate without ceassing in the Law
of the Lord. In his exposition of the first Chapter of the Epistle to Titus,
he blames them, which do contemn those that are studious of holy learning
as unprofitable and vain. But that is very worthy the noting, and properly to
be understood of our times, which in the end of his Commentary upon Nahum
the Prophet, he says, would come to pass, namely that about the coming of
Christ to execute judgment, the people every where should flock together to
learn the holy Scriptures. Now then that ye coming of Christ, is even at
hand, it is forsooth more certain and sure than that it is lawful for any man
to doubt.

Furthermore from Jerome disagreeth not Au. Augustine.
the^ who for the defense of sound doctrine against the treacheries of
Heretics, no man has sustained more paineful labors. He therefore writing
to volusianus in his Epistle 3, avouches, that the Scriptures are to be read
not only of the learned, but also of the unlearned, and even of all sorts of
men whatsoever. For why, it was provided by GOD, that the holy Oracles should
be written in a simple and plain kind of speech: least any manne should
pretend, that he understood nothing in them. The very phrase of speaking,
says he, wherein the holy Scripture is indicted, albeit it be easy unto al,
yet are very few able to pierce into it: the things that are apparent, are as
a familiar friend speaking without guile to the heart, as well of the learned
as unlearned. But those things which the holy Ghost wrappeth in mysteries,
neither does he lift up with proud eloquence, any otherwise than even the
drooping and unlearned soul may be bold to approach, as a poor man to a
ritche: but he inuiteth al men with his lowly manner of speech: whom he does
not only feed with manifest truth, but also exercise in secret verity:
being of like nature in things easy, as he is in things hidden. But least the
things that are open and plain should breed contempt, the same again are
hidden, to the end they should be longed after, and being longed after, should
after a sort be renewed, and being renewed, should sweetly be embraced. Hereby
are both crabbed wits holsomly corrected, and small wits norished, and great
wits delighted. That mind is an enemy to this doctrine, that either through
error knows it not to be most wholesome, or in being sick, hates to be
healed. Thus much in ye place. It is thought also, ye some of ye fathers did of
a set purpose put forth certain of their works in a homely kind of style, to
ye intent every one even among ye common sort, and unlearned artificers (unto
whom notwithstanding the Latin tongue was at that time every where familiar,
howbeit somewhat corrupted) might the more willingly peruse them over, and all
both learned and unlearned enjoy in common together the commodities of godly
doctrine. As touching which matter D. Erasmus Roterodamus, as most sharp and
severe Judge (if ever there were any) of an other man's style, in writing,
has discoursed at large in an Epistle which he prefixed before the
Commentaries of Arnobius upon all the Psalms. The same man, where he shows
his judgment as touching sundry books of Saint Augustines, admonishes, that
there is a book extant of the manners of the Catholic Church, compiled and
written by Saint Augustine, in a wonderful elegant style: but in that which
follows as concerning the manners of the Mainchees, that ye form of speech is
debaced to the capacity and understanding of the vulgar people. Thou would
suppose, that it were not the same Authors: but Charity, whereby they
acknowledge themselves with the Apostle to be debtors both to the learned and
unlearned, Romans 1. and covet indifferently to provide for all men alike,
enforces them to use diverse and sundry kinds of speaking. But that we may
return to the judgment of Saint Augustine as touching the reading of the
holy Scriptures, he in the second book, and. 38. Chapter of his
Retractations, testifyeth, that Lay men studious of the divine Oracles had
sent unto him certain writings, concerning the doctrine of Religion, and that
the again, as was meet and convenient had made answer unto them: Upon
which occasion he affirms, that his work De fide and operibus took the
beginning. And that in those days the Laity was accustomed of their own
accord to handle the holy Scriptures, that they had scarce any need of
admonitions, this may be a proof suffcient, that Augustine, like as Hierome
also before him, was often times ^nen of Virgins and women, not only lovers of
the holy Scriptures, but also expert in them, earnestly called upon by letters
to resolve them in certain doubts: and that for their sakes, he one while
declared hard and perplexed questions, which they did put sooth: an
otherwhile, did some other thing to provoke and help forward the study of
godliness. Read his Epistles to Paulina, Demetriades, Fabiola, Felicia,
Prota, (...), Edith, Florentina a maid, and Maxima a widow of Italy. In his
second Book De anima and ^^^^igme, he tells of one Peter an old Priest
that he learned many things of a young man of the Laity, and that he
rejoiced exceedingly, and gave hearty thanks unto GOD therefore. Seeing then that
by these and such like reasons S. Augustine witnesses abundantlye that the
study of holy Scripture was in his time very common and familiar among men:
and that the people of al sorts, sexes, and ages were able then godly and
expressly both to question and make answer as touching the affairs of
religion: it should be superfluous, to enterlace in these our wrytings, the
exhortations to the same study, which are to be found in his works very
frequent and forceable. Verily out of one only Sermon, which is entitled Of
the study of Wisdom and meditation of Gods law, as out of one bed I will
gather certain flowers, whereby every manne may easily conjecture what manner
of posies of the same sort are to be found in the rest of his Sermons. We
have yet, says he, a good comfort in reding the holy Scripturs: because the
reding of the holy Scripturs is no small foreknowlege of the divine
blessedness. For in them, as in a certain glass, a man may consider of
himself, what he is, or whether he goes. Continual reading purifyeth all
things, it causes fear of hell sire, it stirs up the heart of the reader to
long after heavenly joys. He that will always be with GOD, ought often to
pray and read. For when we pray, we talk with GOD: and when we read, GOD
talks with us. The reading of the holy Scriptures brings with it a double
commodity, either for that it instructs the understanding of the soul, or
because it leads a man from the vanities of the world to the love of GOD: the
labor bestowed in reading is commendable, and avails much to the clensing of
the mind. For like as the flesh is nourished with carnal meats: so is the
inner man nourished and fed with the divine Oracles of GOD: as says the
Psalmest: How sweet are thy testimonies to my mouth oh Lord? yea they are
sweeter than honey and the honye comb. But he is most blessed of all, that so
reads the holy scriptures, as he turns them into practice. Hitherto he.
Soothly these words are well worthy to be written of the godly in golden
letters, and to be painted in those books, which they daily bear about them:
to the intent they may oftentimes learn, exactly to weygh and consider every
one of them.

Saint Ambrose, Ambrose.
whom whilst he lived S. Augustine most willingly heard, and reverenced with
all dutifulness, in his Sermon 35, entitled, Of the fasting of the Lord in
the desert, and that man lives not by bread only: again where he expounds
Psalm. 118. in his Sermon 21. exhorts all the faithful to the diligent reading
of the Scriptures: and in his book of Offices and Chapter 22. he says, That
our words and communications ought chiefly to be framed of the Scriptures.
We might moreover call to remembrance the notable sayings of other famous men
as touching this matter: but I fear me least these which we haste noted
already may seem to be over many and too too tedious to the queysie stomachs
of some. How beit I could do no less but out of those most excellent authors
describe some things even word for word: and that partly, to the intent we
might testifye to the world, that we with all faithful sincerity, and according
to the judgments of most holy men, do handle this cause: partly to the end
we might stop the mouths of some arrogant persons, which as soon as they
perceive a man to differ from them in opinion, do grinne by and by, exclayme
without measure, and accuse him of heresy: not considering in the mean time,
that whilst they condemn us, they condemn likewise the most excellent and
antientest divines, whose voices have now been heard.

But sithence they have thus defined and determined ye were of all other in a
manner as the common schoolemasters and teachers, I mean Origin, Chrysostom,
Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose: it cannot be doubtful to no man, that all their
Scholars in like manner maintained the self same opinion: and wheresoever they
became, with incredible diligence commanded it and set it forth. For, that a
gentle and discreet Disciple should vary and disagree from his faithful
Schoolemayster, professing the truth, is a thing very rare, or at least very
uncomely and uncivil. And undoubtedly their Epistles written to Lay men of
diverse nations, likewise unto Virgins, matrones, widows, in all provinces where
they dwelte, do declare, that there were a great number, that applied
themselves lustily to the reading fo the holy Scriptures. Certes Hierome
writing to Sunia and Fretela, proves, that in Germany, and eue^ among the
people called Get, where they inabited (the common opinion is, that the Getes
toward the North possessed the bancke of the river Fistula and Suedeland, with
the Marchesse adjoining, wherein of the name of Getes came the Goths and the
couetrey of Gothlande to be so called to this day) the study of the holy
Scriptures, and likewise of the Greek, and especially the Hebrewe tongues was
at that time much made of, and highly esteemed. Who would believe this (says
he) that the barbarous tonged Getes, should seek after the truth of the
Hebrewe: and that whilst the Greeks slepte, nay rather labored to the
contrary, Germany would search out the oracles of the holy Ghost? O good
God, what a World was that, wherein the Laity both men and women were found
every where skillful in Divine matters? How sweetly did such reason and
confer together of the doctrine of the Law and the Gospel, and of all the
duties of godliness? Certes I believe, the godly in those days tried among
themselves most honest maysteries, as family to be found, in which there was
not either the master or mistress, either the son or the daughter, or at
least wise some one or other of the householde, that could not at appointed
times read certain Chapters of the holy Bible, and indifferently well expound
all the profitablest places in them.

The holy books were at that time counted for most precious householde
stuff: and every house was after a sort (I say) not only a schole, but even a
Church also, adorned and beautifyed with the daily exercises of reading the
Scriptures, interpretations and prayers. Of which houses it is certain that
the Apostlement, when to the Romans the sixteenth he saluted the Church
which was in the house of Prisca and Aquila, and when as writing to Philemon,
he wishes well to the whole Church that remained in his house. But what
think thou would those holy fathers say, if it were so that they might
now live again? They gently and friendly admonish, they severely commanded,
one while publicly to all, another while privately to every one, that they
should themselves with all care and enforcemente fashion and conform their
minds by the reading of the holy Scriptures: and this did they at that time,
wherein the Commonweals were on every side afflicted with wars and tumultes,
wherein the Churches were with the storms of Heresies and Schisms utterly in
a manner overwhelmed and torn in sunder, wherein was a horrible and lamentable
confusion almost of all human affairs, wherein men were constrained to pay
very dear for their books written in parchments: and yet notwithstanding
they had innumerable hearers of every sort, age, and sex, which gently took in
good part their godly admonitions, and most willingly obeyed the same. But
now, when as al things are indifferently quiet both at home and abroad, and we
inioye, if no continual rest, yet at ye least a releasement of many troubles,
when the copies of the holy Books (by reason of ye new art of Printing found
out by the providence of GOD) are in all parts of the world sold for little,
either how many provinces may we see, in which neither Bishop, nor doctor,
nor Pastor, nor elder, nor yet any other makes any mention at all of buylding
and pervsing at home of the books of the holy Bible? Nay rather (which is
far more bitter, Now a days some Bishops there be that forbid the holy
Scriptures to be read.
and shameful to be spoken, as that which tends to the unspeakable
reproach of Gods glory and of the true and Catholic Church) there are found
in some places Prelates of Churches, which with grievous threatenings and
penalties do utterly forbid the people to read them or once to meddle with
them. Yea and we have tried by experience, that some good men have been sore
punished of such, for that they had begun to read (how little soever it
were) at home in their houses. And (which thou may more marvel at) when the
wicked rage of some cursed persons could not with this cruelty be satisfied,
they took delighte moreover to bring to pass, that the like outrage should
be showed even to the harmless books themselves. For even in our time the
holy Bibles have in some places openly, and by public officers been cursed to
the fire, and consumed to ashes. As who should say, there were come unto us
again from Hell Iehioachim and his rablement of flatterers, presuming to burn
the Sermons, which Baruch received (from the mouth of Ieremye: Jeremy. 36. As
though there were come again the tyrant Antiochus, whose men of war tare the
volumes of the law in peers, and set them on fire, intendyng by that means
to gratifye their master, whom they knew to be fullye minded utterly to
root out all the Jewish religion: 1. Machab. 1. And as though there were come
again Dioclesian, who for the hatred he bare unto Christ and to the
Christians, as witnesses Eusebius in his book 8. Chap. 2. of the
Ecclesiastical History, delivered all the books of the Prophets and Apostles
(not sparing so much as one of them) to the fire to be burned. How long O Lord
shall these abuse thy patience? See thou so many and so great injuries to be
done unto thy name, and yet deferreft thou to take vengeance? To thee oh GOD,
to thee that art Lord of al reuengements, we leave vengeance: thou, when thou
see thy time, wilt repaie. But how am I fallen into this sincke, which ye
more it is stirred, the more foul and pestilent savors it breaths forth?
Truly this doleful mention as touching the burning of Bibles is slipped from
me against my will: but yet it is very true, and the unworthiness of the
thing enforced me unto it. But where there be none, as I began to say, to stir
up the people to the reading of ye scriptures, there must all of necessity
stick in darkness, and that more gross and palpable than was the darkness
of Egypt: and (as those that are attached with the disease called the
Lethargy) always sleep till they snort again in the self same mischife:
and finally without all hope of recovery, die and be buried in a miserable
ignorance of all heavenly and spiritual things.

Verily whilst I behold more nearly ye great slothfulness and negligence of
our Countrymen in this behalf, The neglecting of the Scriptures, of this time,
if it be compared with the diligence of the ancient people, is very shameful
and ignominious.
I feel my self forth with to be so disquieted, that I had much liver to
weep, than to say any thing at al. Let ye men of our time, yea let a number
of proud and over masterly Prelates, (as they call them) ye fat engrossers of
Churches, be ashamed, be ashamed I say, to see, that in reading of ye
scriptures, and in debating of Christian religion, poor seely maidens, and
women, of ye ancient age, wherein the famous doctors a little before named,
lived, should far away surmount and excel them without al co^parision. Of
these (maidens and matrones) some led their lives in the furthest parts of all
Europe toward the North, and yet with no small charge and peril, they sent
messengers over Sea and land, some to Jerome into Asia, othersome to saint
Augustine into Africa, others (to be short) into other places, and all to this
end and purpose, that they might have certain dark and obscure places of
the Scriptures more clearly opened and expounded unto them. Who, I beseech
you, would not willinglye embrace these godly hearts, so greatly inflamed
with desire of perceiving the truth: And yet in these our days there is found
every where and in all sorts of men so great slothfulness, dullness,
ignorance, barbarousnesse (I know not well what term apt enough I should
use) that no man will either come or send to the schole open in the next
town by, no man will repair to the Church standing hard before his doors,
and always open for all men to come unto, no man will resort to his neighbors
house though never so near unto him, of purpose to require any thing to be
declared unto him out of the scriptures: yea they oftentimes come together
under one and the selfsame roof, they eat daily at one common table, and yet
are they so estraunged as it were with a certain lothsomnesse and fullness of
stomach, that one is ashamed to ask and learn any thing of another.

Verily I can scarcely believe that our auncestoures, in whom there was so
feruente a desire of understanding ye holy scriptures, if they should but see
the manners that now are used, joined with so great contemp^e of GODS word, I
can hardlye I say believe, that they would account us for their posterity, or
take us in any wise for Christians. So far forth are we all for the most
part degenerated and gone out of kind from that godly sincerity of our elders.

Neither truly had Lay men and women, The L^^ie is profited (...) d^^g of the
Scriptures, that they were able also to teach others.
only a cold and slender taste of Gods holy mysteries: but a number of them
went forward with so great zeal and enforcement of mind in searching the
holy Scriptures, that by little and little they attained to such ripeness,
that they became not only excellently well learned themselves, but also were
able to teach and instruct others. By profiting in the holy Scriptures, by
prophecy, that is to say, by a learned and reverend interpretation, God will
have his Church, as by a certain mark and peculiar token, to be disseuered
and discerned from the assemblies of the wicked: wherefore to this mark did all
the godly both in times past aim, and now ought all to level, to the
intent they may not only become wise and provident for themselves, but also
for others, by admonishing, I say, by teaching, and by what means soever they
can besides. Moses, when it was told him Number. 11. that Heldad and Medad did
prophecy, or preach the word of God in their tents, and some looked that he
would have forbidden them: he was so far off from forbidding them that
excellent office, that he rather with fervent desires said: Would God that
all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would give his Spirit
unto them. Paul the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 14. in saying, That all may prophecy
one by one gives to understand, that there were in old time a great number,
and that at all times there should be some in the Church, which by the
benefit of the holy Ghost should be adorned with great grace and dexterity
in teaching: and for that their gifts should not vanish away without fruit,
but rather be increased thoroughe exercise, that there should a place to teach
not unwillingly be granted unto them, so that nothing were done confusedly,
or unadvisedly, but all directed to the edifying of the Church. Whosoever
therefore were from that time forward, but namelye enlightened with the gifts
of the holy Ghost, least they should always like children craule upon the
ground, and never declare themselves to have consideration of Gods benefits,
cheerfully and couragiouslye applied their wits to teach and enstructe
others. For thereunto it is, that Saint Chrysostom labors to move his
hearers, in his seventh Homily upon Genesis, whilst he wills them al to
be of good courage, and to prepare themselves to the painful travails of
teaching. I would have you (says he) yea and I beseech you all to be in the
number of teachers, and not only to be hearers of our sayings, but also to
minister our doctrine unto others, and to seek after those that stray, that
they may return into the way of truth: and as Paul says 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Exhort ye one an other, and edifye one an other, and with fear and
trembling, work out your own salvation. So it will come to pass, that GOD
shall increase our number, and your shall more plenteouslye be enriched with
his grace, having great care and consideration of your members. For in deed
GOD would not have a Christian man to be contented only with himself: but that
he should also edify others, and that, as well by doctrine, as also by his
life and conversation. So says he. It is evident therefore, that whilst the
hearers were oftentimes pricked forward after this manner, some of the Laity,
what by hearing, reading, and friendelye conferring one with an other, aspired
to that degree of Learning and Erudition, that they were able, as well
publicly as privately, wisely to entreat as touching the affairs of Religion
For verily to some of them it was permitted in Councelles lawfully called, and
before the whole assemblye of Bishops, to dispute with the adversaries:
othersome were not only admitted to teach the people in the Church, but also
very gently invited by the Bishops themselves. And a great sort of them
(no doubt) spedde very well, and deserved no small commendation for their
godly diligen^e. And as touching Disputations, that this was found true in
the Nicene Synod, Nicephorus Callistus declares very plainelye in the eighte
Book, and fourteenth Chapter of his Ecclesiastical History. There are
besides two notable examples set forth in the Tripartite History, the
second Book and third Chapter, the one out of Socrates
Constantinopolitanus, of a certain young manne: the other out of Sozomenus,
of an old man: out of them both it is declared, that by means of the Laity
studious of the holy Scriptures, and modestly propounding certain things, the
pride and subtlety of the Logitians and Philosophers was wonderfully detected
and beaten down. Albeit we cannot dissemble, that they brought more to pass
by the excellency of their faith and prayers, than by the help and
furtheraunce of Learning: in so much, that all their dooyngs may seem rather
to be (after a sort) miraculous, than to proceed of any knowledge.

Furthermore, Lay men skilful of the holy Scriptures, in times paste taught
in Churches, and were chosen to the goue^^emet of the same.
as touching Lay men that have taught publikly in ye Church, there are extant
in Eusebius, book 6. Chap. 15. the words of Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, out
of a certain Epistle written to Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria. I marvel
(says he) that in your letters you will seem to affirm, that it was never
heard or done, that Lay man should dispute, and expound the Scripures in the
Church when the Bishops were present: when as this custom was commonly
received, that if there were found any in any place that could instruct the
brethren in the Church, and comfort the people, they were always entreated of
holy Bishops to handle the Scriptures. So was Euelpius invited of our brother
Neon among them of Larandra, and so was Paulisius of Celsus at Iconiu^, and
Theodorus of Atticus at Synada. And there is no doubt, but that many other
also in other places, if any there were, that could conveniently fulfill the
work of God in word and doctrine: were to the self same end invited of holy
Bishops. Hitherto Alexander of Jerusalem. And that the same thing was every
where drawn into a custom, the council holden in the time of S. Augustine at
Carthage, does not obscurely prove. For thus we read it enacted in the said
Council: A Lay man in the presence of Clearkes, except they require him
thereunto, shall not presume to teach. And this they did, not for that they
accounted it unlawful for Lay men to teach: but for so much as a number of
them were learned, and always fit and ready to teach, they meant to provide:
First, that no man should unadvisedly, when and where he lifted, and
without having regard of duty to the Bishops or Clarks, yea, and peradventure
contrary to their minds inuegled by Heretics, take upon him to teach or
preach: Secondly, that the Clarks should understand themselves to be twitched
(as it were) by the ear, and covertly admonished of their duties, to the
intent they might labor afterward better to execute ye which became them to
do, I mean ye office of preaching, and not willingly post it over unto others:
Lastely, there was good hope, that by such and occasion the learned of the
Laity might be moved, to addicte themselves (sooner than otherwise they
would have done) wholly to the ministry of the Church. And therefore also
after that decree the godly Bishops went forward (as before) to exhort
the Laity to a perpetual study of the holy Scriptures: and as often as the
case so required, called them forth publicly to teach. And that they did so
much the more justly and willingly, by how much the more they considered it
was necessary, that there should be chosen from among the learned Laity (like
as Tertullian shows in his Book Of exhortation to Chastity) such as might
be substituted in the place of the ministers of the Church deceassed. Certes if
it had not bin lawful, to choose some out of the Laity to the Ecclesiastical
gouernemente, the Church should never have seen the most excellent
Bishops, Nectarius at Constantinople, nor Ambrose at Millayne: of whom the
one supplied the Pretorship of the City, if we may credit Rufinus in his
Ecclesiastical History Book. 11. Chap. 21: the other was President of
Millayne, and of all the Country adioining, as Theodoritus reports in his
fourth Book, and sixte Chapter: and (which is not a little to be maruailed at)
the one baptized but a few days before, this other still conuersaunte among
the Catechistes, that is, such as were newly instructed in the principles of
religion. For soothly so long were the Churches every where very well provided
for, as men of all sorts and degrees, gave themselves diligently to the
reading and understanding of the word of God. Whosoever had now openly
exhibited any notable specialtie as well of their godliness of life, as also of
their doctrine and learning, those by the voices and free consents of the
godly, were advanced (as ye would say) by degrees to the dignity of a
Deacon, of a Priest, of a Pastor, or finally of a Bishop. Neither was it any
strange matter at that time, that Churches should be administered of those that
sought by some honest art or trade to get wherewith to sustain their
family, if at the least they were any thing well exercised in the knowledge
of holy Scripture. For why? the Divine Scripture teaches, yea, and the
Ecclesiastical Histories and Canons do prove, that even he also which is
already placed in the government of the Church, may without reproach
exercise some craft whereby he may nourish both himself, and so many as
appertain unto him. The Apostle Paul reports of himself, that since the
time he began to preach the Gospel, oftentimes labored with his own hands
to get things necessary for his living: 2. Corinthians. 11 1 Thessalonians. 2.2. These.
3. Acts. 20. And there is mention made Acts eighteen of Aquila: a man
excellentlye well seen in the holy Scriptures, and by whose direction the
great learned man Apollo was much furthered in the way of salvation, the
same Aquila in the mean time using the craft of Tente making to get his
living by. There is commended Coloss. 4. the minister of the Gospel, and
Physician Luke, like as also by the same art of Physic no few Bishops are
read to have provided for themselves, as Basyll Bishop of Aucyra, Eusebius of
Alexandria, Boazanes of Persia, Theodotus of Laodicea, Cyrus of Alexandria,
Basil the Great. As for Spiridion Bishop of Trimmythus in Cyprus, the
Author of the Tripartite History first Book and tenth Chapter, avouches,
that he was given to the tillage of Land, and keepyng of Cattle. And we
read Distinct. 91. in the Canons of Pelagius, and of the Councelles of
Carthage and Constance, that unto ministers of Churches, taking over small
stipendes or wages, Hushandrye is commended, as most fruitful and
conueniente for liberal natures.

And look how necessary and expediente it was for the Laity, to apply
diligently the reading of the Scriptures, to the intent that Churches (as is
said before) might by their aid be preserved and increased: even so requisite
also was, is and evermore shall be the self same study to the adorning of
Commonweals, to the enlarging of Empires and Dominions, or certainelye to the
winning and adjoining of those peoples to the Christian World, that do now,
for the hatred they bear to Religion, never cease to afflicte our brethren
with wars, murders, invasions, and other infinite calamities.

Some manne peradventure will marvel, and smyle to himself, to hear this:
But to be certain and true that I say, it shall by and by very playnelye
appear. Hearken how and by what means it came oftener than once to pass in
times paste: and thereby learn, that the same may now also in like manner
come in ure. Whereas Bishops and Preachers could never at any time safely
travail to barbarous Nations and Countries a far off, there freely to
preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ: some one notwithstanding of the common
sort, getting his living by his handy labor, or some Souldior, or Physician,
or Merchaunt or Chapman, being led away captive, or happily by chance or
some other occasion, has bin conveyed and carried thither. Some such man
therefore is this, forsomuche as be had before at home perfectly larned the
holy Scriptures, and there withal could very readily speak to the rude and
ignorant, attempted to open the principles of Christian Religion, first to a
few, afterward to more, according as occasion served: and at the length with a
wonderful spirit, grace, and vehemency proceeded so far forth in dooyng the
same, that in the end he moved a number of his hearers, with folden arms (as
they say) to embrace our Religion. And thus comes it to pass sometimes,
that whom neither the care and vigilancie of Bishops, nor the power of Kings
and Princes, nor any force, puissaunce or subtilty whatsoever could possiblye
win or reclayme to our parties, a little knowledge of the word of GOD
appearing euidentlye in some one seely soul of the Laity, has drawn to
our sides, and joined unto us with and indissoluble hand of friendeshippe and
amity.

As touching which point, I have thought good to add famous example out of
Ruffinus written in the tenth Book and ninth Chapter of his Ecclesiastical
History, and likewise out of Theodoretus his first Book, and two and
twentieth Chapter. Frumentius a child beeng trained up in the knowledge of
good letters, and also in the doctrine of godliness, accompanied Meropius a
Tyrian Philosopher into India, where he being taken was driven into a
miserable state and condition. But afterward by some means winnyng favor
and credit, he was brought unto the Court, and there being very well
liked for the doing of many things, he had a principal charge of government
committed unto him. Soon after having gotten opportunity, he adjoined to
himself certain Merchaunts of Rome, by the help of whom he began there to
gather companies together, after the manner of Christians, and with great
courage and sincerity of mind to preach the Gospel unto them. To be short,
through his long and continual exhortations, he brought to pass, that the
inhabitants of all that Country were instructed in the mysteries of our
Religion, and professed with great reverence Jesus Christ to be their only
savior. In the Chapters next and immeddiatly following in the same writers, we
read, That a certain seely Christian woman, whilst being captive among the
Iberians (they are people near unto Fontus, toward the North and the sea
Euxinus) she was grieuouslye tormented with the continual lothsomnesse of the
prison, laboring with hearty prayers unto God and fastings, became shortly
after very famous through her wonderful and very Apostolical virtues.
Especially she was renoumed for the power of working signs and wonders and
besides she taught the chief points of Christian religion with so great a
grace and dexterity, that al might well wonder at it in that sex, but none
follow it or come near unto it. Now as she excelled in both kinds, so she
prevailed in short space so far forth, by her singular diligence and
fidelity, that she brought the king, the Queen, and all their subjects, to
the knowledge of the true God, and of our savior JESUS CHRIST Moreover she
caused temples to be builded, wherein the people might religously meet
together: and procured ambassadors to be sent to the Romayne Emperor that
godly Constantine, to require of him teachers (such as should be meet to
forward so holy a work.) The Emperor having received this message, was
ravished with no less joy and gladness, then if he had gotten by his own
pollicye and puissance, some new kingdoms and unknown provinces to be
adjoined to the Romayne state: and therewithal picking out many chosen men for
the purpose, excelling both in sincerity of life and doctrine, he commanded
them with all speed to hasten thither.

Furthermore Nicephorus Callistus writes in the eight book and five and
thirtith Chapter of his Ecclesiastical History, that by one Gregory, whom
after many injuries, and sundry torments, Ti^idates king of the Armenians
had kept by the space of fourteen years together in a deep and filthy
dungeon, al Armenia was happily drawn to forsake Idolatry, and to worship the
one and eternal GOD in the Faith of JESUS CHRIST. And in the 33. Chapter he
pronounces generally, that the wars which the Romans held with the
Barbarians, especially under the Empire of Gallienus, and thenceforth, gave
oftimes occasion whereby Christian religion was spread abroad far and near:
when as the prisoners, which the Barbarians took of the Romans and carried
home to their houses, became afterward unto them faithful teachers of
wholesome doctrine of Christ.

JOHN Zonaras a Greek writer records, that at what time the Bulgarians
warred continually without ceassing against the Constantinopolitans, it
fortuned that they took a certain noble Damsel: which being eftsoons
brought to Constantinople, profited beyond all men's expectation in good
learning, and in the doctrine of our religion. But when as afterward truce or
peace being concluded on both sides, this said Damsel was returned home
again into her Country, she persuaded the king of Bulgarians, whose sister
she was (although our men knew not so much) to submit himself with all his
people to CHRIST the LORD. This came to pass about the year after our
salvation purchased by Christ 866, what time the sovereignty of
Constantinople was in the hands of Michaell the son of Theophilus.

I had almost ouerskipped, that which Cassiodorus book ten Chapter eight
of his Tripartite History, and Nicephorus Callistus in his book fourteenth
and Chapter eigteene, have left in writing: namely that whilst Isdegardis
reigned among the Persians, there were sent ambassades, for diverse causes,
oftener than at any time before, from the Romans to the Persians, and again
from the Persians to the Romans. Now whilst there went often thither from
the Romans men learned, and very zealous of Christian religion, unto whom
also was twice adjoined Maruthas bishop of Mesopotamia, it was brought to
pass by their modesty, virtue, holiness, and vehement exhortations, that no
small number of the Persians began to reverence our religion, and by little and
little wholly to embrace it: whereupon afterward it was permitted to the
believers to appoint Churches or congregations, and to dedicate for ever
Temples unto Christ. You see therefore, by what means those foreign countries,
contrary to al men's expectation, were set at quiet with our men: and through
the seeds of Christian doctrine sown among barbarous people, how happily our
religion grew up: and in process of time brought forth most joyful fruits.
But the matter could never have come to that pass, if in those captive Lay
men, in Frumentius (I say) the ladde, in the poor seely woman, in the
miserable and desolute Gregory, in the noble Virgin, in the Merchants
traveling through al quarters for traffike, in the Ambassadors notable for
their godly knowledge, and in others of like estate and condition, there had not
bin, before they were transported into those Countries, a mean understanding
of Gods holy mysteries, and therewithal also a certain wonderful dexterity
in expressing the sense and meaning of their minds, where-throughe wild and
barbarous natures might have bin meeked, mollified, and turned. There was no
Christian in those days, The barbarus enemies of Christian religion, ought
sooner by orderly teching of sound doctrine than by force of arms, be won and
united unto us.
but was fully persuaded of this, that he had manfully to labor for his own
part to provide (so much as in him lay) yt the bounds of Christian religion
might be exte^ded and stretched forth to Gods glory. And it was ye common
opinion of all me^, that by the simple exposition of the principles of
Christian doctrine, by Faith, Lowliness, Modesty, by the duties of Love and
Charity a man might more prevail with the barbarous people, than by any other
means beside, whatsoever. And truly so it is indeed. Long, fierce and
bloody wars have Christian Princes foughten in our and in our fathers
remembrance with the cruel Turks, often invasions have they made one into
another borders, horrible slaughters have they committed on both sides, they
have gotten perforce, they have trodden under foot, they have distroyed all
that ever is: But who ever heard, that any Turk was so far forth moved with
these things, that he so much as once thought to forsake his error, and to
embrace our religion? Again: what honor, or what glory has redounded unto
GOD out of these mortal and bloody battles? Where on the other side if so be
we by entreating modestly and wisely of the dignity and certainty of our
religion, should give the^ to understand, yt we sought neither for their goods,
nor their Castles, nor their Cities, but ye health and safety of their souls:
I suppose that we should sooner this way come to a glorious victory, and such
as would be acceptable eue^ to those that were overcome, than if we should
perpetuallye strive with them by the doubtefull dint of sword. It falls not
out always well on our sides, when we indeauor to drive away force perforce,
craft with craft, and (as it is said in the proverb) one nail with another.
It behooves a wise man first to try all things, before he fall to they hazard
of battle. But especially, when the case concerns the affairs of religion,
or the salvation of souls, then of necessity must swords give place to
doctrine, rage to reason, cruelty to humanity, wars to peace.

In the Counsel holden at Vienna, a City of Gallia Narbonensis, in the year
1310. it was ordained, that in all ye noblest universities of Europe, th^re
should be maintained professors of the Arabicke tongue, which tongue it is
certain that the Turks do use in their Ceremonies: and this cannot I
construe to be done for any other cause or consideration, than that our
Countrymen might be provided and enstructed aforehande to common and treat
at one time or other with the Turks, especially in the cause of religion. But
it belongs not to this place, to search over busily, how the Turks, being
the sworn enemies of our religion, may be reduced to a better mind, and
conjoined with us in rites and doctrine. It shall be good rather to speak unto
those that do proudely challendge to themselves the surname of Christians: and
yet in the mean time of nothing are less careful all their life long, than
of the knowledge of CHRIST out of the holy Scriptures. Gladly therefore would
I learn of you, what minds ye would be off, what advice ye would take, if at
any time being held Captive under the yoke of the Turks, ye should be
driven to such a straight, as that ye should be suffered neither to have any
books, nor yet to hear any Christian preachers? Truly I pray unto GOD, that
he would vouchsafe to withholde so great a mischief from the necks of all
Christians: nevertheless seeing there is none of us all, that ought to stand
in fear of the same, or not much unlike misfortune and distress: there is
good cause why every man should at the least in thought consider and devise
with himself, what he would do, if at any time he were in that estate. Thou
therefore being driven into miserable bondage, and percha^ce fast fettered in
yrons, if thou should hear daily villainous opprobries vomited out against
ye sacred name of CHRIST: if thou should hear all the parts of our religion
to be shamefullye entreated and misused with tauntes and mockes: if sundry
arguments should daily be objected to carry thee away from godly sincerity: if
thou should continually be commpelled to see, hear, and do those things
that are altogether unmeet for Christians, that is to say, for Godly and
virtuous minds: tell me, I pray thee, how and by what means would thou then
confirm and establishe thy heart in Faith, how any by what means would
thou be comforted in the midst of so many temptations, that from thy
childhode never learned any thing at all out of the Books of the Prophets
and Apostles, that might help thee thereunto? I am sure and certain,
whosoever will weigh and consider these things vprightely (as is meet) he
shall be enforced to confess, that in very deed there is nothing more
miserable, than a Christian man, oppressed and consumed (in a manner) with
such anguishes both of body and mind, and all because he is utterly destitute
of all solace and comfort of GODS word. For as much therefore as it is very
plain and evident, that the diligence of Lay men in learning the holy
Scriptures, is very requisite and necessary as well to the conservation of
the succession of ministers in Churches, as also most profitable and commodious
to the adorning of Commonweals, and to the amplifying or rather pacifying of
Kingdoms and Empires. Let all both Kings and Prelates not without good cause
in a common Council, determine and declare, that all Christians without
exception, of what estate or condition soever they be, ought so long time to be
instructed in the holy Scriptures, as they may atteyne at the least some
indifferent knowledge of the articles of our Religion, and become able (after a
sort) to declare the same unto others.

And would to God that all good men, The very consideration of the times
present, does require, that all should apply themselves to the study of the
holy Scriptures.
and especially those that are in authority above the rest, would sufficiently
consider how necessary it were for them, oftentimes to consult and deliberate
about this matter. No man is ignorant, how in certain ages past, Churches were
possessed of unlearned ideotes, and of me^ without all religion, such (for the
most part) as have lepped out of Kings and Bishops Courts, Pantries,
Buttries, wrestling places, banqueting houses, nourceries, by whose means the
pure doctrine of the Gospel, yea all the whole order of preaching, has bin
utterly banished out of holy assemblies: neither did they busy themselves
about any thing else, save the stinking traditions of men, and a number of
cold ceremonies: whereof in some there was a great deal more superstition, I
had almost said sacrilege, than was in times past in the fond obseruatio^s of
ye Heathen. And as for the Schools themselves, what should a man have found in
them, but ugly rudeness, holding the highest room together with unsavory, and
yet subtle sophistry? Again, the Roman Empire has with shame enough for
ye space of these 4. C. years, bin thrust out of joint, shaken, and torn in
sunder, and ye partly by the Turks, who taking occasion by our sins, have
purloined from us now these provinces, now those, partly by Christian Princes
themselves, through whose unquenchable discordes, the sinews of ye Christian
common weal, have bin cut asunder, and the whole strength thereof utterly
wasted and consumed, to speak nothing in the mean time of a million of
mischiefs brought into Europe by the ambition and pride of certain Bishops.
To be short, such has of long time bin ye state of things among Christians, as
we read to have bin among the Jews, when they were oppressed with ye hard
yoke of Jeroboam, Achab, Manasses, the Kings of Babylon, and such like: for
why? over and besides most cruel wars, innumerable slaughters, and common
calamities, not to be named, the sincere worship of the true GOD, has bin
quite and clean abolished, superstitions have borne the greatest sway,
faithful teachers have bin flayne, or thrust out of their places, finally, the
very Books of holy Scripture themselves have bin utterly lost: and rare in
very deed was that man to be found, that thought any better of Religion,
than did godless Diagoras. For soothly so it is, when it pleases GOD to
punish barbarous and faithless men, he strippeth them stark naked (as a man
would say) and depriueth them of all power: But when he determines to punish
his own those people, whether they be of the Jews or Gentiles, he bereaueth
them of the noble and precious treasure of his word: which being once taken
away, it cannot be chosen, but that infinite dangers must straight and
immediately follow after. Now therefore if we cannot be content to have our
Churches reformed and rightlye ordered, if we covet to have our schools brought
into a good frame, if we wish with our hearts to see all the parts of our
Common weal to flourish and recover their former beauty, if we ^ong
unfeignedly to have those kings and peoples recon^led and unite unto us that are
hitherto severed from (...) in the cause of Religion: if we desire to have a
certain happy world, so far forth (I mean) as appertains to the
abundance of spiritual benefits, such a one perhaps as happened for a while
under Solomon, Josias, Ezechias, Ezra, etc. then the presentest help and
furtherance to the performaunce of all these things will be even this, namely,
if we apply our studies and cares to the continual reading and searching of the
holy Scriptures. And we see verily, God be thanked, ple^tiful matter and
manifold furniture, every where provided and prepared for this purpose: there
want not helps and sundry commodities, again, there are set up in all places
pillars, and beacons, to show us the right way, wherein if we have lust to
walk, we shall not hardly come to the wished mark.

The volumes of the holy Scriptures, are none otherwise than they were in times
paste under king Josias, 2. King. 22. or under Duke Ezra, Nehemias 8. delivered
again out of the dungion of darkness: yea and GOD thrusts and drives
forth into all places notable teachers, which do faithfully and sincerely
interpret his word: the brightness whereof so far forth now every where
shyneth and glistereth, that no mortal creature can bring for excuse, that he
has not seen (at ye least) some sparks or beams thereof. Where these
therefore and such like foundations are once laid, where aids and helps of
more sorts than one do voluntarily offer themselves: what cause is there, why
we should not make accounte of far better things? Certain it is, that if we
being at any time to deal in this matter, with good agreement of minds, and
with our forces and strengthes joined together, GOD also for his part, will
aid and assiste us more than we can ask or desire.

But behold, whilst we suppose our discourse to have some weight in it, and
are in good hope to accomplish something to GODS glory? suddenly and at
adventure certain (as they seem) pleasant and merry conceyted fellows, come
me forth, and (not without floutes and scoffs) laugh us to scorn, and clappe
their hands at us, yea and with one only reason as with the pushe of a most
forceable Ram, or rather as with the undermining of a trenche in the ground,
take upon them to throw down and subvert, whatsoever has of us hitherto
been builded up. Out upon thee, say they, with thy Bybles. Think thou that
all are called to be divines? As for us, we are neither prelates nor Bishops,
we are neither pastors, Priests, nor Deacons: and (to say the truth) neither
is it needful, nor yet possible, that all should be such: what do thou
tell us therefore of these things, which are lay men? To those that have vowed
themselves to the service of the Church, sing thou this song: unto whom we
grant that this burden does belong, namely that they should perpetually be
occupied about inward and spiritual affairs: but as for our parts, it is
requisite for many causes, that we should be conuersaunte in civil and
outward businesses, neither (in very deed) can we otherwise choose. For why,
one man is a King, another a Prince some other a noble man or a Courtier:
again, this man is Judge, a Consul, a Praetor, a Souldior: that man a Lawyer,
a Physician: and finally, some it behooves to be Merchants, Artificers,
Husbandmen, etc. and would thou have all these kinds of men to stand (as
it were) bound to the holy Scriptures? No man is ignorante, but like as it
is necessary among Christians that a diversity of states should be had, so
also that diverse and sundry duties and actions do belong unto every one. And
of a great number so many and troublesome are the trades and kinds of dealing,
that they require the whole man to the discharging of them. No man knows not,
that those have need of great forecaste, counsel, advice, industry,
painestakyng, and much time, that do daily apply themselves to the practices
of Peace and War, to Marchaundize, to Handicraftes, and such like, and that
do therewithal continually sustain both themselves and their families.
Wherefore, to go about (as ye would say) by a common decree made, so drive
all the Laity to the reading and ensearching of the holy Scriptures, seems
to be a thing very absurd and inconvenient: Yea, rather necessity it self
requires, that all of them should be holden excused. The answer.
But as this excuse is known to be frequent and common, so will I bring to
pass, that every man shall perceive it to be as weak and vain. As often as
exhortations are made unto virtuous dealying, and unto all manner of good
actions of life and conversation, this truly is the first crinke and starting
hole, that the greatest part of men are accustomed to seek. But Chrisost, in
his homily. 21, upon Genes. shows not in very manny words in deed, yet such
as are grave and waightye, that all lettes and impedimentes whatsoever, are of
them pretended, in vain, that do not with their good wills perform any thing
belonging to their duetyes. For where as the Scriptured Genesis 5. and 6.
reports, that Enoch and Noe being very old, begat sons and daughters,
and yet notwithstanding worshipped GOD aright, and were accepted of GOD, he in
good time adds as follows: Let us pretend neither the government of house,
neither the charge of wife and children, nor yet any other thing beside, as
matters sufficient to excuse our negligente and slothful life. Neither let
us allege those cold words, and say: I am a worldlyng, and have a wife,
and charge of children, as many are wont to say, if at any time we exhort
them, to take upon them some virtuous labors, or to apply themselves to the
reading of the holy Scriptures. This is no part of my charge, saiste thou.
What, have I forsaken the world? Am I become a Monk? What sayste thou O man?
Is it the duty alonely of Monks, to please GOD? GOD would have all men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth, and that Virtue should
be neglected of no man. For hear how he speaks by the Prophet: I will not
the death of a sinner, but that he should be converted, and live. Was it a
let or hinderaunce I pray you, to this just man (he speaks of Noe) to have
the company of a wife, or the charge of children? I beseech you therefore, that
we deceive not our selves, but by how much the more we are entangled in these
cares, by so much the more let us provide remedies by reading of the holy
Scriptures There follows more to the same effect, but because I covet to be
brief, I have thought good to omit it. He entreats also more at large
touching ye self same matter, in his 3. homily of Lazarus and the rich man.

And I know not, whether those words of his as they are generally spoken,
will satisfye all men, or no. For it is a very hard matter, to stop the
mouths of curious and obstinate men with a short and general kind of speech:
and there will some complain peradventure such especially as desire to seem
sharp witted beyond the rest, that we have not answered to every member of
their objection. Wherefore I suppose it will be grately to the purpose, if I
divide the objection aforegoing as it were into parts, and speak somewhat more
exactly of every of them in order.

I will grant them therefore first and foremost: yea and I will reckon up many
causes also, for the which it shall be necessary that so many as have addicted
themselves to the Ecclesiastical function, should before all other Christians
apply their diligence to the understanding of the mysteries of the holy
Scriptures.

Secondly I will prove very plainly, that for the rest which they call Laity,
it is by no means lawful, to cast from them the self same study: but rather
as it behooves the states of men to be divided, so there is prescribed to every
one in the holy Scriptures a certain rule of godly living: and that those
alone finally do substantially perform their duties, that have thoroughly
learned out of the same scriptures how to fear and love GOD, and how to behave
themselves in all the actions and dealings.

Thirdlye I will add to the rest certain reasons which may move the
conscience of every one to confess, that there is no man, that makes any at
least to Christian Religion, that can live altogether destitute and ignorant of
the Truth and Doctrine contained in the Scriptures. Which things being thus
once declared, may stand the godly in great stead, to confute other
objections also, if any chance to be made and put forth.

Therefore they do greatly err, It behooves the Ministers of the Church to be
exercised in the holy Scriptures above all other.
and abuse (contrary to our meaning) (all that has of us hitherto been said,
which suppose, that any, that at leastwise acknowledge themselves to be
Christians, are excepted from the study and reading of the holy Scriptures.)
But of all other we do least of al exclude them, that prepare themselves to
the Ministry of the Church, or that are already conuersaunte in it. For why,
that of these is first and chiefly required the exact knowledge of Gods holy
will, I take it to be so apparante unto all men, as that it needs not once to
be touched of us. For who knows not, that it is the duty of a faithful
Sheepehearde, to procure all things that are available to the feeding and
preservation of the sheep of his fold, whether we have regard to the
pastures, or waters, or shadowings, or curings of diseases, or defense against
Wolves or any such like thing else beside: and that it behooves the father or
goodman of the house to go before all his family in wisdom and discreation
in providing and disposing of things necessary: and that the Schoolemayster
ought to be better learned than his Scholars, and to appoint unto them a form
or methood of Doctrine: and finally, that the Emperor or Captain of an
haste should excel in warlike knowledge al his souldyors fighting under his
standerd? Herevppon forsooth it follows, that those also which are placed
over the Church, if they covet wholsomly to feed the minds of the people
committed to their charge, carefully to govern them, truly to teach them,
directly to bring them to salvation, ought to be far better seen in the
doctrine of the holy Scriptures, than any other of the common sort. If any man
yet doubts let him believe God, who in Leuitic. 10. and in other places
more, gave commandment to the Priests and Levites, that they should
faithfully teach the people the Law and Statutes which he had delivered
unto them. Let him hear Malachy the Prophet, in his second Chapter, saying:
The Priests lips shall keep Knowledge, and they shall require the Law at
his mouth. Let him credit Christ, who calls the teachers of the Gospel,
the Light of the world, and the Salt of the earth. Let him credit the
Apostle Paul, who would have every Bishop and Minister of the Church to be
such a one, as were Didacticos, that is to say, apt to teach: as had a
form and pattern of wholesome Doctrine, as could rightly cut and divide
the word of Truth: as were able to hold fast the Word which is according
to Doctrine, and to exhort by sound Knowledge, and convince the
gaine-speakers. 1. Tim. 3.2. Tim. 1. and 2. Chapter and unto Tit. 1. for
undoubtedly as it stands other in hand to hear and learn the word of God: so
is it the chief part and duty of those ye have the oversight of Churches, to
expound and teach the same, and that not slightly, and for fashions sake, but
learnedly, gravely, and so as many may reap profit thereby.

And therefore very subtly have they abused the World, that with duckyng
down their heads, and with their eyes, The Ecclesiastical Ministry
consists not in songs, or cold ceremonies.
countenance, voice and gesture, wholly set to semble and dissemble have not
been ashamed to auouche, that the Ecclesiastical Ministry consists only
in the bare recital of certain Psalms, Hymns, Proses, and that written in a
tongue known to very few, and scarce also to the Singers themselves: again,
in the imitation of certain ceremonies, which man's wisdom without the warrant
of GODS word has invented one after an other, and do no whit avail, either
to the moving of men's minds, or to the establishing of any order or decency.
For now during certain ages men have thought ye whole substance of Religion
forsooth, to stand in these two things, Singings I say not understood, and
cold ceremonies: yea, and those Churches to be very well ordered, wherein even
these alone have with a cunning kind of Hypocrisy bin practiced of their
craftsmaisters. Truly, it is to he maruailed, that any men, I say not
excellent and learned, but even so much as of ye common sort, could be
brought to that pass, namely, to believe those deceivers: when in the mean
time they perceived in very deed that all the sincere worshipping of GOD,
which, ^s Christ and his Apostles have prescribed, consists in true
invocation and prayer, and in the pure preaching of the Gospel, and
dispensation of ye Sacrements, have utterly in a manner thorough the prevailing
of those shrill squeakings and dumb ceremonies, bin cast out of Churches, and
suppressed. For how could it otherwise be, but that the handling of the
Scriptures being ouce driven out of Churches and Congregations, the studies
likewise of good letters in the Schools, should utterly fall down and
decay? For what man would then seem to bestow his travel in sundry
disciplines, and especially in the exercises of holy Scripture, or take any
long and great pains in the Schools of Learning, when he smells, that
there will be no public use thereof, and foreseeth, that no manner of rewards
shall be allotted to his labors in Churches? I appeal to the testimonies of
a great number of good men, which can remember, that in Churches very
great and notable there have not been scarce four Sermons throughoute the
whole year made unto the people: and yet if there happened to be any, it was
spente for the most part, either in a fruitelesse narration of Miracles, and
those commonly false, or else in some subtle disputation, savoring more of
Aristotle, than of the Prophets and Apostles. Verily, I remember that I heard
ouce in France one being old and hoareheaded, and a man of singular modesty,
tell and report, that he was declared Doctor of Divinity in the Sorbon School
at Paru, when as he had never in all his life read over so much as three
Chapiters of the holy Bible: and further, that he was afterward the Pastor of
no obscure Church: and although he daily descanted upon the hundredth and
nineteenth Psalm, wherein is wonderfully commended the study, efficacy and
use of Gods word: and here and there also be repeated these words, In the
law of the Lord will I meditate day and night, yet notwithstanding that it
never came into his mind one whit to peruse the Books of holy Scripture with
a desire of understanding the truth, nor never made also any Sermon out of the
Scriptures to the people. Which things he not without an honest kind of
shame, calling to remembrance, both bewailed the unhappiness of the time
past, and also complained of the shameful ignorance of the men of his coat
and calling. Yea, and moreover in diverse Countries where I have travailed, I
have seen many Priests (as my manner is in every place to inquire diligently
of the state of Churches) which when they were utterly void of learning, and
very Drones had no Church, wherein they might lawfully minister: But out of
their Masses (as they call them) which they being hired, daily said, they
sucked out no small gain and advantage, and sustained themselves in their
filthy idleness. Furthermore we see it every where commonly received, not by
custom, but as ye would say by a law established, that Priests are made
without choice, no more, as they were in times past, to teach, but only to
say Mass. As who should say forsooth this way do the holy Bishops follow the
holy Cannons, which forbid that without a title (for so they speak) any man
should be ordered: Distinction 70. C. Neminem and Sanctorum Canonum, etc.
Therefore as touching the Doctrine of Religion, there is among them no further
question: but it may be said as Jerome speaks, expounding the thirteenth
Chapter of Ezechiel, that for the sins of men the word of GOD is utterly
lost, and that grievous calamity sent down into the world, that GOD by the
Prophet Amos Cap. 8 threatens, namely, a cruel hunger, thirste, and scarcity
of hearing the word of GOD. The other inconveniences which have flowed out
of that fountain, to wit, the false persuasion of the Ministry to consiste
in bare Songs and Ceremonies, I cease to make any further reckening of.

But to proceed, where Bishops do not provide that the Scriptures be
continually readde and expounded in Churches, and yet give orders to a great
number of such, as they know have neither bestowed any time before in
studying the holy Scriptures, neither can or will do hereafter: I leave it to
be considered of every man, whether such either Bishops, or Priests, can
rightly challenge to themselves the power Ecclesiastical and kayes of the
kingdom of Heaven, as granted unto them of God or no. We have learned forsooth
out of the Sermons of Christ and the Apostles, that there is a double power of
the Churches, or that there be two kayes: the one of Doctrine, which
consists in teaching, that is to say in interpreting the Scriptures, and
administration of the Sacraments which are annexed to the word, and even a
certain portion of the word, like as in very deed they are acomplished by
the word: the other is prepared to give judgment, and to bind and loose. But
now how shall he ^^^^ly teach in the Church, all the chief points of
Christian Doctrine out of the Law and the Gospel? How again shall be wisely
give sentence, as well of sins, for which the obstinate must be bound, as
also of faith and repentance, for the witnessing whereof, it behooves them to
be loosed that were bound, which never exercised himself in the monumentes of
the Prophets and Apostles, neither intends at any time to begin? Certesse
that no keys of Christ's Church are committed to unlearned Priests, it is
well proved by the judgment of those Prelates, that over and besides that they
have deputed a good part of the rabblement of Priests only, as I said, to
the execution of Masserites, and Ceremonies, have moreover devised certain
cases, which they name Reserved, whereof some they will have referred to the
Bishops only of every Church, othersome only and alone to the Bishop of Rome.
Now there should be no need to trudge for counsel to the higher Prelates, if
so be they deemed the Priests, which themselves had made, fit to give
judgment of matters incident, and sufficiently furnished to bind and lose. But
that which the authors of reserved cases have openly protested touching
certain Priests, the same may we interpret worthily to be understood of all
in general, whether they be Bishops or Priests, that are found void and
destitute of all furniture of learning. Hereby then we shall be enforced to
suspect, that many Churches have of long time wanted, and bin altogether
without keys. For the understanding and interpretation of the Scriptures,
being once lost, it could not be chosen, but that the keys must needs have
bin lost also. And in what state the house is, that is neither opened nor
shut at any time with keys, but having as ye would say, the locks and
doors broken all to fitters, stands on every side, and always, and to every
one that comes wide open: in the very same state we suppose the Churches to
have bin, and to be, in which is had no consideration at all of the handling
of the holy Scriptures. But we shall have less cause to maruayle that Priests
have not hitherto bin careful of receiving the true keys, if in case we
consider that a number of them have not been accustomed to go in and out by the
door, but by some other way, and that there have appeared in them more lively
marks of hirelings, than of any true Shepheardes. It remains therefore,
that whosoever having gotten any dignity in the Church of God, will also
purchase to himself credit and authority, and be acknowledged in very deed
for a true Shepherd, having interest in the keys and skill to use them
arighte, do excel and surmount others in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures.

Further, The Minister ignorant of the holy Scriptures, can not convince false
opinions.
there may at all times fall out very many affairs, that do require no
small reading and experience of the holy Scriptures. How would thou behave
thy self I pray thee, if there should at any time any false opinions,
either by Philosophers, or by wise men of the world, or by Heretics, begin
to be scattered among the people? Shall it not be thy part and duty
stoutely, even out of the Pulpet, to confute them? Thou hopest perhaps that
all things are safe enough where thou live, and that thou need not
greatelye to fear any such danger. But take heed thou be not deceived. It
is a wise man's part, even in the time of peace, to be thynking of War.
But what if any doubts of Doctrine should rise in a private man, whom
should he rather go unto, than unto thee his Shephearde and teacher? And
how would thou assuage the tempests lurking in his mind, and cause him to
be caulme and quiet, if thou could not mitigate all things with the
prosperous winds, and even with the pleasant gales of the Scriptures? Again,
what if the Magistrate himself should at any time reguire, or command thee,
that thou would in his presence, and happily before an honorable assembly of
Counselors, as it comes to pass now and then, lovingly confer, or
dispute wih some man fallen into a pernicious error? Doubtless, if in this
case thou can not show thy self to be Didacticon, that is to say, apt to
teach, and be able to stop the mouths of the gaynespeakers, thou shall by
and by be confounded to thy great shame, and all will esteem thee as a fool
and ydeote. To let pass in the mean time, that thou by thy want of knowledge
privily give occasion of thinking, that he, which was supposed to err,
inasmuch as thou art not able to confute him, avouches nothing but the truth.
Which thing, if it come to pass, not only he alone will persevere in his
opinion, but the rest also will begin to join with him, to subscribe, and
maynteyne the same.

Moreover, often times the state of Churches does require, The Minister that is
without the knowledge of the Scriptures, can not wisely reprove sin.
that thou should openly inueigh against the sins, that the people for
the time are fallen into. And here have thou need of heedefull rebukements, of
cunning amplifications, of crimes, of grave threatenings, of punishments, of
sharp exhortations to repentance, and other furniture of like sort. For it is
to be feared, if thou pourest forth nothing else but thine own words, and
manassing speeches, that thou shalt not only not bring them to amendment of
life, but also hardlye persuade them, to account those things for vices, which
are committed by wicked men. Therefore to restreyne and reduce men to a better
trade of life and conversation, it shall be requisite for thee to use the
fires, hammers, swords of the Prophets and Apostles, as fit and peculiar
instruments for the same purpose. The word of the Lord is sa a fire, says God
himself in Jeremy Chap 23. and like unto a hammer that breaks the hard
rock: It is a Sword, Ephesians. 6. Yea, it is of greater force to enter, than any
two edged Sword, as witnesses the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. He
therefore that has no skill aptly to leue^, shake, and throw these weapons of
the word of GOD, from the Pulpet into men's hearts and minds, in vain shall he
take upon him to subdue and cut off the sins of the people.

Furthermore, The Minister that is ignorant of the Scriptures, can not confer
with others of godliness and piety.
sometimes he that has the oversight of the Church, is invited of learned men
dwelling near unto him, to talk and confer: sometimes also it falls out
that strangers coming far off, or Ambassadors, or other, do visit him, and
crave some question to be declared of him, or require his counsel and help in
some matter: perchance also they call him for honors sake to dinner, or
supper: to be short, now and then learned men come together for other causes,
mingling their communication with sober and holy talk, as touching matters of
Divinity, which partly is applied to the understanding of the holy
Scriptures, partly to the stablishing of the wavering conscience. Now if in
these and such like meetings, the Pastor of the Church shall carry only the
visor of a dumb personage, or if he do any thing, shall only puff for pain,
sweat, wax pale, and be ashamed, shall he not, I pray thee, discredit the
whole order Ecclesiastical? And truly, look how commendable a thing it is
for lay men handsomely and comely to reason of divine matters: so shameful a
thing is it, for him that should be a teacher of the Church, not to be able
aptely to common of any thing out of the Scriptures.

What shall we say to this moreover? that in many Churches the order is derided
from the ancient institution as well of the Romayne as Constantinopolitan
Church, as witnesses Cassiodorus in the 9. Book and 35. Chap. of his
Tripartite History, The Minister can give no counsel to careful consciences,
that is not conversant in the Scriptures.
although in very deed more necessary for those times, than for ours in
these days, that so many as come to the holy Table of the Lord, do confess
and bewail their sins to the Ministers of the Church, and require comfort
and absolution by the word of GOD. They that can not sufficiently try and
examine themselves, according to the precept of the Apostle, had need to pour
forth their secrets into the bosom of their Pastor, to disclose their
ignorance, and so long to be instructed and taught, till all doubtfulnesse and
perturbation be rooted out of their conscience. But what should the good Pastor
do in this behalf, when of the good questions and demands propounded, he can
avouch nothing more certaynely, than if they had never bin heard of before?
Neither doubtless are we in hand here with flimflammes (as they say) and
matters of no value, but even with such, as upon which depends the eternal
salvation or destruction of souls. So far forth for the most part, as
pertaining to this point, lies it in thee, that many either obtain
salvation, or else utterly perish: whereof the one verily comes to pass,
when thou art able by the help of GODS word to fortifye men's minds: the
other, when thou art not able so to do.

But go too, The Minister that he may be able to comfort the afflicted, must of
necessity have experience in the Scriptures.
to whom, I pray you, does it more apperteyne, to lift up weak and feeble
consciences, to sustain the sick and oppressed for any manner of cause, with
holy comfortes and consolations, than to the Minister of the Church? who is
counted as a common parent of men's minds, and as Saint James seems to
signify, a Physician also, which laboring to GOD in Prayer, will endeavor to
help in the time of need. And that consolations are proper and peculiar to the
holy Scriptures, it is sufficiently plain and evident, by the testimony of
S. Paul to the Romans 15. Commonly also and for the most part, the whole
multitude stands in need of comfortable Sermons, to the intent it may
persist and go forward in patience, faith, and hope: as for example, when war,
beseegeme^t, tumults, fires, floods, famine, pestilence, or other contagious
sicknesses, perils by Heretics, cruelty of Tirants, or other strange
calamities, do on every side oppress, and in a manner destroy Churches and
Commonweals. But much more often do private me^ (as in deed infinite are ye
kinds of temptations and dangers, wherinto we wretched creatures are always
ready to fall) require the easementes of comfort and consolation. Therefore the
Minister of the Church shall have in a readiness, to all events and purposes,
great store of co^solatio^s out of ye Scriptures: unless he will be content to
hear his own doom, namely, that he utterly forsakes, and even betrayeth a
great number of men, terrified and grieved with the burden of their sins,
and that even then when they have most of all need of his help, and so dryueth
them to utter impacience: and from impacience they are carried headlong into
fury, from fury into horrible mischiefs, which they commit either upon
themselves, or upon some others: after mischeuous acts they incur the blotte
of infamy, from infamy they fall finally into desperation, which is the most
unhappy winding up of al miseries, ending in everlasting damnation. Now if any
through ignorance of ye holy Scriptures shall become the author of so great
mischiefs unto others, think thou ye he ca^ be able to give account unto
GOD of ye charge committed unto him.

Verily I confess with all my heart, that there is great dignity and true
glory attributed, as in deed it ought, to the Ecclesiastical office: but on
this condit^o^, that so many as are placed in it, be found skilfu^^ in the
holy Scriptures. The honor comes not of the persons, To have the name of the
Ministry without the substance of it, is an absurd thing.
but of the functions. For what is it to have the name and title of a thing,
without the thing it self? As for those (I mean names and titles) any
Bishop or Suffragan can easily give at his pleasure, who has himself
peradventure of late boughte with a great sum the vain title of a
Bishopric, lying in the further part of all Asia. But undoubtedly, as
touching the thing it self, he can no more give that, than can the maker of a
Play or Interlude, who whilst he is busy in setting forth of a Comedy or
Tragedy, appoynteth to this man for the while the person of a King, to that
man of a Prince, to another of a Judge, in the Theater, and yet that any one of
these should at any time be advanced publicly to so high a degree of honor,
he can by no means bring to pass. If so be then thou have nothing else save
the idle name of a Pastor, They that can not perform the office of the
Ministry, must not reap the fruits of it.
and art in very deed far distant from the thing it self, with what face
dare thou be so bold, as to gather the fruits not due, but to those that do
faithfully execute their office? Who has authorized thee to reap corporal
things, that by reason thou art ignorante of the Scriptures, can not sow
spiritual things? Why will thou milk or sheare the Sheep that thou have not
fed? It is commonly said, If thou will needs reap the gain, then must
thou needs also take the pain. Whosoever desires to have the guerdons of
honor allowed him, it is right and reason yt he sustain also the difficulties
of ye burden. Which thing seeing it is so, thou ought to judge, yt thou
can by no means receive tithes, first fruits, oblatio^s, and other duties,
by what name and title soever they be called, if being placed in ye ministry
of ye word, thou do not labor and take pains in ye word. They ye receive
wages, meat and drink, and apparel of noble me^, do know very well, and
profess, yt those things are bestowed upon them, to the intent they should
every moment be in a readiness to accomplish the things that are commanded
them to do: and truly they brag not a little, albeit they endure sometimes
labors very full of dangers, that they are entertained into the favor and
protection of so honorable personages, and in that behalf think themselves to
be in very happy and fortunate estate. After the same sort so often as thou
put on thy apparel, take thy meat, receyuest tithes or other things
into thine house, thou ought to think, and rejoice with thy self, that all
these things do happen unto thee for and in consideration of thy diligent
study bestowed in the holy Scriptures. As often likewise as any honor or
dignity do befall thee, thou ought to consider with thy self, that that
chiefly comes to pass by reason of thy knowledge of the holy Scriptures, in
respect whereof thou art advanced to the government of the Church, and by
the direction only whereof thou art able to discharge thine office arighte.
Where, The Ministers that are unskillful of the Scriptures ought to be
removed from their places.
if at length thou feel thy self to be altogether unfit for the office of
teaching the word of GOD: my counsel is, that thou rather give over the
Ecclesiastical function, than to receive the fruits that thou deseruest not.
For this is the very commandment of GOD himself, having grievous
threatenings joined with it against all those that will not subscribe
thereunto. For why, the Prophet Osee in his fourth Chapter, after he had
complained, that there was neither Truth, nor Honesty, nor knowledge of GOD
left upon earth, turning to the Priests and Prophets says: My people be
cut down, because they are without Knowledge: and forasmuch as thou haste
refused knowledge, I have also refused thee, that thou should not be my
Priest. In which place many things are spoken to the same effect. Jeremy
Chap. 23. calls the ministers of the Church, which are ignoraunte and
negligent in the word of GOD, and which in stead of the word do obtrude
unto the people their own fond and fantastical dreams, burdens that must
be cast away from the presence of the Lord. In Ezechiel Chap. 22. and 44. the
Lord requires such to be Ministers of the Temple, as among other things can
teach also the people, what difference there is betwyxte Holy and Profane:
those that cannot so do, he utterly excludes, and will have them to be marked
with a perpetual blotte of infamy and shame. And like as the Lord does
greatelye commend Malach. 2. the Levites and Priests, from whose mouth is
heard the exposition of the Law: even so on the other side, so many as cannot
perform that thing, but become rather occasions to ye people of erring and
straying from ye right way, he utterly discrediteth and makes the^odious unto
al And when as about the same time Ezra and Nehemias after the return out of
the captivity of Babylon, had ordained a Church and Common weal, they
prohibited so long the Levites from eating of the Sanctum Sanctorum, that is,
the holiest of all, until there arose a Priest with Vrim and Thummim, that is
to say, as the LXX. Interpreters have translated it Exodus 28. The declaration
or manifestation of the Truth: except some peradventure had rather call Vrim
simply a Brightness or Cleerenesse: and Thummim Innocence, Integrity,
Perfection. Besides all this, the Prelates of the Christian Churches not
intending to bear with so great a reproach of ignorance and blindness, have
put forth diverse and sundry Cannons, whereby they give commandment, that
such as are chosen to the government of the Church, in case they be found not
sufficiently learned, and especially ignorante of the holy Scriptures, should
be remeued from their place and dignity. There are extante, over and beside
the Cannons of general Councelles, sundry prescriptes of Bishops sentences
also, and resolutions of certain of the fathers, as may appear Distinction.
36.37.38. again, in the Decretalles as touching the election and power of the
elected, as touching the age, and quality of those that are to receive orders.

The Histories in like manner, and Epistles of the Bishops do testifye, that
some have now and then bin deposed from the Ecclesiastical Ministry, among
whom was the Bishop of Catina, deposed by Honorius the third, of whom we
may read in the Decretals. Can. Quamuis multa. And unless that even in these
our days also that laudable custom of excluding unfit and unable Ministers,
may (as it were) after long banishement be reduced into our Churches, it is
not likely, that their authority can any long time continue in safety. Every
unlearned ydeot do now offer themselves to the Ministry, and are admitted
without any difference, no lawful trial being had before of their profyting
in Divine knowledge: and being once admitted, they then think that they are
cock sure (as they say) and even conclude with themselves, that they can
never afterward be removed. By which reasons and consideration it is too too
evident, that they are both hardened in slothfulness, They do most
grieuo^sly offend, which being placed in the Ecclesiastical Ministry do
still neglect the holy Scripture
and in contempt (as ye would say) of all good studies and exercises, and
also enboldened to atttempt and commit any evil and disorder whatsoever,
though never so shameful and desperate.

And certes I do not alittle marvel oftetimes with my self, that no
Ministers of Churches (in a manner) can with so many reasons hitherto
aleadged, ^ee rouzed up and provoked to the love and practice of the holy
Scriptures. They have ye manifest precepts of GOD, they have the exhortations,
promises, threatenings, of the Prophets and Apostles: they have the decrees
published in councelles by Bishops. Moreover, they see and perceive, that
they are contemned and derided of all men for their ignorance: they see that
they are troubled and ouercrowed of Lay men and Heretics which do obiecte
for themselves the Scriptures, but for the most part wickedly wrested: they
see a number of Churches utterly decayed, and to be without possibility of
any repayring or amending, except sound Doctrine be restored again to her
former purity: they see that they cannot give a fit answer to those that
ask a question, and require any counsel or comfort at their hands: they
see finallye, that they can by no means perform the things that pertayne to
their office and calling, so long as they are destitute of the knowledge of the
Prophetical and Apostolic doctrine. I say nothing all this while as touching
the opportunity of learning: which now by the wonderful goodness of GOD, is
offered every where in great measure. For GOD has vouchsafed to raise up
(as a man would say) from Hell, the studies of good Arts and Disciplines,
which were before even as good as dead, and of long time utterly buried:
barbarous Sophistry, and vain iangling subtilties do no more keep a quoyle in
the Schools, as tofore they have done: again, in many places the studies and
exercises of Divinity are meetely well scowred from many corruptions: so that
men having ouersayled the maine Sea of cold questions and doubts, flowing
from the sentences of Peter Lombard, they are come directly to the clear and
sweet fountains of the sacred Scripture: moreover, in many Countries and
Regions, the minds as well of the teachers as of the learners are effectually
long since stirred up by Gods spirit to embrace and set forth the holy
Scriptures: yea, and the tongues, prophecy, and other spiritual gifts,
wherewyth it behooves Churches to be enlightened, and adorned, are seen daily
more and more (as it were with full stream) to break in into them: also to
the furtheraunce hereof, serve not alittle the godly desires of a great
number of good men, and their incredible expectation as touching the
reformation of the Church. Certainly they that with these and such like
reasons and arguments feel not themselves to be awaked and stirred up,
must needs be very senseless and blockishe: But if they do feel the
force of them, and yet will not yield unto them, then must they of necessity
be very wicked and insolent. I for my part would suppose them to be
intoxicate with nightshade or some such like poison, and in very deed to be
rightelye mad (as P^inie speaks) and to be utterly bereafte of their
right mind. For why, that it is no small or light offense, to neglecte the
occasion offered, to despise so many, and so excellent gifts of the holy
Ghost, every one of you may easilye consider though I hold my peace. The
Ciuilians, to the intent they may get commendation in their kind of
studies, stick not to spend whole twentye years together in the huge and
intricate Volumes of the Imperial Laws: It grieueth not the Physicians to
bestow a good part of their time in reading of Hipocrates, and the tedious
works of Galen. Where if it so were, that they had all the rules of their
profesion comprised in so small a Book, as is the holy Bible, I believe
verilye, that they would then konne them all, and every of them perfectlye at
their fingers ends: and we should see those (I mean ye Lawyers) to be able
out of hand, and quickly, and (as it were) with one breathe, to recite the
laws both old and new, and these, namely, Physicians, no less promptely
and readily to repeat Aphorisms and precepts as touching any matter
propounded or falling into question whatsoever. Those that would gladly be
counted Ciceronians, do (as we may see) apply themselves continually to the
Books of Cicero: and often times read them al over not slightly and by
startes, but with so great attention and endeavor, as that they observe not
only the matters, but also every word and sentence, and as well the sense and
meaning, as also the order and placing of them. Which travail and diligence
though it be very painful, and not greatly needful to the ordering of the
Church or Common weal, yet we see that it is very well lyked, and approved of
all learned men. If then the case stands thus, why do not those that ought
to be Doctors and Teachers of Christian Churches, use the like diligence in
learning the small, yea easy and passable work of the holy Bible: by the
opening whereof not only Churches, but also commonweals may very much be
furthered and helped? A foul shame is it for Ministers of Churches, if so be
they suffer themselves to be overcome in the exercise of reading, of Lawyers,
Physicians, Orators. Oh how truly and gravely is it said of Bishop Leo the
first, in his Epistle. 22. to the Clergy and people of Constantinople: If
Ignorance seem intolerable in the Laity, then how much more is it
unworthy either of excuse, or pardon, in those that have the ouersighte of
Churches? But it is not needful, that we should stand longer in handling
of this cause: would GOD the things that we have presentlye touched, might
be well laid up, and fast fixed in memory: and then at leastwise some
Ministers of Churches would with these reasons, which we have alleged, be
rouzed up, and endeavor to become not only readers of the holy Scriptures
themselves, but also Readers and Expounders of the same unto others.

But we must not think, Albeit the study of the holy Scripeurs do
especially become the Ministers of the word, yet may not the Laity
therefore reject it.
that hereby it is proved, that those which they call Lay men, are by the
like reason discharged, and may pass their time without the pervsing and
understanding of the holy Scriptures. For wiselye did Bishop Leo, of whom
we heard even now, joining the cause of the Laity with the cause of the
Ministers of the Church, determine, that ignorance of the Scriptures is
intolerable even in Layemenne also. Truly they are very fond, that do
thus reason: The Pastors of Churches ought continuallye to be occupied in
reading the word of GOD, therefore the Laity need not so to do. These men
should have remembered, that some duties are for just and wayghtye causes so
enjoined to a certain kind of men, as though they agreed peculiarlye unto
them alone: when as in the mean time, by reason they are directed unto Virtue,
that is, to Faith, Hope and Charity, they are common to more, yea, to all men
universally without exception, and again, they should have considered, that
for just causes and considerations, certain vices are in such wise forbidden,
as though a peculiar sort of men only ought to beware of them: and yet
in very deed they are forbidden indifferentlye to all. But by examples
produced we shall bring to pass, that every manne may perceive it to be
true that we say.

The fifte commandment in the Decalogue, seems to prescribe only unto them
of Obedience, whose natural parents, of whom they are begotten, be alive:
Honor (says it) thy Faaher and thy Mother. But yet no man can deny, that in
the self same precept it is commanded that all inferior persons generallye
should yield honor, and obedience to their superiors. For why, al must obey
the Magistrates and the Prelates of Churches: again, Wards must obey their
Gardians, Disciples their Tutors, Soldiers their Captain, Craftsmen their
Craftsmayster, Mariners their Pylot, Servants and Handmaydens their Masters
and Maistresses. and so forth of other degrees. But namely, and especially the
example is set down as touching children, forasmuch as in them it is
convenient that a greater obedience do shine forth than in any others. In the
seventh commandment GOD forbids, that any man should break Wedlock,
or commit Adultry. Some man perhaps therefore would think, that it is meante
only of them that are married: and that Adultry, and not Fornication, which
is properly of them that are single and unmarried is condemned. But we learn
partly out of Histories, partly out of the holy sayings of the Scriptures,
that al carnal company of man and woman out of lawful Wedlock, that is to
say, not married together according to GODS ordinance, is forbidden, and as
well Fornication, as Adultry, howsoever they be extinguished, are punished of
GOD alike 1. Corinthians. 6, Hebr. 13. But it pleased the holy Ghost to give forth
this commaunment in such a form of words, for that whereas all men and women
ought to be embracers of Cleanesse and Chastity, yet ought married folks
inespecially to be given thereunto. Hebr. 13. In like manner Exodus ^8.23. Leuit.
19. It is commanded that such Judges should be ordained as fear GOD, as are
lovers of the truth, and as are free from covetousness. Now these things are
not so required of Judges, as though it were lawful for other men to do the
contrary, without controlement: but for so much as when GOD requires those
virtues of all, yet he would have them to be seen especially in Judges. Of
the same sort it is, that the Apostle 1. Timoth. 3. wills such a one to be
chosen Bishop, as is unreprovable, the husband of one wife, sober, not given
to overmuch Wine, no fighter. Now shall a man, leaning upon these words,
cavil and say, that it is lawful for other, which are no Bishops, to defile
themselves with the dregs of all manner of uncleanness, to be carried away
with wandering lusts, to be desguised with drink, and surcharged with Wine,
not to bridle their fury? to fly upon others with their fistes, feet,
staves, knives, and with whatsoever else comes next to hand? No: but we
must understand, that there are required in all men manners unreprovable,
chaste, sober, discrete, peaceable: and that Bishops ought for these virtues to
be commended and well spoken of before others. After the same manner therefore
must we interpret, that the Ministers of Churches ought in deed of all other
most diligently to search and ransacke the Books of holy Scripture, as to
whose duty it belongs to teach the whole multitude: but not so that the
Laity therefore are to be restreyned from the fellowship thereof, nay rather
that the precepte as touching the reading of the Scriptures, do apperteyne to
them also, and that they ought to labor so far forth in accomplish^ng of it,
(...) they may both more easily understand the public teachers, and also be
able after a sort to instruct and (...) (at the least) those of their own
householdes (...) ^es. Wherefore the Apostle, which willed Ti^^^^^ and with
him all the Ministers of Churches 1. Tim 4. to apply himself busily to the
reading of the Scriptures: the same also commands Coloss. 3. men of all
states and conditions, to teach and admonish one another through the word of
CHRIST dwelling in them. And in the old Testament, the only Tribe of Levy had
power and authority to deal with the Priesthode, with the Sacrifices, with
the holy rites, and to interpret the Law of GOD: but yet to read the holy
Scriptures, and likewise publicly to teach them when opportunity served, it
was left free to every man's choice, and unto all the Tribes indifferently to do
it. For why, that there have come forth no small number of Prophets, even out
of other Tribes also, Epiphanius declares in his Book De vitis Prophetarum:
and Christ being descended of the Tribe of Judah, taught openly in the Temple
and in the Sinagogs, no man forbidding him. Paul in like sort, of the tribe
of Benjamin, was required often times very courteously of the chief of the Jews
to speak unto the people. So then, albeit it be very requisite and
necessary, There is no degree of men among Christians, to whom it perteyneth
not exactly to learn the holy Scriptures.
that in every fellowship and society of men, there should be limited out
certain orders, kinds of life, functions, and besides that, sundry duties
should of sundry me^ according to their several natures and qualities, be
performed and accomplished: yet it can not be denied, but that there are some
things also found common and indifferent to all without exception. As in men's
bodies, we see always great difference in their stature, lineamentes, voice,
countenance, but greater in their gestures and motions, which express the
affections of their minds: so likewise in those large and ample bodies of
civil society, wonderful diversities do every where appear, whilst namely
some duties are executed by Kings, Princes, Judges: othersome by Lawyers,
Physicians, Soldiers, Merchant men, Artificers: yea, in a small house or
family, some by the husband and the wife, some other by the sons and
daughters, othersome finally by the servants and handmaydes. But again, like
as in this point, all men and women are very like and egal, that they consist
of soul and body, and are partakers of one and the selfsame substance, and
are all subject to the common law of being borne into the world, and
departing out, in which behalf verily none is said to be above other, nor
none inferioure unto other: even so must thou needs grant whether thou will
or no, that there are no small number of actions, to the accomplishing whereof
partly for the reteyning of the dignity of the mind, partly for the
conservation of the body, all men mortal are bound. For if we have regard to
the body it self, truly whether we mean to speak of the most rich King
Croesus, or if the most vile beggar Irus, or of any other that by reason of
outward respects, do very far differ between themselves, we must needs
confess, that all of them ought here unto to apply their diligence, and
indifferently to join in this, namely, that they between whiles refresh their
bodies with meat and drink, that they take their sweet sleep and rest,
being weerie, that they preserve and maynteyne their health, that they recover
it when it is lost, that they seek to nourish it when it is recovered, that
they cover and defend their bodies with apparel, etc. There is no need why we
should proceed any further in this reckning. In like manner, if we consider the
mind, no man, whether he be of the highest degree of honor, or of mean
worship, or of the lowest and basest estate of all, can be utterly void of all
knowledge of God: no man can be ignorante of the will and Commandments of
God, according whereunto we discern good things from evil, and are moved to
follow the one, and eschew the other: no man can avoid, but that he must
needs yield obedience unto GOD, as unto him that is most high, most mighty,
most excellent, and most just. But seeing, that whatsoever things be of this
kind, are most plentifully declared in the Books of the Prophets and
Apostles: and that we speak all this while to Christians which do highly
reverence and embrace these Books: we worthelie conclude, that it is the
duty of all Christians both to read, and hear the said Books, and to gather
out of them the knowledge of GOD, and his most holy mysteries. This study and
this diligence, every one owes unto his own soul, for the dignity, health,
and salvation whereof, we ought to leave nothing unassayed, nothing
unattempted. Look how dear thine own Soul is unto thee, and so far
should thou be off from foreslowing the study and practice of Gods holy
word. But as touching the duties, which for the dignity of their minds are
common indifferently to all Christians, we shall have occasion again anon
after to speak. Now we will show, that to the end every man may according to
his calling and kind of life, duly execute those manyfolde and several offices
which are allotted unto him, it is good, yea very necessary, before he begin
or attempt any action, which at leastwise may become vprighte and acceptable to
God, to hear the counsel and judgment of the holy Scriptures, and in all
things to follow and be advised by the same. For in very deed, neither King.
nor Prince, nor Judge, nor any other man else whatsoever, can possibly perform
to any purpose, the things that belong to his office and calling, unless he
first shall have learned (as well as the Minister of the Church) the manner
and form of good actions out of the Prophetical and Apostolic writings. As
touching which point, least any manne should doubt, we will not stick of
diverse degrees of men, to set down so much in effect, as to this present
business shall seem expedient.

Wherefore, if thou be a King or Prince, Kings and Princes must read also the
holy Scriptures.
verily there is so much the more cause, why thou should continually and
attentively read the holy Scripture. For it is thine office to govern and
preserve Commonweals, to make just and upright laws, to defend the innocent,
to punish malefactors. But how and after what sort these things should
rightly, and according to Gods holy ordinance be done and accomplished, it is
most certaynely to be learned out of the sacred Scriptures. And for the same
cause did GOD command Kings and Princes by name, studiously to read the holy
Books, in giving forth a statute as touching this matter Deuteronomy. 17. When the
King sits (says he) on the seat of his kingdom, he shall lay before him a
pattern of the Book of this Law in the sight of the Priests and Levites, and
it shall remain with him, and he ought to read in it all the days of his life,
namely, that he may learn to fear the Lord his GOD, and to observe all the
words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them. In which place, more
matter touching the office of a King both goes before, and follows after. I
omit to tell that in the 1. Samuel Chapter. 8.12. and 1. King. 5.8.10. 2.
King. 22. 2. Chron. 1.9. Proverbs. 20.21.25.29.31. Eccles. 10. Psalm. 20.101.
Jeremy 22. and in other infinite places mo, many things be declared, which
are most needful to be known and observed of all Kings and Princes, if at
leastwise they covet to obtain any place in the Kingdom and Court of the
most mighty King JESUS CHRIST: if they will from their heart testifye and
declare, that they, according to the counsel of the most holy King and Prophet
David Psalm. 2. do in deed kiss and adore the Son, sent of GOD the Father
into the earth, to whom the Father has given the Gentiles for an
inheritance, and all the coasts of the earth for a possession, and
therewithal also power and authority to destroy all the wicked and ungodly
from the face of the earth.

Again further, All C^urtiers and noble men, must diligently read the holy
Scriptures.
both all the Courtiers, and all the whole nobility, must endeavor to frame
and conform themselves, after the example of the King, and must with a
certain holy kind of ambition, strive among the^selus, to the intent, that by
reading and learning the Divine philosophy, and true Christianity, they may
become most like to their godly and Christian King. In vain do some lay for
excuse the troubles and impedime^ts of the Court, and I wot not what heaps
of business besides, wherewith they are overwhelmed. It is not the place, but
the mind, whereupon (to make thee studious of Gods word) the point of the whole
matter depends. And very easily may he find a place, time, and hours
convenient to read and study in, that has at the least a desire to seek
them. Obadias governor of the wicked King Achabs house, is read 1. King. 18.
to have bin vehemently addicted to ye word of God, and to his Prophets the
interpretours of it: of which Prophets he had a hundred, at the least, in
caves, and (notwithstanding Iezabels cruelty, who sought to slay the^) privily
ministered unto their necessities. And the Pagan Eunuch, treasourer to Candace
Queen of the Aethiopians, found ye means to get opportunity of reading ye
holy Scriptures, even whilst he traveled by the way, and was carried in a
Coach, as we may read Acts. 8. But why do I not, to reprove ye detestable
dullness and sloth of some men, set down the words of John Chrysostom, as
touching the diligence of this Eunuch, written in the beginning of his 34.
Homily upon Genesis? These they are: That Barbarous Eunuch of the Ethiopian
Qu. which was in so great glory, and was carried in a Chariot, even at that time
neglected not reading, but taking the Prophet in his hands, used great study
and diligence, though he knew not what was contained in the book: and he
brought with him, whatsoever was in him, namely, a good desire, cheerfulness
of mind, and aduizednesse in marking. For consider I pray thee, what a thing
it was, not to omit reading so much, as in the time of traveling, and
especially sitting in a Chariote. Therefore well worthy are they of blame, that
can not be persuaded thus to do when they sit quietly at home in their own
houses: but supposing such manner of reading to be superfluous, because either
they keep company with a woman, or are appointed to warfare, or be charged
with children and servants, or otherwise entangled with business, they think
it no parcel of their charge, to apply themselves to the reading of the divine
Scriptures. Behold he was an Eunuch or gelded man, and he was a Barbarian,
which both were sufficient to make him negligent and careless: and yet besides
he was in great honor, and abounded in riches. Add hereunto also that he was
in his journey, and was carried in a Coach. For to him that in this wise
trauelleth by the way, it is no easy matter to be occupied in reading, nay, it
is very hard and troublesome. Nevertheless, he through the wonderful desire
and care that he had, ouercomming all lettes and impedimentes, gave himself
intentiuely to reading. Whereupon it follows, that he uttered not those
words that a great number now adays have in their mouths, namely, when they
use to say, I understand not the things that are written, I can not conceive
the deep meaning of the Scriptures, wherefore the^ should I bestow my time in
vain? I read, and have no body to direct me. As for him, he thought no such
matter, being in language a Barbarian, in mind a Philosopher: but he considered
rather, that he should not be shaken off, but helped with grace from above, so
that he brought with him that which in him lay, a true endeavor I mean, and
diligence, whom also let us imitate, etc. These things has he in that place.
See thou not, with how great sharpness and gravity, Chrysostom cutteth
off, and beats back the cold and senseless reasons, that some deynty
toothed Cockneys are wont to use, to the intent to cast from them the care of
heavenly things: Truly they are ouerwise, nay rather very vain in this
behalf. They prove themselves to be guilty of a most grievous crime, who when
they can find a time to bestow in banquetings and bellycheere, in dicing and
carding, in tossing to and fro of balls, in huntings in hawkings, in idle
ridings up and down, yea, in devising ways to oppress the innocents, and to
spoil good Citizens of that which they have, to speak of nothing else more
bitter, do yet deny that they have any spare time or leisure left, wherein to
be occupied in reading and understanding the word of God. But with Clubs
undoubtedly, I had almost said with forkes or rods and scourges are those
most perstilente flatterers worthy to be beaten, that are not afraid to
whisper in the cares of soft and delicate men, and of such as are ouer-lighte
of credit, that the study of the holy Scriptures is altogether unmeet for a
noble man, as though forsooth that true Nobility could stand without the
knowledge of true virtues, which the Scripture alone does rightly teach, or
any noble enterprises be happilye achieved, where the foundation of Faith is
not laid out of the word of God, as though that which God himself has
defyned to be fair and expediente in a King, that by man's authority ought to
be deemed foul and unseemly in a Noble manne. But rather to let pass
these sh^melesse and treacherous flatterers, all true Nobility in deed has
respect to those worthy men, whom especially the holy Ghost, than holy and
godly men do wonderfully for their study of GODS word and sanctimony of life
commend and set forth. So does the Scripture celebrate him whom we spoke
of, namely, Obadias, likewise Naaman the Syrian, 2 King. 5. diverse Princes
believing in Christ, Joan. 12. certain Centurians, Math. 8. Luke. 7. Acts.
10. a Ruler, Joan. 14. the Eunuch, Act. 8. Joseph of Arimathia, Math. 27.
Sosthenes, Act. 18. the noble men of Thessalonica and Berrhoea, Act. 17.
certain of the family of Caesar, Philip. 4. I pass over very many godly Kings
and Potentates mentioned in the old Testament: neither do I declare what
manner of examples of a Courtelye life and conversation, may fruitfully be
gathered and observed out of the Books of Genesis, Kings, Esther, Daniel. Of
some holy fathers in their Commentaries and Histories are greatelye extolled,
Apollonius an Ecclesiastical writer, Abdomenus, Senna, Tertnl. Chrysostom,
Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, Ambrose Bishop of Millan, Hillary
Bishop of Orleance, Cassiodorus Author of the Tripartite History, Boethius,
Seuerus, Sulpitius, and others: who, besides that they were noble by the
pedigree of their Ancestors, and likewise in that they were of great
authority in the Church or Common weal, obtained also an Honorable name and
report by their handlyng of the holy Scriptures. The consideration of these
times of ours compelled me, inasmuche as I see now every where the Nobility
in lamentable sort to be far away withdrawn from the Doctrine of Religion,
to say more to Noble men, than I was purposed to have done. Let us now
therefore pass forward to the other degrees.

If thou be a Judge, Consul, or Praetor, surely, seeing it belongs to thy
office to take up controversies risen among men, Judges, Consuls, Pretors,
must exercise themselves in reading the holy Bible.
wisely to publish and set forth laws and ordinances, to relieve the
afflicted, especially widows, fatherless children, and all persons in
general that are unworthily oppressed, and neither for favor nor for hatred
to turn aside from equity, to take upon thee the defense indifferently both
of the poor and rich, weak and mighty, small and great: it shall become
thee before all men continually to read the holy Scripture, wherein are
found most weighty examples and precepts, which may in all thine actions
and dealings put thee in remembrance of Justice and equity. Read in
especially Exodus 18.23. Leuit 19 Deuteronomy. 1.10.15.16.17.22.24.27. Judge. 2.3.1.
King. 1.2. Paral. 19. Proverb. 18.24. Psalm. 82. Ies. 5. Iere. 5.22. and other
places more else where. So highly ought all good men to esteem of the word of
GOD, that they should covet to have the laws put forth by Emperors and
Kings tried and examined by the rule thereof: and if any clauses be found not
thoroughly to agree with the doctrine of Christ, that those then either to be
corrected, or utterly to be excluded from the compass of Christian equity.
But how shall any Judge perceive whether the civil laws do answer to the
rule of that doctrine or no, if so be he has never at any time bestowed any
study in it? for if a man shall content himself only with the laws once
brought in and established, and (without any further trial of them) have no
regard at all to the sacred Scripture, verily this man may be judged to be
in no better case th^n a Pagan or Miscreante. But it pleased the most godly
and wise Princes, Constantine, Valentinian, Theodosius, Lotharius, and many
others, otherwise to determine: Who, seeing many laws to be more hard and
sharp, than that they ought to enioine Obedience to men that profess Christ
and true Religion, changed some of them, and othersome they utterly abolished.
For in deed they truly judged, according as the case requires, that the word
of GOD ought to be preferred before all man's laws whatsoever, and that
inferioure laws cannot be taken for just and upright, that are found in any
part to vary from the high and supreme Law of GOD.

But if thou profess thy self to be a Soldier, Neither must soldiers
neglecte to read the holy Scriptures.
then soothly even for this cause, forsomuche as now in these days through
the negligence of Captains the good ordinances of warlike discipline are (for
the most part) disanulled, thou stand in more need to taste of the holy
Scriptures, and even by little and little to drink them in (as I may so say)
with full draught. For out of them shalt thou learn to stand in awe of GODS
Majesty: and shalt be admonished very earnestlye not so vngratiouslye
hereafter to abuse (as Soldiers do now every where, common soldiers
especially, more vile than any barbarous and hired Carian) one while the most
holy name of GOD, and otherwhile other things, which ought to be most
highlye esteemed of all, and not without a certain reverence and
signification of Honor and Fear, once to be named or spoken of. O how
horrible and unspeakable blasphemies do these common Camp followers, and
sellers of all manner of riffraffe, daily vomit out of their mouths? Verily
I whollye quake and tremble, and am afraid least the earth should open, so
often as I stand or sit in company, where some things are discoursed as
touching the incredible cruelty of these new kind of Souldioures for
doubtless to the people of old time I suppose that such were not known.

Why do they not therefore at the length take the holy Scriptures into their
hands, and out of Moses Deuteronomy. 11.12.13. out of Iehosua 23. out of the
Psalm 144. out of John Baptiste Luke 3. and other places more, learn, with
what fidelity, integrity, and discipline they ought to be conversant in
war, and with what conditions to look for joyful victory at the hands of
Almighty GOD? If by no other means, yet truly even by the ungodliness alone
of the soldiers of this time GOD being provoked to anger, justly sends
down upon the earth, which now al provinces do feel and bewail, even the
vttermoste of all extremities and calamities, Doubtless I am persuaded that it
cannot come to pass, that those Chieftaines should ever obtain any glorious
victory, and triumph over their enemies, being guarded and environed with
wicked soldiers, and now and then fighting without cause why, cast
themselves headlong into wonderful dangers. For the sin of one false hearted
soldier, which had privily kept to himself some of the things that were
commanded to be destroyed, all the whole host of GODS people was brought
into great hazard. Iehosua 7. Then what may we look for, where so huge a
rablement of most vile and treacherous souldioures are dayle hired, for the
wars? But I remember that which Anacharsis on a time demanded of one,
namely, Whether those that sail ought to be counted among the quick or dead?
And he added the cause, that when they are thought to be in greatest safety of
all, they are no further off from death than the thickenesse of the ship
board: that is, a three of four fingers breadth. Which reason Iuuenall in his
Satire 12. forgate not to render, saying: Go now thy way, and to the Winds,
thy life and soul commit,
And trust unto a brittle board,
as though full safe on it,
Thou mightste remain, when further off
from death thou shalt not be,
Than inches four, or seven at most,
Beet nere so large a tree.


And surely even as doubtful and uncertain is the life of those men that
serve under the standerdes of any Emperor or Captain whatsoever within the
sight of their enemies Camp. For among so many weapons of the enemies, so
many Darts and Halberds, so many Swords, and (as now the manner is) amongst
innumerable bullets of Gunnes, which are shot very swiftely and very far
off, who can be sure of his life so much as one moment of an hour? Alas how
often comes it to pass, that a man sitting in his Tent doors, or being in
the Town and Castle besieged, or at home in his house doing of some work,
and thinking of nothing less than of death, is suddenly taken away with one
of these bullets? There is no regards or difference of the Emperor, Marshall
of the host, Standerd-bearer, common Soldier, pezaunt Scullion. Moreover, as
now adays (for the most part) wars are made, and Soldiers do live all
very dissolutely and intemperatelye, often times it happens, that contagious
disseases do spread abroad through all the troops and bands: by means
whereof many more are consumed with burning agues, with inflammations, with
perilous flixes, with the pestilence, with hunger, with thyrste, with cold,
than with the force of their (...). Wherefore, like as in times paste there
were some that counted it a happy thing, in case they might dye in battle,
and win as great renown after their death as did the Latins, or worthy
Romans, whereby they would signifye and proteste the invincible fortitude of
their minds, even so now let our men of war in these days worthilye
esteem it as a principal point of praise and commendation, if it fortune
them, being beset on every side with so many and great perilles, to dye, not
as the common sort of soldiers use to do, but as true Christian warriors in
deed. But no such men can dye valiauntely either for the glory of GOD, or
for their Country, or else return home with tryumphant victory, save those
only, that when they are quiet at home in their houses, do so exercise
themselves in reading the Scriptures, that afterward when they must watch
abroad in the wild fields, and abide all bru^ts that shall fall upon them,
they may comfort themselves mutuallye out of the word of GOD, inflame their
minds with courage, call rightelye upon GOD, commit the safety as well of
their soul as body to his tuition, and make confession of their Christian
Faith. And surely it behooves as well all other Christians, if at least wise we
will hearken to Saint Paul's counsel, as also those undoubtedly that follow
the Camps of Christian Princes, to be evermore throughlye furnished with the
whole armoure of GOD, and to have their loins girded about with Truth, their
breast fenced with the breastplate of Righteousness, their feet shodde with
the preparation of the Gospel of Peace: and above all to take the shield of
Faith, and to put on the helmet of Salvation, and lastly to bear always in
their hands the sword of the spirit, which is the word of GOD (of which
inward and spiritual weapons a type and resemblaunce we may daily in our
mind behold in the outward weapons of the body) whereby they may be able
to stand fast against all the assaults of the devil (the common enimye of
mankind) and to repulse the fiery darts, that he never ceasseth to hurl at
them.

Further (says an other) I am a Lawyer: L^wi^rs oug^^ to be familiarly
acquainted with the holy Scripturs
what have I to do with the Scripture? Shall I tell thee? Very much. For it
is to be wished by all means, both of thy self, and of all that crave thine
aid in the Court, that thou werte in deed with a certain addition such a
one, that is to say, A Christian Lawyer. Thou make thy vaunte I am sure that
thou will do all things according to right and equity, and challengest to
thy self both the power and will so to do. But very hardlye shalt thou make
any man believe that thou art of this mind, unless thou imbracest also the
pure Doctrine of Religion, and by the direction thereof envre thy self, to
deal faithfully and truly in all thy proceedyngs, and to prosecute the
things that are lawful and just. In some Countries the Lawyers are evil
spoken off, and noted to be scante good Christians. This blotte shall he wype
clean away, whom the people shall perceive earnestly, and with an unfeigned
disire as well of profiting in godliness of life, as also of finding out and
observing of equity, to pervse the holy Scriptures. Lactantius Firmianus, and
after him Saint Hierome, do wonderfully commend one Minutrus Felix, a notable
Lawyer of Rome, for his excellent knowledge of holy Doctrine: what let is
there then, why the Lawyers of our time should not imitate this manne in the
study of Heavenly things? Physicians also must devoutly trau^ile in the
Scriptures


Moreover, by the selfsame Law and condition must Physicians know themselves
to be bound also, especially forbicause they have a singular commendation of
their Art and full of authority taken out of the holy Scriptures
themselves. For they brag very much, that by the mouth of the most wise
Hebrew Jesus the son of Syrach Chap. 58. Physic is commended as a thing
given of GOD for the necessity of man's life: and that most holy men, as
the Prophet Esaye ^. King. 10. Esa. 38. the Euaungeliste Luke Coloss 4. and
others more, have exercised the same Art to their singular praise. Certes
Hipocrates the Prince of Physicians, being but a Heathen man, in his book De
decenti ornatu, says that the knowledge of GOD ought inespecially to be
rooted in the heart of the Physician, and that in disseases and maladies
happening, Physic should very reverently behave it self toward GOD. From
whom disagreeth not Galen, in his ninth Book and fifteenth Chapter, De
Hipocratis and Platonis degmatibus, and in his work De animi moribus corporis
temperatur^^ sequentibus, that is, Touching the manners of the mind followyng
the qualities or temperatures of the body, the eleauenth Chapter. And all men
do greatelye covet and desire to attain unto a certain happiness in making
and ministering of medicines. But this dexterity can they by no means look to
come by, unless they call upon GOD with a true and lively faith, and provoke
their patients likewise to do the same. Which, that they might diligently
do in deed, we read, that it was well provided in the council of Lateran
Cannon. 22. which is referred also among the Decretals De Penitent^s and
Remissionibus, C. Cum infirmitas. And Hostiensis expounding the same, says:
that those Physicians do grievously sin, which obey not that most wholesome
law. And I know not truly how it comes to pass, that all sick folks for
the most part, do more willingly call for him, and commit their life unto him,
and trust assuredlye that they shall be helped of him, whom they perceive and
understand to be a lover of Gods holy word, and a follower of true Christian
piety and godliness: in like case, as if they were persuaded, that what Art
is not able many times to do, that might he supplied by sanctimonie of life and
Prayers. After which sort verily we have known many in times past restored to
health by most holy me^, more no doubt through fervent Prayer unto God, than by
any medicine though never so artificially made. So also does Saint James
Chap. 5. command that to the anointing with oil, holy Prayer should be
adjoined. It follow^th therefore, that the Physician, if he diligently pervse
the Books of holy Scripture, shall very well provide, both for the salvation
of his soul with God, and also for his credit and estimation amongst men, yea
and besides all this, he shall obtain of God happy success in his Science,
and in all his proceedings.

But now, he that is a Merchante, It is expedient that Merchant men also, and
Artificers, should profit in the Scriptures.
and compassed about continually with innumerable affairs and dealings
belonging to his trade and Merchandise, tossed and turmoyled too and fro, now
hither, now thither, and never at any certain stay, ought ever and anon to
bestow some time in sifting and examining of his own conscience, and in
commending the safety of his body and soul into the hands of God: and that
so much the more often, by how many more and greeuouser perils both by Sea
and by Land, he sees himself to be cast into every minute of an hour. He
ought moreover to labor by all means possible, that credit and trustiness,
which is a certain constancy and truth both of sayings and doings, may
appear in all his actions, which then chiefly comes to pass, when he
inforceth himself to abide by his word and covenant, when he does not
counterfeit or adulterate the wares brought home from any place, but without
vanity, without fraud or guile, without the conceyte of filthy gain,
utters and sells the same. But that any man should in this wise give both
unto God that which is Gods, and unto men the things that are men's, it is very
unlikely, nay, it is impossible, except he shall first deeply imprint in his
mind the commandments of God, put forth in the holy Scriptures, as touching
buyings and sellings, as touching diverse and sundry kinds of contractes or
bargaynes, Leuit. 25. and elsewhere: of payments, Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 24. of
pawnes or pledges, Exo. 22. of justice and equity in weightes and measures,
Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 25. Prouer. 11.20 (out of which oracles, as out of
welsprings, do flow all civil laws devised and made of like matters.) The
selfsame judgment is to be given of all artificers and craftesmen in general.

Where if it were so now that husbandmen knew, To husbandmen also is
commended the reading and hearing of the Scriptures.
how greatly their state and condition is every where commended in the holy
Scriptures: but who is able to reckon up the places, wherein are propounded and
put forth examples, sentences, precepts, comparisons, parables, taken and
drawn from matters of husbandry? if they knew likewise, what duties of
godliness are prescribed unto them toward the pore and toward strangers,
Leuit. 23. they would no doubt make much of those Books, and suffer no day
to escape, wherein they would not bestow some time at home, either evening or
morning, in reading and meditating the word of God. Doubtless, the things
that are contained in the^, be far more excellent, than those which
Chrysostom in his 19. Homily to ye people of Antioch, sets down as
touching the honesty and virtuous conversation of Husbandmen: though (I
grant) his allegations are not to be despised, yet for breuities sake, I will
not here insert them. And for so much commonly as these kind of men do
inhabit, and dwell far off from neybors, and besides have not always the
Ministers of their Churches near hand unto the^, it ca^ not be, but very
requisite and necessary, that at leastwise, the good man of ye house himself,
especially where there is great store of children a servants, and many workmen
are daily hired (as it v^ually comes to pass in husba^dry, being for this
cause very worthy of commendation) should so profit and go forward in the
doctrine of Religion, that he might be able to go before his household and
family in invocation and prayer, sometimes to open and declare the chief
points and principles of faith: and (in case any casualtie or misfortune so
require) to lift up him that is beaten down with affliction, or other
necessity, to comfort those that be sick and like to die, whether they be in
his own, or in his neighbors house, to arm and strengthen with places of
holy Scripture the party that wrastles in the last agony of death, to
instruct his children in some measure in the ways of godliness, and when
they of his household are let by vuseasonable weather, or other occasion,
whereby they can not resort to the Church to hear the word of God expounded by
the Minister, then he to read something^ unto them out of the holy
Scriptures: after which sort truly we know that the holy Patriarchs, and
innumerable others have in old time bin accustomed to do. What shall I say
further? There is no house that can rightly be called a Christian house, except
the word of Christ dwell in it, and something be daily uttered and hard as
touching holy matters or points of Divinity. Every well ordered and true
Christian family, ought to represent the form and similitude, as well of the
common weal, as also inespecially of the Church, and that most chiefly by ye
continual ha^^^ing and entreating of ye word of God. Neither ca^ it be
pretended, yt any person is unapt or unfit to be taught. If it to fall out that
even little children do soon perceive words tending to laughter, It is
expedient that Boys and Mothers also be instructed in the holy Scriptures.
or otherwise unprofitable, light, I will not say, lewd and filthy, and ca^
find the means readily enough to r^peate them again, why should they not as
well learn now and then somewhat as touching godliness of life, and
Christian Religion? wherefore Chrysostom in his 2. Homily upon John, with a
very sharp and controlling kind of speech ratleth up parents, saying: That they
do provoke Gods wrath against themselves more than they would think, when they
count it to be troublesome and ouertimely to have their children trained up in
the exercise of sprituall things: Do not so account it, (says he) do not so
esteem it. This age does of all other stand most chiefly in need of
Spiritual admonitions: it is green and tender, and quickly drincketh in the
liquors that are dripped into it. If any man will go about to draw them even
from their cradles, and (as ye would say) from the very traces of sin, unto
the way of virtue, he shall confirm them in a certain stayednesse and nature
of godly living. Neither will they lightly of their own accord, fall into a
worser biasse, where they have with such a custom as this, bin allured from
their tender years unto virtue. By this means also they shall the more
willingly both honor and reverence their elders. Again, they shall be made
more fit to deal in any worldly affairs. Thus much has he there. I am
compelled to add hereunto out of the same Authoure, that is to say, the
golden words of his golden mouth, written in his 21. Homily upon the Epistle
to the Ephesians. Would thou have (says he) thy son to be well nurtured?
bring him up from his youth in the fear and nourture of the Lord. Think it
not to be superfluous, if he hear the holy Scriptures: for there shall be
first hear this: Honor thy Father, and thy Mother. Therefore this is done for
thy behoof. Say not, it belongs to Monks to hear the Scriptures. Shall I
make my son a Monk? No, it is not needful for him to be a Monk. Why
fear thou that which is greatly for his profit? Make him a Christian. It
is chiefly requisite for worldly folks, to know what things are taught them
out of the Scriptures, especially for children: for there is much folly in
that age. And that folly of children is much increased, even in outward
things, when they once know that those noble men also whom they have in
admiration, are subject to infirmities, and afraid of death. Of which sort was
this, that Achilles, when he saw that he must now dye for his concubine,
repented him then of his deed: of which sort is this also, namely, when one is
drunk, and many other such things are committed. These medicines therefore
are needful. For is it not to be thought a point of great folly in thee, to
send thy children to learning, and to provide them Scholemaysters, and to see
that nothing be wanting for their instruction, and in the mean time not to
bring them up in the nourture and chastisement of the Lord? Therefore do even
we first of all reap the fruit of this thing, that is to say, through our
own defaulte, we have harebraynd, ungracious, disobediente, and unmannerly
children. Let us not then thus do, but let us obey this blessed Apostle, who
gives us good council: let us bring them up in the instruction and
information of the Lord. Let us set before them an example, causing them from
their tender youth diligently to apply the reading of the Scriptures. Woe is me,
whilst I am thus continuallye speaking, I seem to do nothing else but trifle:
howbeit, I will not cease for all that, to do that which mine office binds
me to do. These things has he. All that Sermon of his is very worthy to be
read, as in which he shows with many reasons, that those (when all is
said) do best provide for their children, and lay open unto them the way to
riches, peace, and tranquillity of life, happy estate, and to preferment in
Princes courts, which have a care over them that they be instructed even from
their infancy in the holy Scriptures. To be short, the husband and the wife,
the parents and children, the masters and servants, the mistresses and
maids, may find in the holy Books infinite as well precepts, as examples,
which it is not needful to rehearse, as touching all those things that it
behooves every one of them to do in their several state and calling. The same
must thou think to be spoken both unto widows and virgins, of whose care and
diligence, like as also of the instruction of children in the holy Scriptures,
we have above somewhat discoursed. So far-forth therefore is that true, which
Saint Augustine says, De verbis Domini Sermon. 19. namely, that unto all
estates of me^ there is prescribed in the sacred books a rule to live by, and
that all and every sex, age, and degree, is provoked to lead an vprighte and
godly life. Therefore (as we began to say before) not only those that are
appointed to the Ecclesiastical ministry, but also generally all Christians,
of what estate or condition soever they be, ought daily to bestow sometime (at
the least) in reading and pervsing the Books of the Prophets and Apostles. The
continual meditation of the Scriptures, is not the private and peculiar office
of some few persons, but the common and public duty of all Christians. I
grant in deed that the godly and learned Pastors of Churches should go
before, but yet must all other states and degrees follow after. There is
none, neither one nor other, that can be debarred from this dance. There is
no man in this life in all respects so perfect, unto whom remains not some
thing more to be learned: no man so exactly accomplisheth his duty, but that
some good man (for I speak not of any slanderous and envious cauiller) may
say unto him: this would be amended. Wherefore I believe there is not any man
living, which by the rules and exhortations of the holy Scriptures, may not
only become better learned, but also better qualified, and which by reading of
the word of God, may not be made more strong and courageous to all good
actions of life whatsoever. A great offense it were doubtless, to surmise,
that the Philosophers, or any other persons besides should be able, better to
prescribe what every one ought to do, or to leave undone, than God himself.
Certes the Philosophers, Lawmakers, and other worldly wise men, when they
dispute of duties, do oftentimes err. Euidente proofs hereof we have in
Plato, Aristotle, Panaetius, Cicero, and such like, which do commonly one
carp and control another. Neither do they commend any thing as comely and
honest, but so far-forth as it is deemed to be such by the opinion of men. But
the Prophets and Apostles could not err, because they were taught by the
holy Ghost (who is the spirit of truth, and void of all error:) yea and they so
urged and commanded all things, as they knew ye same to be allowed of God. But
to frame ye life and manners in such wise as God may be pleased with them, is
no doubt a most sovereign thing, and highly to be desired of all men. And in
deed ye Philosophers ca^ after a sort tell us what one man owes unto another,
but what man owes unto god, how God should rightly be worshipped, of true faith
in God, and remission of sins, of ye inward spiritual righteousness of ye
heart, and of other things like unto these, they do not so much as make any
mention at al, much less ca^ they perfitly declare the^. As often as in the
writings of ye Philosophers, there happen any place as touching God, or as
touching ye duty of man toward God, we see how coldly, slenderlye, and
obscurelye, they run over it. Which truly that it should so come to pass,
God undoubtedly had ordained, and that either for because they were convicted
in their own consciences, and stayed not upon any sure foundation in these
their disputations: or else for that it was not their proper charge, but was
reserved for others, the Prophets, I mean, and Apostles, and their Disciples:
and finally, for so much as God would have all men to be admonished by this
means, that the perfect knowledge of God, and of his will, is to be learned,
not out of the Books of the Philosophers, but only and alone out of the holy
Scriptures. And this is that in effect which the Apostle means 2. Timoth. 3.
when he says: That the holy Scripture inspired of God, is profitable to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, and prepared to
all good works. Whereunto, Saint Augustine having respect in his 2. Sermon
upon the 90. Psalm, very wittily said, That the holy Scriptures are letters
patents, sent down from the heavenly City to us, which do exhort us all to
live well. Wherefore, whosoever coveting to read the holy Bible (wherein is
most absolutely comprised all the discipline concerning ye duties of all and
every Christian, as well toward God, as toward men) and to reform his manners
accordingly, requires the same Bible to be reached unto him, he shall more
truly a great deal say of it, There be certain duties common to all
Christians, which it is needful for the^ to learn out of the holy
Scriptures.
Give me my Master: then long ago Cyprian usurped ye like saying, as often as he
meant or spoke of ye most famous writer Tertullian (if we may credit Hierome.)

But I will proceed somewhat further to speak of certain duties which are
common to all Christians, and yet in the mean time can not rightly be
performed of any man, without the reading and knowledge of the Scriptures.
Howbeit, I will speak only of the chief and principal, whereupon depend
other almost infinite. In the explication whereof we will gather together those
reasons, wherewith the consciences (I hope) of men shall so be stricken and
pierced through, that whosoever will be counted in the number of Christians which
make not their vaunt at the least of the vain title, may easilye understand,
that he has of necessity to apply himself diligently to the reading of
the Scriptures. Which thing that we would do and accomplish, we have once
before promised alredye.

Tell me therefore, whosoever thou be, All Christians must endeavor to show
themselves to be true members of the Church.
and haste a desire to be called a Christian: I mean such a desire as is
unfeigned: ought thou not (if thou couetest in deed to be that which thou
feign would) to labor by all means possible, to declare thy self to be a
true and lively member of that spiritual body, which is the Church, and
whereof Christ is the head? for thus we read of all men, of what age, sex,
dignity, or condition soever they be that are regenerate and borne again in
CHRIST, Romans 12. We being many are one body in CHRIST, and every one
severally one an others members. 1. Corinthians. 12. We are all baptized by one
spirit into one body, whether we be Jews or Greeks, or bond, or free, and
we have al tasted of one spirit. And in the same Epistle and tenth Chapter.
We that are many, are one bread and one body* for we are all partakers of
one bread. Ephesians. 4. One body and one spirit, like as also you are called in
one hope of your calling. One Lord, one Faith one Baptism, one GOD and
father of us all. Chap. 5. We are members of his body, which is the Church.
Therefore thou canste not choose, if so be thou will be counted better than an
Ethnicke, Jew, or Turk, but testify by some means, that thou art indeed a
true, liuelye, and effectual working member, of the holy Church of GOD. But
if thou canste not be the mouth or the eye, that thou might sustain the
roomth of a Bishop, and govern the Church by commanding and ordeynyng
whatsoever things should be profitable and necessary: if thou canste not be
the tongue, whereby thou might publikelye teach and prophecy in the
Church: if thou canste not be the hand, to dispose the Sacraments or goods
of the Church: yet surely thou may be the ear, thou may be the finger,
thou may be a part of the breaste, and (to make an end) thou may and
ought to be of that Church, which stands in need of very many
Ministers, and is always occupied about many things, some certain member,
and that truly quick, lively, stirring, and such a one as is bewtified both
with feeling and moving. Only take heed thou despair not: and accounte thy
state to be happy, if thou may have place in the Church, but even among
the basest and weakest members, so they be sound, and not as yet for their
rottenness to be cut quite away. But there is no common wealth that
acknowledges that manne to be a Citizen and suffers him to enjoy the common
privileges of the Country, which does not reverence the Magistrates in it,
but refuses to obey them: which will not embrace the vprighte Laws and
excellent Statutes, that are the very sinews of Commonweals, neither
promise that he will live after them. Neither in very deed deserves he the
name of a good Citizen, that cares for none of those things, which pertayne
either to the dignity of the Common wealth wherein he lives, or to his duty
in defending and adorning the same.

How then shall the Church judge thee to be a liuelye member of hirs, incase
thou do not homage, as thou art bound, unto CHRIST her head? incase thou
never bethink thy self to understand the Doctrine of CHRIST? incase she
perceyueth no life of Faith, no motion of any good actions to be in thee? the
Church finally is not helped by any duty or diligence of thine. For why, it
is certain that all the godly do receive life and moving, from CHRIST their
head, and from his word. CHRIST is the life of the Church, who powers
abroad after a wonderful manner his vital powers into all his members: and
the words which CHRIST speaks, are spirit and life: Ioh. 6. and again, by
the word of GOD the faithful do live: Deuteronomy. 4. Math. 4. Is any of you so
fond and foolish, as to think himself for this cause only to become a
member of the Church, for that he does now and then, or (if he will) every
day in the week, repair corporally to holy assemblies? Nay it behooves thee
to be ingraffed and linked into that body in spirit, like as in very deed
the self same body is spiritual. But the spirit is nourished and sustained
by the word, with the which it has a certain Anologie, or proportion. Now
therefore if so be either when thou art present in Ecclesiastical assemblies,
which are especially ordained for the handling of Gods word, or when thou
art returned home to thy house, thou intentiuely read the word of GOD,
hear it, and layest it up in thy mind: then, believe me, shall thou be
reputed and taken in very deed for a lively member of the Church. And truly
this is a very small matter, and easy to be done, which (as a testimonye of
thy engraffing into the Church) we require at thy hands. For if thou refuse
once to ensearche the Scriptures, doubtless I do not see how thou shalt be
able to perform any thing worthy of commendation. He that cannot abide, to
apply himself to the hearing and reading of Gods word, without the which
there is no access unto Faith: how shall we suppose, that he can be brought
to accomplish any works or duties of Love flowing out of Faith? for soothly
where the word of GOD is, there is hearing: where Hearing is, there is Faith:
where Faith is, there follow of necessity the works of Love. Be careful
therefore, to hear, read, and understand the word of GOD: so shalt thou
have Faith and the fruits of Faith and Works: yea, and so shall all things
redounde to the common edifying and increase of the wholebodye of the Church
Ephesians. 4.

But I have further to demand of thee O Christian (for I do as willingly for
mine own part attribute this glorious title unto thee, Every Christian ought
to be ready to render a reason of his Faith to every one that asks it.
as thou for thy part art willing to hear it:) Wherefore, I pray thee, art
thou called a Christian, but because thou beleuest in JESUS CHRIST, and haste
once received baptism, as a seal of this thy faith, and of the Righteousness
thereof. But how will thou persuade us that thou beleeuest in CHRIST, if so
be thou be ignorante of the articles of Faith? if thou can not make
confession of thy Faith? and so often as need is render an account of the
same? for there are certain general precepts prescribed indifferently to all
Christians, as: He that believes, shall be saved. Math. 28. Romans 10. etc. He
that confesses me before men, I will confess him before my father which is in
Heaven: Math. 10. Marc. 8. and Luke last. Again, Romans 10. With the heart man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
Salvation. Moreover, the Apostle Peter in his second Epistle and third
Chapter says: that all those that have given their names unto Christ, or are
called Christians, ought so farreforthe to proceed in the study of the holy
mysteries that they having heard ye truth of their Faith out of the Prophets
and Apostles declared in the Scriptures, might fully and substantiallye
comprehended the same, and also be able every man for himself at all times,
and to every one that requires it, to render a reason of his faith and hope.
But that any man should be able to confess his faith, and to yield an
account thereof, that has not been some space conuersante in the sacred
Scriptures, it is by no means probable or likely. For it is one thing simply
to make a confession of Faith, and an other to render an account of Faith. As
for the one, it may readilye enough after a sort be performed of every
manne, especially when there is no peril of persecution near at hand: and
there is no man in a manner, which has not seen at one time or other, many
folks so to have learned and repeated by heart the Symbol of the Apostles,
yea, and the Nicene Creed, and that now and then also in an unknown language,
as Popiniayes are wont to chatter when they bid men good morrow or good even:
but as touching the other, he that will do it, must of necessity declare, that
his faith is vpholden by the word of GOD it self, and (as Paul speaks
Rom^) confirmed with the testimony of the law and the Prophets. For thou art
utterly deceived, incase thou think it lawful for thee to put over the
office of believing to another, and to be sufficient, in case thou confessest
thy self to believe, as thy Godfather believed, which undertook and gave his
word for thee at the holy Font, or as the Churches believe, or as the
Ministers of Churches. For undoubtedly in the matter which appertains to the
everlasting salvation of the soul, every manne ought to be his own factour,
to be nearest unto himself, to gage his own proper Faith before GOD, and the
Church, with his own proper heart to believe unto Righteousness, and with
his own proper mouth to confess unto Salvation. For like as it profits not
thy body, in case an other manne takes meat for thee or in thy stead, and
thrusts it into his own mawe, and in the mean time, leaves thee hungry and
almost hungersterued for want of food: even so art thou wonderfullye
deceived, when thou weenest that it will be behouefull for thy soul, in case
thou thy self being ignoraunte of the things that belong unto Faith (whilst
I mean thou art both of age and understanding meet to have learned the
word of GOD) and making no confession at all, an other man do declare his
Faith before GOD and his Church. This is not the way, no, this is not the
way, believe me, to attain unto the scope and mark of Salvation. Those said
precepts of believing, of confessing, of rendering an account, do in very
deed bind every particular man without any difference. Be ye ready
(says Peter) to give a reason always, and to every one that asks. But how
canste thou hope that thou shalt have at all times, and in every place,
either thy Godfathers and Godmothers, or teachers of the Church to be present
with thee, which will do so much (I mean make answer) for thee? And for
this very cause is the custom commonly received in the Church, that the
confession of Faith should upon Sondayes and Holy days, be recited in such a
form, as albeit there be but one common Faith of all, like as there is but one
GOD, and one Baptism, yet it should not be said in common, we believe in one
GOD: but, I believe in one GOD, to the intent verily every man might perceive,
that he has for himself both to make confession, and also to render a reason
of his faith. For which cause also, when Baptism is ministered, it is used in
all Churches and Provinces after one and the selfsame manner: as for example,
every one being asked the question of the minister of the Church severally,
answers for himself, and says: I believe in GOD the father, I believe in
Jesus Christ his only begotten son, I believe in the holy Ghost, and so
forth: as touching which order of questioning and aunsweryng, there is
plain mention Act. 8. where is touched the regeneration of the Ethiopian
Eunuch. Neither can it be declared, how great a pestilence that fond opinion
of Faith inuolued (as they term it) scattered abroad by certain unlearned
idiots, has brought into the minds of men, where by they think they do
enough, when they profess themselves to believe, as other men believe. For
doubtless here upon has risen a most perilous security. Yea it has come
to pass by little and little, that those which should have obtained salvation
by faith, have bin so bold as utterly to neglecte and contemn Faith. But those
that have once neglected and cast from them the care of their faith, how is it
possible that they should afterward perform the works of Charity, especially
such as are pleasing and acceptable unto GOD, of which sort are those only and
alone that flow and proceed from Faith? And in whom there is neither Faith
nor Charity, the same must also of necessity be destitute of ye benefit of
hope. These things being thus determined, it follows, that such persons are
hitherto fallen away from the grace of GOD, and ought not to be made any
better account of (if we have regard to spiritual blessings) than Pagans or
brute beasts. Than which estate doubtless, especially of a man that is
baptized and glories in the name of CHRIST, nothing can be said or
thought, more wretched or miserable.

The manne that has either no Faith in him at all, or such as is very
slender and imperfect, neither uses to stir up, to nourishe, to increase,
and confirm the same by reading and meditating of the word of GOD: that manne
(I say) whatsoever he be, looks in vain to receive any spiritual
benefits at GODS hand. But that Faith do we affirm to be nothing, or as
slight and slender a thing as may be, which only is implicita, that is to
say, inuolued or enwrapped, such I mean as is fast fixed and locked up in
the breaste of an other manne, but has no manner of place in thine own.
Therefore even as Faith is looked for at thy hands, and must issue from thine
own self, so is the reading and knowledge of GODS word, wherein are declared
the principles of Faith, and whereby the lively justifying faith is kindled and
nourished in the mind, likewise required at thy hands, and must of necessity
also proceed from thy self. And to this end pertains that rebukeme^t, or
complaint (whither it be) of Chrysostom in his sixteen Homily upon John: Some
there be (says he) more fond than children, that say: Blessed is every
soul that is simple: and he that walks in Simplicity, walks in Faith.

This truly is the cause of all calamities, that a great number can no skill
to allege fit testimonies of Scripture for matters in question. For the
simple in that place is not to be taken for the Fool, and for him that knows
nothing at all: Every Christian ought to foresee and provide, that he err
not, or be not deceived in the doctrine of Religion.
but for him that is not evil, for him that is not craftye. For if it should
so be understood, it had been superfluous to say: Be ye wise as
Serpents, and simple as Doves.

But now ought every man very carefully to beware and take heed, least he
err in any wise in the Doctrine of Faith, or be deceived and beguiled of
others. The Angel of darkness often times changes himself into the likeness
of an Angel of light. In these days are to be seen every where great
swarms of Hipocrites, false teachers, and envious me^, which do break into
the Lords field by night, and there sow darnell. Again, there is no man privy
in his own conscience, that he is on every side so confirmed in sound
doctrine, but that he may both be deceived of others, and also deceive others,
yea and even himself to. Our first Parents Adam and Eve, whom God had
adorned as well with perfect righteousness, as also with a most plentiful
knowledge of all goodness, and many other spiritual graces, were
notwithstanding beguiled of the subtle serpent: and even forthwith (without
any great striving) gave consent to his treacheries and illusions. How and by
what means therefore may we warrant our selves, that we shall in no case be
ensnared or entangled, when as we are both far more weak than they: and the
old serpente does now no less craftily than in times past endeavor by
Heretics and false teachers to entrap and circumuent us? He then may seem
rightly to be out of his wits, and even to strive with reason it self,
whosoever fears not ne stands in doubt of such a danger. And soothly,
that thou may arm thy self substancially against all pestilent opinions,
that thou may be able to avoid, to preuente, and beat back the strokes of
the adversaries, who seek on every side, with the enuenomed darts of wicked
arguments, to assail and set upon thee, and may stand so fast, and persevere
so vnvanquishable in sound doctrine, as is most meet and requisite, thou have
need to put on spiritual weapons, the shield of faith, the helmet of
salvation, but especially the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, as
the Apostle teaches and commands in the sixte of the Ephe. But thus does he
arm and defend himself, that daily and duly hears, reads, meditateth,
learneth the word of GOD set forth in the books of holy Scripture. For the
Apostle Paul in the second Epistle to Timothy and third Chapter, says very
well, that the Scripture is profitable to reprove and confute those, that
casting abroad the nets of false opinions, go about to beguyle, to mask,
and destroy the unwary and weak. What doctrine soever is first brought in, it
is necessary that ye same be tried by the touchstone of the holy Scripture as
by a most absolute rule. And there are to be found every where in the sacred
books, as well exhortations, which do plainly show, with what great
heedfulnesse the authors of sects are to be avoided, as also counsels and
certain reasons, which do no less evidently declare, how wisely and
circumspectlye the same ought to be resisted. Which things do very plainly
prove, that it is a most vain toy, that a number (to beguile simple people
withal) do often times iangle off, and have continually in their mouths,
reading of the Scriptures, do by and by become Heretics. But this speech is
more worthy to be abhorred and abandoned than to be answered. For what other
thing else is this, than to say, that the Physic wisely given and ministered
of GOD himself, is poison: and that sickness and death is procured by that
thing which is provided to the furtherance of health and preservation of life?
Shall we think him that we have oftentimes spoken off, John Chrysostom, to
have been beside himself, and void of reason, who following the judgment of
the Apostle, by how much more he saw many Heresies to grow up in his
time, and in manner of the disease called the canker to creep further and
further: by so much more thought it necessary to have his hearers admonished
that they should diligently apply themselves to the reading of the holy
Scriptures? There were in deed at that time no small number of Heretics, as
namely the Manichees, the Anomaeans, the Arians, Aetians, Eunomians,
Valentinians, and Marcionites, the Marcellians and Sabellians, the Acoluthia^s:
there were (to be short) Gentiles, and such as following the Emperor
Iulianus, had revolted from the Tents of the Christians: for with all these it
is evident that he encountered, by sharpning his pen against them: and so
much the rather for that they vnmeasurably vexed the Churches of
Constantinople, and else where over all Greece, and very many men (being
otherwise not evil) were seduced by them. This necessity therefore drove the
most vigilant Bishop, to stir up all men's minds, as well by books
notoriously written, as also by public preachings and Sermons, to the
continual reading of the prophetical and Apostolic wrytings: as we have
more than once or twice here already. And in one place he pronounces, that
is we intend to resist Heresies, and to descerne the true Church from the
conuenticles of Heretics, we have need especially (to the doing of it) of the
aid and furtheraunce of ye Scriptures.

His words in the exposition of the four and twenty Cha. of Math. Homily 49.
are these: In these days, since Heresy invaded the Churches, there can no
trial be had of true Christianity: neither is there any other refuge for
Christians, desirous to know the variety of Faith, than the holy Scripture of
GOD. Before indeed it was showed many ways, which was the Church of CHRIST,
and which was Gentilitie: but now it can no way be known of any, which
is the true Church of CHRIST, but only by the Scriptures. And why? Because
that all these things which are properlye Christ's in truth, those Heresies
have also in Schism: they have Churches alike, and the holy Scriptures
themselves, they have Bishops alike, and other orders of Clearkes, they have
Baptism alike, they have the Eucharist alike, and al other things, and finally
even Christ himself. A man therefore desirous to know which is the true Chuche
of Christ, how shall he know in so great a confusion of likeness, but only
and alone by the Scriptures? Again before time the Church of Christ was
known by her very manners and conditions, when the conversation of Christians,
either of al, or of the most was holy and blameless, which was not so among
the ungodly. But now Christians are become as evil, or worse, than are the
Heretics or Gentiles. For, to say the truth, there is greater continency
found among them, though in schism, then among the Christians. He therefore
that will know which is the true Church of Christ, how shall he know, but only
by the Scriptures? The Lord knowing then that so great a confusion of things
should happen in the later times, therefore commands, that the Christians,
which are in the state of Christianity, and desirous to embrace the
steadfastness of the true faith, should have recourse to no other thing, than
to the Scriptures. Otherwise, if they shall have regard to any other matters,
they shall be offended, and perish, not understanding which the true Church
is. Thus much there. Yea moreover the same Father is bold to say, that Heresies
do then chiefelye budde forth, when men neglect to read the holy Scriptures.
A great defense and bulwark against sin (says he) in his 3. Homily of
Lazarus, is the reading of the Scriptures: a great downfall, a dangerous
pit, is the ignorance of the Scriptures: a great loss of salvation it is,
to know nothing of Gods laws: this thing has engendered heresies, this thing
has brought in corrupt life, this thing has turned all things vpside
down. For it can not be, no, it can not be I say, that any man should depart
without fruit, that is delighted with the continual reading of the Scriptures.

The counsel therefore that (we see) Chrysostom gave, the self same (no
doubt) did other of the holy fathers give also, as Origin, Hierome,
Augustine, and such like, who then especially exhorted al men to the reading
of the Scriptures, when as Heresies every where waxed rife. In these sentences
then as well of the Apostle Paul, and also of Chrysostom, and others, laying
forth the lawful use of the holy Scriptures, we will willingly rest: and if
any shall be found hereafter to the high reproach and slander of GODS divine
majesty, to cry out, that the sacred Scripture does minister matter and
occasion of Heresy, those (unless they will be convicted of high treason
against the holy GHOST, the author of the holy books) we will command and
charge to hold their peace. But if they shall go forward to speak blasphemies
against the holy GHOST, then will we with the martyr Polycarpus, (for so
does Iustine write of him to Florinus) stop our ears with our fingers, and
turning unto GOD, say: O merciful GOD, what times have thou brought us into,
that we should hear these things? If ever at any time, then undoubtedly at
this time, which ingendreth sects not a few, whereby the ignorant multitude
is infected, it were to be provided, that out of the most plentiful storehouse
of the holy GHOST against the pestilent air of wicked opinions, all good men
would diligently procure to themselves in time, preservative remedies,
gathered out of the most excellent rules of the old and new Testamente,
which in deed ought to be preferred before all manner of costly and sweet
smelling spices whatsoever. Where if so be any malapert merchaunt or craftye
cousiner, be found to abuse the Scriptures of themselves most notable and
most wholesome, to his own and other men's destruction, there can nothing here
truly be imputed to the Scriptures: but what evil or mischief so ever be
taken, it must of necessity be ascribed to the perverse nature of men, as
well of the deceivers as of the deceived. There is nothing at any time so
excellent, profitable, and wholesome, that Satan, and his Disciples, dare not
subtly counterfayte, and apply to another end than it ought to be, but
especially to do hurt. Evil men make the air, sun, fire, water, earth,
meat, drink, to become hurtful unto them, when they will not use them
aright. The like judgment is to be given of the word of GOD, which in the
holy Scriptures is called a light, a lantern, bread, meat, food, fire. But
indeed, like as the Apostle says that he preaches CHRIST crucified, unto all
that are called both of the Jews and Grecians, the power of GOD and wisdom of
GOD, albeit the ungodly either Jews or Gentiles should never so much be
offended and laugh him to scorn: even so is the course of our talk directed to
the commendation of GODS word, to the intent the Godly minded may receive
life thereby: though the wicked and ungodly do snatch it, and violentlye wrest
it how and whithersoeuer they list themselves.

Again how many Christians may we find, There is no Christian, that stands
not in need to be reproved for his sins, and often times to be admonished.
which do not now and then diverse ways ouershoote themselves, and fowly
also fall? If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us, as says S. John in the first Chapter of his first Epistle,
whereunto it behooves us al to subscribe. For why, it is requisite, that even
the saints also do pray daily, as our Lord and master CHRIST has taught and
commanded, saying: Forgive us our debtes. And the excellent Prophet David
Psalm. 33. says, that all the holy ones shall call continually upon GOD, to
obtain pardon for their sins I will acknowledge, says he, my sins unto the
Lord, and thou have pardoned my unrighteousness. For this cause shall all the
godly pray unto thee. Wherefore there is no man living, that stands not in
need often times of a controller, or Judge, which may diligently admonish,
rebuke, chasten, and bring him into order. But if it so fall out that men dare
not reprove thee being a sinner, or they vouchsafe it not, or they do it not
so franckly and courteously as were to be wished, and that peradventure,
because thou art grieved if any do deal with thee in that order: then truly
there remains this only advice, namely, that thou read with an attentive
mind, the precepts contained in the holy Scriptures, the sentences, the
threatenings uttered of GOD against sinners, likewise the Sermons of the
Prophets and Apostles, wherein the sins of all men and therefore thine also
are openly and severely reproved: and humbly transfer unto thy self, whatsoever
things thou find agreeable to thy state. By this means even alone thou
may in good earnest be brought to the knowledge of thy sins, from this
(knowledge) secondly to repentance, and from repentance (finally) to faith and
amendment of life. Add moreover that the Scripture, does find out and
condemn those secret sins in thee, which men know not off, and which thou
would be ashamed to confess, and so could never be reproved by the lively
sounding voice of any man. Therefore the holy Scripture when thou read it,
speaks only unto thee alone: it is a faithful keeper of thy secrets, it will
admonish thee of most weyghty affairs, it will not put into thy mind but those
things that are excellent, and of which peradventure thou should never have
heard any thing of any man living. For in good sooth this very word whilst
it is reverently and with a fervent affection read, or heard recited of
another, becomes quick and mighty in operation, so that it pearceth to the
very marow of the bones, and to the innermost entrayles of the heart, and even
leaves behind it certain strings sticking fast of long time after in the
minds of the readers: which thing to be true Saint Augustine in his book of
Confessions, and other holy me^ do avouch, that they have tried by experience.
And John Chrysostom in his third Sermon of Lazarus presumes to say, That
men even only by the outward view of the holy books are afraid to commit
sin: and that wheresoever the spiritual books are, from thence is expelled
the force of the Devil, and all things become there safe and sound. But he
that hears not GOD in the Scriptures, by a certain priuye violence, but yet
with great and absolute authority, briefly ripping up sins though never so
secret and hidden: how will he hear man when he accuses, controlleth, or also
(by a certain grave kind of speaking) condemns them? But if there be any
person that neither admits man to be his counselor, nor yet hearkeneth unto
GOD continually speaking in the Scriptures: that such a one from his heart
should be a Christian, no man (I am sure) but he that is over lightly carried
away with words, and willingly suffers himself to be deceived, will ever
grant or allow. Therefore to the intent thou may declare, that thou art
(at the least) unfeignedly sorry for that thou remaynest fast fettered in the
bands of sin, and that thou couetest to hear GOD lovingly and with a
fatherlye affection talking with thee, admonishing thee, and calling thee back
into the right way before thou be utterly destroyed: thou will, if thou wise
be, invre thy self daily to read the holy Scriptures, and in them as in a
glass behold, and learn more familiarly to know, not so much what GOD is,
as what thou thy self art. No Christian ca^ be without comfortes.


But how large a field should be opened, incase I might speak of
consolations, whereof in the holy Scripture are expressed innumerable, and the
same most certain and sound? For albeit Philosophye has now long since
been commended of her retayners for many causes, but especially for that she
ministers in adversity a present comfort: yet are all Philosophical reasons
found to be very faint, barren, cold, weak, if they be compared with those
which the holy Scriptures do afford. Truly, I have oftetimes sorrowed with my
self, and complained, that as well Tullius Hortensius (with which work Saint
Aug. confesses himself to have bin wonderfully stirred up in his 3. book and
4. Chap. of Confessions) as also his book of Comfort, and likewise the
excellent and most clear Consolatory works of other Philosophers beside, are
utterly lost. But my mind somewhat stayed with this cogitation, I again
confirmed, interpreting, that this thing came not to passed without the
providence of GOD, namely, to the intent, that men, when they see themselves
deprived of the necessary aid of such writings, might take occasion to fly
more studiously to the holy books, out of which only and alone the remedy
against every heavy hap, and all lamentable and doleful events is to be
taken. For to this end especially is the Scripture before all other
disciplines put forth that it might supply in the families and asse^blies of
wretched creatures the most needful and commendable office of comforting.
Whereupon to the Romans 15. the Apostle affirms, that whatsoever things are
revealed in the holy Scriptures, are revealed for our learning: to the intent,
that by the worthy examples of Patience, and by the notable Sermons of comfort
made every where by the Prophets, Christ and Apostles, we might be
encouraged and supported, to the holding fast of our hope in dangers, and to
the invincible going forward in all godliness and virtue. And who is he, I
beseech you, that will not judge that a man ought rather to give credit, and
to stay himself upon the comfortable persuasions that are given from the
holy Ghost, that is, from GOD himself, and which by reason of the dignity,
power, and goodness of God, must of necessity by all means be effectual and
fruitful, than upon those that are uttered and put forth of men: which do
themselves waver, and are oft-times deceived, never able to perform the
things that they promise, and to be short being taken for very tall men of
their hands, do commonly stand in need to be comforted and encouraged by
others? If there be any thing, says Hierome, in the Preface of his
Commentaries on the Epistle to the Ephesians, that holds up a wise man in
this life, and persuades him to abide patiently among the troubles and
vexations of the world, then is it even this specially in my judgment, namely,
the meditation and knowledge of the Scriptures. Which things, seeing they are
thus, verily I am not afraid to say, that like as God has so appointed, that
no man, whether he be in noble or base condition, should be utterly void, and
free from all dangers: so also is it to be determined, that no man, in what
state or calling soever he be, can want, or be without the reading,
hearing, and understanding of the Scriptures. Let there come forth amongst us
some odd Christian, and tell us, that he was never at any time assailed with
the darts of temptations, either inward or outward, that he was never
heretofore plunged in any troubles or perturbations, or that he never needs
to fear any hereafter: let such a one I say come forth, and he shall make
us believe, that he is one alone that wants no comfort, and to whom we
ought to grant, that he may live and dye in the ignorance of the
Scriptures. But would to God that miserable and ten times wretched men,
compassed about on every side with innumerable calamities, could sufficiently
consider, partly their own weakness, far vnfi^te to sustain the burden
of so many miseries continuallye oppressing them, partlye the most bountiful
helps and comforts which they may receive out of the holy Scriptures: then out
of all doubt should their s^ates be in far better case than they be, and we
should not see so many daily (as we do) to cast themselves headlong into the
deep gulf of desperation, and with their endless shame and confusion, to die
not only in this world, but also in the world to come. But the time would
fail me, if I should proceed any further to discourse of the necessity,
utility, and efficacy of consolations to be gathered out of the Scriptures:
wherefore I think it requisite even here to make an end.

Therefore, O ye Christians all, The Conclusion.
of what state or condition soever ye be, I heartily pray and beseech you by
the precious blood of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, that ye would
thoroughly persuade your selves, that the things which have hitherto of me bin
treated of, do tend first to the sanctifying and celebrating of Gods name
here on earth, and next to the stirring up of every one of you, to the intent
you may become diligente in procuring the business of your own everlasting
salvation. For in very deed every man's own proper cause is here handled.
And it behooves us all oftetimes to consider, that the Church is a public and
common School, instituted of GOD our heavenly father, wherein the most
excellent teacher of truth the holy Ghost teaches and professes of free
cost, and lovingly allureth us all unto him. The Scholars admitted into this
School, are even so many as are baptized into the name of CHRIST. There is
but one book, and that is given indifferently to all, containing the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles: in which Book, is nothing else declared in
effect, than how by JESUS CHRIST righteousness and eternal salvation
comes to the believers: and again, how all the Goldye ought to endeavor,
that their Faith, Love and Hope may become manifest and apparante unto all men.
It stands every one of us in hand, wisely to weigh and consider, how he
behaueth himself in this School, and what profit he reapeth from time to
time in the holy Book. For he that does daily in expounding, reading,
hearing, and repeating of it diligently exercise himself, and be a mean to
provoke others to do the like, he declares himself indeed to be the
Scholar of GOD, and to be well worthy of praise and commendation. But on the
other side, who soever he be that refuses to read, hear and learn the said
Book, also causes others to abstain from the same, he does not obscurely
signifye, that he is of his father the Devil. For so, least any man should
be offended with me, as having spoken more boldelye than becomes me, Christ
himself determines John. 8. He that is of GOD (says he) hears Gods
words, you therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God: whom also a
little before he had said flatly to be borne of their father the Devil. And
this sentence, being of more force than all the definitive sentences of the
Judges of the whole world, as that which is pronounced, not of any mortal
manne, but of the immortal GOD himself, must of necessity abide firm and
unchangeable. Let every manne therefore diligently repute with himself, what
manner of judgment may be given of him, that is to say: whither he be
addicted unto GOD to everlasting life: or given over to the Devil to eternal
confusion.

OF THE READING and daily meditation of the holy Scriptures, very requisite and
necessary for all Christians, of what estate or condition soever.
The second Book.
HE that will take upon him to persuade with a sick man, must not only tell
him what medicine is of force against his sickness, but also how and in what
order the same is to be used. For it skilleth very much, whether a thing be
taken, within the body or without: of an old manne, or of a young: of a
strong body, or of a weak: of a man, or of a woman: also, at what time of the
year, and (to be short) in what order or manner tempered and made. Saint
Augustine reports in his fifte Epistle to Marcellinus, that there was a man
on a time, through a certain medicine ministered by the excellent Physician
Vindicianus, restored to health, after a few years when the very same
sickness came again, the sick party without asking any counsel of the
Physician, used the self same medicine (as before:) but it did him no good.
Anon there was running to Vindicianus, of whom they demanded, what the cause
should be, why the medicine now lastelye taken did not avail? he answered,
that it was therefore unavailable, because he himself had not willed it to be
taken: but least they should suspecte any harm by his so saying, he added:
that the manner of the using of a thing is greatly to be taken head of, and
that all things are not meet for all ages. In like manner therefore, for so
much as we have hitherto with sundry and plain arguments declared, that it
is the office of every Christian, daily and continuallye to read, hear, and
learn something out of the holy Bible: it remains now that we specifye and
demonstrate, how and by what means a man may readily, and without any
trouble or thinking of the time long, so take in hand, and point out this
office of reading every day of the week, as that in a years space, he may
well read and pervse over all the holy Books, especially so many as the old
and purer Church has avouched to be Canonical. We have indeed tarried
longer in the former Book than we were aware of, inasmuch as no man is
ignorante, that there is a more labor and diligence required of us, when men's
minds are first of all to be prepared and inflamed unto any thing, seeming
strange in the opinion of the unlearned multitude, and hard to outward
appearance (neither truly shall it repent us either of our travel, or long
standing, if we may by some means bring that to pass which we covet and
desire) but in the matters following, we will be more brief: as also the
thing it self, of which we have determined to speak, may well be
dispatched in fewer words.

Whosoever he be therefore, The willing mind easily finds opportunity to do
well,
that is truly, and indeed so careful of his own souls health, as he would
be counted, and knows assuredly, that the knowledge of Gods will out of the
holy Scriptures, is very requisite and necessary to salvation: that manne may
easily (if he list) find opportunity to read, and ensearch the same. The
thing that a man has once earnestly set his mind upon, unto that by
striving may he at length atteyne. It is no hard matter with us to devise a
way, whereby at one time or other we may enjoy that which we greedily gape
for. The covetous sort seek narrowly, and will be sure to get both time and
all manner of helps, that serve to the increase of their gain: and some can
find the means to serve their turns, in gadding up and down, in riding
too and fro: othersome in quaffing and drincking, in telling of fond Fables, in
playing at Dice, etc. in which (besides the loss of their money) are many
things also hurtful and noisome: why may not thou therefore (if thou will)
bestow some parcel of time in the searching and pervsing of Gods holy
mysteries? Truly, it is against all reason, that any manne should
complain, that he wants time to read the holy Books, since we may behold
the same daily to loose many good hours, in things not necessary, and
peradventure unseemly, or at least wise unprofitable. And a very preposterous
care it is, springing of a perverse judgment, to search nearly and nimbly to
provide all manner of things, that tend to the satisfying of the paunch, the
lust, ambition, pride, and other such like desires of a corrupted mind: and
when virtue comes in question, so to doubt, so to waver in mind, so to
weaue delays, so to pretend lettes and impediments, and I wot not what, as
though all ways and entries unto it were on every side forestalled and shut
up. It may very truly be said, that it lies for the most part in us,
that a thing be made to be either easy or hard. The gate unto well doing is
always open, so that we our selves do not shut it up, or of our own accord
turn aside from it.

But I hear incontinently one that says unto me: It is false to say, that
in reading there is labor and grief.
the reading which you so greatly urge, has no little labor and
painfulness in it, further, it requires good leisure and opportunity.
Verily, to the intent I may cut off, whatsoever appertains to this excuse,
I will endeavor in few words to show, how a man may provide, that in
reading he shall feel neither labor nor irksomeness: then next, that it is
not so hard a matter to find both leisure and opportunity. I will in one word
declare that which may seem sufficient. Bring with thee to ye reading of
holy things, a godly and willing mind, and thou haste (in effect) utterly
removed all manner of incombraunces. There are some diseases, if we may
believe Galen writing De locis adfectis lib. 3. Cap. 6. in which the powers of
the senses are so damnified and hurt, that the patientes, for so much as they
are continuallye attached with a kind of heaviness and fear, do imagine
whatsoever they see, to be sharp, bitter, and altogyther against them:
wherefore they have in suspicion and ielousy all things that are done or
said, and do eschew and abhor the presence and company of men: but yet
after a while they are healed and delivered from this malady. Even in like
case (say I) the reading of the Scriptures seems hard and painful unto
thee, because forsooth thou do so imagine it to be, some evil spirit
peradventure beguiling and bewitching thy senses: but the same (no doubt) will
become sweet, easy, yea and pleasant also unto thee, when by the help of
the holy Ghost thou have cast from thy mind that imagination. And to what
end, I beseech you, should any man thus colourably pretend these things,
since we may see daily a great number, that think not the time long a whit,
when they read the long and tedious tales stuffed with lies, of certain old
Greeks, and the fantastical Ass of Apuleius, and the fond dotages of
Lucian? I say nothing all this while of the most vain figmentes of Florandus,
Sir Lancelot, Sir Tristram, king Arthur, the four sons of Aymon, of
Magelona, Melucina, the round table: I speak nothing of Amorous (or rather
venomous) books ouerflowing in lasciviousness and uncleanness, of the hundred
Nouels, of unsavory and ribaldly ^estes, and of other dregs of like stamp,
which it were far better to be abolished with fire, the so often times to be
put forth in print. And in these toys, whylest Courtiers, whylest noble men,
noble women, young men and maids, whilst the worshipful, whilst the common
sort of men do spend certain hours in the fore noone, certain in the
afternoon, again some after supper, and oftimes a great part of the night,
there is not so much as one word whispered as touching any labor or pain in
reading: but as well the eyes as the ears, yea and minds both of the reader,
and also of ye whole company sitting about him, do abide intentiuely fixed upon
these trifles, and neither the noise of the household, nor the coming in of
others can possibly break off the base and loude-sounding voice of the speaker.

And moreover the labor of reading, if at leastwise it deserves to be called
labor, thou may now and then divide with the residue of thy family, so that
thou that art governor of the house, may read one while, another while some
one of thy company, another while thy son or thy daughter, another while thy
wife, another while some other in the house that can skill of reading.

As in other actions, so in this also may one not without a cause succeed
another, resembling (as a man would say) Hercules who (as the Poets imagine)
rescued wearye Atlas by bearing up heaven with his shoulders. Neither truly
ought it to seem a thing strange or removed from the usage of the godly, to
commitet the office of reading and recyting holy books unto wives, children,
servant, and other in the house.

Again, if the reading of the scriptures be fitly pointed out and distinguished
into certain peculiar hours (as it is expedient it should be) then may thou
have sufficient space both to breath in, and also to recover the powers of
thine eyes, the sight whereof peradventure is dazeled, or of thy voice, if it
be thy hap to read in the presence of other, and this may thou do, albeit
thou have determined to pervse over daily many Chapters. Moreover, there is no
let to the contrary, but that thou may now and then, to avoid irksomeness,
change places. For thou may very well read in thy chamber, when as either
thou risest in the morning, or go to bed at night: in the Church, when
there is either nothing or very little out of the Scriptures (as it oftimes
comes to pass) red or expounded to the people, in thy parlour, so long as
thy dinner or supper is in making ready, until thou be about to take thy
meat, whilst the dishes are brought too or carried from the table: in thy
Study, in thy garden, to be short, wheresoever thou will and art disposed.
Saint Augustine even before the time of his Baptism read with great
feruencie, and at all times, and in every place the holy books, he disputed
as touching the sayings of the Prophets and Apostles. He reports in the 8.
book and 6. Chapter of his Confessions, that he read Paul's Epistles at the
table. Chap. 22. that he took in hand often times the new Testamente in his
Ortchard, where he heard once a voice from heaven saying unto him: Take, read.
Whereby he was vehemently moved and provoked to embrace Christian religion, as
he records also in other places more. Again being awaked in the night; in the
morning, after dinner, after supper: and one while alone, another while with
his most sweet companions Licentius, Trigetius, Nauigius, Alipius, Nebridius,
and others, he usually and often, and with an incredible desire of learning
conferred as teaching the word of GOD. By these means therefore the
difficultly and tediousness, if any be thought to spring out of reading, is
easilye either diminished, or utterly taken away. For as the mouth that is out
of taste, can not away with any meat though never so deintie and wholesome:
but when it is recovered, is refreshed there with, and can scarcely be
satisfied: so when a man begins first to read the holy scriptures, he
quickly loatheth them: but when he has once tasted the sweetness of the
spiritual doctrine, then he feels daily more and more all things to become
more pleasant and acceptable unto him, and then sings he with ye Psalmist:
How sweet are thy testimonies to my throat, yea they are sweeter than honey to
my mouth.

But it remains now, that we show, How we may get leisure and opportunity
to read the holy Scriptures.
how and by what means a man may pick out leisure and opportunity to read
the holy Scriptures. Verily I dare avouch, that there is no kind of calling so
vnwrapped or entangled in businesses, wherein may not be had a convenient
respite to think upon and accomplish something for the safety and preservation
of the soul. Among the offices that are full of difficulties and dangers may
be reckoned the kingdom, the state of Consuls, Lieutenauntes, Judges, the
government of armies, and if there be any honorable function besides in a
great and mighty Commonwealth. And it is evident, that a great number of men
being in the said several authorities very famous and renoumed, even in the
troublesome state of things, and in the greatest floods of cares and
perplexities, gave notwithstanding a certain portion of time to reading,
writing, meditation, and consultatio^ of and concerning difficult and weighty
affairs. Examples of the Gentiles if any be delighted to hear, he shall not
need to seek far for them. It is reported, that Alexander the Great, even
whilst he was busy in leadyng about his royal army of soldiers, used to
read and write diverse and sundry things: and that if at any time he was to
join battle with his enemy, he would snatche up some one book or other for
his purpose, and read, whereby as by a counsailer and encourager, he might be
made both more apt, and also more courageous to fight.

Octauius the Emperor (if we may credit Suetonius) in a most cruel
battle holden at Mutina a City of Gallia, read, wrote, and declaymed daily:
in the night time being awaked out of sleep, he used a reader of
Commentaries: and when he was at home, he would recite certain writings of his
own to his familiar friends, as unto hearers in the Schools, Julius Caesar,
as he happily fought sundry battles, so put he the same himself as elegantly
in writing, and that even in his Tents, in the noise of Trumpettes, and in the
confused clattering of armor and weapons, so far forth that a man may
doubt, by whether of the two things he attained greater commendation. And
before this man, Cato Censorius, famous for his skill both of war and peace,
read very much, year learned the Greek tongue perfectlye, when he was an old
man, as afterward his graundchilde, whom they called Vticensis, waiting in
the Court till the Senate should come together, had his Books with him,
least any part of the hour-glasse should come forth without fruit. Plinius
Veronensis, albeit he was entangled with the affairs of the Court, of the
law, and of warfare, yet did he never refrain himself from Philosophy,
and from the insearching of hidden things, but whither he were taking his
meat, or iorneying, or doing of some other thing, he either read, or heard
one reading, wrote, or indighted to one writing for him. But omitting these
Gentiles, in whom no doubt shines forth a wonderful industry and care of good
learning: I think it much better for godly and Christian people to have the
examples of godly men expounded, that even for the likeness of religion and
doctrine which they follow, the minds of all may become the more prompt and
ready to imitate and embrace the same. Set before your eyes therefore the
noble king David, a man strong and valiaunte both in war and in peace, and
right notable in battles and conquestes. For he, whether it were so that
flying the tyrant Saul, he one while wandered in obscure and forborne places,
another while sustained woeful banishment with the king of Geth, or whither that
he feared himself by reason of his son Absolon kindling ye coa^s of civil
war against him, or whither he should stand to the trial of battle abroad
with his enemies, or whither he ruled at home the raines of his kingdom, was
not only bent and inclined continually to the law which he had always about
with him by gods co^m^adement: but also in those most doleful and troublesome
turmoyles, he wrote, and sang manifold Psalms. His son and successor
Solomon, so administered his kingdom, that he brought the same to a peaceable
and most flourishing estate: he was in his own person the chief dealer in
matter of justice and equity: the ambassadors, which kings and Princes sent
unto him, as desirous to hear his wisdom and Councels, he most wisely
answered: he builded moreover most gorgiously and sumptuouslye: but in all
these things, he omitted nothing as touching his manner of reading and pervsing
the holy law: yea he put forth parables, and verses (or sentences) in great
number, he disputed most sharply, as touching summum bonum or the chief end
of man, as is to be seen in Ecclesiastes, as touching trees and plants, of
beasts, of birds, of worms, of fishes, 1. King. 4. And what think ye did
Ezechias and Josias, during the time of their several gouernements, in the
study and meditation of the holy Scriptures? who to the reforming and
preserving as well of the Church, as of the common wealth, using the counsel
and advice of the wisest of the Priests and Prophets, (that age was ennobled
by the excellent Prophets, Esaias, Hoseas, Micheas, Ieremias) left no way
vnsoughte, nor no stone unturned. But yet before a great number of other, that
honorable Eunuch, for his wonderful diligence deserves commendation, who was
the chief treasourer to a Queen, and always occupied in giving and taking,
in casting and recasting of accomptes, which is a most troublesome office,
especially in a woman's Court: and yet not so much, as even then wh^^ he
iourneyed by the way, and rode in a Chariot, suffered he the time to pass
away without the reading of the Scriptures. Of whom, forbycause we have
spoken before, now it shall be sufficient briefly to have repeated thus much.
Notable is the praise of Cornelius the Centurion, Captain of the Italian band,
whom Luke Acts 10. sets forth to have been a lover of sincere religion, and
to have feared and worshipped GOD with al his house, which himself (no doubt)
had so taught and informed, to have given willingly alms to the poor, and
finally with fervent prayers to have called upon God without ceassing. But
that he was such a one without the reading and understanding of the
Scriptures, we can by no means suspect, seeing that even Peter in his
oration which he made to those that were assembled in the house of Cornelius,
says plainly, that the word which the Lord sent to the children of Israel,
preaching Peace by Jesus Christ, the Lord of all men was known unto them.
Thou sest therefore, that Kings and Princes, Courtiers Lieutenaunts, Capitaines,
whom no man can deny to be evermore distracted into many and diverse affairs,
even at what time they were in a manner oppressed with the waighte and burden
of businesses, could find some opportunity to the readyng and meditation of
Gods word: how can then the cold and far fetched reasons take place, that a
number do allege in great plenty, and I wot not without what colored
pretenses, to excuse and defend their own slothfulness withal? To be
short, there is no state or condition, no function or office, no labors, no
causes incident either to public or private dealings, that can minister any
excuse sufficiently lawful, to discharge any Christian from the reading and
pervsing of the Sacred Books.

Now since it is evident, That a time certain, ought to be given to the reading
of the Scriptures
that no excuse or allegation whatsoever will go for payment, it is meet and
requisite, that every man do so distribute the times and hours of his
actions, as of them he may give some daily to the searching of the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles. And in good sooth it is not likely, that the things
should otherwise be well done, that are not accomplished in order, and in a
time appointed. Some things are fit to be done in the night, othersome in the
dawning, othersome in the morning, othersome at noonetide, othersome in the
evening. And look how much more laborious the businesses are, or labors
busy, which it behooves to deal withal, so much more duly shalt thou sever
and divide them, and endeavor to execute every thing in certain hours and
peculiar distances of times and seasons. We read in Ammianus Marcellinus, that
Alexander the great, Julius Caesar, and the Emperor Iulianus (who labored to
immitate those former in many things) divided the nights while they lay in
their camps into three parts: whereof the first part they gave unto rest, and
to the satisfaction of nature, the second to the doing of things needful,
the third to the study of good arts and sciences. But why do we not rather
turn our consideration unto Christian princes? Therefore to speak of Alfred
king of Britain, who first of all founded the famous schole at Oxforde, we
find it recorded, that he in like manner disseuered all the time into three
portions, and gave eight hours daily to the mind, to read, pray, and meditate
in: other eight to the administration of his kingdom, and the residue to
bodily exercises. Not much unlike unto this man was Charles the great, who
used to feed his mind with good studies and meditatio^s, but especially with
the reading of the holy Scriptures: and (which not a few have reported of him)
in the time of dinner and supper he would always have some things recyted as
well out of the sacred Bible, as also out of the works of Saint Augustine. It
is plain and evident, that many other princes mo besides, have in learning the
duties of godlynes out of the holy Scriptures, trodden the salfe same pathe. Why
do not every one of us therefore after the example of so worthy men, especially
of Alfred and Charles, kings that deserved exceedinglye well of Christian
religion, take counsel by and by, as touching ordinary hours to be appointed
to the reading of the holy Bible? I do very willingly, and even purposely,
rehearse ye factes of kings and princes in this cause: partly to the intent the
kings, princes, and noble men of our days may perceive that they also are
provoked by the authority and princely presidents of their ancestors to the
like diligence in learning the doctrine of religion: and partly, to the end
that inferioure persons, who are by no means like princes surcharged and in a
manner overwhelmed with the waves of manifold and difficult affairs, may
understand, and will they, nil they, confess, that they have no manner of
excuse left unto them, whereby they might pretend that they want fit time and
oportuniti to read the holy Scriptures.

Be it therefore concluded and determined, that it is no hard matter for any
Christian, to find fit places, times, and hours to pervse over the books of
the heavenly Philosophy, that at leastwise considering what other excellent men
have done in the same matter, will not stick valiantlye to prick forward
himself to the doing of the like.

Therefore now as one letting his suit fall, What time most apt to the reading
of the Scriptures.
and acknowledging himself to be vanquished and overcome, some man demands,
and would gladly learn of us, what time, or what hours we deem convenient to
be chozen to the reading of the sacred books. I will in few words declare,
what I think to be most expediente. The choice ought especially to be in thy
self, to determine of the hours, according to the manner of the fu^ction
which thine office or kind of life does require. Doubtless GOD himself
seems greatly to commend the time of the morning and evening, when a Deuteronomy. 6.
and 11. he says: ye shall lay up my words in your heart and in your soul. And
ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them, when thou sit in
thine house, when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up. Thou see the times to be pointed out, which every man, even
without any informer, should effectuallye in deed consecrate unto prayers,
thanksgiving, and meditation of things spiritual and heavenly. Albeit where
the Lord adds, that when a man sits at home in his house, and when he
trauelleth by the way, he ought to talk of his word: he does not obscurely
signify, that not only in the morning and evening, but also at all other times
and hours whatsoever men may profitably be excused in learning the law of
God: and therefore that it must be leafte free to every manne to appoint
certain hours according to the trade of his life, and variety of businesses
which happen therein. That which is of it self wholesome, and fruitful, at
what time soever it be done, is well done. Let thy chief study and care be
this, that what hours thou haste once appointed, thou may without
interruption, and manger all lettes and impedimentes, perpetually observe. For
why, all things that shall once in this behalf reverently be decreede, are, as
by an inviolable law, and yet without superstition, to be retained and kept.
And if at any time peradventure some odd business, and unlooked for, do fall
out to the contrary, then it behooves thee very carefully to provide, that at
some other time the want be supplied.

But again, How much every day to be read.
thou ask: how much shall I read every day? in what space shall I once
peruse over all the whole Bible? I answer, that (as I understand) it was an
ordinary matter with our ancestors, once in a years space to have the Bible
from the beginning to the end publicly recited in holy assemblies, to the
common instruction of all that were present. For to the intent that thing might
the more commodiously be done, they admitted in those days no other Psalms or
Books of Scripture in the said assemblies, but such as were Canonical, as
we have showed in the former Book. And that the same most commendable usage
was kept and continued many ages following, it is not to be doubted. For
even Gratian himself distinct. 15. declaring what Books of holy Scripture
were wont to be read in his time, that is to say, about the year after
Christ's birth.1160. signifies, that there was made only a very small
change. From Septuagesima (says he) to the xi. day before Easter, let the
five books of Moses be read. From the fifteenth day before Easter to the
Supper of the Lord, the Prophet Jeremy. From the Octaues of Easter, to the
Octaues of Pentecoste, the Apocalypse, the Acts of the Apostles, the Canonical
Epistles. From the eight day before Pentecost to the Calendes of August, the
books entitled of the Kings, and Paralipomenon. From the first Sunday of
August to the Calendes of September, the Books attributed to Solomon: namely,
the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, the Book of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus. From
the first Sunday of September to the Calendes of October, Job, Tobias,
Esther, Ezras: of some is added also Judith. From the first Sunday of November,
to the Calendes of December, Ezechiel, Daniel, and the twelve small prophets
From the first Sunday of December to the nativity of the Lord, Esaias. From
the first Sunday following the nativity of the Lord to Septuagesima, the
Epistles of S. Paul the Apostle. These Books therefore, among which
notwithstanding we see some ^o be placed of the Bishops, which the old and
purer Church acknowledged not for Canonical: and again some, which are
reckned in the Canon, to be pretermitted, were usually read and expounded of
readers, when, and at such time as the faithful come together, in the
morning, and often times before dailight. We gather hereby a most certain
argument, as touching the prayers which they call morning prayers, and are yet
still in use in many Churches, and in which certain parcels out of the
Books of the old Testament are usually read. Again the Books of the
Evangelists concerning the doctrine and doyngs of Christ, they did in like
manner, and peradventure in the time of Evening prayer read over and expound.
But now in these days this practice is utterly worn out of Churches, and only
the beginnings or parcels of certain Books are slightly tasted of, a number
of newe-founde and unnecessary songs being brought in, clean contrary to the
decrees of the ancient fathers: as in deed many other things more in time
paste holesomly ordained, we see now either utterly to be decayed, or
wonderfully to be perverted and corrupted. And there is now no place left so
much as to the books of the Evangelists, that they might be red over once in
a year, but on the sondayes only certain Histories out of the^ are by
piecemeale picked out: whereas of our ancestors, the Evangelical books
especially were wont to be expounded wholye without interruption to the
people. I grant indeed, that in some places in the holy feasts, chiefly of
Easter and Whitsontide, and likewise at the Nativity of the Lord, for as much
as then commonly those that had profited sufficiently in the doctrine of the
Cathechisme, or in the principles of Christian religion, were with great
preparation, and to the incredible reioycement of all the godly baptized, the
interpretation of the holy book begun and not ended was a little intermitted
and left off, and the mysteries of the nativity and resurrection of CHRIST, of
the sending of the holy GHOST, also the doctrine as touching the use of
Baptism diligently declared. But as soon as those holy days were past, it was
provided, that the same books should again be taken in hand and continued:
which thing Saint Augustine does not obscurely signifye in the beginning of
his exposition of the Epistle of Saint John. But to what purpose is it to
stand longer in these things?

When and as often therefore as I behold and consider the diligence and example
of the fathers, me thinks verylye yt it were no hard matter to find a
mean, whereby eue^ now also any manne may once or oftener in a years space
read over the whole Bible, or certain books of it, according as he himself
shall think good. For there is no let to the contrary, but that a man may
appoint this law unto himself, namelye to pervse over the holy books in the
selfsame order and time, that (as we declared even now) they are reckened and
distinguished in by G^e^i^n.

Every man may easily observe that form and order that is of him prescribed.
But for so much peradventure as that order and disposition will not be liked of
all men, wherein be recounted some books which are not in ye Canon: and
again, othersome that being Canonical and right worthy to be read, are
omitted, I mean the volumnes of the four Evangelists, and the Psalms of
David: we, as by the pointing of a finger, will show another way, and that
truly more easy, and more certain, as comprehending all the Canonical
books, and likewise least any man should complain, the residue also called
Apocrypha. Go too therefore, first of all let us place by themselves, the
Canonical books, The Canonical books of the old Testament.
according as they are of the ancient Hebrews, and also of ye Greeks and
Latins, but especially of Orige^, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Hierome, Augustine,
and the counsel of Loadicea digested and set down: and withal let us mark
into how many Chapters every book is divided. These books following belong to
the old Testament:

Genesis has Chapters 50 Exodus has Chapters 40 Leuiticus has Chapters 27
Numeri has Chapters 36 Deutronomy has Chapters 34 Joshua has Chapters 24
Chronicles. 1. has Chapters 29 Chronicles. 2. has Chapters 36 Ezra. 1. has
Chapters 10 Ezra. 2. has Chapters 13 Esther has Chapters 9 Esaias has Chapters
66 Judges has Chapters 21 Ruth has Chapters 4 Samuel. 1. has Chapters 3^
Samuel. 2. has Chapters 24 Kings. 1. has Chapters 22 Kings. 2. has Chapters
25 Jeremy has Chapters 52 Lamentations has Chapters 4 Ezechil has Chapters
48 Daniel has Chapters 12 Hosea has Chapters 14 Joel has Chapters 3 Amos
has Chapters 9 Abdias Conteyneth Chapters. 1 Jonas Conteyneth Chapters. 4
Micheas Conteyneth Chapters. 8 Nahum Conteyneth Chapters. 3 Habacuc Conteyneth
Chapters. 3 Sophony Conteyneth Chapters. 3 Haggeus Conteyneth Chapters. 2
Zachary Conteyneth Chapters. 14 Malachie Conteyneth Chapters. 4 Psalt. has
psalm. Chap. 150 Job has psalm. Chap. 42 Proverbs has psalm. Chap. 31
Ecclesiastes has psalm. Chap. 12 Song of Salomo^ has psalm. Chap. 8
Out of all these books a man may lawfullye fetch proofs and allegations to
fortify and confyrme the doctrine of religion, and they are in authority
before the other books and fragments which are called Apocrypha, and be in
less price: wherefore we shall not without good cause bestow our greatest
care and diligence in reading and learning of the same.

Therefore in this wise and order I judge they may once or oftener in a years
space readilye and without trouble be red.

Now I hold best, that we take our beginning at ye Psalter, and that it be
read apart, yea sometimes read again, by reason of the manifold profit and
utility thereof. For it is manifest, that in it is contained as ye would
say an Epitome or abridgement of the whole Scripture.

Therefore there is offered always in it that which may profitablye be
learned, there comes always next to hand something whereby the mind in so
great plentye and variety of things may be refreshed: and therefore is the
one only book of the Psalms before al other thought worthy to be learned,
yea and to be ka^ned by heart of all men.

This book moreover consists of prayers prepared for every event and
purpose: of thanksgiving, it minstreth doctrine of great importance and
excellency: there be in it exhortations sharp and severe: it abounds with
most sweet consolations: yea al things are so handled and delivered in it,
that in every part thereof both the glory of GOD is celebrated and set
forth, and the mind of man informed to godliness of life and conversation.

Wherefore even they also are wont that absteyne from other books of holy
scripture, not unwillingly to exercise themselves in reading and reciting daily
both morning and evening certain of the Psalms.

Which things seeing they are thus, we do not without good cause and
consideration set down our advertisement apart by it self, as touching the
reading and substanciall learning of the Psalms.

Now the Psalms do amount in number to a hundred and fifty: and the whole
year consists of two and fifty weeks and one day. If therefore thou be
disposed to read over the book of Psalms once in a years space, thou shall
read every week three Psalms: so shall there remayn two weeks to spare: or if
thou will, thou may pervse only two Psalms, in every of ye last 6. weeks.

But if thou be determined to read over the Psalms twice in one year, then
shall thou read every week six Psalms, which will most conveniently be
done, if thou repeat every day, after ye Lords day, one Psalm. Howbeit so
again will be left two weeks void, unless peradventure it likes thee in
every of the four last weeks to read only three Psalms.

Where, if incase now, by observing the selfsame order, thou will recite every
week nine Psalms, then shalt thou read over the whole Psalter thrice in one
year, using a Prouiso in the mean time, that in some of the latter weeks
thou distribute the number of the Psalms, according to the proportion
specified in the premises.

Albeit thou may also in such wise divide and participate this labor, as
namely in one week thou may recyt^ eight Psalms: and in an other nine, and
so go on with like proportion to the rest: and at the length thou shall
perceive fifteen Psalms to be kept in store to the last week.

Last of all, when thou shall be minded to read over the book of Psalms
four times in a year, it is requisite that thou read every week eleven
Psalms: and in every of the four last weeks, fifteen Psalms, and so there
will remain one only day free from reading. Thou see therefore an easy and
open way, whereby thou may in twelve months space read over the whole
book of the Psalms once, or twice, or thrice, or fouretimes, even as thou
list thy self. And is this so great and troublesome a labor, wherein thou
accustomest to say three Psalms in a week, or every day one or two Psalms,
and the one perhaps in stead of a prayer in the morning when thou risest, and
the other at night when thou go to bed?

Let us proceed now in like manner to the other books called Canonical. There
are found in these seven hundred threescore and sea^enteene Chapters.
Wherefore if a man will read every week fifteen Chapters, he shall dispatch al
books which a little before we numbered, once in a years space, and there shall
remain two days only to spare. And it will be a very easy matter to
dispatch the reading of fifteen Chapters, if in some one day of the seven
thou repeat three Chapters, and in every of the rest twain. Who is he
therefore that can justly complain, that he has even by this means an over
heavy and importable burden laid upon him? Now then, as it shall please
thee to multiply the number of the Chapter: so will it be easy for thee to
account, how and in what order thou may in a years spaces pervse over
either twice or thrice all the books of the old Testament.

But in what estimation, says some man, shall the books called Apocrypha be
had? Shall it be good to spend any time in reading of them also? Why should
we not, say I, whenever opportunity serves, even extraordinarily read
them? Or if it please thee to apply the reading of them to certain peculiar
times appointed, there is no let but thou may do it. Let us therefore rehearse
as well the names as Chapters of the said books and fragments.

Tobias has Chapters 14 Judith has Chapters 16 Susanna has Chapters 1 Bell
dragon has Chapters 1 Song of the threee children has Chapters 1 Fragmentes
of Esther has Chapters 8 Ezra. 3. has Chapters 9 Ezra. 4. has Chapters 16
Machabees 1. has Chapters 16 Machabees. 2. has Chapters 15 Baruch has
Chapters 6 Wisdom has Chapters 19 Ecclesiasticus has Chapters 51
The sum of the Chapters amounts to a hundred threescorne and thirteen.
Read therefore every week three Chapters, but the last week of the year
save one ten Chapters, and the last of all thirteen, and thou shall very
well dispatche all the whole matter.

But there is no cause, as I have also admonished before, why thou should
bestow so much study in these, as in those which the church has long agone
avouched to be Canonical.

Now it is requisite that we speak of the Books of the new Testament. And
they are in this order, by a received custom (which no man will lightly find
fault with) placed and disposed:

Matthew Containing Chapters. 28 Mark Containing Chapters. 16 Luke Containing
Chapters. 24 John Containing Chapters. 21 Acts of the Apostles Containing
Chapters. 28 Epistle of S. Paul to ye Romans Containing Chapters. 16 To the
Corinthians the first Containing Chapters. 16 To the Corinthians the second
Containing Chapters. 13 To the Galathians Containing Chapters. 6 To the
Ephesians Containing Chapters. 6 To the Philippians Containing Chapters. 4 To
the Colossians Containing Chapters. 4 To the Thessalonians the first Containing
Chapters. 5 To the Thessalonians the second Containing Chapters. 3 To Timothy
the first Containing Chapters. 6 To Timothy the second Containing Chapters. 4
To Titus Containing Chapters. 3 To Philemon Containing Chapters. 1 To the
Hebrews Containing Chapters. 13 The Epistle of James Containing Chapters. 5 Of
Peter the first Containing Chapters. 5 Of Peter the second Containing Chapters.
3 Of John the first Containing Chapters. 5 Of John the second Containing
Chapters. 1 Of John the third Containing Chapters. 1 Of Jude Containing
Chapters. 1 Apocalypse Containing Chapters. 22
The Chapters in all are two hundred and three score. For in what place the
Epistles of Peter the second, of John the second and third, and one of Jude,
deserve to be put, I do not now dispute, who profess my self to follow the
common opinion, or rather custom.

Now if thou read every week in the New Testament five Chapters, thou
shall go thorough with it once in a tweluemonths space. If thou pervse over ten
Chapters, thou shall go thorough with it twice, and one only day shall be left to
spare. If fifteen Chapters, thou shall accomplish it thrice. If twenty, thou
shalt accomplish it four times.

These things being thus declared, it remains that every godly man do repute
with himself, how often he will read over the holy Psalms, how often the
books of the old Testament, how often the new Testamente in a years space.

Of which point when he has once determined, then shall it be needful for
him to limit out the Chapters of the books according to the weeks and days
of the year, after that form and order which we have showed in the
premises.

Howbeit, partly to the intent the godly disposed may the more willingly and
easilye embrace our counsel and advice, partly least those that have
already attempted to read daily the holy Bible at hours appointed, should
allege for excuse, that they do (sooner than a man would think) fail and
miss in the order or number of the Chapters: I have provided a Calendar,
wherein for every day in every month are noted and set down certain
Chapters, as well of the work of the Psalms, as of the other books of ye old
and new Testament, and the same truly so digested and distincted in number,
that thou may very well read and pervse over once or oftener in a year, as
thou think good, all the said books of the holy Bible, or at leastwise so
many of them as thou have most fancy to, and can best like of. And in this
order is this Calendar made.

First and foremost we have given to every month two little pages or sides of
a leaf ye one answering to ye other, and either of them with lines from above
drawn directly downewarde disseuered and divided into Columns or pillars.

In the former page of the left side are drawn two such lines, between which,
for as much as they represent and make a very small and slender pillar, there
is no greater space or distaunce, than that by descending from the head to the
foot, the letters A.b.c.d e.f g.A b.c., etc: whereby are wont to be noted in
common Calendars the spaces of the weeks and number of the days, may be
written. But before this same pillar, toward the left side, there are set down
certain notes of numbers, which whilst they answer to the said letters,
do at the first sight declare, what day of the month every day in the
week is. From the second line to the uttermost part of the same side toward
the right hand, is a great deal of space left, wherein whosoever list, may
at his own choice and liberty, note the public feasts and holidays happening
throughout the whole year. Though I, who am fully resolved to consecrate this
labor whatsoever it be to the reading of the Scriptures, and for this cause
have willinglye called it a Calendar of the holy Scripture, do set down the
things memorable, which the holy books report to be done on certain days:
adding also some things in some places, which the opinion only of the learned
warranteth to be done on ye same days: of which sort are, the nativity and
death of CHRIST, the murder of Stephen, the calling of Paul, etc. as touching
which things verile the holy Scripture expresses no certain days, and yet by
the common consentes of all men there are some certain dayees appointed.

Thus much of the former ^age.

On the other side or page, which stretchesh toward the right hand, there
follow four other distaunces or pillars, marked out with five lines let down
to rights in manner of a plum line.

And of all of them well near the breadth is alike, saving that the first is
discerned to be somewhat narrower. Which first is appointed only to the work
of the Psalms, and it conteyneth in such wise the number and order of Psalms
affixed on certain days, as all men may pervse them over once every year.
But if a man be disposed to read them twice, or thrice, or fouretymes in a
year, there is no cause to the contrary but yt he by his own choice and
industry, multiplying the numbers of the Psalms according to the rate and
proportion of every week, may frame to himself papers with columns or
pillars correspondent, and and fix them in a table to his own use, concerning
which thing we have touched somewhat also above. Next follows the second
Column, wherein are placed the books of the old Testament, which our
auncesters, the most holy governors of Churches, have acknowledged to be
Canonical.

The names therefore of these books we have set down in a decent order, and
likewise what and how many Chapters of them may conuently be read every
day. The third Column we have given to the books of the Old Testamente no
numbered in the Canon, whereof the titles and Chapters are in a number certain
distributed throughout the weeks of every month. And we have purposelye
sundered these books from the former, neither would we mingle them together
in one and the selfsame distance. For it came to my remembrance to fear,
that that would not only have bin unseemly, but also to some very grievous.
For what, if some man's stomach could not well brook the Books of the latter
kinds or at least not think them worthy the reading every year?

Truly I for my part will interpret my success to be happy, and my labor
and diligence not to be utterly lost, if so be I shall obtain but thus much
of good folks, namely, that they will even once in a year read over all the
Canonical Books. Furthermore, the fourth column is dedicated to all the
Books, which are now every where (by a custom received) ascribed to the new
Testament: the Chapters whereof we have in such wise digested and disposed, as
that they may once in a years space be read over without any pains. But if
any man's mind shall be inflamed with so seruent a desire of reading the holy
mysteries, that he will assay to attempt greater matters, and like as the
Psalms, so peradventure also covet to go through a twice or thrice with the
Canonical Books of the old and new Testament, it shall be an easy matter
for him, by doubling the numbers which we have put, or by conueying them
somewhat otherwise, to devise an other way fit and profitable for his purpose,
and to make another Calendar.

Moreover, above these Columns in the pages of every month, there are fixed
of us (in stead of pillar coronets) certain titles. The first and highest
line extended throughout both the pages, contains the name of every month in
Latin and English: then next how the Hebrews do call the same, and how many it
is with the^ in number: finaly, how it is termed in the Atticke tongue of the
Greeks. The line that is underneath this, I mean in the former page, over and
above the first pillar, has nothing at all written on it: but over the second
and maine pillar we have noted in these words, THINGS DONE: and in the latter
page, the first pillar shows this title, PSALMS: the second and third, OLD
TESTAMENT: the fourth, NEVVE. In this wise therefore whilst passage is made
through the twelve months, there is laid open a certain and undoubted way,
whereby in a years space the whole book of the Psalms, again all the other
Canonical books of the old Testamente, further, the books not Canonical,
lastly all the books numbered in the new Testament, may once very well be read
over. And least any man should want any thing herein, I have thought good to
inserte into this book, the whole Calender of the holy Scripture, drawn forth
in that form and order which we have spoken of, and with all the pages and
pillars incident thereunto, so farforth as might be, truly decked and
distinguished.

Here follows the Calendar of the holy Scripture.
Ianuarius, January, Thebet in Hebrew, x. Month, THINGS DONE. Psalms. Old
Testament. New. 1 A Circumcision of CHRIST. Luke. 2. There appeared to Noe 1
Genes 1.2.3 Math 1. 2 b the tops of the mountains. Genes 8. The diuorcemente 2
45 2 3 c strange wives, Ezra. 10. 3 6.7 3 4 d 8 9 4 5 e The destruction of
Jerusalem is showed to Ezechi. Chap 33. 10.11 ^obia. 1. 5 6 f Epipha. of
Curist. He is worshipped of the wise me^. Ma. 2. 12.13 2 7 g He is baptized.
Math. 3. He works his first miracle at 14.15 3 8 A a marriage. John 2. 4
16.17.18. 6 9 b 5 19.20 7 10 c Nabuchadnezar besieges Jerusalem. 2. King. 25.
Ierem. 25. 6 21.22. 8 11 d Ezechiels parable. Chap. 24. 23.24. 9 12 e Ezechiel
prophesies against Aegipt. Chap 29. 25 26 4 10 13 f 27.28 5 14 g 29.30 6 15 A
7 31.32.33 11 16 b 8 34.35 12 17 c 9 36.37 13 18 d 38.39 14 19 e 40.41 7 15 20
f 42.43 8 21 g 44.45. 9 22 A 10 46.47.48 16 23 b 11 49 50. 17 24 c 12 Exodus 1.2.
18 25 d The calling of Paul year (...) after ye death of Christ. Act 9. 3.4. 10
19 26 e 5.6. 11 20 27 f 78 12 28 g 9.10 29 A 13 11 12.13 21 30 b 14 14 15 22 31
c 15 16.17 23

Februarius, February: Sebas in Hebrew, XI Month, THINGS DONE. Helaphebolion
in Greek. Psalms. Old Testament. New 1 d Moses expounds the law. Deuteronomy.
1. 18.19 24 2 e CHRIST is offered to the Lord. Luke. 2. 20.21 13 25 3 f 22.23
14 4 g 24.25 Iudeth. 1 5 A 16 26.27.28 26 6 b 17 29.30 27 7 c 18 31.32 28 8 d
33.34 Mark. 1 9 e 35.36 2 2 10 f 37.38 3 11 g Noe sent forth the Dove, which
returned again. Gene. 8. 39.40 4 12 A 19 Leuitic. 1.2.3. 3 13 b 20 4.5 4 14 c
21 6.7 5 15 d 8.9 6 16 e 10.11 5 7 17 f 12.13. 6 18 g Noe set forth ye Dove,
which brought an Olive bra^ch. Ge. 8. 14.15 7 19 A 22 16.17.18 8 20 b 23 19.20 9
21 c 24 21.22 10 22 d 23.24 11 23 e 25.26 8 12 24 f Zacha. prophesies. Zach.
1. The election of Mathias. Act. 1. 27. Nume. 1 9 25 g Noe sent forth the Dove,
which returned no more. Ge. 8. 2.3. 10 26 A 25 4.5.6 13 27 b 26 7.8 14 28 c 27
9.10 15

Martius, March, Ader in Hebrew, XII. Month, THINGS DONE. Munychion in
Greek. Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 d 11.12 16 2 e 13.14 11 Luke. 1 3 f
The temple finished year 6. of Darius. Ezra. 6. 15.16 12 4 g 17.18 13 5 A 28
19.20.21 2 6 b 29 22.23 3 7 c 30 24.25 4 8 d 26.27 5 9 e 28.29 14 6 10 f CHRIST
hears Lazarus to be sick. John. 10. 30.31 15 11 g The taste of Esther. 3.8.9
32.33 16 12 A The question of divorce. Children are brought. Math 19. 31
34.35.36 7 13 b CHRIST comes to Ierico. Luke 18.19. 32 Deuteronomy. 1.2 8 14 c He
heals the sick. Math. 20. The days called Purim 33 3.4 9 15 d 1. Esther
9.2. Match. the last. The Purim days 2. Esth. 9. 5.6 10 16 e He rayseth up
Lazarus. John. 11. 7.8 Susan. 1 11 17 f He goes to Ephraim. John 11. 9.10 Bell,
Dragon. 1 18 g He returns to Bethany. John. 12. 11.12 Song of the 3 chil. 1
19 A His sees are anointed. John. 12 34 13.14.15 12 20 b He comes to
Jerusalem. Luke. 19. 35 16.17. 13 21 c The Acts are done which are read of
Math. 21.22.23.24 36 18.19. 14 22 d 25.26. Mark. 14. 20.21 15 23 e Judas goes
to the Bishops. Math 26. 22.23 Fragme^t of Esth. 1 16 24 f CHRIST keeps the
passover. Math. 26. John. 13. 24.25 2 25 g He is crucified. Gabriel is sent to
Mary. Luke 1. 26.27 3 26 A The Sepulcher is kept. 37 28.29.30 17 27 b CHRIST
rises from death. Sheafes are offered. Leuit. 23. 38 31.32 18 28 c Iehoiachim
brought forth of prison. Ierem. the last. 2. 39 33.34 9 29 d King. 25.
Joshua. 1.2 20 30 e 3.4 4 21 31 f 5.6 5

Aprilu, April, Nisan in Hebrew, I Month, THINGS DONE. Thargenon in Greek
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 g Noe sees the land. Genes. 8. The tabernacle
is reared up. 7.8 6 22 2 A Exodus the last chapter. The temple is purged. 2.
Chr. 24. 29 40 9.10.11 23 3 b CHRIST appeared to Thomas. John. 20. 41 12.13 24
4 c 42 14.15 John. 1 5 f 16.17 2 6 e Joshua leads the people out of Set^^.
Iosu. 3 18.19 7 7 f Ezechiel prophesies against Egypt. chap. 30 20.21 8 8 g
22.23 Ezra. III. ^ 3 9 A The passover is instituted. Exodus 12. 43 24. Judge.
1.2 4 10 b The people passes over Ior. Iosu 3.4. The pascal lamb 44 3.4 5 11
c Exodus 12. The people are circumcised. Iosu. 5. 45 5.6 6 12 d The vessels of
the Lord are restored to the Jews. Ezr. 8. 7.8 7 13 e Edictes against the
Jews. Esther. 3. 9 10 2 14 f The Lords passover. Exodus 12. Leuitic. 23. Iosu.
5. 11 12 3 15 g The departing out of Egypt. Exodus 13. Numb. 33. 13.14 4 8 16 A
The purging of the temple finished. 2. Chronic. 29. 46 15 16.17 9 17 b
Jerusalem taken by Titus, in the year of Christ. 37. 47 18 19 10 18 c The
Israelits pass through the red sea. Exodus 14.15. 48 20.21 11 19 d Ruth 1.2 12
20 e 3.4 5 21 f The eight day of sweet bread. Exodus 12. Samuel: ^.1.2 6 22 g
The Israelits come to Marah. Exodus 1^. 3.4 7 13 23 A 49 5.6.7 14 24 b The vision
of Daniel. chap. 10 11.12. 50 8 9 15 25 c 51 10 11 16 26 d 12 13. 17 27 e 14 15
8 28 f 16.17 9 29 g 52 18.19 IIII. Ezra. 1. 18 30 A 20.21.22 This month is
called the month of new corn. Exo. 34

Maius, May, her in Hebrew, II month. THINGS DONE. Zeiropnor^o. Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 b The people num^red. Numb. 1.2. 53 23.24 19 2
c 54 25 26 20 3 d 27.28 21 4 e 29.30 2 (...). 1 5 f CHRIST ascended, (...) into
heaven. Luc. 24. 2 Samuel. 1.2. 3 6 g 3.4 4 7 h 55 5.6.7. 2 8 ^ 56 8.9. 3 9 ^
57 10.11 4 10 f Noe is commanded to carry things necessary into ye ark. Ge.6 12
13 5 11 e 14.15 5 6 12 ^ 16 17 6 13 g 18.19 7 14 A Some hold the passover.
Numb. 9. 2. Chronic. 30. 58 20 21.22 7 15 b They come into the desarte of sin.
Exodus 16. Pente. Act. 2. 59 23.24 8 16 c It rayneth Manna. Exodus 16. 60 1 King.
1.2 9 17 d Noe enters into the Arc Genes. 7. 3 4 10 18 e 5.6 8 11 19 f 7.8 9
20 g The second year after their departure they go from 9.10 10 21 A mount
Sinay. Numb. 10. 61 11 12 13 12 22 b Their tents are set on fire. Numb. 11. 62
14.15 13 23 c The Castle of Jerusalem is cleansed. 1. Machab. 13. 63 16.17 14 24
d 18.19 15 25 e 20.21 11 16 26 f 22 II. King 1 12 27 g Noe at ye yers end going
forth of the Arc offers sacri- 2.3 13 28 A fice. Genes 8.9. 64 4.5.6 17 29 b
65 7.8 18 30 c 66 9 10 19 31 d 11.12 20

(...), June, Simon in Hebrew, III. Month, THINGS DONE. Ecatombaon in Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 e Their first coming to mount Sinai where they
abode ^^. 13 14 14 21 2 f months and 20. days, and all the things are
accompli 15.16 15 3 g she^ which are written from the 19. of Exodus to the end
17.18 16 4 A of the book, and in Leuiticus, even to the^^. of Numb. 67
19.20.21 22 5 b 68 22.23 23 6 c The weeks or Pentecost of the Jews. Exodus 34.
69 24.25 24 7 d 1. Chronic. 1.2 25 8 e 3.4 1. Match. 10.1 26 9 f 5.6 2 10 g The
Captives in Babylon send gifts to Jerusalem. Baru. 1. 7.8 3 11 A 70 9.10.11 27
12 b 71 12.13 28 13 c 72 14.15 Roma. 1 14 d 16.17 2 15 e 18.19 4 3 16 f 20.21 5
17 g 22 23 6 18 A 73 24.25.26 4 19 b 74 27.28 5 20 c 75 29. II. Chronic. 1 6 21
d 2.3 7 22 e 4.5 7 8 23 f Edictes for the Jews. Esther. 8. 6.7 8 24 g John
Baptist is borne. Luke 1. 8 9 9 25 A 76 10.11.12 9 26 b 77 13.14 10 27 c The
wa^ers increase. Genes. 7. 78 15.16 11 28 d 17.18 12 29 e 19.20 10 13 30 f
21.22 11

(...), June, Simon in Hebrew, III. Month, THINGS DONE. Ecatombaon in Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 e Their first coming to mount Sinai where they
abode ^^. 13 14 14 21 2 f months and 20. days, and all the things are
accompli 15.16 15 3 g she^ which are written from the 19. of Exodus to the end
17.18 16 4 A of the book, and in Leuiticus, even to the^^. of Numb. 67
19.20.21 22 5 b 68 22.23 23 6 c The weeks or Pentecost of the Jews. Exodus 34.
69 24.25 24 7 d 1. Chronic. 1.2 25 8 e 3.4 1. Match. 10.1 26 9 f 5.6 2 10 g The
Captives in Babylon send gifts to Jerusalem. Baru. 1. 7.8 3 11 A 70 9.10.11 27
12 b 71 12.13 28 13 c 72 14.15 Roma. 1 14 d 16.17 2 15 e 18.19 4 3 16 f 20.21 5
17 g 22 23 6 18 A 73 24.25.26 4 19 b 74 27.28 5 20 c 75 29. II. Chronic. 1 6 21
d 2.3 7 22 e 4.5 7 8 23 f Edictes for the Jews. Esther. 8. 6.7 8 24 g John
Baptist is borne. Luke 1. 8 9 9 25 A 76 10.11.12 9 26 b 77 13.14 10 27 c The
wa^ers increase. Genes. 7. 78 15.16 11 28 d 17.18 12 29 e 19.20 10 13 30 f
21.22 11

Iuium, July, ^hanius in Hebrew, (...) Month, THINGS DONE. (...) Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 g Mary visits Elizabeth. Luke 1. ^^.24 ^^ 2
A 79 25.26.27 14 3 b 80 28.29 15 4 c 81 30.31 16 5 d Ezechiels visions. Ezech
1. 32.33 I. Corinth. 1 6 e 34 35 13 2 7 f 36. Ezra. 1 14 8 g 2.3 15 9 A
Jerusalem taken of the Babilonians Jeremy set at liberty. 82 4.5.6 3 10 b
Jeremy. 39.52.2. King the last chapter. 83 7.8 4 11 c 84 9.10 5 12 d Nehem. 1.2
6 13 e 3.4 16 7 14 f 5.6 II. Machab 1 15 g 7.8 2 16 A 85 9.10.11 8 17 b Moses
drake the Tables. Exodus 12. The spies terrifye 86 12 13 9 18 c the people.
Numb. 13. and the Babilonians begin to be- 87 Esther. 1.2 10 19 d siege
Jerusalem. 2. King. 25. 3.4 11 20 e 5.6 3 12 21 f 7.8 4 22 g Mary Magdalen the
sinner. Luke. 7. 9. Esaias. 1 5 23 A 88 2.3.4 13 24 b 89 5.6 14 25 c 90 7.8 15 26
d 9.10 16 27 e 11.12 6 II. Corinth. 1 28 f 13.14 7 29 g 15 16 8 30 A 91 17.18
19 2 31 b 92 20.21 3

Augustus August with the Hebrews V. Month, THINGS DONE. Boedromion in Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 c Aaron dies. Number. 20. 33. Ezra comes to
Jerusalem, Ezra. 7. 93 22.23 4 2 d 24.25 5 3 e 26.27 9 6 4 f 28.29 10 5 g 30.31
11 6 A 94 32.33.34 7 7 b Jerusalem is brent. 2. King 25. Baruch reads the
book in 95 35 36 8 8 c Babylon. Baruch. 1. 96 37.38 9 9 d 39.40 10 10 e
Ezchiel to the Elders of Israel. Ezech. 20. Some think 41.42 12 11 11 f that
upon this day Jerusalem was set on fire both of the 43.44 13 12 g Babilonians.
Jeremy. 52. and also of Titus. 45.46 14 13 A 97 47.48, 49 12 14 b 98 50.51 13
15 c 99 52.53 Galath. 1 16 d 54.55 2 17 e 56 57 15 3 18 f 58.59 Baruch. 1 19 g
60.61 2 20 A 100 62.63.64 4 21 b 101 65.66 5 22 c 102 Jeremy. 1.2. 6 23 d 3.4
Ephesians. 1 24 e 5.6 3 2 25 f 7.8 4 26 g 9.10 5 27 A 103 11.12.13 3 28 b 104 14.15
4 29 c John is beheaded. Mark. 6. 105 16.17 5 30 d 18.19 6 31 e 20.21 6
Phillip. 1

September, Elul in Hebrew, VI. Month, THINGS DONE. Maimacterion in Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 f Haggeus prophesies. chap. 1. 22 23 Wisdom.
1 2 g 24.25 2 3 A 106 26.27.28 2 4 b 107 29 30 3 5 c Another vision of
Ezechiel. Ezch. 8. 108 31 32 4 6 d 33.34 Colosl. 1 7 e 35.36 3 2 8 f It is
thought that Jerusalem was brent by Titus. 37 38 4 9 g 39.40 5 10 A 109
41.42.43 3 11 b 110 44 45 4 12 c 111 46.47 I. These, 1 13 d 48.49 2 14 e 50.51
6 3 15 f 52. Threnes. 1 7 16 g 2.3 8 17 A 112 4. Ezech. 1.2 4 18 b 113 3.4 5 19
c 114 5.6 II. These. 1 20 d 7.8 2 21 e 9.10 9 3 22 f 11.12 10 23 g 13.14 11 24
A 115 15.16.17 I. Timoth. 1 25 b The walls of Jerusalem are finished Nehemia.
6. 116 18.19 2 26 c 117 20.21 3 27 d 22.23 4 28 e 24.25 12 5 29 f 26.27 13 30 g
28.29 14

October, Thisri in Hebrew, VII. Month, THINGS DONE. G^anepsione in Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 A The first day of trumpets. Leuitic 23. 118
30 31.32 6 2 b 119 33 34 II. Timoth. 1 3 c Gedalia is supposed to be slain. 2.
King. 25. Jeremy. 41. 120 35.36 2 4 d 37 38 3 5 e 39.40 15 4 6 f 41.42 16 7 g
43.44. 17 8 A 121 45.46.47 Titus. 1 9 b 122 48. Daniel. 1 2 10 c The feast day
of clensing. Leuitic. 16.23. The Jubilee year 123 2.3 3 11 d 50. Leuitic. 25.
4.5 Philemon 1 12 e 6.7 18 Hebrews. 1 13 f 8.9 19 14 g 10.11 Ecclesiastic. 1 15
A The feast of tabernacles. Leuitic. 23. Numb. 29. John. 7. 124 12 Hosee. 1.2 2
16 b Ezech 45. 125 3.4 3 17 c The arc stayed on the mountains of Ararat.
Genes. 8. 126 5.6 4 18 d 7.8 5 19 e 9.10 2 6 20 f 11.12 3 21 g Haggeus is sent
to Zerubabel. chap. 1. 13.14 4 22 A VIII. day of tabernacles. Leuitic. 23. 127
Joel. 1.2.3. 7 23 b The people sent after ye dedicatio^ of ye temple. 2. Chro.
7. 128 Amos. 1.2. 8 24 c A new covenant with God. Nehem. 9.10. 129 3.4 9 25 d
5.6. 10 26 e 7.8 5 11 27 f 9 Abdias. 1 6 28 g Jonas. 1.2 7 29 A 130 3.4.
Micheas. 1 12 30 b 131 2.3 13 31 c 132 4.5 James 1

November, Marhefuam in Hebrew VIII. Month, THINGS DONE. Anthesterione in
Greek. Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 d 6.7 2 2 e 8. Nahum 1. 8 3 3 f 2.3 9
4 g Habacuc. 12 10 5 A 133 3. Sophony. 1.2. 4 6 b 134 3. Haggeus. 1 5 7 c 135
2. Zachary. 1 I. Peter. 1 8 d 2.3 2 9 e 4.5 11 3 10 f 6.7 12 11 g 8.9 13 12 A
136 10.11.12 4 13 b 137 13.14 5 14 c 138 Malachy. 1.2 II. Peter. 1 15 d
Jeroboam ordayneth a feast day. 1. King. 12. 3.4 2 16 e Job. 1.2 14 3 17 f 3.4
15 18 g 5.6 16 19 A 139 7.8.9 I. John. 1 20 b 140 10.11 2 21 c 141 12.13 3 22 d
14.15 4 23 e 16.17 17 5 24 f 18.19 18 25 g 20.21 19 26 A 142 22.23.24 II. John
1 27 b 143 25.26 III. John. 1 28 c 144 27.28 Jude. 1 29 d 29.30 Apocalypse. 1 30
e 31.32 20 2

December, s^sl^u in Hebrew. IX. Month, THINGS DONE. Goseideone in Greek.
Psalms. Old Testament. New. 1 f 33.34 21 2 g 35 36 22 3 A 145 37.38.39 3 4 b
Zacharias prophesies again. chap. 7. 146 40.41 4 5 c 147 42. Proverb. 1 5 6 d
2.3 6 7 e 4.5 23 7 8 f 6.7 24 9 g 8.9 25 10 A 148 10 11.12 8 11 b 149 13.14 9
12 c 150 15.16 10 13 d 17.18 11 14 e 19.20 26 12 15 f Antiochus places an Idol
in the temple. 1. Machab. 1. 21.22 27 16 g 23.24 28 17 A 25.26.27 13 18 b 28.29
29.30 14 19 c 30.31 31.32 15 20 d Ezra commands the strange wives to be put
away Ecclesiastes. 1.2 33.34 16 21 e Ezra, 9. 3.4 35.36 17 22 f 5.6 37.38 23 g
7.8 24 A The foundation of the second Temple. Haggeus. 2. 9.10.11 18 25 b
Nativity of CHRIST. Luke. 2. The temple cleansed. 1. Mac. 4. 12. Cantic. 1
39.40 19 26 c Stephen the Deacon. Act 7. 2.3 41.42 20 27 d 4.5 43.44 21 28 e
The children are slain. Matthew. 2. 6.7 45.46 22 29 f 8 47.48 30 g 49.50 31 A 51

THou see now, and in what sort we have ordained ye Calendar of holy
Scripture, and brought it to an end. And to the intent the greater number of
godly readers may reap of sweet and continual fruit by this our labor, we
have provided this Calendar, and digested it in such wise, as that they may
draw it forth in tables of paper or parchment, and fasten them to the walls in
their study, Parlour, privy chamber, shop, chapel, Oratory, and
wheresoever they list themselves. For my part I covet nothing so much as that
all the godly would receive this work with that mind, that it is of me
offered. Howbeit I go not about to prescribe any thing as of necessity to any
man, but do franckely confess that every man ought to be at his own choice
and liberty, to appoint and determine more at large of and concerning all this
whole business: and therefore (hardly) let every one choose such a way of
reading the holy mysteries, as he shall suppose to be most fit and convenient
for his purpose. Yea if any man shall by his own proper wit and industry
denise a more apt way than this is, and will not be grieved to impart the same
unto us, we protest that we shall be so far of from envying his good success,
that we will follow him rather for our guide and lodes man, and render unto him
the express meaning of a thankeful mind when and so far forth as in us
shall lie. For why, we truly are not ashamed to confess, that after the
manner of painters, who use with a cole or chalk to draw the first lineamentes
of their work, we have shadowed out more truly than fully finished, a certain
slender and easy form of distinguishing and limiting forth certain chapters
of books to be read every day throughout the year.

And soothly, of al other we covet least that any thing should in this behalf
be superstitiously observed. Let a man read daily certain chapters, but
without superstition.
Liberty is a thing of it self very amiable: neither is it meet, as
perteyning especially to this matter, that any thing should in such wise be
commanded or enjoined as though that he that did otherwise, should by and by
be put in fault and blame. For doubtless it is very fit and requisite to be
permitted, that a man should at any time of the year begin the holy Bible,
that he should dispose and digest in such order and number as well the Books
as Chapters, as he himself can best like off, again that he should pervse
some certain books out of which he hops to read most profit in the
doctrine of religion, so much the oftener, like as Saint Ambrose wished
Augustine to read before others the prophet Esaias, and other books more rarely
and sparinglye. But this thing we are most of all desirous to persuade, that it
is very necessary for every Christian, that he should daily pervse over
certain Chapters of the sacred Bible. And if so be the same man shall once in a
year go through with the reading of the whole Bible, then we promise him, that
over and besides he shall deserve no small commendation of his godly travel
with all men, he shall also reap most ample fruit and commodity by this his
diligence.

I would have thee therefore, whatsoever thou art, duly to consider with thy
self, whether any man may justly hereafter allege for excuse, that it will
be as great a matter for him to read over the holy Bible, as a number will
seem to make it.

What labor, I pray thee, is it, to bestow one hour, or m^e p^raduenture in
pervsing over three, four, or five Chapters at the most every day in the
week? In good faith he may well blushe and be ashamed, that dare hence
forward so much as once tomutter against these things. Therefore let every
manne forthwyth without any delay make, prefix, and inionye to himself a
law, and let him with all care and industry endeavor to obey it so long as
he lives. But if it shall happen through business falling out of the sudden
that law to be broken and interrupted, then let him not spare (hardlye) to
punish, and even to be awreaked of himself.

No man is better styrred up and retained in his duty doing, than he that
of his own accord is both a law and a judge to himself. It is incredible,
how acceptable a thing it is to GOD, when a man willingly and without
compulsion, gives himself freely to godly exercises.

But now I would not have thee to say unto me, The depth and majesty of the
holy Scriptures ought not to fray us from the reading of the^.
that thou art driven away from the reading of the sacred Bible, because all
the matter thereof is hard and beyond thy capacity, neither can thou
atteyne unto the things therein contained. Nay thou see further, that of the
things which thou read, or in some sort understand, thou can not
gather any spiritual profitte: for why, thou art ignoraunte, how or by what
means thou may aptlye transfer the things that the Scripture specifyeth, to
the instruction and information of thine own life. But I will not suffer
theee, I say, to use herein any longer cyrcumstaunce: and for because it
would grieve me very much, if there should any thing As yet be a
hyndraunce to thy godly purpose: and that thou which seemedst to be even now
ready bent and fully prepared to the reading of the holy mysteries, should
yet be withdrawn from the enterprising thereof: I will also go about to remove
out of thy way these lettes and impedimentes, and as I may so say, thorns
and briars.

First, whereas thou think and speak honorablye as touching the work of
the holy Scriptures, and art fully resolved that in it are comprised things
heavenly, Divine, and in all respects noble and excellent, in good sooth thou
do very well and godly and like a good Christian. For in deed it behooves
that all the things therein comprehended be aunswerable to the majesty of him
from whom the same proceeded. Wherefore so often as we take the Bible in our
hands, it is meet and requisite that we behave our selves with all reverence,
as if we were come to a palace or Court furnished with all sumptuous and
gorgious attire, wherein we had to talk and debate, and that of most weyghtie
affairs, with some mighty lord and Emperor, sitting in a high and stately
seat, and guarded about on every side with many noble men and officers. For
in very deed to read the holy Scriptures is even for a man to present
himself unto GOD, and to make entreatie as touching everlasting salvation.

Neither can it be perceived, that any man is in good earnest conuersaunt in
the sacred books, except therewithal he lift up his mind unto GOD: and
behold, wonder at, anwadore, his goodness, power; Wisdom, righteousness etc.

And truly how it comes to pass I know not, the very sight of the holy
Books themselves does sodainelye strike as it were priuilye a (...) Which
thing Chrysostom also in his third homily of Lazarus testifies. Let us not
hoorde up gold (says he) but let us lay up for our selves the treasure of the
spiritual Books. As for gold, verily when it increases most, the^ does it
most of al endanger the possessors of it: But the Books being well laid up,
do bring much profit to the owners of them. For even as when the warlike
weapons of a King are bestowed, although there be none to possess the^, yet do
they minister great safety and preservation, to those that dwell in the house
where they are laid up, whiles neither thieves, nor breakers down of walls,
nor any other malefactor dare once venture upon that house: so wheresoever the
spiritual Books are found, from thence is expelled all the power of the
Devil, and great consolation offered to the inhabitants. Inasmuche as even the
very beholding also of the Books makes us to be more slow to sin. For,
whither we have committed any thing that is forbidden, and defiled ourselves,
yet being returned home, and having looked upon the Books, our conscience
does more fiercely condemn us, and we are made afraid to commit the like:
again, whither we have continued in godliness of life, by the Books we
become more strong and steadfast. For so soon as a man has touched the
Gospel, by and by he has disposed his own mind, and withdrawn it from
worldly affairs, and that only by the sight thereof. But if he shall add
diligent reading, then, as the soul that is occupied in the holy mysteries
and matters of GOD, so is he purged and made better, GOD talking with him
through those Scriptures. So says Chrysostom, whose words it is meet we
should read with such an affection, as he himself uttered them in: that is
to say, a godly and religious, and void of all superstition.

Now albeit the dignity of the holy Books be greater far-awaye, No man ought
to complain that he cannot understand the Scripturs, and how we may attain
to the understanding of them.
than we are able to express in words: yet there is no cause why any man
should mistruste, but that the understanding of them may be opened unto him.
God indeed speaks himself in them, but the same God does wonderfullye
apply himself unto us, and even willinglye abateth his talk to our capacity.

As mothers know how to stutte and stammer with their stutting and stammering
infants: even so does God vouchsafe to debate many things with us after the
manner of men, whilst namely, of the things that are common amongst us, he
borrows examples, similitudes, sentences, and many other things more,
profitable to an easy and plain method of teaching. Yea, and moreover the
writers that first of all compiled the sacred Books, whom he would have to
be as his Vshers and substitutes to teach us in the School of his Church, he
has chosen to be such, as were not famous with any notable learning, but of
vile and base condition, and utterly void in a manner of al knowledge and
erudition.

Moses, whom a number do suppose to be the Author, not only of the five Books
commonly ascribed unto him, but aso of the Book of Job: likewise David and
Amos, were renowned thoroughe feeding of cattle: Peter the Apostle and John
the Gospel writer, lived by the trade of Fishing: Paul exercised Tent-makyng.
Luke publicly dealte with Physic, albeit there be some not wanting, which
contend that he was also a Paynter: Matthewe played the Publican or
Tolgatherer. Loo^ what crew and fraternity the most excellent writers were.
Now then they used a kind of speech, that was agreeable to themselves and to
their likes: that is to say, familiar, plain, and savoring every where of
such a certain ordinarye simplicity, as we read that S. Augustine and
certain other favorers of eloquence, durst for a time contemn the holy
Scriptures, by reason of their beggarly phrase, creeping upon the ground, and
destitute of all Rhetorical beauty.

All men and women therefore ought assuredlye to trust, yea, even the homely
husbandmen, sheepe-beardes, Fishermen, Bakers, Bruers, Paynters. Carpenters,
Fullers, Corriers, Tanners, and all inferior craftsmen whatsoever, also Wives,
Widows, Virgins, that they and every of them, so they have hearts desirous to
learn, may quickly profit in reading of the Scriptures. And often times,
whereas somthings escape us, not GOD, but we our selves are in the fault. For
why, it is not without a cause that he complayneth or the ungodly, who says:
that they would not understand to do good, but hardened their hearts,
because they regarded not the voice of the Lord. Psalm. 36.95. Moreover,
there are precepts extante, whereby we are commanded to crave GODS aid in
this behalf: there are promises also, which do put us in sure and certain
hope, that nothing shall be denied unto us. Ask (says CHRIST) and it shall
be given you: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Matthew. 7. Luke. 11.
And James Chap. 1. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of him that
gives it, namely, GOD: who gives to all men indifferently, and casts no man in the teeth.

Who then would be grieved, when he comes to read the holy mysteries, to
use first some short form of Prayer? And many forms of praying, may be
gathered out of the hundred and nineteen Psalm alone, to the intent I may
speak nothing of other places. No man, I trow, will think much to say:
Blessed art thou O Lord, teach me thy statutes. or, Open thou mine eyes O
Lord, that I may see the wonderful things of thy law or: O Lord make me to
understand the way of thy commandments: or: Teach me O Lord the way of
thy statutes, and I will keep thy law, yea I will keep it with my whole
heart. Cause me to walk in the path of thy commandments for I am well
pleased in it. or: The earth O Lord is filled with thy goodness, O Lord teach
me thy statutes. or: Thy hands O Lord have made me, and fashioned me: give me
understanding, that I may learn thy commandments. or: Deal with thy
servant according to thy goodness, and teach me thy statutes. I am thy
servant: give me understanding, that I may know, thy testimonies. or: The
righteousness of thy judgments O Lord abides for ever, give me
understanding, and I shall live, etc. Also out of the Ps. 25. Show thy ways
unto me O Lord, and teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth, and teach
me, for thou art the God of my salvation. Again in the same Psalm. The Lord
is good and gracious, and therefore will he teach sinners in the way: He
will direct the meek in judgment, and teach his way unto the lowly. All the
ways of the Lord are Mercy and Truth, to them that keep his couenaunte and
his testimonies. Thus whosoever shall pray with an assured confidence, God
will open ye eyes of their mind, whereby they may judge uprightly of al things.
Further, it cannot be denied but that there be many things in ye Scriptures of
themselves very plain, and easy to be understood. Likewise there are diverse
and sundry things here and there intermixed, which who so has any
judgment at all, does soon perceive where unto they tend. Moreover, there
is no man ye carries not about with him an expert maistresse of many secret
and mystical matters, to wit, his own proper conscience, which does often
times privily reprove, find fault with, and make ashamed those that pretend,
that they understand not the holy Scriptures. It is a very grievous offense,
when thou once understand the truth, to dissemble it, to neglect, not
exercise, or deny it: and God is wont, to give up those that so do, having
first (as witnesses the Apostle Romans 1.) blinded their hearts into a reprobate
sense. Furthermore, be shall best provide for his own safety, that does not
labor to fly overmuch alofte: but contenteth himself in places some what
hard and difficulte, to draw forth the simple and sound meaning, which the
words themselves do signify without any couertures, and which seem not to be
strange from the mind and purpose of the author. To hunt after subtle and
strange interpretations, to muse upon allegories without cause why, to crake
continuallye of mystical meanings, is the property of men that consider not
sufficiently the snares and bayted hooks of the devil. Examples how such
curiosity and unadvisedness has bin punished. God would have in all ages to
be seen. Would to God we could oftetimes call to remembrance, how great a
benefit it is, to be wise to sobriety. He shall not a little be helpen to the
collecting of proper sentences, that will exactlye mark where the beginnings
of sermons, disputations, and narrations, and where the endings of the same
be: again, where the prefaces, propositions confirmations, confutations,
conclusions, are distinguished in them. Let him observe also the proper
speeches and phrases that are familiar in the Scriptures, let him search
diligently throughout every member, as well the things that go before, as
also the things that follow after: to be short, let him duly examine the
causes and circumstances of every point. If after all these things thus
discussed, there remain some things yet still hidden, it shall be expedient to
repeat them oftener than once, and the more intentiuely to consider of them.
Repetition commonly causes some things to be more clear and lightsome: and
that which is hard to day, to morrow or next day becomes plain and
easy. One day teaches an other, and one night certifieth an other. If the
day, as it is said in the proverb, takes away the sickness often he body:
then undoubtedly takes in away also ignorance, which is a malady of the
mind.

It shall be very profitable in like manner to confer diligently the plain
and agreeable places of the Scriptures, with that place touching the meaning
whereof the question is: (as Luke reports Act. 17.) the Thessalonians did. If
this conference be in vain, then there is no let but that thou maiste ask ye
advice of some other wiser than thy self. GOD will bring to pass, that when
thou think least of it, thou shalt light upon some Philip that may
resolve thee of thy most intricate doubts Act. 8. He that wants altogether
the help of a teacher, let him look over the Commentaries or Annotations of
the choicest interpretres that he can come by.

Last of all, Some things we are ignorant of to cure benefit.
if all thy labor in searching of some hidden mysteries prove void and of
none effect, and that man's industry (as ye would say) be mocked and
deceived: then doubt thou not that it comes to pass for some benefit of
thine, that some things which thou soughtest very desirously to know, do
remain still unknown unto thee. It is profitable, that thou should know
by this means, the infirmity and ignorance as well of all mankind, as also
of thy self. Hereby also thou learnest, how highly thou ought to esteem
the gifts of the holy Ghost, who enlightneth the minds of the godly. Thou
understand again, that the same gifts are given to every man according to
the measure of Faith. Further, thou haste in admiration eayl^ more and more the
majesty of the things comprehended in the sacred Scriptures. And there are in
very deed some things in them, which ought of us rather to be believed, than
perceived: like as also certain points are only touched by the way, but not
fully declared. Neither truly is it to be doubted, but that many before thee
have sticked and stammered at the selfsame places. Yea, even the diligentest
of al other do oftetimes stumble, and are deceived. Therefore the want of
knowledge of some certain places does by no means give thee occasion to
cast away the holy Books: but rather thou must so much the more
diligently and constantlye go forward to pervse them, as thou art sure and
certain, that there will be always a number of things, which thou shalt
never be able to attain unto: and that a Christian manne ought all his life
long to be a Scholar of the holy Ghost.

But to declare, how, and by what means thou may reap a Spiritual
profit, How thou may gather spiritual profit by the things that thou
read.
by the things which thou read, and indifferently (at the least)
understand, although a man might stand long upon this matter, yet I will
say so much in effect, as I trust for this present time shall be sufficient.

First, all men ought to be persuaded of this, that the effectualnesse of
prayer poured from the heart unto GOD, is very great, for which cause we
have a little before admonished, that so often as we come to the readyng of the
holy Books, we should in any case (to begin wythall) use some form of
prayer. Secondly, there lies hidden in the word of GOD it self, when it is
read or heard, or when it is duly examined, a certain wonderful power of
the spirit, The power of the spirit works priuiely through the word is the
hearts of the readers and hearers.
where with the minds of men are stricken and after an unspeakable manner moved
and drawn. Which thing doubtless we would by no means affirm, except it
were found expressed in the sacred Scriptures, and except further it were
manifest, that many good me^ had at all times proved the self same thing to be
true. Hearken I pray you, what the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews Chap.
4. says: The word of GOD is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper than
any two edged sword, and enters through, even to the dividing asunder of
the soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and the marow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts, and of the intents of the heart. Neither is there
any creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but al things are naked and
open to his eyes, with whom we have to do. In which place there are two
things of us to be observed. The one, that unto the word of GOD are ascribed
life and other effects of very great importance. It is (says he) quick or
lively, and mighty in working and operation: for it pierces and enters
through, even to the dividing of the soul and the spirit, in as much as it
moves the whole manne after an incredible manner: again, it discerns the
thoughts and intentes of the heart, in as much as it finds fault with and
judges a man, and brings him to the knowledge of himself and of God, and
compels him to humble himself, to confess that he is a sinner, and to fly
unfeignedly to Gods mercy. The other, how that from the word we may pass
suddenly to GOD himself, unto whom all things (though never so secreate)
are wide open and bare. Therefore, by the former point, we must be moved, to
think and persuade our selves, that in the word of GOD, yea, even when it is
read only or heard, there is a certain majesty and excellency, by reason
whereof it deserves to be embraced of us with all reverence and lowlynesse of
heart. And by this later it comes to pass, that we believe, that God is
not far absent from his word, but when and so long as it pleases him,
works mightily by it, as by a fit instrument, and accomplisheth most
wonderful things. Not that the word as it consists of bare letters and
sillables, as it is written, read, pronounced, or heard, is in it self of so
great efficacy, no verily, our meaning is not so to persuade: but we hold for
truth, that whilst the author of the same word, written, read, pronounced, or
heard, is considered, and whilst the things signified therein are diligently
examined, the divine power in the mean season after a certain imperceyueable
manner approaches, wherewyth estsoones the minds of readers or hearers, are so
moved, pierced, inflamed and enlightened, that repe^ta^ce, faith, and other such
like virtues do follow in them. For we understand, that even the very same
consideration is to be had of the outward word, that all men do confess to be
had of the outward elements in the Sacraments of CHRIST'S Church. The water,
if it be considered in it self, is of no great force, neither can it in very
deed wash away the filthiness of the soul: but as soon as the word is added
to the element, according as CHRIST gave in commandment, it becomes a
Sacrament. How be it, in this word of the Sacrament, we have not so much to
mark the sillables and sound of the letters, as we have to observe the
dignity of him that first instituted that holy action, and the things
signified by it, especially the invocation and calling upon of the three
persons in one divine essence or substance of the Deity. And then forsooth so
great is the power of the water through the working of the word, that it
touches indeed the body, but it washes also the heart (I use the word of S.
Augustine in his treatise. 80. upon John) not because ye word is spoke, but
because it is believed: for whereas GOD is thus called upon by faith, there he
does not disdain by his power to work heavenly and spiritual effects in
the hearts of those that are baptized. We say then, that even in like case
when the mind is wholly set upon the word which is read, heard, or
understood, and has regard unto God the Author of the word, and besides
weighs in a just ballaunce the things signified in it: that then the divine
power does wonderfully show forth it self, and repentance, faith, hatred of
sins, endeavor of true holiness of life are stirred up, and even the whole
man both in body and in soul is changed and renewed. Of which divine
workemanshippe there are proofs set forth in the Sacred Scriptures very
plain and apparent to all men. For Ezra read in the book of the Law,
Nehemia: 8. in the open street that was before the watergate, from morning
until midday, in the presence of men and women that gave heed unto it, and the
ears of all the people hearkened unto the Book of the Law It follows a little
after. And all the people when they heard the words of the law. The Apostle
Peter, Acts. 2. rehearses the Scriptures to the Jews, and interprets them
as touching Christ: which being heard, so many as were present were pricked in
heart, and said unto Peter and the rest of ye Apostles: Men and brethren what
shall we do? And unto the Rom 10. But what says it? The word is near thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thine heart. This is the word of Faith which we
preach, to wit, if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God raised him up from the dead, thou shalt be
saved. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth manne confesses to salvation. Again, in the same place: Faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word of GOD. Moreover Peter Act. 10. making a
plain declaration of the sum of Christian doctrine out of the holy
Scriptures, in the house of Cornelius the Centurion: To this CHRIST (says he)
bear all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believe in
him, shall receive remission of sins. While Peter yet spoke these words, the
holy Ghost fell on al them that heard the word. We may therefore out of al
question confirm this assertion, namely, that by the diligent and attentive
reading, hearing, and meditation of the word of GOD, a man is induced to the
knowledge of GOD and of himself, to the detestation of his sins, and to
unfeigned repentance: to Faith in Jesus Christ, to the amendment of his life
and conversation, and to be short, receives the holy Ghost, and with him
most large and bountiful gifts. That which we know in times paste usually
befell to the readers or hearers of GODS word, that the same also may happen
now in these days, we flatly auouche without controlment. For why, if he
that being incensed with desire of profiting, takes in hand the holy Books,
do before al things crave the aid of the holy Ghost: the^ next devoutly read
or hear the word of GOD, by which (as by an instrument) it pleases GOD to
talk familiarly with us: after this also lift up his mind unto GOD speaking
by the Prophets or Apostles, and duly discuss ye things specified in the^:
there is no doubt but that God after his acustomed clemency putting to his
hand, will stir up, purge, teach and sanctify the heart as well of the
reader as the the hearer, and graciously grante unto him Repentance, Faith, the
holy Ghost, and other gifts and graces of his spirit.

Furthermore, to the intent, that every one furnished and affected in that
sort that we speak of, may in reading envre himself wisely and discretlye
to note, pick out, Certain Chapters or fountains, to which all things in the
holy Scriptures ought to be referred.
and as by a certain method to distinguishe those things, that may be
profitable to all intentes and purposes, and applied to the attaynement of
perfection and soul health: we add last of all, that the very edge of the
mind, ought always to be intentiuely fixed, and set upon those five
fountains or Chapiters, to the which the Apostle himself avouches, that al
things contained in the holy Scriptures are to be referred. For thus we read
2. Timoth. 3. The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation,
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. For the whole Scripture is inspired
of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct
in righteousness, that the man of God may be made absolute and perfect to al
good works. Likewise. 1. Corinthians. 10. They are written to admonish us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. Again to the Romans 15. Whatsoever
things are written aforetyme, they are written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Of these five
fountains therefore, I mean, Teaching, Reproving, Instructing, Correcting and
Comfortyng, al persons, when they read the Scriptures, or hear them read,
shall very carefully consider. Neither in sooth will it be a hard matter in
passing through these fountains as by steps, and in meditating deuoutlye
upon them, to find out and gather those things that are agreeyng and
answerable to every one of them. And in very deed they may rightly be taken
for places (as ye would say) of Divine invention. Teaching.
For the fountain as touching Doctrine or Teaching, does admonish, that thou
should intentiuely look about thee, whither any thing out of the place of
Scripture which thou have gone through in reading, may be drawn forth as
pertaining to the chief principles and common places of the doctrine of our
Religion. He that knows and can say by heart the precepts of the
Decalogue, the articles of the Faith (as they call them) the effect and meaning
of the Sacraments, and other points usually taught unto young beginners and
learners in religion: this man shall easily (in a manner) at the first sight be
able to discern the principal parts of Doctrine what they are. For upon those
fountains or welheads (seeing they are to be accounted for the groundwork
and foundation) are built all the rules of Christian religion whatsoever.

Going forwardr to the second fountain, as concerning Reproving, Reproving.
thou shalt with all diligence and endeavor weigh and consider, whether in the
place or sentence by thee read, any thing be reposed, as available to
impugn heresies, and any false doctrine whatsoever, either old or new, (for
even at this day, the more is the pity, are heard over many things even
among the common sort contrary and repugnant to the truth.) Whatsoever shall
betide proper to this kind, see thou bestow and lay up in thy mind, from
thence, when occasion shall be offered, to bring it forth as a preservative
against the pestilent poison of Heretics.

Next, in the third fountain, Instructing.
which is as touching Instruction, we are willed out of the words and sentences
of Scripture wisely to gather those things aparte, which tend to the passing
of the life in righteousness and true holiness, and generally, which are any
thing available to the good administration of Churches, of pollitike or
household affairs. For why, that knowledge is barren and unfruitful that
brings not a man to such dealings in the common trade of his life, as are
both wholesome and commendable.

To Correction, which obtayneth the fourth place, Correcting.
and is after a sort contrary to Instruction, he that is desirous to find
fit matter, must first look about him and consider with what faults, either
privy or apparent, he himself is infected: then next with what corruptions
and defilementes the Churches every where are blemisted and impaired, also the
common wealth and private houses or families: how in these on every side
discipline is let loose: and to be short, how lewd and corrupt the manners
and conditions of al sorts of men are. If therefore the place of Scripture
which thou haste in h^n^e, does minister any thing, to the controlling
either of thine own faults, or other men's, and to the reproving and amending
as well of public as private enormities, then shalt thou with very good
right, account all that among Corrections. Whosoever furthered by Gods great
goodness, intends earnestlye to lead a godly life, and with all
inforcement to detefie and abandon sin, he shall be able with judgment to
gather out of the divine Oracles both Instructions and also corrections.

Last of al, Comforting.
to heap up matter of Comfort or Consolation, it is not so busy a labor. He
that is grieved with a sore, or vexed with any other malady whatsoever, that
manne diligently seeks and serapeth together medicines wheresoever he can
come by them: so likewise he that is touched with any sense or feeling of
public or private calamities, whereof undoubtedly every one of us have dailye
experience, and do taste of many in some measure, and that not of one sort or
kind, will studiously note and gather every where in reading plentiful matter
and comfort against all perils and dangers whatsoever. But those men that by
their daily dealings, and experience of many things, have gotten to themselves
any wisdom, they can much better than a number of others give sentence, as
touching all these points. For Wisdom as well in all other affairs, as also
in the consideration of divine matters makes men atten^^^e and circum^pect,
and helps them greatelye to the finding out of the use of those things, as
that which h^^deth up a Torche in the dark, and goes comm^^lye before them.

That man in like care shall not a little profit in this exercise, and shall
get the Garland from a great many, that has been some space conversant in
^eating the holy Scriptures. Yea, and he also shall be able to perform
something worthy of commendation in this behalf, that has bin happily
furthered with the acquaintance and familiar conferences touching Religion of
learned and Godly men. But the readyest and most certain way of all is,
to observe with great care and industrye, in Sermons made by faithful Teachers
to the people in Sacred assemblies, how and by what means in the discourse of
every part of the Prophetical and Apostolic writings, which are there
declared, one while a manifold Doctrine as touching true opinions, an other
while Controlementes of false opinions, an other while Instructions or
Exhortations unto Virtue, an other while reprehensions of Faults, an other
while Consolations, all them applied to the present state of things, and (so
far forth as may be) to the times, places, and persons, are uttered and
produced, and with no small cunning, Clearklinesse, and endeavor inculked and
repeated.

Like as those children do put us in good hope and expectation of their
towardness, which we see willinglye and uncompelled to go to the Schools,
wherein the first points of Learning are taught: so we dare be bold to
say, that those shall easily understand all the whole use of Christian
Religion, that do cheerfully (laying all other matters aparte) resort to the
Church, so often as any entreaty touching the Scriptures is there godlily,
and purely, and sincerely practiced and made. Every Church, wherein are placed
diligent and faithful teachers, is as a famous University and common School
for all men to come unto. And that is wont to be taken for most sound, and
least suspected, which is publicly, and of those that have the charge of
teaching in the Church committed unto them, given forth and exhibited. But I
hold best to set down here, that which Saint Chrysostom in his homily
21. upon John, has wisely pronounced as touching all this matter. If we
would (says he) diligently ransacke the Scriptures, we might thereby obtain
salvation: if we would be thoroughly conversant in them, we should rightly be
instructed both in learning and living. And albeit a man be crooked, perverse,
and unmerciful, albeit he has profited nothing aforetime: yet now at least
wise shall he profit, and (although he does not by and by perceive it) receive
some comfort. For if so be a man sits in a shop, where ointments or
perfumes be made, he does even whither he will or no taste of the savor
thereof: then much more he that frequenteth the Church. For even as of sloth,
grows negligence: so of exercise comes cherefulnesse. Though thou be
subject to never so many sins, though altogether unclean: yet refuse thou not
to come to the Church. For, what if thou do not the things that are
taught? Thou shalt not lose altogether thy labor, if thou understand but
thy self to be miserable. This fear will not be unprofitable, nor this dread
out of season If thou sob and sigh from thy heart, because thou do not that
which thou hear, there is no doubt but that thou shall one day begin to do
well. For it cannot be, that he that both hears GOD, and talks with GOD,
should be without profit. For by and by we are kept under. We wash our hands,
when we take up the book. See thou with what reverence we are moved before
we read? But if we add diligence hereunto, then will great profit come
thereby. For none but the reverent soul washes his hands. And the wife if
she have her head bare, covers it so soon as may be, giving a token of
her inward reverence: but the man if his head be covered, will by and by
discover it. See thou how the outward fashion declares the inward
affection? Furthermore, he that is a diligent hearer of a divine Sermon, does
often times groan in conscience, does often times find fault with his life and
manners. Let us apply our selves therefore to the Scriptures, my dear
brethren, and especially to the Gospels, let us often times be in hand with
them. For the book is no sooner opened, but straighte ways we shall meet
with the name of CHRIST: and when we hear the order of his birth, we shall
remember Mary his mother, which of Joseph her husband was found to be with
child by the holy GHOST. Now he that shall hear these things, will
immediately be inflamed with a wonderful love of virginity, he will marvel at
the child, he will despise earthly things. Neither is it to be thought a
matter of small importance, that a virgin was accounted worthy of the holy
Ghost, and to be saluted by the message of an Angel. And these things briefly
for a taste. But if thou will diligently search through all things, thou shall
incontinently contemn al worldly affairs, and shall rejoice with thy self.
If thou be rich, thou will pass nothing for riches, when thou understand
that a poor Carpenters wife, in a vile cotage and condition, became the mother
of our Lord. If thou be poor, thou need not be ashamed, when thou hear
that the author of the world refused not a most vile cabin. Thus being
persuaded, thou shall not be carried headlong to rauine and extortion, thou
shalt not be carried to covetousness, thou shall not take thy neighbors
good, but rather thou shall embrace poverty, thou shall despise riches, thou
shall by this means put away al malice. Again, when thou shall see Jesus
lying in a manger, thou will cast away all care of decking thy son with gold
or silver, of garnishing thy bed, thou will cast away I say all
covetousness: thou shall obtain many things, which perticularly I can not now
stand to declare, but they shall know that will take a taste of the^. Wherefore
I exhort that ye would give attendance to reading, that ye would gather
the true meanings, and write them in your hearts. Which when the Jews regarded
not, they thought it enough to carry the books in their hands: but we, let us
have them, not in our hands, but in our houses: yea let us, as it behooves us,
imprinte them in our hearts. For by this means the filthy dross of this life
being done away, we shall obtain the sweet blessings of the life to come.
Hitherto he. These words are indeed somewhat long, but yet such as are very
worthy to be observed of all persons. And in good soothe it is expedient, that
next after the Scriptures the godly admonitions also of the holy fathers,
amongst who^ Chrysostom is notable, should be graciously heard, and highly
esteemed of all men.

But it is time, that I now make an end of speaking. Conclusion.
I most heartily therefore pray and beseech all persons even in the bowels of
our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, of who^ we profess and auaunt that we
have obtained the most honorable name of Christians, that we would by all
means possible endeavor our selves to answer to so holy a name and calling.
And for because this thing can not be brought to pass, but by the knowledge of
GODS will and of the whole substance of Christian doctrine: it is evident
forsooth, that the continual reading and hearing of the Scriptures is very
much requisite and necessary for all Christians. Take therefore, I beseech
you, the aduertisementes of us hitherto collected in such wise, as by the same
we may have intelligence, that you are in some sort persuaded to buy the holy
books, to take them in your hands, and yearly once or oftener (if it may be)
to read and pervse them. It is an old saying, that there is no longing for
that which is unknown: and that knowledge has no enemy, but the ignorant But
thus it is, thou shalt no sooner begin to read the holy Scriptures, but
thou shall begin also to love and embrace them. The wonderful sweetness
that is in reading, thou shalt then first of all perceive, when thou art a
little envred with it. As for those counterfaite reasons, wherewith in these
our days the crafty Foxes and Aegiptian inchaunters go about to withdraw all
sorts of men, but especially the common sort and youth of good calling from
their holy and godly purpose, stop thou thine ears against them and pass
them over as deadly Mermaides songs. Satan the common enemy of mankind,
sleeps not, neither takes any rest: but from time to time thrusts forth
one while verily such as are approved in opinion for their notable wisdom,
another while swinishe haters and contemners of all holy things, an other while
Hypocrites puffed up with a vain show of holiness, and therefore marvelous
fit instruments to beguile the simple, by whose painted and smooth persuasions
and by other crafty conueyances the unwary sort may be brought to the
neglecting and open hatred of the Scriptures: but it is your parts, with these
reasons and instructions, whereof you have hitherto heard many and sundry, as
well out of the sacred Scriptures themselves, as also out of ye most godly and
learned fathers, to shore up and fortify your minds, and even in spite of all
the rablement of the wicked whom Satan subborneth and armeth daily against
us, to stir them up to the love and study of Gods word. Let us consider that
CHRIST does even now also without ceasing preach unto us: which in very deed
he does not after one way or manner: and that there is no precepte of him
oftener urged and repeated, than this, wherein he says to all Christians:
Search the Scriptures: for they are they that testifye of me. This voice of
CHRIST, for so much as his heavenly father has so commanded, let us hear
with patient and stayed minds, and with all reverence and submission obey it:
finally in comparison of that, let us refuse and abandon all men's pesuasions,
precepts, counsels, flatteries, threatenings, curses, and torments whatsoever.
For he that makes none account of this voice of CHRIST, there is no doubt, but
that his name shall oneday be utterly scraped and raced out of the register of
Christians, that is to say, out of the book of life, which GOD himself has
written: and that at the last judgment of the great day, he shall hear from
the mouth of the same CHRIST, a far other manner of voice, namely, a heavy and
a horrible voice as touching the suffering and enduring of everlasting fire.

THE END.
Jmprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, 1579.


