The Treasure of EVONYMVS, conteyninge the vvonderfull hid secrets of nature,
touching the most apt forms to prepare and destyl Medicines, for the
conservation of health: as Quintesse^ce, Aurum Potabile, Hippocras, Aromatical
wynes, Balmes, Oils Perfumes, garnishyng waters, and other manifold excellent
confections. Whereunto are joined the forms of sundry apt Fornaces, and
vessels, required in this art. Translated (with great diligence, and labor)
out of Latin, by Peter Morvvyng fellow of Magdaline Colleadge in Oxford.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martines.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

John Day to the Christian Reader.
COnsideringe with myself (louinge Reader) many and sundry times, how yt
nothing is so desired, so acceptable, or so necessary in the time of
dangerous infirmities, and pearel of bodily health, as to preserve those yt are
free of sickness from the violence of the same, and to restore the sick, weak,
and languishing paciente unto his former estate and pristinate health, which
thing is performed by the noble and excellent knowledge of Physic: and
again, how that this Art is exercised, yea of famous and learned men, which
with out any great profit to the pacient, or worship to ye minister, because
their medicines are negligently prepared: I thought it my part, by this my
trauail and expenses, somewhat to serve herein thy necessity. Wherefore, I have
caused this precious treasure to be translated into our usual, and native
language, that like as all men are subject to sickness: so in likewise all men
may by this occasion learn the way unto health. And because thauthor (whose
name I spare to manifest, for fear of inuious detracters) do in many places of
this his work, send the Reader unto Philippe Vlstadius and Brunsvvick: therefore
I will with expedition (if this my labors shall be thankfullye accepted,) also
publishe them, sparing neither labor, diligence, or charges for to bring
them both to their perfection, and also thy necessary use. As touching the
excellencye of the preparinge medicines, the utility springinge thereof, and
the argument of the work, because it is exactlye set out by the author in
the preface following, I will leave to trouble the further herein. Fare most
heartily well in Christ. At London the.ii. of May. 1559.

The preface of the author to the Reader.
i Of the invention of liquors and oils destilled. ii Of the scope and end of
this book. Whereof more also shall be spoken about the end of the Preface. iii
The praise of them that can be content to make common the best and most
effectuous medicines they have. iiii How much the dressing and manner of
preparans avails in every thing.
THe Art of destillatio^ (which they call Chymia, Alchimia, Alkimia, Chemia
Suidas calls it, and Alchemia) has invented many profitable things for ma^s
life, and in Physic also certain marvelous things, and praise worthy, if a
man prepare them right and diligently. For the lack of knowledge,
Covetousness or negligence of Physicians and commun Apothecaries is the cause
why many such preparations are set little by: and worthily, if you respect that
which they prepare: unworthily, if ye mark the Art it self, which certes is
most excellent and most profitable: which seems to be the cause why it lay hid
so long, and began to come in ure very late. Some ascribe unto Hierom of
Brunsvvick, which about.lxx. years past practiced Physic at Argentyn, the
original of getting out waters, as they call them, and liquors and oils out of
simple medicines by the strength of fire: but they are much deceived, for this
Art was not invented by him, but written in our Dutch tung and first set out by
him. In mine opinion this inuencion is so ancient as the inuencion of the very
Chymia, which I suppose was celebrated first and put in writing by men that
used the Punicall or else the Arabicke tongue, a little after the age of the
Grecian Phisicions, Of those I speak that writ almooste the latest, as Aetius,
Oribasius, Actuarius, Psellus. In certain libraries in Italy even at this day,
are there extant certain wrytinges of Chymia by certain late Grecians, namely a
certain Philosopher called Stephan: al so a book entitled of the changing of
metals, which co^munlye are called Chymia, or Arcymia. There is also a book to
be had of Alchymia made by Auicenna unto Assis a Philosopher. Geber (the Nepheu
of I can not tell what great Mahomet) who is celebrated as a captain and
prince of this science, what age he lived in I can not easily say. Although I
judge him not to have been the first in uentor of this Art, but one that
brought it to light and renouned it. This man in his work entitled Summae
perfectionis, discoursinge excellentlye and disputinge many things of
destillacion generallye, writes that diverse manners of destilling are known
almost of all men, even as an ancient inuencio^, yea in his time also, no new
thing. Certain late writers declare the wrytinges of Alchymia not only of
Albertus Magnus, S. Thomas, Rhaza, and Auicenna, Arabik Physicians, but also of
Aristotle, Plato and Solomon, at the least wise mention to be made by the^ of
it: to whom I give small credence, not that I think this study to be the
newer, but certes that it was either unknown to these philosophers or mentioned
in no place. Some there be that expound feetly and wittily all the feinings of
the Poets, and chieflye that of the golden fleece, sought by the Argonautae,
unto the multiplying of Gold or Art of enterchaunging of metalles. Some also
ascend higher, and make the first men by and by after the beginnidg of the
world, authors thereof. Some simplely make it most ancient, and affirm that no
certainty is to be had of the first inue^ters. At Padvvay in Italy in our time
was found a most ancient monument, namely an erthen pot, having written upon
it this Hexasticon.

Plutoni sacrum munus ne attingite fures,
Ignotum est vobis hoc quod in vrna latet.
Nanque elementa graui clausit digesta labor,
Vase sub hoc modico, Maximus Olibius:
Adsit foecundo custos sibi copia cornu,
Ne praetium tanti depereat laticis.
This sacred to God Pluto (thieves) ware that ye touch not,
Unknown is it to you all, this that is hid in a pot.
For the elements has ishut up digested with much pain,
In this small vessel the great Olibius certain.
Plenty with thy fruteful horn as a guard be thou present,
Least the price pearish of this liquor most excellent.
Within this pot was an other little pot with the inscription of these verses.

Abite hinc pessimi fures
Vos quid voltis cum vostris oculis emissitiis?
Abite hi^c vostro cu^ Mercurio petasato caduceatoque
Maximus maximo donum Plotoni hoc sacru^ facit
Away from hence ye mighty thieves, trudge else where and go by,
What seek ye with your spying eyes, why do ye por and pry
Hens with your hatted Mercury, and with his rod also.
This gift is sacred by the greatst unto the greatest Ploto.
Again, within this little pot was found a light yet burning between two
Phials, the one of Gould, the other of Silver, full of a certain most pure
liquor, by the virtue whereof they believe that this light had burnte many a
year, as did noote in their collections and gatherings of old ancient
inscriptio^s or Poesies Petrus Appianus and Bartholom eus Amantius Hermolaus
Barbarus also in his Corollarium or addicion upon Dioscorides made mention of
this same thing, whereas he entreats of waters in co^mun. There is also (says
he) a heavenly water, or rather divine of the Chymistes, which boothe
Democritus and Mercury Trimegistus knew: calling it sometimes a divine water,
sometimes a Seythicall liquor, sometimes pneuma, that is, spirit of the nature of
the firmament, and of y^ fifth essens or substance of things: whereof potable
gold, and that philosophers stone much spoken of, but not yet fond, consists.
Hereupon also is the name given unto the art calling it Psammurgicall, and
mystical, and Annophysiall and holy, and greatest: as though it had certain
secreate letters, and such as it should be conueniente to keep and restrein the
profane commun people from. This kind of liquor, as I suppose, does the
Epigram signifye of late found within the field of Padua nie unto the village
called Atesta, made upon earthen or brick metal, and therefore frail, and
broken unawares by the hands of a man of the country digging the ground in the
same place. The remembrance whereof least it should pearish we have added
hereunto the very words. This holy gift to the God, etc. as before. Therefore
it appears that the study of this Art was of most antiquity amongste the
Barbarus nations, but derived unto the Romans and Greeks somewhat late, nether
before perauenture that the Romans obtained the dominion of a great part of
the world: or if sooner yet covertly and retained emongst a very few.
Cicendulae y^ shine in the night (says Cardane) teach us that a liquor may be
made that may shine in the dark. It is made certes by the putrefying of those
things that have most erceding brightness, light and perspicuitie. I dout not
but it is possible to be made, whereof and how, I am uncertain. But these things
are almost besides our matter, saving that it might seem utterly that the way
to sublimate and destil, as they term it, has had his original of the
Chimists, and continued also alwais with their art: was opened unto the me^ of
our part of the world the^ first, when as ye world being made known bithimpery
of the Romans, sundry kinds of spices also and diners medicines unknown before
to the men of Europe, and to the Greeks and Latins also, began to be brought
in: and afterward also more, what time as the Mauritans and me^ learned in the
Arabik tung and doctrine, possessed a great part of Spain, whereby certain books
of learned me^ came unto us: and amongst the latter sort, as I think, the works
of one Bulcasis Benaberazeris who in the place where he intreteth of the
preparation of medicines, teaches also of many things to be sublimated and
destilled. About the age of the same man almost, I think Johannes Mesue was
famous, who^ we read to have lived about ye year of our Lord. 1158. But be
me^cioneth none other destild waters the^ of Roses and Wormwod. Me^ say
Auicenna flourished the year of our Lord. 1149* who also speaks of Rose water
destild. The vsa of metalli things sublimated is far more ancient, at the
least wise touching the tradition or tretises of authors, and like wise is the
use of oils that are made by descension or downwarde as in Rasis and Aetius. A
certain man (whose name I spare to rehers,) writ of late that these manner of
destilled liquors were not unknown to the latter Greek writers, using this
argument, that destilled liquors are sometimes named in the writings and works
of Actuarius, And in deed he names in so^e places Rhodostagma, as in his Iulep
against ye cogh: and a little following in an other Iulep intybostagma. But with
these words is signified nothing else the^ a simple syrup of Roses or Endive.
Rhodostactum does Agenita describe in his. 7. book, yt. 15. cha. with these
words. Sieth.ii. sextars of the juice of Roses yt nails whereof are taken away,
one sertar of honey skimming it til the.iiii. part be consumed. Ye a little
before also he describes Hydrorosatu^ rosed water, that also far differing
from a destiled liquor, or water destild for it consists of.iiii. pounds of
Roses the nails taken away.v. sextaries of water: ii. sextaries of honey. The
Arabians also or their expositors, when they speak of the water of any plant,
they understand the decoction of it in water: and likewise Nicolas Myrepsus
that writ in Greek of the compositions of medicines, whom it appears to be
a very late writer, by the barbarous words that he uses very often: wherein I
marvel this, that no mention is made by him of waters or oils prepared in
Chymistical instruments. Only the oil Capnistum or smoked, that is destilled by
descention, does he describe, as Aetius also. Moreover, the things that the
Chimistes make may I comprehend in.ii. kinds for the most part, that they be
either liquors or Massy things, the liquors again are either watery or oily: and
these either aerie or fiery. The Massy things, are either such as rest in the
bottom: or such as are carried upward: and that.ii. ways, either as pure bodies
and substauces, as they which they call sublimated, quick silver. etc. or Sout
for the remedies of the eyes with Phisicions. There be also other artificial
manner of preparings, wherewith the purest and most effectual part in medicines
is drawn out, and as it were the form is separated from the matter.

And although I am not greatly travailed nether in the Chymistical nor in the
other manner of preparings, but by the way have got the kuowledge of certain
things, partly by mine own experience in some things, and partlye of myfrends:
yet what so ever and how much so ever this is, I will communicate it with the
studions of Physic: not as though I entend to teach perfectly and absolutely
the very Art of destilling and preparing of other things, but as it were
writing unto such as now already are not all void and without knowledge of
these things, having either experimented them selves or red other men's wrytings.
For I have nothing so exrelle^t or secret, but I covet it might ge abroad to
the publik and common profit, and although in small wealth, yet have I ben ever
of nature ready to communicate and make any man priuye of any cunning I had,
which some refer unto simplicity or childishnes, other some better to the
liberality of my disposition. There be some that do utterly cloak and keep
secret their things, and that diverse kind of men: some for Ambicion, that
they may have wherewith to excel and pas other men: some also for
covetousness, to get gain thereby: other through the ignorance of the
aunciente writers, as though there were not put in wrytinge either the same or
far better by men of antiquity, which now are despised of many, and a folish
and insatiable lust is there alwais to find out new things. There wantes not such
as think, great and effectual medicines should be kept secret for this cause,
least uncunning men, as many practicioners be, without al reason almost, and al
learning, might abuse them, and convert those things which are invented for
the health of me^, to their destruction. To such would I answer, As no kind of
evil ought to be committed for this intent that any good thing might follow
thereof: so that which is good ought not to be left undone, least some evil
might ensue, for the world shall never be without them that will abuse good
things and profitable inuencions. But good men, simplely such good things as
they have, they make them common, and will not stick nor cese to do so because
they fear, that certain lewd persons may do hurt thereby. But I will leave of
this disputation, thye do I protest sincerely and as I thinck withal my heart,
that I covet by my example to stur up learned and good Physions, that laying
apart al Ambition, Covetousness, Ignorance, Envy, if they can bring any
excellent thing unto our profession, that they would do it gentlely and
publicly. As for the unlearned certes, they in ministering not only these great
and effectual medicines, of which sort we shall put diverse in wrytinge hear,
but meats also and most common drinks, out of time, do hasard and bring men's
lives many times to diseases and death: and it is well known that Hippocrates
writ how our Ptisan ministered not in due time, was the cause of death to a
certain man sick of the Pleurisy. These therefore ought to be left partly to
their ignorance, partly to their leude malapartnes. But they that have need of
the Physicion are to be admonished to do that in Physic, that all men are
wont to do in all other Arts: that is, to choose good Physicions, and learned,
and such as exercise and practice this Art by their profession, both with
reasons, as a part of Philosophy and also in the very actions and doings of
cures. But I return to the purpose. The preparing therefore (as I say) is of the
greatest moment and weight in every matter. In Rhetorik vtterans, gesture, and
pronunciation more almost move the minds of the hearers, then the very
argument that is handled. Hereupo^ it comes that things put in meter and in
numbers, do delight so greatly: which if a man utter in proos, they shall be taken
for cold, dnl and solishe. Hereof comes it that one being asked the question
what was the chiefest thing in an orator, answered pronunciation: what was the
next and the third: the same. Shows and plays, that they delight the hearers
and beholders so greatly, it is much more long of the form and manner of their
forniture and preparance then of the matter played or showed. In like manner in
the very things and works, the form, the fashion, figure, manner, as well of
nature as of Art, finally a certain preparation is more marked and commended
then the matter. Likewise in physsk, the conninge to prepare things aright,
and the descression to minister them aptly, have the greatest moment and skill
most. Nether is it of greater force what thou ministrest, then in what manner.
And although there be many circircumstances to be considered, that thou may
exhibit the medicin aright, yet the manner, and the preparing is with in the
medicine, and is at it were the form thereof and part the other circumstaunces
are without it, as time, place, and such things as are to be considred about
the sickman. But letting pas other ways of dressing and preparing at this
present, we will only touch those, by the which all the virtue and faculti or
operation is separated from the substance of the medicines, so that ye more
liquid and moist, the more pure and subtle part of every remedy or medicin,
may be bad severed and drawn out from the gross and erthy part: whether it be
gathered into a liquor drawn out of the sam remedy or medicin or into an other
certain ertarnall. etc. which the barbarous writer Arnold calls Eruirtuare
to outuerteuat, or Excorporare, to outcorporate. Furthermore, if sumthings shall
seem to be written somewhat curiously or double diligently, ye must consider
that suthe pertain not to the Physicions of the common people and pore fooke,
but to such as abound more with riches and ease, and have plenty of servants,
or such as remain in Princes or Kings courts: or also to Philosophers, that
busilye search out the marvelous mutacion and virtues of natural things, and
in them delight them selves. To conclude, let no man marvel that so great and
long commendacions and praises are added to certain medicines, as unto the
Quintessences as they call them, to Aqua vities, and made ba^mes, and that unto
some marvelous virtues are attributed, as to sharpen the wit and memory, to
co^serue the senses and youth. etc. When as even by the ancient Greeks and
Latins also we read such effects and operacions to be ascribed to Triacle and
other preservatives and compositions, specially by the Arabians unto diverse
things, yea even of Galen also unto Triacle. There be some that I will not auow,
and whose credit I leave to the authors, whose names I write every where. But
it is said before already, that we wryt all these things for the learned and
discreate men, which for the most part shall judge more easily how much credit
is to be given to every thing. Although in very many it is not sufficient to
be furnished with learning and judgment, except experience and practice be
joined also therewith. But I make an end hear of my Preface.

The authors alleged in this Book.
AEgidius book of ix. or.x. liquors destilled, in the which I find many
things which are also in the book of Raimund Lullus of waters. Aetius Amidenus.
Albertus Magnus. Alexander Benedictus. Andreas Furnerius book in French of the
decking and of man's nature. Antony Guainerius. Arnolde de Villa Noua or Newton.
Auicenna. Barthol. Montaguana. Bulcasis some call him Albucasis. Brudus
Lusitanus. Dioscorides. Epiphanius Empericus book written, not prynted, of
medicines, a Physician that had travailed in Grekela^^ whom I knew when I was
a young man. Geber a Chemist. Gualterus Ryffius Dutche book of destillacions.
Hermolaus Barbarus. Hieronymus of Brunsvvik, that writ first in Dutch of
destilled waters. Hieronymus Cardanus. Iac. Hollerius de materia Chirurgica.
Iac. Syluius comme^taries upon Mesuen, and a book of preparing and composinge
of simple medicines. Io. Almenar of the French disease or pockes. Io.
Brasescus. Io. Ganiuettus. Io. de Rupe scissa, look in Raimund Lullus. Io.
Genrotus a french book. Io. Manardus. Io. Mesuae. Io. Tagautius Metaphras up
on the Surgery of Guido, de Cauliaco. Io. de Vigoes Surgery. Marianus Sanctus a
Surgean. Munkes commentaries upon Mesue. Nicander. Nicolas Massa of the French
pockes. Nicolas Myropsus. Peter Andro Matthaeolus Senenfis book of the french
pockes, and Italian comme^taries upon Dioscorides. Petrus Aponensis. Philip.
Vlstadius Coelu^ philosophorum, that is, heaven of Philosophers.
Raimund Lullius book notable good and very learned, of Quintessence which was
prynted once at Argentin, and of late at Norinberge, but differinge in many
things. I have.ii. written copies, and other.ii. I saw with a friend of mine,
which al did differ amongste them selves and from the prynted. I did se also
the book of Quintessence of Ioannis de Rupe scissa, almost throughout word for
word agreinge with the same, that it might seem that Lullus writ out of his,
or else that some man fatherd it falsely upon Lullus, if so be it he writ before
Lullus, as we read in the Dialog of Ioannes Brasescus. Yet Symphorianus
Camperius noted that Lullus or Lullus flourished the year of our Lord. 1311.
But Io. de Rupe scissa the year. 1340. Trite.

A book of the same Lullus, of waters. Look before in Aegidius. Rasis. Remaclus
F. Lymburgensis, that writ of those destilled waters yt be in common use.
Rogerius Bacho of the virtues of Aqua vitae, according to the.xii. fignes,
whicke book some not truly ascribe to Arnold de villa no. Serapio.
A Table of the chapters contained in this Book.
WHat destillation is, and of diverse forms and kinds. 1. Of the virtues of
licores destilled generallye. 7 Of the manifold use of lyquors destilled, both
in Physic, and otherwise. 15 A way to purge and make clean troubled waters.
17 Of Balneum Mariae generallye, and of those destillatio^s that be don by
vapors of hot water and in horse dong. id. Certain excellent simple waters
destilled in Balneo Mariae, first of Plants then of bea. 24 Of Rosewater. 38
Of waters* destilled of beasts, or of their parts, or excrementes, and first
of all of the hoole beasts. 49 Of vessels and diverse instruments belouging to
destillation. 51 Of the matter for vessels of destillacion: and first against
leaden and brazen vessels. 57 Of Fornaces. etc 61 How to close vessels and to
defend them, both with clay and otherwise. 61 Of the preparation for
destillation. 67 Of the rectificatio^ of liquors destilled. 73 Destillacion by
a filter or a list of Woollen cloth. 75 Of burning water or single Aqua vitae,
and of the strength thereof, and manifold use. 76 Of the strengths and virtues
of Aqua vitae 82 Of such things as be destilled dry, put into any liquor. 89
Of quintessence of remedies. 94 How the quintessence of all things may be
drawn out, to minister the^ or the virtue of the^, to men's bodies. 98 Of the
drawyng out of the Quintessence from wine. 102 How quintessens may be drawn
out more easeli and with les cost, for pore men's sakes, out of the same. 104 In
what places Vlstadius teaches in his heaven, teaches to draw out diverse
quintess. 106 A merueilous water that has a contrary operation to Aqua vitae,
which may be called cold quintessence. 107 Of the extractinge and drawing
forth of all the virtues of Chelidonia, or Selandine: by the which example,
every man of any understanding, may use to draw out the virtues also of
other plants. 110 How Quintessence is drawn out of fruits, as Apples, Pears,
plums, Cheries, chestnuts. 1^6 Out of flours, herbs and rotes. idem Of
quintesse^ce of ma^s blood, eggs, flesh, and Honye. 117 Of quintesse^ce of
metals. 121 Of the drawing out of quintessence from Antimonia, lead, whit lead
122 Of diverse kinds of Aqua vitae composed. 124 Aqua vitae against
Pestilence, proved and used with great and marvelous success by a certain
Physician of our time of Solodurn in Heluetia the year of our lord 1547. In so
much that scarsly every tenth of the^ that received it, died. 128 Two
compositions of Aqua vitae. 125 What medicynes be mixte with Aqua vitae,
without any destillation first within the body, the^ without. 141 A water to
wash the parts taken with the palsy. 145 Of destilled waters composed, but
with other, the^ with Aqua vitae. 146 Certain composed waters, to be destilled
other of the medicines by them selves: or with well spring water. 135 Of waters
of virtues or golden water. etc. 155 A water of certain remedies for short.
etc. 163 A water for the ston. 165 Certain waters composed. idem Waters of
Capo^s. 168 Waters composed for diverse diseases, within the body chiefly,
whereof some are made of medicines and juices, whiles they be yet new, other are
infused and put into the juices of pla^ts or waters destild, whai, or blud 170
An aproued water for the sores of the raines and bladder. 171 A water composed
172 A water against the Pestilence. etc 174 Of purging medi. 175 Gold potable
or. etc 177 Certain waters composed. etc. 183 Certain waters for the eyes. 185
Of waters of swiet savor. 187 Rosewater with musk Saffron, cloves. etc. 189
Waters of swiet. etc. 192 Waters destilled called Cosmeticall. etc. 195 Certain
waters destild for ye garnishing. etc 200 Certain Cosmetical things. 207
Waters for the dying of the hears. etc. 208 A way to destill swiet waters and
effectual. etc 211 Destillation in ashes 213 Of Rosaries, that is to say
instruments. etc. 218 Of oils destild. etc 222 How oil must be drawn out of
spices. etc 225 How oil is drawn of wodes. etc. ide^. Of oils of flours. 232
Oils of seeds. etc. 237 Certain oils of seeds 239 Of oil of the beries of
Juniper. etc. 242 Of oils of gu^s. etc 246 Of oil of Turpe^. etc, 249 Oiles of
barks. 251 Of oils that are drawn out of wodes. 254 Of true balm, and an
tibalm. etc. 261 Of balm made. etc. 268 Of balms that. etc. 285 Of oil of the
parts of beasts or excreme^ts. 289 Of oil of metals. etc 290 Of Aqua fortis.
etc. 320 Of the lyquors. etc. 325 Of certain massy. etc. id Of certain other.
etc. 338 Of diverse oils. 339 Of oil of Tartarum, yt is the dry Lies. etc. 351
Of oils of the yolks of eggs. 354 Of Perfumes. 362 Of certain juices 367
Again of the juice of black Elieborus etc. 375 Of the juice of ye flour Deluce
and Rape. 378 Of decocted things. 381 Of made wine, and mixed with medicines 383
Of Aromatical wines yt is made of spices. 392 Of swiet wines spyced. 396 Three
wais to make Nectar. etc. 401 Of spiced wines with burning water. 404 Of
certain other Aromaticall wines, specially such as are made by ha^ging a little
etc. 406 Of Artificial wynes, which rese^ble the taste of straung wines. etc.
407
The end of the Table.
What Destillation is, and of diverse forms and kinds.
DESTILLATION not distillatio^ (as learned Siluius. Destillation by ascentio^ or
going upward, is when the vapors or fume is carried up and be there gathered
together into water and so drop down: The same author. Moist things put
into a body (for so do they call the bigger Siluius. Certain like things nature
has wrought, both in exhalatio^s above in the air, specially the^ the lower
parts. Therefore of a plant or any other substance ordained to be destilled:
what part of it is most meet to be extenuated and fynet (that is the purest
part, the lightest, the thinnest, the moistest, and the most superficial part
next unto the uttermost parts of the body) being first of all fined by the
force of heet, is lifted up: next such other parts as in puernes cum nie to
the first and last such a moisture of the things as is more gross that held
together the earthly parts, a certain (Pliny, I think, writes of the wode
that is called Smilax, how it willet sype through water mixed with wine, and it
true) but this is no destillation in deed, except unto such as speak
improprely. For that which is proprely called destilation is done by heet: and
that from the son, or of fire, corruption and rot tennes: By the son, as
certain men have inverted, to draw of flowers a kind of water, very nere to
them selves in smell and other pleasant qualities. By fire, that is, by flame
that come of aere and of aereall bodies: or else by burning cooles, that are
made of earth or earthly bodies enkindled,

Morouer the flame it self, as well as the cool, is diverse, not only in
respect of that it is great and little, but also of the wood whether it be
rotten and doated, or sound, stinking, or well smelling: grene or dry. Besides
this it is a great matter what bigness the furnace be of, what fashion, Syluius.
ascend up in their order: the lightest, subtilst, and hoatest first, that is,
the fire: secondarily the air: thirdly water: the earth remains in y^
bottom: and likewise I judge in the destillation of vinegar.

The nature of fire is to deminishe (as Cardane Balneum Mariae. The best kind
of destillation next unto this, is in horse dong. Then by ashes: the best in
this kind, is by the superfluous refuse of olives, after the oil is pressed
forth, for it being a hot and moist matter, will reteyne his heat very long,
yea a great meany of months: and so much the longer then the kurnels of
grapes, because the substance of the olives is thicker and fatter. But none

The heat of the first degree, which is moderate, as of horse dong, and Balneum
Mariae, is called the heat of digestion, resolution, putrefaction, maceration,
and of circulation, whereof we shall

Of diverse ways to destil by sublimation with water and without water, look
within in Rose water, out of Bulcasis.

Of destillation generally G^ber an Arabian, writ certain things in. 1. 4. 50.
chapter of his book callid Summa perfectionis. Where he reasons excellently
of many things chiefly of the difference and diverse affectes of destillation
by water and by ashes. In the same book. 39. chap. he teaches of
sublimatio^, why it was invented: and so forth in the. 40. chap. what
sublimation is and

Brunsvvicke Such common things as ar put into a rose still, to be destilled,
it is best not to put myche in at once, least they that be nethermost be dried
away and burnt, those that lie above remainyng

Such herbs flowers and other plants and growyng things, as ar to be
destilled, ought to be gathered when they are perfectly ripe, chiefly while the moon encreasith: when the wether is fair, and in the day time to be laid in
y^ shadow, to be cut, and if need require, to be brosyd also, and

Of the virtues of licores destilled generally.
MAnarde in his Epistles. 15. book 15. chapter, says thus: when I perceived
in the commun waters that are destilled out of plants by fire, nether the smell
nor the taste remain, but many times the contrary (for the water of wormwode I
perceived to be chymici, by what devise both the smell and the taste might be
preserved in thies waters, that is found in the hoole herb. It were long to
write all the ways, which I proved to find out thies things: yet

Syluius. Waters destilled, reteyne and kiepe still the virtues of the simples
wheroute they be drawn: saving that they are more pure and strong, the oftener
they be destilled, which we prove in the water of wine, for the most part,
very seldom in other things.

The virtues of licore destilled, some do alter with some matter, as honey,
Ladanum and such like, or else by putting it in ye nose of the still, which
serves for the most part, to the grace of the smell: for they bind musk,
cloves, Caphura and such like

A doubt. If so be it yt fire makes al things hot and dry: all waters
gotten by destillation, ought to be hot and dry. Nether does the watery
substance disprove this, for when as brenning water is such, it does both bren
and mightly make hot and dry men's bodies. Again, al waters be cold and
moist, as long as the substance has the upper hand. But nether of thies is
always true: yea, some of thies ar more like unto

Therefore men be wont to axe whether these waters reteyne and kiep their own
propre virtues and strength. We once said, whiles we entreated of the evil
manner of curing, that they are no strengthes nor virtues, because they are
destitute of savor and taste. For water of wormwode, nether smells like
wormwode, nor is bitter yea that is more wonder, it is sumwhat swiete. Yet
burning water (to speak nothing of Rose water) well declares that there is a
certain virtue and efficacy in waters. For if you will say it is such
because of fire: how comes it to pas that none Cardan.

But me thinks thies things would be more diligently considered and weyed.
First, where he true, if a man destill it negligently as the co^mun apothecaries
ar wont, in leaden limbeckes. but destill it in Balneo Mariae, and see whether
it shall lack his smell and taste, or no. Yea, it shall retain boeth, and that
effectuously, not only this herb, but also any other plant whatsoever it be,
having any sauoure or taste: if it be dried and weikte or stiept in wine a few
days, then destilled in Balneo Mariae or by ashes gentely, as I shall show
further within. Now when certain things have Theophrastus writes, do retain
their savor very long: other sum be unlike to their plants. for such waters
as have their virtue and force in the uttermost and superficial parts, they
fume or else more nie to the midest or utter part of the same. I am surely of
that mind with Raimunde Lullus, that water of the same quality may be gotten
out of any plant whatsoever it be, of cold plants, cold water: of hot,
hot: of dry, dry: and of moist, moist. But I will not grant that the same
virtue remains, except like savor, or like taste or both, (as in smelling
things (be left.

The cause why the smell of certain flowers as of Iasmin, of the flowers of
cloves, remains not Cardane, where as we entreat of Balneu^ Mariae generallye.

It were good if every water once destilled, were powered again, yea or the
third time upon his own dreggees beaten, and to be suffered to putrify two or
three dais, and so to be destilled again: or rather, not upon his own dregs
that remain, but upon other like herbs of the same kind, and to putrify in a
circulatory or a blind limbeck, and to be destilled: Brunsvvick

I saw once an alchymist, that destilled not the very herbs renewing certain
times the destillatio^, and powering again ye water upon ye dregs ground
upon a marble moler: Gnaynerius.

Oats (whereof drink may be made as Ale or Bear of barley) do warm and make
dronk no less then wine. Men say that in Tartaria, water of milk destilled
makes men drunk. But every water, not an element (that is alone without any
mixture) but lyquor or juice mixed and compounded, being often destilled may do
the same: for it Cardane.

Also a lyquor or other thing be destilled, the thicker it is, the more it
seems to conceive heat and fire, if it be often destilled.

It is manifest (says Cardane) that a water may be made which shall
inco^tenent break the stone in the bladdar, if it be put in by a squirt or
syring. Tecolittius, or of the stones of crabes. for so may a water be made, to
break also the red marble. Moreover, that it shall not hurt the bladder, is
brought thus to pas, if the mattier out of which the water is taken be void of
any salt kind of thing, or alum, or coperoos, or of wine lies, but some of them
that we me^cioned erewhyle. But there is nied of diligent trial, in co^firming
a subtle means, that such things which we have serched out so subtly,
being surely confirmed first by experience and proof, we may then deduce and
bring them to the commodity of man.

In deed I know that pigeo^s donge and paritary either the one or the other,
destilled by this means, is able too break the hardest stoone that ever
Cardane. Perauenture also Chrysocolla would help unto this art, being
artificiusly made, and without sharpnes, such as is also praised of the
goldsmithes: wherefore to make Borace sum use rain water destilled, and milk
destilled, sum also honey marow: etc. I hard of late, a certain practicer cured
the stone Borace mixed with burning water, to the thicknes almost of honey,
mingling also Tartar, punned, or a stone cut out of a man or the grounds of
piss out of a pispot. He commanded that a man shall use this medicine by the
space of fourtene days, so that he should always mixed some with his wine when
he dronk, yea both at diner and supper. I remember I have red of certain
liquores, in which if a man put a stone or flint, it should be resolved. The
Chymistes and destillers use destilled vinegar, and

They dissolve with strong vinegar, chiefly destilled, or with the juice of
limons, perles, egg shelles, stones of the reins, of the bladder, both the
coralles, and they afterward dried, ar quickly and redily cro^med betwixt ones
fingers. Siluius.

I can not let pas here to speak of the water of Epiphanius the practicionar,
which is such. Re. Antalis et dentalis, boracis, sarcocollae whyt coral, white
crystal, claye, anessede, rys, meel of orobus trochiscos (little roules or
balls) with water of beans made with musk. The use of it is for women to
make their faces whyt and fair, but the face must be perfumed before with
water of a decoction of barley and oats: then let one baul be steept and
consumed in bean water, and anoint the face before you goo to bed, but in the
morning wash it away with water of a decoction of beans and bran: and again
with coold water. If the more beautify the face: for limones roasted and
anointed upon the face, they alone do beautify y^ face. If a man drink this
water fasting and anoint the place of his priuities where hear grows therewith,
it breketh the stone: which is prouid by this, that if a man lay Porcellanas in
it the space of a night, the next day he shall order them with his fingers
like warmed wax (Porcellanas men call certain shelles, and also precious
earthen vessels.) I have used the mo words in this, to give

Of the manifold use of lyquors destilled, both in physic, and otherwise.
I Do perciue a manifold use of destilled waters, but chiefly and most of all
for physicions, which use such stilled chymistically dressed and prepared, with
oyntmentes, either that they may have the better savor, or else to make them
hoater, and that they may perce the sooner, they put moist linen clothes in
thies voaters to cool and refreshe the parts of the body, parts about the
arms, and hot fyrie swellings. Surgeons use such waters as dry mightily,
to wash wounds withal. But the most common use, of long time has been in
mixture of syrups to be drunk, and to zulapia or iulebs, chiefly of roses and
violets. There be that make diverse kinds of liquors and oils alonly for the
good savor. Glasiars also that paint glass in baking in their colors, they
do use burning waters. Goldsmiths use aqua fortis (as they call it) which
signifies a Raymund Lullus writes of y^ marvelous use and commodity of
burning water even in wars, a little before the joining of battle, to styre
and encourage destillation is necessary. Sweet water may be separated from the
salt, in a great caudron with a great and hie keuer having a beacke or nose.

A way to purge and make clean troubled waters, out of Bulcasis.


FIll a great pot with the puddled water A and putting B lay two sticks or mo a
crose C upon the pot brinkes, and upon the sticks lay clean wol D well washed:
the^ whatsoever the woll drinks of ye vapors that ascend up, wring it out and
kiep it, and amilu^ or meel: for thies things go dounwarde, and draw with
them to the bottom of the vessel, the gross mattier of the water.

Of Balneum Mariae generally, and of those destillations that be done by vapors
of hot
Hot water or else ye vapor of the same, send les strength into the thing that
is to be destilled, then other fire alone or else such other dry means as are
me^cioned before. for yt cause as Galen says Diploma, that is, a double
vessel (the Apothecaries as the men that still lyquors also, call it Balneum
Mariae) melts, heateth, seatheth those things whose strengthes the violence
of fire will not dispers nor separate: so, such things as be tender and
gentle,



You must have a furnace A of this sor, upon the which you shall set a great
brazen vessel B full of water, C in a circle as many as it will receive, in the
botome, of the which vessels the things that you will destill, must be put.
Other build ye furnace A otherwise as though it were a vessels: B in their
broad bottoms standing inward, they contain the things that they will destill
the mouth without as though it were a bottell being covered, C in the which ye
vapor carried up by his open belly gathered together, and by the long mouth of
the same droppeth down. Syluius.



But why remains not the smell of certain flowers in the waters but in
Iasmin, Cariophillum, and le^is, the water comes forth wtoute savor? the
reason is declared otherwher: because yt unto so sclender and thin
substance, no substancial and thick part is joined. There Cardan. It appears
without doubt that those flowers should be destilled in Balneo Mariae, or in
vessels of glass

Balneum Mariae may be hansomly made hoate with a great pype of copper A set in
the midst, in the bottom whereof is a grate for ye B ashes to avoid at: men
call it communly a stowe harry. Vlstadius names it a furnace of sloth. Upon
that pype, do they make a cover of copper G with a small pype coming out a
shore, to carry and convey the smoke out at a window or some hoale. (So do they
also make warm house flors now a days to bathe in.) The commodity of this
pipe D is then E, a ten or twelve at once, to spare time, labor and cost.



Some use brazen cupping boxes to still withal in the Balneo Mariae, and
glassen limbeckes, whose noses if they be to short or broken, they join other

The herbs yt be to be destilled in a bathe or otherwise, some do pun them,
and let the^ remain so a while, (perauenture for certain days) before they
still them, thinking to have more plenty of water in a hot place, it were well:
but the most apothecaries and other, that sieke most for lucre and gain
thereby, leave it in cold places in open cofers, till the herbs lose their
smell, and be corrupted with a moist and gros air.

Some there be that put some sand also in the water of Balneum Mariae, to
the intent the heat may be the greater and more vehement: as Mathaeolus of Sena
in ye water that is called aqua philosophica against the frensh pocks. And he
affirms that

The water of Balneum Mariae ought to be no hoater, then that a man may suffer
his finger in it: Brunsuicensis.

Vlstadius prescribes the destillation of a certain kind of aqua vitae in
Balneo Mariae, to be done with so slow a fire, that a man may tell one, two,
three, until seven, before a drop fall.

Of such things as pertain to the commun wai of Balneum Mariae, you shall read
more with in where we make mention of aqua Camphorae out of Bulcasis, and of
Rose water out of the same.

This way of destillation in Balneo Mariae, is used also to the rectifying (as
they term it) of oils, to draw and purge the fleame from them, for only the
waters and nothing else may be lifted up and drawn out by the heat of the bath,
the oil remaining still in the bottom.

When as I perceived that waters, as they are accustomed commonly to be
destilled out of pla^ts, they kiep nether their taste nor the same smell: I
began carefully to think upon the matter and to try many ways, yt I might
find a means how to preserve and kiep in the waters the same qualities. It
should be long to rehearse all the ways yt I proved. Only one will I touch, which
seemed to me to be the best and ye easyest. That is this, to work on this wise
in a double vessel, after the manner that Galen would all oyntmentes to he
made, of that vessel A wherein the herb is contained B, do not touch the water
C that boyleth in the bigger D, but that it wax hot with nothing else then the
fuming moisture lifted up from the same. Manardus. Albeit things destilled in
this wise, although they of the plants (as the former smell, yet for as much as
they be corruptuous, they can not be long kept: Syluius.

The chief use of dong, or as some term it, a horse belly, is such: that the
matter which is to be destilled in a glasen vessel set in the dong may be
prepared by the heat thereof, as we shall declare more at large in his place,
where we shall make mention of putrifactio^ and rotting. It is possible
notwithstanding for destillation to be brought to pas in y^ Brunsvvick
supposes to excede in the middle degree, the heat of Balneum Mariae.

If you desire to have a water destilled of the flesh of any beast, you shall
strangle the beast, yt it bleed not in any wise, then take away all the fat
Brunsvvick.

The parts of beast or excrements, as blud, the liver, the lights, eggs, gall,
and ox dong, ought to be destilled in horse dong, with vessels not very close
stopped (but honey and milk a man may stop the^ close) least the water stink. But
if it chance to in Balneo Mariae, specially the water of excre me^ts of oxen
whose first destillatio^ is scarce found without stench: Brunsvvick. It would
frame better if a man put to a little curtsy of salt in the putrefying or
destilling of dong, that they may corrupt the less.

Certain excellent simple waters destilled in Balneo Mariae, first of plants,
then of beests.
Absinthium.


OF Worm wode water Johannes Mesuae has made mention: and of it and of Rooses
only, as the Munks that writ upon Mesuae have noted, that it is Balneo Mariae,
or if yet stronger, in ashes. But such as be destilled first stiept in any
liquor, the waters of thies now are not simple but compound: of the which we
shall write hereafter severally.

Alsine.




Which commonly they call Morsus Gallen

Caepa.




THe whyt Onion destilled breketh the stone. Martianus Sanctus.

Cerasus.


CHery water of what kind soever they be, is drunk against to much heat,
and is ministered with out ye body: but particularly of sweet black cheries,
which also is commended of many against the palsy, if it be poured into the
mouth: and the mouth be well washed therewith, that it restores the use of the
tung lost. They destill the flesh of it alone, or the kernels also beaten
together, that ye liquor destilled thereof may entye out the stony matter of the
reins and bladdar. The black and sower ar called Visula, they yield agues
which couleth and confirms the strengthes: it is profitable also against
thirst and bluddye flixe: Ryffius. The water destilled of the swiete black and
fresh Cheries, is maruelously commended of Remaclus F. of Lymburg: As Soon
(says he) as it shall be powered into the mouth of one sick of the falling evil
already taken with ye fit (the potion of it is.iiii. drammes or moor) by and by
he reuiueth refreshed, neither is he any moor drawn together with any cramp,
til in the ordinary

Camphora: water thereof or oyll is thus made. Take one of the vessels for Rose
water, that is called baten (that is a belly) and fill it with the sticks or
cips of pynappull tree which has great and brood leaves, and let it be
filled. Siluius takes it so as though the roose water should be poured to the
chips of the pynappull tree, but me thinks yt cucurbita or belly, that it may
be a certain repeticion of the same which he had spoken before, and let it be
covered with a vessel having a nose: then put the belly into a brazen vessel
full of water over the fire, till it begin to boil: for an oyll shall destill
(and yet they deny that oyll may be lifted up by the heat of water) subtle of
a good odor, which is called water of Camphora. Or if ye list destill it
destilled. Bulcasis. But Belluensis says that water of Camphora according to
the Arabians (says he) is a water that runs out of the tree that brings
the Camphora: which as his tree also is of a hoot nature in third degree: so
Camphora it self is cold: Monachi in Mesuae. Put three little bies in the vessel
of glass where the Camphora is, which shall so be turned into water.

Fragaria.


SStraweberies shall y^ putrify in a Vessel of bras (peraue^ture salt may be
put to it, or sugar) and destill them. This water (says Lullus in his.ii.
book of quintessence) is holso^ a woman having newly all over her face
blesters or wheals by the struck of a ston with heet, which the only washing of
this water was straight way heled with great admiration. But the virtue there of
is a hundred foold mor marvelous and stronger in operacion with burning water,
and much moor with quintessence. Yea, this water mixed with quintessence or
with burning water cures the Leprosye.

Fraxinus.


Three ounces of the liquor destilled of the inner bark of ash, with as many
ounces of whyt wine is dru^k against the pestilence, and the same drinck after.
Halicacabus is commended of some against ye stone of the reins and bladder, if
it be drounke ons or twyes a week.

Helxines.




Which we call Parietary or Pelitory, the water thereof is profitable against
the stone, ried before in the virtues of waters destilled generally, out of
Cardanus.

Hieracium.


DEntdelion, in french with us it is called Dandelion, the water thereof siemeth
to be of the same virtue, as is the water of Endive and Cikory. Some destill
it first steeping it in wine eight days, it is of a sower taste, and they give
it to drink against the fittes of the falling sycknes, with marvelous trial
(as they say.)

Hissopus.


HIssop retains merue louslye his virtue in a destilled liquor, although it
be destilled in a common earthen lembek, only upon sa^d put in a fire pan: and

Intybum.


Endive, the water there of coleth all Lullus upon waters.

Lauendula.




WAters of the flowers of lauender, is Remaclus.

Iuglans.


THe water of walnuts not ripe made about saint Ihons tide, ministered without,
is good for wounds and hot byles, and the pestilent anthrax. Also being
drunk a two or three ounces, it cools and resists the pestilence. A water
also is destilled of the utter husks of walnutes (either ripe, so that they be
new brast and left of the nut, or not yet at all) in the month of September,
nether skilleth it if they be black, so yt they be not rotten: yet the black
are counted the best. A moderate potion if it invade a man with heet) letting
blood first, is given to drink against the pestilence, as a certain
experiment. It is praised also for ye noise in the ears and the difficulty of
heering, and for the diseases in the throat called angine being gargild. A
water destilled of ye leaves of walnut tree about the end of May, is maruelously
commended for the drying and knitting of sores, and to bring them to a skar, if
they be washed therewith morning and evening, and a linen cloth moystened
therein be Brunsvvicencis.

Orchis.


SAtyrion is destiled roots and al, good for ye falling evil (as men say.)

Persica.




SOme destill the flowers also of Peeches.

Petroselinum.




A Water destilled of Persely (of ye Aegidius.

Plantago.


AVyol of Pla^tain water is able to stau^che blood from whence so ever it
run. Cardanus. Brunsvvick does note many commodities upon plantaine water,
and specially if it be dronke^ in the morninge and evening, at each time

Pulegium.


Penny real look before in Hysope.

Rapum.




RApe water may Brunsvvick, is good against burning, of what cause soever it
be, if the sore place be washed with it, there will rise first a scurffe, but
wash the scurffe also, and it will hele

Rosa,


ROos water seems to be first invented: for I find mention of it in Auicen
the.ii. book, in the chapter of rooses: Roosewater drounke (says he) is good
in a Geleniabin, and helps to digest. And the roos and his juice are good
for a stomak to mich hoot. And although the Arabia^s for the most part ar wont
to say water for juice or Mesue in the chapter of Rooses. And again, The Roos
and his oil and water sublimated comfort the heart. etc. The same speeketh of
rooswater destilled, in the.vi. destinction, whereas he describes the iuleb of
roses, as the Munkes his interpreters do prove: of whom also this was and nomo
mentioned in Mesue, that is of rooses and wormwod. They make no epithe^ or
outward medicine at this day, but they put roosewater in it. In sharp vehement
and greet inflammations, to strengthen the principal members, it may be
commodiously used. It is good for the flixe of the bowels and vomiting. It
helps the inflammation of the eyes very much in the beginning. Sum are wo^t
to mixed with it a little thucia and sugerca^dy. It strengthens the eyes and
sharpeneth the Remaclus F. Of wine mixed with roswater in time of meet, see in
Arnold in his book of wine.

Rooswater although it be made diverse ways yet the best is made by Balneum
Mariae: Matthaeolus. If thoos rooses which we call commonly carnacion, dried
and moystened with the vapoure Syluius. They may be holden in a linen cloth
over hot water, til they have drunck enough of the vapoure.

Of Roose water out of Bulcasis.


THe making of Roosewater is known in most cou^tires. It is better made with
water then without: better also by fire of cooles then of Aharach. A. Thou
shall make therefore in a large house by a wall a little berchile B so does he
call the vessel that is filled with water the bottom and sides shall be of leede,
so well closed, that it leek not in any place. Then make meet a and make two
or three round hooles in it C C C moore or les, according to the largnesse of
the vessels, and as you desire to either much or little water D, then make a
pot of bras like to the pot made in Balneo Mariae, which thou shall set upon
the fornaice, so that the Berchile above the furnaice be lower in situacion
then the pot, (so that it may conduite the heat of the fire of the
Berchyle, to the pott: but me thinks thies words do either redounde or be
depraved.) Thou shall also is finished, put away the first rooses, and put in
fresh: thus says Bulcasis. Some man would marvel, that in such a making of
the furnace, where the fire is not put under the duble vessel or berchile (as
I conjecture, seeing he makes the bottom and sides of leed) but at the side of
the furnace, wherefore he should think it to skill any thing, whether the fire
put under the pot be made of wood or cooles. Moorouer it is known (says
Bulcasis in the same place) that rosewater of wyld

There is a destilled water made of thies with us a shorter way then that
before, is this wise.



A A brazen pot such as diers use, is set to a wall whereunto a cover B made
meet with hooles, wherein the be D it of the croppinges of vynes or such like.
But in process of the destillation thou shall close the mouth of the furnace til
the hot destillation be finished. if thou burn cooles, the water shall be the
swieter. (Here is more reason then in the former, because the fire here is made
immediately under the stillatory vessels.) The second way of destillacion with
out water with fire of coals is such.





MAke a square or round furnace A with a cover C made of glased earth, so that
they may abide the fire: And when the cooles are kindled, and the water
begins to destill shut the mouth of the furnace* and leave holes open for
the smoke to go out at. There is an other bridgemente of the third and fourth
way.



A Brazen pot A full of water is set over a furnace, with a cover bored B through
C more or les. Put under fyr of the cropping of vines or cooles till the water
sieth.

Saluiae.


SAge water keeps and reteineth his former smell. Remaclus. F.

Brunsvvick says, that the members being rubbed with the water of Sage, and so
dried by it self, and often drunk is good against the palsy, and also to
drink two ounces in the mornyg and at night, is very good, and helps against
the Crampe, he says further it is good against the

Scabiosa.


SCabiose water is profitable given to drink to them that are diseased with any
fistula, and the very herb pound is likewise put in.

Sedum.




THe water of ye least syngrien or houslieke, Remaclus. F.

Brunsvvick reports, that ye water of Scabiose drunk twyse or thryse a day
an ounce and a half, helps the stiches in the side, he says further, it
heals wounds inward and outward, being drunk.ix. days together two
ounces at once fasting. Look in the same author.

Solanum.




THe water of Solanum or Morrella is good against all agewes if the sick the
day of his fit abstain from all meat and drink: and a cloth dipped in it
be laid upon. It helps also the liver that is hot, and the lunges that are
dried and grieved with an Hecticke fever. Against all these diseases it ought
to be drunk with the third part of wine. Lullus in his book of waters.

Tilia.


OF the flowers of Tilia whose smell Tilia beaten. The dosis or quantity of
ministration is one or one and a half. It asswageth the griefs of the eyes:
and heals the places brent with fire or any hoot matter, and that tiliae be
stiept in this water or instead thereof the grains or kernels of quinces, or
psyllium, and the places be anointed with the horines or mouldines that bredeth
there upon: Ryffius.

Some use against the pestile^re a liquor drawn by the force of fire out of
the blood of a graye or badger.

Also of the blud of duckes against poison. etc. whereof thou shall read more
in the book of destillarions of Ryffius, written in Dutch.

Some mixed the blood of a goat with medicines against the stone to be destilled.

A water composed of the blud of a barrow hog and other diverse medicens will we
describe hereafter in some place.

Of the water of worms, and of the kind of Ca^tharides which is surnamed, as
Mey lander Kaeser says, of the month of May, read Brunsvvick.

A water to take away wrinkles and spots of y^ face and to clear the skin. Beat
the whites of eggs,

I would adioyne here a table of waters destilled of plants, which are
described in the Dutche books of destillacions of Hierom of Brunsvvick, and for
the most part all that Gaulterus Ryffius has borrowed of him: saving that I
study to be short. as liquors also may, and are wont to be destilled of all
such plants whereof there is any use in physic. But to reckon up also the
virtues and faculties of every of them as some do, it is superfluous when as
none other for the most part, but even the very same also be attributed and
ascribed to ye waters which are unto the plants: so that these repetycions
move irckesomenesse to the reader, yea even if it be but meanly learned, never
a whit les then colewortes twice sod. Yet because Remaclus F. has described. I
will ad hither a rehersall and table of them, in like order as he uses and has
recited them him self.

Absinthinm wormwod. Apium. Artemisia, mugwort, Agrimonia. Althea, the holy
hok. Acetosa, Alkekengi. Auricula muris, mouse ear.

Basilicon. Buglossos. Balsamita, that is mynte of Rome. Betonica. Betony.
Bursapastoris. shepherds

Chamomilum. Cammomill. Calendula. Mary goldes, Carduusbenedictus, Centaurium,
Centory Chelidonium. Felandine. Cichorium. Cikory. Capillus Veneris. Maiden
here. Caprifolium, that is Pericly menon. woodbinde. Cucurbita. Gourde. Cuscuta.

Ebulus. Walwort. Endiuia. Enula. Euphragia, Eiebright.

Foeniculum. Fennel, Fumaria. Fumitory. Gentiana, Genista, Browme.

Hepatica, that is Lichen. Liuerwort. Hedera, Iuy. Hyssopus. Hippuris, that is
horsetaile.

Lactuca, Lettes. Lauendula. Lapathum. Sorel

Maiorana. Maioram. Melissa. Baulme. Marrubium. Hoorhound. Melilotus. Melilot.
Millefolium. Milfoyl, or Yarow. Menta. Mint. Malua Malowes.

Nemiphar, both kinds with the flowers. Nigella.

Origanum, Organy.

Paeonia. Pyonie. Papauer satiuum, sown Poppy Parietaria. Pelitory,
Pentaphyllon. Cinkfoyl. Petroselinum. Persly. Pimpinella. Pimpernel. Pastinaca.
Parsnip. Plantago. Plantaine, both kinds. Portulaca, Purslein, Polygonos, that
is Ce^tumno dia. Pulegium. Peniroyall.

Roses white and red. Ruta. Rue, sown or set. Rosmarinus. Rosmary. Rubea
tincterum. Madder set or sown. Raphanus, Radish.

Saluia. Sage, Saxifragia. Satureia. Sauery. Sa^bucus, Scabiosa Scolopendrium.
Solanum, whereof seeing there are many kinds. Remaclus writes that apothecaries
draw water out of Halica^abus only for the most part that is Alkekengi.
Semperuiuum. Singrien. Serpillum. Salix, Willow. Senecio. Grounswell.

Thymus, Time. Berded Tapsus, that is Verbastum. Tauacetum. Tormentilla.

Violae. Violets. Valeriana. Valerian. Virga pastoris, that is Dipsacus,
Tasill, Verbena. Veruin, Vermicularis, yt is the les syngrien. Vrtica, nettell.

Of waters destilled of beasts, or of their parts, or excrementes, and first
of all of the hoole beasts.
A Water destilled of whelps, will make that heir shall not grow again. And,
Furnerius. I give little credence to thies curious and exquisite remedies, and
although they be true, yet I do not allow them, specially

A young Storck some bid strangle and destil it like rose water and therewith to
anoint the parts taken with palsy, or shronke together, and at certain times
to be washed away with a decoction of sea crabes without salt: they say it
helps marueilously, if a man continue it. Some bid put an ounce of Camphora
and a dram of amber, in a young storkes belly the bowels taken out, but it must
be one that never yet flew: then in destilling, to gather

They destill also a water of a pie, whereof read Brunsvvick and Ryffius, as
also of them that follow. Of a Capon, whereof we will speak severally within.
for it is not made simpely and singly only, but also composed many ways.

Of Frogs, Crabes, Snayles, Pismiers or

Of the blood of a Duck, a he Goat, a Gray of a calfe, look in Ryffius and
Brunsvvick.

Of man's blood, look Brunsvvick, and within also, where we make mention of
Quintessence.

Of the liver and lights of a Calfe.

The liquor of milck destilled, the chymistes and destyllors do use: and sum
that go about to make Borax or Crhysocollam. It is a wonder that men say,
amongst the Tartarians, water destilled of milk, does make men drunk. The
milk must Carda. Some use water destilled of wine and milk together against
ye fever quartain: specially in England, as Brudus Lusitanus writes: Some
drink it against the iaundys, as witnesses Johan. Goeurotus. Ryffius.

Water of an Ox hyde: see in the same author.

Of the whytes of eggs, and of the yolke: In the same.

Of the spaun of Frogs found in waters: look in Ryffius.

Of kowes donge look in the same.

Some say that water destilled of man's donge will heal fistulaes, also fretting
soores, and such Tinea or matering of the head: that it will also make skarres
like unto the other skin: and put away the spots or white webbes of the eyes.
If it be druncke, it is good for them that have the falling sickness: it helps
them that have the gowte, it drives away the stone out of ye rains and
bladdar, it is a preservative against the bitinge of a mad dog or other
venomous beast. But the oil of the same which destilleth after the water, with
a greater fire, is much better to fistulaes, and ca^cres, Matthaeolus of Sena,
and other, you shall read certain merueilous things in Brunsvvick.

Man's urine destilled, the Chemists do use to resolve certain mettalles:
Printers to make their printinge ink, but these destill it in Rose
stillatoryes.

Of vessels and diverse instruments belonging to destellation.
WHen men name a stillatory vessel, they understand the body of the still or
the Cucurbita, which the dutch men in their language, because of the fashion of
it, do call clauam (ein kolben.) The body or gross vessel some call the greater
vessel or Cucurbita wherein they put that which is to be destilled. Syluius for
this vessel compared to the limbeck or head, is Arabians name it, as Bulcasis
witnesses, Beten Batan, that is a bellye. It appears also that Atanor in ye
same Bulcasis, where he prescribes the destillation of vinegar, signifies a
Cucurbita. (A furnaice, Athanor or a fixed instrumente Geber describes in his
book of fornaces. The Cucurbita some barbarously do call bocciam a box. Of
the same ^igure and fashyon the greater vessels are meet to digest and
putrify: thereupon when they must be destilled, the matter digested is
distributed into some les Cucurbit or boxes. The limbecke is taken, as I
suppose, both for the body and for the head, but moore properlye for the
head, as I said, is the upper vessel, that has a certain similitude of
the head, in respect of the nether, that is bigger and longar. The same vessel
(late authors call a bell and (ein helm) a salet or helmet. Tubus which comes
forth of the limbeck a length turning downward, is called a nose, a beak, and
simple as it is a pipe: because the through the holownes thereof, the drops
gathered together in the limbeck, which all come together fold about the
lowest part of the limbecke, running forth do drop down into a vessel set
underneath, which commonly is called a receiver and a vrinall. The nose and
beak are termed of y^ like figure, because this part stands out, after the
same manner that beakes do out of the noses of fouls, and noses of.iiii. foted
beasts. The receiving vessel when as oils are destilled out of metals, as of
Vitriol or Corporoos, whereas there is need of a great fire, and continual,
must be very large: for

A blind limbek is that which has no nose nor beak, nor limb or hembe which
serves for preparation and rectification or circulation, that is, perfection.
vitrial.

Such heads as be put upon bodies not standinge vpryght, but as though they
were lying, they lack the limb folded skirt, and be like to commune earthen
Syluius.

I have sien also two heads one upon the other, that by the nether which was
bored through, part of the matter might be carried into the upper, which was
joined to the nether with nails, least y^ nether that is stopped with clay should
be taken away, when as

Some times the fashion of the head is like to a spyre ascending upward aloft,
sometime edged: sometime it waxes brood in the highest part of the head, that
it may receive the more of the vapors, Syluius.

Sublimation is taken of many simpely for destillation: other take it
particularly to lift up or cause to ascend up into the limbeck by the force of
fire, the matter that is to befixed in it: as many metally things ar
sublimated.

Some join glasse^ or earthen bottels together, which they call horned pypes,
the one whereof is set and cemented or clayed in the fire containing y^ things
to be destilled: the the other is a pretty way distaunt from Syluius. Thies
instruments are called commonly crooked: the frenchemen call them also horned.

This horned pipe is a musical instrument, which the Germans commonly call

The receiving vessel for the most part is a phiall of glass with is put, and
some times the belly thereof is set in a pot or some other holowe vessel that it
may stand the stedfaster in his place, or else for the commodity of the
thing, is set one way or other.

Vessels for circulation as they wherein the vapors ascend by course, and
again turned into lyquor, desce^d and go dounward as we shall declare within
where we shall make mention of putrificatio^ Of al thies the most excellent
vessel is that which is named Hermes vessel, because he was the inue^ bill:
eue^ so this vessel as though it were eared on both sides, has pypes that
beginning at ye head, that is the upper part, descend in manner of a half a
circle and ar bowed again and fastened as it were into the beginning of the
Cucurbita with a blind limbeck without a folded skirt or else a vessel of a
hooll glass, that is somewhat straiter in the midst, and out of the beginning of
the belly it has looking out a short pype, by the which liquor may be powered in
and out. We shall put the fygures of both thies within in the chapter of
quintessence: fornaces every where in this work.

The forms and fashions of vessels ar diverse, and almost without number
commonly used with the chymistes and destillers, Syluius. Who so desires the
figures and names of diverse vessels, let him look in Brunsvvick. Ryffius
Andro. Louicerus and other. A man may cause to be made, of what fashion he will
in the glass makers shops, such as be in Heluetia nie unto Scaphusia, and not
far from Basil and Solodourn. But the best

Of the vessel called aludel^s, look in Geber in his book of chief
perfection. 1. 4. 44. chapter, and again in his book of fornaces. Albertus
writes it a luttell, and expounds it a vessel appointed for sublimation:
likewise Bulcasis. The same wills arsnick to be sublimated in an earthen
dyshe glased, the fashion whereof he describes in Belluencis.

Of the matter for vessels of destillacion: and first against leaden and brazen
vessels.
WAters destilled in Balneo Mariae, do so far pas those that are made simplye
by the tire in leaden limbeckes, as gold Balneo Mariae, with large chaplets,
limbeckes or heads, and somewhat great and of glass, do give the natural savor
and taste of the herbs and flowers, wherout they be taken, without any noisome
smell of smoke or burning, which chances not al in the common leaden stilles.
For the waters that are made in them, very few and seldom, specially whiles
they be new, are without notable lothsomnes of smoke and burntnes, which unto
sickmen that drink, it is not only grievous, but also hurtful: Balncum
Mariae, and although it shall be a little more chargeable unto them and
painful, yet so shall they satisfy and please both God and man. Matheolus.

Such things as are destilled in lead, I judge them altogether to be
disalowed, because of ye Cerusse and other malicious qualities of the lead,
lead, Galen condemns, because it bredeth diseases in the entrails. Syluius.

Moreover the vessel alters much, as well in destillacions as in things
sodden. Wherefore a man must take great hied in these things, that the vessels
be rather earthen or glass then of metal, and those that be of earth, yt they
be of a very pure earth, and well baked, such as be the earthen vessels of
Paris, Bellonaca, England and Spain. But glasen vessels are the best because
they be more Galens reason in every one almost of these kinds of metals. For
if he affirm that water only conveyed in leaden pipes does bread diseases of
the bowels, how much more ought we to fear waters destilled in a leaden
limbecke or still. Besides that no small cerusse remains cleauynge to the
inner side of a leaden head, as in destillinge of Vinegar is gathered, so by
the force of the vehemente heat or brentnesse also tarte, that is of sharp
and tarte plants, which infecteth the very wa^ers, and for the most part
makes them white like milcke, till that it be settled and suncke to the
bottom. Vessels of other metalles that bried other roust or canker, are so
much the more pearilous, as rouste or canker is more hurtful the^^cerusse.
Vessels made of pure silver or gold, as they be least hurtefull, so are they
more hard to be gotten because of the cost. Syluius.

The best vessels be of glass: the next, earthen that be glased both within
and without: then limbeckes of tin, the bodies (in destillinge of Roses) of
lead. Thirdlye, the limbeckes and the bodies also of lead. For the strength
of the fire if it be moderate, it hurtes not the lead, but these bodies of
lead must be set in syfted ashes, a handful thick, not in sand.
Fourthlye limbeckes of copper tinned within. Fifthlye brazen. But copper and
brass have two discommodities, Christophorus de Honestis, admonishes to take heed and avoid them: Brunsvvick. Therefore saying all the most learned
Phisicions, and experyence it self, do utterly disalowe waters destylled in
vessels of lead, Brass and other unclean metals, matter to the Magistrates,
that it might not be lawful for Apothecaries other to prepare any more or
sell such waters partlye hurtful, partlye unprofitable. Bulcasis in deed,
uses leaden bodies in destillinge of dry Roses, which perauenture may be
granted for such waters as ought to be used only without the body. Some find
no fault with vessels made of pure and best iron, because no evil qualitye
(as they say) can issue thereoute into the matter or liquor: and troth it is,
that certain Berchile. Bulcasis does call a vessel in a furnace for Rose
water, which receives the boylinge water derived out of an other standing
by it, in the which vessel, the body of the still containing the Roses, is set.

Of Fornaces, etc.
I Declared before and described two manner of fornaces meet for destillation
by ashes, and Balneum Mariae also out of Bulcasis.

Hear will I trace out and descrybe another manner of fournayce, the use
chiefly when as any thing is to be destiled by a great fire, so that no mean
be betwixt the fire and the cucurbite or pan wherein is contained the matter
that is to be destilled: after which manner oils or certain liquors that burn
the skyn and flesh are gotten out of metals, as aqua fortis. etc. The use
thereof shall be also to sublimation: and if a man will set a kettell in at the
top upon theyron cross, then fill it with ashes or water and put clay about it,
he shall be gin what destillation he will. aqua fortis or such like, he shall
set a cucurbite or pan dawbed with clay by and by, right upon the cross. Yea
this furnace may be made also upon a strong board of wode, as I have made my
self, that you may remove it from one place to an other at your pleasure.
Therefore upon a woden table you shall buyl a four square furnace, of such
bigness, that it may be sufficient to set in a mean circubite. The walls you
shall make of brick, joined with mortar very well made, the hight shall O. where
as the ashes may be taken out, which fall from the coals from the grate
builded upon it. If so be it that an other grate were made also for the ashes
to fall through (and that lowest space to be somewhat dieper) a man should not
niede to take out the ashes so often, and the fire should be the more vehement.

The letter. I. shows an other door, streighte way above the grate, which I
have markte with certain pricks set overthwart in order. That door as the
nether also, it is sufficient if it be only so big as a man may easily put in
his hand at it. V. shows the iron cross, that is.ii. bars of iron, ye nether
whereof must have a bought downward in tee midst to receive the other in that is
laid overthwart him. A. and. E. declare the highest corners of the furnace, in
which so many breathing hooles (or ventes as they commonly call them) ought to
B. the board upon which the hole furnace is builded is noted with. C. as
apeareth in the figure here present. An other kind of furnace, for oil of
vitriol or corporoos, Balneum Mariae, y^ have already discribed before, whereas
we entreat of Balneum Mariae generallye out of Syluius. Also in yt making of
Rose water, out of Bulcasis. Of diverse and destillacions, there is a book of
one called Geber. Concerning the making of a furnace, look in his book
entitled Summae perfectionis. that is, of chief perfection. 1. 4. 43. Of
commune Rose stilles in earthe^ pottars fornaces, although some make them also
of bras, we shall speak with in, by and by after the destillation by ashes.

Of slow Harry, or the furnace of sloth, that is, a pype wherewith the Balneo
Mariae is made hot, we have written above where as we have entreated Balneo
Mariae.

The differences of coals shall we know in Theophrastus, but better of our
own smithes, specially goldsmithes, and of the very experience it self. Such
coals as ar dug out of the ground are condemned and forbidden because of
their foul smell. They are counted the best that are made of bieche or fir
tree.

Dioptra or a little skrien I call an instrument, which some men hold before
their face with their

Lyquors destilled should be kept in glasen phialles with narow mouths. Let
the mouth be shit with a stopple of wod, or rather of cork, and besides that,
a man must cover it with wax and bind a parchement about it also.

How to close vessels and to defend them, both with clay and otherwise.
CLaying of a thing, men do commonly say for yt which is to daub with clai, to
plaster, to pariet. Tothinte^t we may the better keep the smell and qualities
of such things as are destilled, we must close diligently and join together
with Vlstadius chap. x If the head be not miet inoughe for the body but somewhat
to big, you shall put paper round about between it and the clay. Without also
whereas about moist paper about it, or else a linen cloth, and after clay it.

The mortar to join the cucurbita with the limbecke withal. etc. ought to
be made with claye and hear, and to be dry before fire be put under, Bulcasis
entreating of oil of tilestones. The mortar shall be the stronger if it be
tempred not only with hear or woll, but also with gotes blood, and the more
also to be made with that is dros of iron, beaten as is found about smithes in
fields.

Of Hermes seal, that is, of joining together the mouths of glasen vessels
with a pair of hot burning tongues softlye thrusting them together, and how
after they ought to be opened again, read Vlstadius. cap. 20.

Let the cucurbita also be fensed round about with clay, specially those that
must abide the fire directly put under them and nothing betwixt, and that aqua
fortis and oil of Vitrial are destilled. For the destillation in ashes, there
needs no such mortering nor claying: albeit if a man will provide for the worst
considering the frailnes of the vessels, specially where many vessels are
set together in one furnace, it shall be sufficient once or twice to pariet
the^. Those cucurbitas which they use in Balneo Mariae, specially when many
are set together, some men use to like as it were hoose or cases.

They say glasen vessels will abide the fire better and longer, if they be
wared, that is, if they be warmed and don over twice or thrice with molten wax.

Of the preparation for destillation.
FOr as much as in destillacio^ we seek ye separation of the elements either
for one or mo of them, or else to thinte^t that they quintessens: separation
truly can not be don without heat. For heat unites and gathers together
such things as be of one kind and nature, and they that do differ and
disagree it separateth to the intent this might duly be brought to pass, both
the Chemists and Phisicions have invented diverse means and ways. They term
this preparacion diversely and give it sundry names, digestion, leauening,
putrefaction or rotening. Digestion they call it respectinge, the concoction
that a certain inward virtue, but increased or styred up by an outward heat,
comes unto an humor or moisture, so that a certain common and general
quality be mixed and spread throughout the h^ole body, with a hot spirit, and
one that moves and breadeth bubles, as it is in ye mixture of true leaven in
deed knode^ with meal: also in vinegar powered upon the earth. And this affect
is the beginning of rotennes in such things as have superfluous humor. That
which is called putrifactio^

The savor or other quality of ye putrefying matter, in my mind, it is not
possible it should infect the mixture that is put in a glasen cucurbita with
glass is: for the common grene glass will gather a certain duskishnes and as
it were a skin.

Destillation that is done by rottennes, or with horse dong both alone and with
lime be sprinkled and often changed, or with barks watered, or other rottening
things, how so ever it is profitable to the Chymistes and destillers many
ways, a physician not withstanding ought not to receive it, for a cause in
rotten wod and evil smelling, through the rottennes or some other cause:
specially if the Syluius.

Of this kind of destillation in horse dong read before in the latter end of
those things which we writ of Balneum Mariae generally. At this present we
should entreat rather of rotening then of destillatio^. But because of
rotening also in horse donge seems to be disalowed, if destillacion in it be
reproved, it is not altogether from our purpose

Putrification or rotening in horse dong with lime is otherwise done on this wise,
that the dong every day or every other day or by longar distaunce, be
sprinkled with warm water: otherwise, without sprinkling, when as the dung of
it self serves to be hot enough. A pit or hole being digd in some corner of
the house, they lai one course of horse do^g about a foot thick, that is three
handbread: then an for the by course. There is need of three burden for the most
part of dong, as much as a porter is hable to carry.

Some put the things that are to be destylled (specially such as be
stiepte in wine) into a tin botel, and that they do set in vnslaki lime closed,
which they quench at certain times now a little and then a little, with
rain water. Some mixte Oten straw with the horse donge, and sprinkling it with
hot water, set in their vessel, Cardanus teaches. If a man covet but a
light heat, it shall be sufficient to put it simplye in chopte straw.
Certain of the Germans that live in stouffes that is hot houses, the winter
time, make A. and in the vpperparte they set two or three glasen pottes. C.
upon little iron bars and pariet and rub them over diligently with clay.
In thies filled full of fine sand or ashes, both things may be destilled
which I would should be tried, and also certain lyquors may be rectified or
prepared. etc, and by this means a man shall save both labor and cost.

Some to digest the matter which they will destill in the son, provide a
holowe lokinge glass. D. beams. B. which they received: and direct them into
the vessel C. wherein the matter is contained: for this purpose (as I am
informed) the figure of a holowe parabolae should be more apt and meet: a
parabolae conus. Read Archimedes in his Book of burnnynge glasses.

The same also may be done very well with balls of Cristall. A* hanged between
y^ vessel B. so yt the beams of the sun may com unto the vessel. C by the
balls. The only end of all these preparations is, that the liquor may be
drawn out more easily, more abounda^tly, and more

The time of this digestio^ does vary according to the matter, which the more
massy it is, the longar time does it require: new herbs need the less time,
when they are stiept or weekt in wine or other liquor: for they be the
tenderer, and if they should be let stand long, they would have a certain
hoarinesse: the same dried must stand a little longar: then the seeds: last
of all the rotes: so that almost double time is necessary for them that follow
to yt which goes before them: as to new

The putrification of herbs to be destilled in horse donge, is wont to be
done almost by the space of.xiiii. days, but in Balneo Mariae. ii. or.iii.
natural days. Brunsvvick.

Such things require chiefly putrification, whose substance is somewhat dry,
gros, thick: raw have les nied which are contrary wise, and ar digested

Putrification is sooner done in cloudy wheather then in fair. Vlstadius.

To the most part of things that are prepared in horse dong, some salt is
cast, as unto beasts blood, to flesh, to fyshe: Guainerius.

To digest, take a blind lymbeck: if the matter be pure, as pure liquor, then
take a vessel for circulation, of which sort the pelecan is the best:
although it can skarsly be made, and not without great cost. etc.

But in digestion or putrification, the hoal vessel would be hid with horse
dong or with the refuse of grapes. etc. To circulation the half of the
vessel, or at the least the third part, must look out into the free and cold
air (as also to destillation.) Vlstadius chap.viii. where as he teaches at
large of putrification in horse dong.

Of the rectification of liquors destilled.
WAters destilled in Balneo Mariae, ought to be set in the sun and to be
rectified, namely in a glasen vessel, (the mouth whereof let it be bound
about and stopped with lether) full of the destilled water, so that the third
part must be left empty. then set it in hot sand by the space of forty
days, that all the fleme may be consumed, the third part of the vessel must
poured first into wine or burning water, least they should hurt a man by the
means of their over much heat, let them stand for the space of a monthe or
more if the water be hotter, in moist sand, in a cold place. Likewise the
third part of the vessel hid in the sand: or two parts of the vessel (two
third parts) let them be digd in the earth in some wine celler. Brunsvvick.
Every water if it be destilled again, specially upon the dregs and grounds
well pund and broken, it may so be rectified: quintessens must be added.

But ye the brentnes yt is in these, may brethe out it shall be best to keep open
a while the phials wherein the liquors stand: not withstanding you must take heed that the grace of the smell in the mean season and with it much of the
strength and virtue thereof, do fume out. Syluius. Destilled liquors of diverse
sorts if a man mixte them together sometimes they become troubled and pudled
like thin milk or whay, and for the most part an old lyquor make them clear
and pure again, if into three pounds, you cast six or eight drops of white
vinegar very sharp: for they will drive down the pudly matter to the bottom:
Brunsvvick.

Destillacion by a Filter or a list of Woollen cloth.
DEstillation by a filter is more in ure with the last vessel only and lowest
shall have no listes, which must only receive, not yield forth. The
destillation by a filter is done also in two crooked vessels of glass well
clayed, the one where of must stand higher then the other, when you will draw
precious and swiet smellinge liquors from the matter (digested first in Balneo
Mariae,) as Vlstadius makes mention. Chap. 56.

To the sirrup which is made of the sower juice of the citron, that juice must
a man destill by a filter, or elsse it will gather into a courd when it waxes
cold, and likewise ye juice of Lemons and Orenges.

By a list some destill also the decoctions of herbs sod with a soft fire,
which afterward by little and little they sieth till it be as thick as honey,
as of the rotes of black Elleborus or bears foot. Other thinck it sufficient
only to sethe it or strain it.

Of burninge water or single Aqua vitae, and of the strength thereof, and
manifold use.
BVrnynge water or Aqua vitae is drawn out of wine, but with us out of the
wine lies only, specially of them that sell it, and by this only almost get
their living. And parauenture it is never a whit ye worse that it is drawn
out of lies: for Lullus teaches it be destilled often, it shall be made the
more effectual, that is to say, hotter and drier: for dregs also or lies
burnt, are very hot, and give the hottest oil, which they call oil de
Tartaro, but that burning water that is destilled out of wine, me thinks it
shall be the swieter, and more plesaunt both in smell and taste, and without all
brent taste: besides that more apt also for quintessens. Burning water is
called also water of sapa, of which and oil, mingled together soope is made,
for it brenneth ye Monachus in Mesuaem.

Burning water often destilled, is brought into such sharpnes yt it can not be
drunk. Cardan. But this is commonly known: they that sell it commonly
serpentins or writhen or crouked vessels or in other accustomed vessels (with
pipes of brass as big as a man's arm) may afterward be perfected in ashes,
until all the steame be put away: by the which means it is made not only
hoter and more subtle and finned, but also more pleasant both form or
fashion of the bodies and heads which they call limbeckse, to destill all
^uyces: for some draw the water out of wine put in a great brazen vessel,
standing upon the fire, the neck or mouth whereof is great and broad, upon a
three foot, and upon this neck stands the head of brass also with a top
like a spire steple, and a thing like a paile or bucket. D. compassing it, full
of cold water, that the large vapoure may be thickened the sooner by the head
made cold, and least the water of ye wine Syluius. We did see diverse fashyons
of vessels set out in figures to destill burning water or aqua vitae, in
Gualter Ryffius and Andro Lo nicerus. Bulcasis says wine may be destilled
after the same manner, as vinegar, the destillacion where of he described. Read
within, straight after the title of destillacion in ashes.

Some make a long round pype. A. going vprighte from the cover of the
Caudron containing the wines or lies, which pype is larger beneathe after the
fashion of a figure in Geometrye called conus which they bow at the top
almost with a straight corner, and by a bucket full of water not a crouked nor
wri then course: and so they say, shall a man have more plenty of water. Such
like little instruments certain apothecaries do make, and call them bladdars,
for this purpose, that if they need

Aqua vitae is thought then to be stilled enough, that is, after it be stilled
four times at the least, and pourged from all his fleame, when as if a Aqua
vitae so often destylled should atteyne, ought too be lyghter it should also
become thin and pure, more and more, and when every fire, the thicker and
grosser it is, the more it burns: contrariwise, the thinner, the less: that
which is most thin should burn least of all. By the same cause it comes to
pass, that a drop of Aqua vitae poured in the palm of a man's hand, the better
it is, the sooner it vanishes away and is consumed. I hear that this is a
laudable note of this water, if succinum amber being set on fire and put to it
into a spone do burn. When wine Vlstadius. 10* chapter.) is destilled twyse or
thrice, you shall cut a fine sponge into pieces, so great, that on every side
they may touch the cucur bita or body within the upper part (that is in the
inner circuit) the spo^g must be tied in three or four stringes hanging
without, when you shall set on the limbeck, so that the sponge can not fall
into the bottom of the still: let the sponge be dipped in oil olive, and
crushed out a little again, least pexauenture the oil should fall into the pot
or body of the y^ me^ of our time call it dead water: for it is unsavory and
stinking. Such, that is the stinking water, whether it be yeilden of lies
only, or also of wine, I have not tried.

For the destillation of aqua vitae or burning water, a man must choose the
best wine, black, red, or white. Black and old, yelds more plenty and also
better water, then any other. The fire at y^ first must be light and soft, and
after more vehement: but you must take heed in any wise yt the wine sethe
Albertus as some allege.

Of five parts of lies, when it is twice destilled I hear, one remains or
somewhat les. When y^ fleame is one clean consumed, nothing is lost after in
the destilling, but the hole is yielded again. Of.iiii. measures of wine, for
the most part one measure of burning water is gathered in the first
destillacion or there about according to the goodness for the most part we are
content with the third or the fourth destillacion, and call it perfect. And
surely it rests much in the instrument, that the water should be perfected
sooner or slower. For the vapor is more destilled and perfected in the first
destillacion in a serpentin (that is in a crooked and bowed pipe) the^ thrice
destilled by a straight pipe. Note further that there diverse waters may be
gathered in the first destillacion, whereof the first is perfect, that is, that
which burns and is consumed Lullus.

Of the strengthes and virtues of Aqua vitae, in the book of Arnold, De Villa
noua, which is written
ARnold in his book of Aqua vitae describes many qualities thereof both of it
alone, and also mixed with other medicines after the destillacion, observing the
order of the.xii. signs, from the head to the fete, for as he says, a man
must minister much more effectual remedies to the head, if a man have need, at
such time as the moon is in the ram: and likewise in the other, which thing
how true I judge it, I will not say at this time: notwithstanding this will
Arabians have brought into physic. Aqua vitae simple and alone (says
Arnold out of one Theoricus I can not tell whom) breaks an impostume or
recours of matter both within the body, if it be drunk, and without, as
botche, if it be anointed therewith. It helps read and duskish eyes. It
stauncheth the running and watering of the eyes. It is good for them that have
the falling sickns if they drink it. It cures the palsy iuila fallen down with
humors, also the salt fleme, the rose drop and the touth ache. It is merueylous
profitable for fre^tik me^ and such as be mela^choly. It erpelleth poyso^, The
smell thereof burnt, kills flies fishes from roating. It restores wine that is
turned or putrified. It draws forth the virtues of herbs and rotes, if they
be laid in it.iiii. days (otherwise.iiii. hours) except only the Violet. It
ought to be set up in a glasen or silver vessel and to be well stopped. There is
more of it and better made of old wine pure and read. This he. He that desires
more concerning the virtues of Aqua vitae, let him read that which we write
above of ye virtues of certain liquors, which our men call golden, Aqua vitae,
as to the other, specially to simple Aqua vitae, and much more to compound or
Aqua composita, but chieflye to the quintessens thereof. Read more over Lullus
in the book of waters. I have seen also a certain broken work ascrtbed to
Albertus, of the virtues of Aqua vitae. But practicioners, ignorant of things
and times, or else of a purpose to deceive me^, as many as they could, have most
impudently fathered Galen, Hippocrates and Aristotle of the virtues of Aqua
vitae, or burning water, as written by them. All kind of cold passions or
greues, that be curable, it helps in short space, specially diseases of the
brain, sinews and joints. Also worms in the bellye, biles and all scabbines,
if it be washed often therewith, it heals it. It helps ye spleen, it kills
all worms. It me^deth a stinking breath. It takes away the disease of the
loins. The hurt members if they be anointed health. It preserves fish and
flesh from corrupting, but before they be eaten, they must be washte with
common water. Camphora put into it, will dissolve. If common water be poured
into it, it goes to the bottom: and likewise oil. This writes Albertus as
some allege.

The taste of it excedeth all other tastes, and the smell all other smelles.
Lullus, It comfort the natural heat more then any other remeadye: it is most
holsom for the stomach, the heart and the liver: Lullus. Anoynte the head
therewith and it helps it of the head ache: it kills the worms drunken
fasting: it puts away away diverse kind of touth ache. It puts away the
blemishes and whit spots in the eyes, if it be poured into them: and auoydeth
the running and watering of the same, if a man do but hold it in his mouth. It
lets the leprosy a space and hides it It helps rotten and materinge
biles, if linen cloutes be dipped therein and laid upon them. With a little
decoction of parcely, it drives away the stones in the bladder. It makes
women apt to conceive, but anoyeth them that be great with Lullus.

I knew an old woman, that was cold and Cathectica, to be restored by a
handkerchief made warm with Aqua vitae set a fire within it.

Some allege the testimony of Constantine, of

Aqua vitae besides other things is commodious and profitable for the strangury
and other diseases of the bladder, for the tertian ague and quartain also which
are joined with cold humors: against the disease called the Wulfe: against
worms: against the sens or painful fealinge of a man's body like unto
biles. It furthereth and provoke wemens flowers. It breaks and puts
away the stone in the reins, and expels a of the bellye and fluxes, it
helps, what so ever they be. They say, that Aqua vitae is perfect when often
measures is made one, (which I suppose will come to pass in the third or
fourth destillacion). Annoint the head therewith, and it heals worms, the
scuruinesse and scabbes, pusculs and skailes. It puts away the spots in
the face and other where. Broken eggs or eggs that that lack a shell, put
them in Aqua vitae and it will sieth them. It healpeth the numnesse of a
Apoplexia, swellings, steames, tenesmum or desire to the stool and weariness.
It amendeth the morphew being drunken or anointed theruppon. It makes the
skin soft and pure. To conclude, it is good against the bitinge of a mad
dog. It will heal any wou^d excellentlye, if it be washte therewith, and so
that no evil effect shall come thereafter by the means of the same wound.

I perceiuinge Aqua vitae to be hot and to dry, apomel^, which with us
commonly they make of honey co^bs. etc. Some wet figs there in and set them on
fire, then eat them hot. A man may also mixed any sirup therewith, one or other,
according as ye disease shall require. To preserve wine y^ it be not troubled
nor putrified, put to it the tenth Aqua vitae. in deed sulphur is far better
for the same purpose, but it bewrays the craft and the smell there of. The
same will alum do, but being both hurtful, they are very noisome to the
health. Cardane.

If wine by the means of the savor of the vessels or taste of the grapes be
corrupt and soured, pour Aqua vitae into it and it will restore it. The same
purges ha^ging wine that is new: also wine that is putrified and soured also:
for it conuertes vinegar. To conclude it brings a good smell and Albertus as
some allege. When the wine is to be drawn into an empty vessel, most use to
put in a ball of brimston set a fire: other use Aqua vitae, dipping towe
therein.

Wine that is made to have any taste or smell, out of hand in a momente, is
both a curious thing for rich men cheiffy, which will aduaunt them of ye sorts
of wine: and also profitable. For the qualities Aqua vitae for the space
of.xxiiii. hours for so the strength of them shall be drawn out. Then ye waters
so affected and died, shall be mixed with a little wine when ye will drink.
Arnoldus de v^lla noua.

How that wine is made which they calcommo^ly Hippocras, with Aqua vitae and
certain spices stiept therein, I will declare when I shall speak

Of the quintessens of wine I shall speak within, in the title of quintessens.

Of such things as be destilled dry, put into any liquor.
THe things that be dry can not be destilled, except they be stiept in some
liquor. Of these will I write in this place. Of those that whiles they be new,
be stiept and wet in some liquor before they be destilled, I will speak
hereafter amongst waters Aqua vitae rectified seems to agree best to the
stieping of spyces, except we will avoid to much heat, wherewith the things
destilled in them might be infected withal, when the liquor is drawn away.

Some still Cinnamon beaten with spring water poured to it, as we shall show
amongste Oils. Seeds also and other spices, wheroute oil is taken, are stiept
in some of the forsaid liquors. It is best according to my judgment to destill
all these into anything in ashes with a soft fire. Of waters of virtues or
golden waters, that are wont to be made with saudge and other smelling herbs
and spices, set in wine, I will speak within amongst the co^pounded waters: and
of them that are put in burning water, emongst the composed waters of life. It
is to be considered also how long they stand to soke in wine: for new things,
and they yt be thin or open not massy, need les time the^ dry, gross and
thick, and beaten things, the^ hole: the rotes then the gentian, astrantia, ye
flour deluce, y^ beries of juniper and other: I would more allow ye liquors of
drithinges set in wine or other where: but if ye things be thin or slendar, or
of no savor, or ought to coul and moiste^ they should be destilled rather new.
Sometimes the time of the year causes a man to take dryethinges because of
the lack or scarsity of fresh.

Gentian water. Take.iiii. pounds of the fresh and new rotes or rather dry cut
in small pieces, of great Gentian or white Gentian, (whose rotes are most fat,
and being set in wine, they nether corrupt them selves nor suffer the wine to
corrupt, as I have tried my self by the space of these ii* years) set in a
couple of great glasses in a stoufnie the furnace, or hang them if you will, the
glasses diligently stopped, and put into them pure good wine, so much that the
wine be.ii. fingers above the^: and you shall ever put new wine unto them still,
cucurbitas, ye wine and the rotes distributed together, and destil them in
Balneo Mariae, or else in ashes with a soft fire. Of the water of Centory y^ les
and gentian together destilled in wine, read within amongst composed waters.

Juniper beries also dry set in wine, give a very good liquor and swiet
smellinge: but wormwode

Pelitory other fresh or dry is set in wine or vinegar destilled or vndesti^led*

These things also sookte in burning water (as I said) do communicate their
strength with it: but I hear it is done much moore effectuallye, if the
things be beaten at the beginnynge and myxte with the lies of wine redye of
wine, the men of our country draw Aqua vitae.) So also did one teach me in
counsel as a great secreate, that Wormwode water and other may be best made.
I have not tried it yet.

Water of Roses with dry Roses is so made. Pour water to dry Roses, not more
the^ is sufficient to stiep them in: then put them from thence into glasen
cucurbitas or leaden, and destill them by little and little. This water shall
be profitable in medicines, and also to garnishing and trimming, Bulcasis. If
the Roses which we call commonly incarnation Roses, dried and moystned with
the vapor of hot water be destilled, they will give good Rose water. Syluius.

The water of the nux vomica or spueinge nut, or the juice gotten out with
fire, is like the water Cardanus in his second buke de subtilitate. And a
little after. If the poison newly taken remain yet in the stomach, the best
kind of remedies be they that provoke much to vomit strongly, milk, lie, oil,
the water of the spewing nut, I suppose he means by the juice gotten out by
the fire, nothing else but the water destilled thereof. For he names water
that is like it in color, not in smell nor taste, which agrees with destilled
waters. most hard and dry, it apeareth that his shel must be sookt in some
liquor as water, wine, vinegar, Aqua vitae. I would soke it rather in vinegar,
which by it self resists poison, and is good to provoke vomitting.

Waters destilled of new and fresh pla^ts (says Brunsvvick) ought to be
preferred, which if they can not be had, either for some other cause or because
they be brought out of strange countries only dry, as spicknarde, lauander,
stichae, scoenantum, Balneum Mariae, and rectifye it also in the sun, (that
is in hot sand, for the space of: xl. days) and keep it a year. The^ what time
of the year so ever thou lakst liquor of dry herbs, do thus. Take as many
herbs as thou list dried in the shadow (the leaves being taken away and kept
apart by the^ selves) put them in a glass, and pour upon them that first thou
power on so much, that the herbs be sufficiently ouercouered with water: and
again twis so much. Then set it in horse dung two or three days, still it,
and putrify it again, so that it be thrys putrified and destilled by course
in order. This water surely shall be much better, then if a man, as Bulcasis
writes, to one pound of dry roses (or other herbs or flowers) shall put ten
pound of common water and destill it by and by. A certain cunning physician
writes that if water be aqua vitae. Hitherto Brunsvvick.

And in the dew it self also there is a certain medicinal virtue as
Brunsvvick techeth in an other Alexander Benedictus.

Of quint essence of remedies.
QVint essence they name to be, the chief and the heauenliest power or virtue
in any plant, me and purity of the hoale substance, not by any elimentall or
sensible quality (although it be not without qualities) conserueth the good
health of man's body, prolongeth a man's youth, differs age, and puts away
all manner of diseases. Of this first of al me^ writ Raimu^dus Lullus, although
it were unknown to all the physicians of his time, nether written of in any
book, nor tried or gone about in any use. After him follows besides other
Johannes de Rupe scissa, (whom one certain Lullus, as I writ before, I judge
they were both in one time) Hieronimus Brunsvvick, Philippus Vlstadius, and
perauenture a few other which writ sumwhat of the same. Sum kind thereof is
simple, as yt most famous quint essence of wine or Aqua vitae, of chelidony or
selandyn, of man's blood, of strawberys, of Antimonii. etc. Other ar co^pounde
that is when certain remedies ar put to sum quint essence now perfited, yt it
may draw out yt virtues of the^, whereunto

But here springs a doubt, says Cardane, whether a man may make ye water
te^perat, which they call quint essence: It will be, as I shall prove, of the
nature of the firmament, that is a most pure and thin substance moveable, and
which by the moving reteineth a temperat heat, and very much thereof. This
thefor is of power to co^serue al strengths, and topro long life. For being
most subtle, it mixith it self with the first moistur, pearcing the massy
things, and separateth And because it has much heat, it expels what soever
is unclean, and therefore restores the natural heat. For age is nothing else
then a lessening and diminishing of natural heat, which is therefore diminished,
because the mouinge is hindered: as I said of fire: for there is like reason of
this unto that. Moving is hindered, because of ye abundance of earthy matter,
because the earth only has very much matter, and is destitute of all moving.
Therefore that water being of so te^perate Aqua vitae reteininge his purity and
subtle matter: by the long mocyon of circulacio^, has put of and rid away his
heat and sharpnes of taste and smell, it is becomed of the nature of the
firmament: and then first of all it smells swiet and fragantly. For a
fragra^t smell is nothing else then a sharp smell when it is moderate. Aqua
vitae, if it come once to a temperatnes, the thinnes and purity remaining still,
it must needs be made fragra^t and swiet smelling: and if it be once fragrant,
it must necessarilye be turned into the nature of the fyrmament. There is also
a water made of the flesh tyrus or an adder, that restores youth: there is
made olso of Elleborus, which I saw at my fathers. But these vex and unquiet
the body, and firmamentall water does it in deed, which reteineth long that
which a man has and adourneth the same. But is the firmament more pure then
the fire which is most hot* It is surely so: for it is next unto the heaven,
and therefore most light. For by his circulacion it moderateth the heat caused
in it by the stars: and after ye same manner this water, brought to the
most puritye by the heat of the fire, by mocion it self is coled again and
obteineth a temper. Wherefore both Stoikes believe man's soul to be.) All this
write Cardane.

The virtue of every thing rests in the quintessens quintessens. Somthings it
is sufficient to destil the^ few days, if any part of the earth or lies remain
in the boto^ of the circulating vessel, to put it away pouring it forth. The
quintessens of wine will no more burn the mouth, nether is it burning wine any
more, but more subtle, and is called heaven: whereunto we say his stars is
added, when as herbs of diverse qualities, and such as be excellent against
diverse sicknesses, are sokte and stiept therein, as we shall show hereafter in
Aqua vitae compounded. To be solificate or made golden, is Lullus book of
quintessens.

The quintessens of any medicine has a thousand times the greater virtue,
then it had before, whiles the thing had yet the element in it. Vlsta.

How the quintessens of all things Lullus, intreatinge of quintessene.
THe quintessence of any thing may be drawn out from it, as of wode, fruits,
flowers, rotes, leaves, seeds, stones, metals, flesh, and of what spices a man
will, in this sort.

Any thing that you will separate the quintessence from, you shall put it into
the quintessence of shall set it forth to be solified and sonned in ye spring,
or else in a vessel to a light fire, and within three hours you shall have the
quintessence of ye thing mixed with the quintessence of the wine, which shall be
converted into such a nature as is of ye thing that is put in, whether it be
hot or cold, moist or dry, purge or what other condition or smell so ever it be
of: and it shall not only have the same operacion, but also in the same degree,
yt is nether more nor les. etc. After this he reherseth remedies one
quintessens. Rogerius Bacho also writ a little book of the qualities and
strengthes of Aqua vitae, throughout the.xii. signs according to the diseases
from the head to the fete, adding waters and medicines according to the nature
of every part and disease, for one, one, for an other, an other. This book
some ascribe to Arnold de villa noua.

Ihon Brasescus a man of our age most exercysed in the mysteries of the Art
of liquors, as his writings do testify, in a certain dialoge, the spekers
whereof be Raymund Lullus and Demogorgon, (which ye author set forth in
Italian, with an other also upon the exposicion of the books of Geber. Ihon
Petreius at Norinberg Prynted them both in Latin without the authors name)
affirminge that quintessens which serves for the conseruing and lengthening
of man's life, is not to be lokt for out of plants, beasts or precious
Raymund. Seeing it is necessary that this medicine should be utterly
incorruptible, and in this thing it ought to pass and excede al things that
have any part of the elements in them: it must needs be drawn out of such a
matter as is most far from all corrupcion, and least subject to the same.
Demogorgo^. Yet thou said in ye book which thou writst of the secrets of
nature, yt it should be drawn out of red wine, ye same confirms John de rupa
scissa, other suppose it should be made of Celedonie, other would take man's blud.
Ray. Thou art not a little deceived, if thou think ye writings of philosophers
ought to be taken and understood according to ye bare letter, chiefly in this
science, ye more clearly and plainly they speak, so much ye more darkness have
their writings, for they have spoken by similitudes and ridles in ye darkest
form of spech. Demo. In this thing what similitude have they used? Ray. Senior
the philosopher says this medicine and from taste to taste, and from nature to
nature: and therefore the names thereof are multiplied. Also Minois a
philosopher, if a man ask (says he) why is it made read before it received
whyt: Answer, that it was twys made black, twys turnid into orrenge color,
and received twys red color. Seeing now that it receives twys red color,
as red wine and man's blood, that is to say, after the putrefaction and in the
destillation: therefore the old men speakinge by quintessence now perfect,
which Io. de Rupescissa does: that is, that al men entering into the house may
be marnei lously allured unto it set in a corner of the house: and an other.
that all birds that perceine that swietnes of sauoure, may flock together
unto it set in the top of a toure: this is expounded allegorically, that by the
toure, the furnace set in a corner of the Rasis also was. Thus says he.

Of the dravvyng out of the quint essence from wine, out of Vlstadius and
Raymund Lullus.
THou shall take the best wine thou can get, what color soever it be, let it
be wyny rather then swiet, destill it.iiii. times in a lembeck, so as commonly
burning water is made. If so be it, it be ofter destilled, it shall be the
better. To know when it is sufficiently destilled, you shall consider, side
one, which also some call the vessel of Mercurius, by the hoal whereof in the
top, the matter that is to be circulated, may be put in and out. And when the
quint essence. Then the wine so destilled as we have said, when as it has all
the four elements, yet by the often moving agitacton and going up and down, it
passes and is turned from corruptible into almost incorruptible. If so be it
that by the often ascension and descention of destillation, the is separated,
how much more does it come to pas in a still where it is tossed up and down a
thousand thousand times. By this moving therefore, it is to be supposed, that an
elementall matier is turned in to a substance void of all elements and a body
incorruptible, so that this quint assence is of so much the further from the
corruption of a body that has part of the elements in it, as the heaven it
self is more incorruptible the^ the four elements. But when this circulation
is many times done, quint essence. For if it be perfitly done, there will issue
forth a most fragrant and pleasant smell, so excellent that they that feel it,
shall think them selue to be rapt from the earth into heaven, and to have the
fruicion of a certain heavenly sauoure. This vapor if it chance to insinuate
it self into some close place

If it be set in the top of a toure, it will allure all kind of birds unto
it, that be there about. But if that excellent grace of sauoure appear not
yet, then thou shall shytte it close again in to the Pelecane, and when it is
diligently clayed, fet it in again to the circulating destillation, until the
perfect quint essence it self appear, or else as Raymundus in his first book
the second chapter, calls it quick Mercury. And it has not only that most
excellent savor and taste, but also a certain incorruptible nature to be
occupied about other medicines.

And surely it has no brentnes in the mouth as aqua vitae, nether any moisture
or fleame, because all the earthy and elementall matter is settled down to the
bottom.

How qvint essence may be drawn


PVtt Horse dung A in great and deep vessel B or in a pit made for this
purpose: and in midst of the dunge set C full until two third parts of the
matter to be destilled, so that the third part remain without the dung
empty, that the matter may ascend and descend, and so to be turned into
clear water. But the dung must be renewed once at the least every wieke. The
same after they be pressed in the wine harvest: or else in the dog days with the
sun. It is possible also to draw quintessens out of troubled, unclean and
corrupt wine, if it be not sower or like Vinegar: For we see even of corrupt
wine, if it grew in a good place, although it be troubled and of an ill
taste, yet very good Aqua vitae may be destylled therout.

There is also an other way to draw it out without fire and labor. Take Aqua
vitae the best with a long neck, in the top whereof must be a hole, why the
ought to be closed and stopped with wax prepared accordingly (as Vlstadius
techeth after in the tenth chapter.) Then let it be turned vpside down, and
with the neck let it be put into the dung, so the grosser matter shall settle
and lie in the bottom of the that is, the very quintessente, stop the hoole
with thy finger and turn the glass upright. So have thou quintessence, but les
precious then the other before. In like manner may burninge water be put in a
glasen vessel, not turned, but buried vprighte in dunge for a certain space.
After by streinynge may you separate the groser matter which is settled to the
bottom, from the pure that is above: but this is yet les precyus.
Notwithstanding it draws out all the virtues of the herbs, and other
Vlstadius the.viii. chap.

After this he adds the way how to draw out quintessence out of new
wine, yet hot in the Lullus) I will let it pass.

In what places Vlstadius in his heaven, teaches to draw out diverse quint
essences.
HOw the quint essence of wine is drawn forth, wherein gold may be resolved to
make potable Gold, or Gold to be drunk.xi. chapter.

How the quint essence of honey is drawn forth, which is put into the
confection of potable gold xii. chapter.

Quint essence of Chelidonia. xiii. chapter.

Ofmans blud, eggs, flesh. etc.xiiii. chapter

Of apples, pears and other fruits. xv chap.

Of flours, herbs, and rotes.xvi. chapter.

Of antimonium. xvii. chapter.

And of the same every one thou shall read in Lullus, in his first book of
quint essence.

Quint essence of wine some call quick Mercury, some heaven, and the key of
philosophers, this (as men say) does extract and draw out within the space
of.iiii. hours, the virtue and strength of every thing that is stiept therein.

Ihon Brasescus, by red wine, wherout quintessence quintessence.

A merueilous water that has a contrary operation to Aqua vitae which may be
called cold quint essence.
THe flours of samoncus elder, y^ flours of horse houf, which grows upon
waters having giluu^ (otherwise y^ flour of nenuphar, which I think to be true,
and so does Rogerius interpretate it) of either of them a pound. Purslan sede,
lettis sede, of either.iii. pound, (other wise half a pound) of the leaves of
salonum nightshade.ii. sru (otherwise as much of nighteshade as of al
the other.) Al these must be taken grene and destilled.vii. times and kept diep
in ye earth in a glass. This water when it waxes hot in the sun about midday, it
will make glasses, or thin wodden vessels, the images or shel of eggs to fly
in the air Aqua vitae be sprinkled upon it, and then cast it into ye fire, or
set it on fire with a candle: it will burn but not consume nor waste, nether
leave any sign of burntnes in ye cloth. If so be it part of this water, when
Aqua vitae in cold Wherefore the use thereof is good in all agues as well hot as
burning agues: in all hot diseases, and grieves of the eyes and head, that
comes of heat: also against the irkesumnes and lothsumnes of the stomach:
for the diseases called Lupus, and the fistula, and the pain of the side, and
the heat of the privy members through the act of generation, and all diseases
about thies privy parts, what hot causes so ever they cum of. And after the
deliverance of women, it is very proffitable if a

A certain water in Raymund Lullus book of waters, seems to be of the like
operation, which he describes in this wise. A water compounded according to
the contrary of Aqua vitae: Take white Camphora, roses, whyt pople and black,
cichory, porsulane, violets, Solanu^ or night shade, maidenhear, cymbalaris,
singrene, vermicularis, rostrum porcinum, cardicellum. The leaves that be to be
punned, let them be punned and destilled.

Of the extracting and dravvyng forth of all the virtues of Chelidonia or
selandine: by the which example, every man of any understanding, may use to
draw out the virtues
BY the quint essence of selandin, Joan. Brasescus thinks sumwhat else to be
allegorically understood, as I declared before where we entreated of quint
essence generally.

Chelidonia, Sela^din (says Vlst.) has innumerable virtues: and the quint
essence thereof, which we will teach here to get out, goes cucurbitam or body
of a still of earth glased: when the body is full shit it close, and clay it
round about, then set it in now horse dung, for the space of iii. weeks. After
put it in a limbeck and destill it in Balneo Mariae, with a slow fire, and the
fleame shall avoid out of it. Then shall you draw out the dregs, and stone,
put the^ again in a cucurbita with a blind lymbeck, and let them stand in
Balneo Mariae a seuennight, or in horse dung mo days. Afterward the matter by
little and little being couled put on a nosed limbeck, and destill it in ashes,
according as in the.x. chap. of the separation of oil from the earth, we have
spoken: and there shall issue out a clear water containing in it self air
and water. Thou shall separate the water from the air in a new cucurbita by
Balneo Mariae, with an easy fire: Balneo Mariae seven days at the last thou
halt destill the^ in sand with a great fire, and the fleame shall issue out
first, then a radishe water, or rather an oil, which is the element of fire,
from the which thou shalt separate the Balneo Mariae, as is before said. But
the dregs that left, which conteyne nothing else but earth, must be urged
with a strong fire and brought unto lyme, by the space of ten days. (that is
in a furnace of calcination or reuerberation, or a very lyme kiln, as I have
taught in the tenth chap.) Then grynd them again upon a marble stoone and sooke
them in the fleame, and let them be destilled in a limbeck, until you see in
the matter little white stoones like salt. And out of which you have destilled
it, and after, you shall destill it again, and again so often, until the earth
chance and put away from it all unclean and earthy color, and be brought to
a very white (to the whytnes of wax) and so it shall be rectified earth. The
other elements also ought to be rectified, so that every one be destilled
seven times, pouring every time the fleam to the air and fire, and after
separating them as is before said. When as thou will do this an easier way,
dissolve every quintessence, but it must be presupposed that every element be
first justified. Then let it be put in a vessel of circulation in horse dung or
in Balneo Mariae. xxx. days, and then destill it again. So shall the very
body as a gros matter be changed into spirit or most subtle and pure
substance. quintessence. The matter is judged to be sufficiently circulated,
when the quintessence swimmeth above the other matter.

Of the virtues of every one of the liquors of Selandine. The element of the
water is good for all the diseases of the body, both hot and cold. It tempereth
all ve nom from the heart: it cures all the diseases that chance unto the
lunges. It purges the blood, and preserves a man from all corruption of the
natural strength and power. At once, it is good for all sick men in what
disease so ever they be.

The element of air, like unto oil, confirms and increases the strength and
beauty of young persons, if they use it sometimes with meat, for it lets the
blood from corrupting by any menes.

The eleme^t of fire, if so much as a wheat corn in quantity be mixed with the
best wine ye can get and poured into a sick man's mouth, yea if he be half
dead, it restores and refreshes all the stre^gthes of the body: for it perceth
unto the heart, and makes it warm: and expels all poisons and moist
superfluities from the heart. Lullus with the quint essence of wine mixeth a
little drop of this oil, to restore the^ that are about to die, and past al
hope, in that within the.xx. part of an hour.

Some draw out the quint essence from Selandine an other way and shorter. They
cut Selandine together with the rote and flour in small pieces they wey it, and
pouring well water upon it, they sethe it til it be brought to the same weighte.
Then they pun it in a stone mortar, and when the juice is streined out through
a linen clothe and purged it be ad consistenciam mell is as thick as honey.
After, they put it in a cucurbita so that it be half full, and by destillacion
in Balneo Mariae, they gather ye water or fieme. Then translating the vessel
into ashes, they receive the aerie oil, whereupon when they se an other kind of
oil swim above (the fire being encresed) they set under an other receiving
vessel, wherein the element of fire is gathered. Every one of these liquors must
be rectified, that it may be mete for the medicines of man's bodi, that Balneo
Mariae, so yt at every time the cucurbita be diligently washed, (made clean)
from the dregs which remain, which ought to be mixed with the element of
thearth, which remains in the bottom of the cucurbita after ye destillation
of ye fiery liquor. Likewise thou shall rectify their, destilling it in
ashes.vii. times, mixting the dregs with thearth. Afterward ye liquor of fire
likewise. The earthy matter, in such manner Selandine puts away al heats and
poisons out of y^ breast. It is good for the stoppinges of the liver and lunges:
for it consumes ye superfiuous humors and fleme: Ty conclude, it delivers a
man within the space of.ix. days, free from all infirmities. choler, no
bitter, nor fleme in ye body to get ye moisture. It encreseth blud, and
destributeth it into all the parts of the body by his pearcing. Wherefore they
that use this oil, do let blud the ofter. If a man be in ieoperdy ^f losing of
an eye, let him drop in a drop or.ii. thereof every day by the space of xxx.
dais, and it shall do him merueilus much good. The firye liquor is much more
effectuous then the watery or aerie, and helps where they fail. It conserueth
the youth, it makes age liuelye and elipir of life. Moreover ye earthy matter
rectified by dissolucio^s, coagulations and ielyings: calinatio^s and sub til
salt of ye earth, wherewith al metals may be turned into stone, and al spirits
may be fixed: having radicable and natural moisture. It norisheth lepre me^.
Of this ye ancient philosophers made a stone which they called ye philosophers
stone. The manner to receive y^ for said liquors within the bodi is Sela^dine,
iii. sponeful of rosewater, put to it a little sponeful of y^ sanguin air (y^ is
the liquor of the air) and give it to be drunken fasting, if the disease be
hot, with wine: and if the man be past.xxiiii. years of age give it him with Aqua
vite. In hot agues it ought not to be taken in no wise. All this writes
Vlstadius.

Of drawing out the four elements from Selaudine and bay leaves, read also
Io. Ganiuetus book, which is entitled Amicus medicorum, a

How quint essence is drawn out of fruits, as Appels, Peers, plummes,
Cheries, Chestnuts. etc. out of Vlstadius.
WHen the fri^te is small cut and stampte in a stone mortar, mixte it with
the.x. part of common salt. Then put it in a cucurbita with a blind limbeck,
and set it in horse dung, as is said before of man's blud. etc

Out of Flowers, herbs, and roots.
GAther the Plants, when they be well ripened, in fair weather, in the spring
of the moon: and when it is almost at ye full, wash them and cut the^ very
lmall: beat them in a mortar of marble with the tenthe part of salt, and thou
shall sower them in a circulating vessel or blind limbek, in horse dunge for ye
space of a month. Then shall thou destill them in Balneo Mariae, encreasyng the
first fire to the third degree. The^ take the dregs out of the cucurbita, and
grineding the^ very small pour the destilled water upon them again, and when
they are putrified in dung again as before at the length thou shall destil
them, deminishing the fire by the half degree. Then grind the dregs again. etc.
as before, and when thou destillest the^ again, deminishe and lesson the fire,
yet also by ye half degree. The putrefaction also must always the second
digestion, it may be putrified by y^ space of one and twenty days, in the
third.xiiii. days, in the fourth.viii. days. When the fourth destillation is
done, put it in a circulating vessel (close above and beneth and large, narowe
in the midst, with a short byl holow coming out of the upper part of the nether
belly, looking upward) and let it be digested in dung or a bath with a fire
quint essence: which not withstanding shall be the more effectual if thou shall
destil the water of the herbs, seeds, or routes: and pour it again upon his
own dreges, then digest it by the space of seven days, and afterward destill
it by ashes, the very same way as it is said before of selandin that every
element

Of quint essence of man's blood, eggs, flesh, and honey.
How quint essence is gotten out of ma^s blood, eggs, and flesh, read
Vlstadi' the xiiii. chap. They put unto them the tenth part of salt, wherewith
they are well mingled, putrified and destilled and that four times, length they
are perfited by long circulation, until they come to the most swietnes of
sauoure, and pure fynnes of substance: Lullus also in his first book the.iiii.
chap. mencioneth of quint essence, but the printed books left out that, that
salt must be added unto it. It seems that salt may ryghtly be added to the
destilling of moist things, specially those that would easily corrupt,
such as chiefly the parts of beasts are.

A most precious water of Albertus magnus, as Albertus water, if it be his,
when as he wylles it to be destylled only once and simpely. The composition
that follows has more reason with it, which I found also in the same
written book.

Holy oil or life oil (because it preserves Hevve Gordones, wherewith he
cured many most grievous diseases: Three pound of read blood of a helthfull
man or helthfull men of.xxv. or thyrty year old, Spermaceti, the mary of neet
of either a pound: Let them be destilled in a lymbeck well clayed and closed,
and a water shall issue out first white, the next pale, the third yellowe,
the fourth read, and sumwhat thycke. An oil so destylled, when the moon
increases and decreaseth, therefore they name it holy. If so be it then give a
sick man that has

It heals diverse diseases, the Leprosy, the Morphew, the Palsy and other, if
a man fasting drink a drop of it with white wine. Many boaste much of
man's blood sublimated, as a certain man Bartholomevve de Montaguana, made at
Padua, but surely he was ignorant how to prepare it, which if thou wylt use,
make

Take the blood of sanguin young me^ using a good diet whiles it is newly
letten, and let it stand a while, and put away the water that swymmeth above,
the^ with a little salt punned chauf it a good and put it in a vessel well
closed and clayed, after set it in horse dung forty days. At the length
destill it certain times, ever pouring the water again upon the dregs. At the
last thou shall have a marvelous water, which being mixed with sum zulapio
(ielup as we call it) is wonderful proffitable Gnaynerius.

To draw out the four elements from man's blood, read the book of Ioh.
Geniuetus called the friend of physicions. 4. 7.

Of man's blood destilled simpely, read Brunsvvick, in the duche book of
destillacio^s. He writes

Io. Bracescus, is of this opinion that the old writers would signify
allegorically some other thing, and that of metal, when they speak of man's
blood: as I recited before, where I write of quint essence generally. Vlstadius
in the.x. chap. of his teaches how quint essence of wine is made, every
element drawn out apart by him self: And this (says he) which is destilled in
the seventh time, is called man's blood, which the destillers, chieflye
search, and it is very air. This says he. In deed the liquor of the air,
which in the most part of destilled things is oylye, seems to be called
by the name of man's blood, for as much as our body consists of four humors
as elements, whereof the blud is compared Ihon Brasescus, man's blud is a certain
metally thing, so called of the color.

For the extracting and drawinge out of quint essence from honi, which goes to
y^ making of potable gold, read Vlstadius the.xii. chap. and.xxii. whereas he
prescribes also diverse ways to gather three manner of waters, and reherseth the
virtues, whereof he spoke nothing in the.xii. chap. and declared to get out
only two diverse waters.

Of quint essence of metals.
IHon Brasescus in the dialog of Raimund and Demogorgon, when he had affyrmed
that quint essence which is profitable to the preseruacion and lengethening of
man's life, can not be had of any other thing the^ of metals only, he adds
at length. When as according to the opinion of the ancient philosophers,
every metal after their simi^itude, in every metal, as it is plainly
declared, in the book of the exposition of Gebrus books: therefore this our
medicin also although it be extracted and drawn out of some one metal only, yet
nevertheless it shall have the virtue of al metals and plants, and the virtue
over the hole body of man to heal many infirmities that be curable. Joan de
Rupescissa speking of our radical and natural moisture, and of quint essence
under the name of Aqua vitae, would signify the same, for he Brasescus, wherein
he expounds Gebrus.

Of the dravving out of quint essence from Antimonia, lead, white lead out of
Vlstadius.
QVint essence of antimonio is thus made. Incorporate and mingle the powder of
antimonii most finely beaten, with most sharp vinegar destilled, and let it
stand til the vinegar be turned into a very red color. Then drive the
vinegar out, and in a clean vessel put other destilled vinegar upon the
antimonium, and set over a little fire till the vinegar be colored* This shall
you repete so often, till the vinegar will be colored thou shall destill it in a
limbecke in ashes. First the vinegar it self will run out, after this thou
shall see a matter issue forth of a thousand couloures, and this is that
quint essence which is called of the Philosophers. Philosophers lead, and of
some virgins milk (it differs notwithstanding from it, whereof shall be
spoken here after, says Vlstadius) and it is almost like blessed oil in
color. Put this in a Pelican to be circulated for the space of fortye days.
It dries

Yea also quint essence is extracted and drawn out of lead or white lead
after the same manner as out of antimonio, pouringe destilled vinegar upon it,
that the vinegar be over it four fyngers deep: after let it be digested in
dunge, as it is said of quint essence of herbs and flowers. quint essence of
lead: and it has in it a certain swietnesse like* as the oil of antimonii.
It is good against all burnynges with fire and hot water, as also against
itches, as ringewormes and chollericke bladders.

But a man must noote, that the white lead ought first to be washed often
with water until none of the powder of the white lead remain in it. Then when
it is dried, reserve it to your use. So does Bulcasis and Joan of Sanct Amandus
upon the Andidotarie of Io. Mesuae, will to be done.

Of the drawing forth of quint essence out of diverse metals, as gold, silver,
lead tin, vitriol, or coproos, iron, coper, brimston, read orpment, yalow
ocker, antimonio and marcha^^ta leaden, who so lists, let him read in Lullius
in his book of quint essence.

The spirit or quint essence of vitriol is commended of certain men against
the falling sickness, and Apoplexia or the benumninge of the senses. The
spirit of gold against the diseases of the liver. The spirit of ^irall against
the stone of the raines and bledder. But of these and certain other we shall
speak hereafter amongste oils of metals and otherwhere.

Of diverse kinds of Aqua composed.
Waters of life composed are proprelye called, when as certain medicines are
stieped in the very Aqua vitae and destilled together, improperly when as they
are put to after and not destilled together. There be also waters of virtue or
golden (as they call the^) when as the medicines stieptfirst not in Aqua vitae
but in wine, but of which we will write hereafter: those that we describe here:
saving that they are les vehement and les hot and dry.

Sum sorts of aqua vitae are commanded to be made simpely, putting the
medicines into y^ aqua vitae: other into aqua vitae thrys or four times
destilled. Sum there be also to whom a certain time of infusion or digestio^
is prescribed, as. xiiii days. etc. Sum are put in punned in the beginning*
other hoal, and broken after a certain days fermentacion and stieping. Sum are
destilled on Balneo Mariae: other in Balneo Mariae once ortwys and thirdly in
ashes, as that which Vlsta. describes xlvi. chap. although there is nothing
else done but infusio^ in wine. In the same author.xliiii. chap. Aqua vitae
is described to be destilled thrys, the first water whereof is called Blessed,
the second Aqua vitae, the third, the mother of balm. Again the destillatio^
of certain is repeted twys or thrys, that the water first destilled, be always
powered Vlstad. teaches in the.xlix. and.lvi. chap. Also sum are commanded to
be drawn out with a slow fire in Balneo Mariae. Other in the same with a
strong fire, as the the water described in Vlstadius. xlvi. chap. Many times in
the first destillacion, only fresh herbs, and fresh seeds are put with the
aqua vitae: and dry swiet smelling things, spyces and other, also honey is
added after to the water drawn out of the herbs or seeds, and then are
camphora put unto it, thirdly, folding the limbeck every foot with moist
clothes with the whytes of eggs and bran together. Read Vlstad. li. chap.
and.lvi. Concerning the matter, none almost is composed without spices: unto
diverse also swiet smelling herbs are added: unto some, both the flowers and
the siedes, sumtymes also other destilled waters: Also malmsey, honey, sugar,
figes. To conclude, unto some hoale pieces of gold: I suppose it to be added in
vain except it be que^shed Vlstadius described.xiiii. kinds of aqua vitae
composed, which we let pas because of brevity and shortness. We read in
Vlsta. the.liii. chap. of aqua vitae, with spices and honey, etc to be destilled
in Balneo Mariae, and an other likewise, but without honey, the.liiii. chap.

Vlstadius describes a certain marvelous aqua vitae in the.lvi. chap. First
he bids to digest diverse fresh and new medicines, in Balneo Mariae. xiii. aqua
vitae powered unto them: then to be destilled in ashes with a slow fire. After
he adds spyces and other dry things: and bids digest the^ xiiii. days: and
destill them again in Balneo Mariae. Afterward he added camphoram, rhabarb,
safron, amber and mosch. If so be it (says he) thou will have the water yet
better, put unto it certain precious and costly powders or spyces of
confections made of amber, made of mosen, made of precious stones. etc. and a
few ducates of the fynest digest it three days in warm water of Balneo
Mariae, afterward destill it by a filtrum or list of woollen cloth in crooked
glases well clayed, so that the one glass stand higher then the other. And this
(says he) is the most excellent Aqua vitae amongst all other.

An aqua vitae, which may be a remedy against the most part of diseases, put
rosemary, cinamo^, geloflowers, ginger, and maces, and two or three pieces of
gold, (which will be never a whit the aqua vitae, four times destilled. Use
this water.iiii. times destilled, morning and euenyng before slepee. It dryueth
away diverse kinds of diseases, and restores youth.

What aqua vitae can do, wherein rosemary is stieped, see hereafter where we
make mention of oil of rosemary.

Take three ounces of Dianthos made with sugar, put it in three pounds of wine,
three days, Filtrum. Sum destil it in a lymbeck, and keep it unto their use.
Sum mixed the third part of Rosatae nouellae, that they may assuage the heat
and dryth of the Dianthos.

An aqua vitae against pestilence. Take Rewe, Sage, the flowers of lauendula,
maioran, wormwod, rosemary, red roses, blessed thistle, pimpernell, Tormentill
valerian, the beryes of Juniper, beries of baies, terrae sigil. (that is ground
sill) bole armoniack prepared, of every one two drames. Dictamni, angelica,
bistorta the bark of citron, melissa commonly called baulm, zeduaria, inulae
came. gentian, rhaponticum or centory, of every one three drames. Coriander
prepared, flowers of borage, buglose, sandali or saunders whyt and red, the
sede of sorell, basil, rewbarbe, ben white and read, the grains of paradisi,
peper, of every one a dram and a half: ginger two drammes. Cinnamon, saffro^,
electuarii liberatis, lectuarii of precious stones, diamoschi y^ is swiet,
diacameron diambre, diarhodon abbatis, laetificantis Almansoris, of every one a
dram. Calami arom, egloflowers, maces, nutmegges, cubeba rum, cardamomi
galingall, agallochi, of every two scrup. The bon of the heart of a heart,
spiknard, came phora, of every one half a dram, eight leaves of gold, half a
scrup of mosch, chosen triacle.iiii. ounces, Mithrida^ii two ounces. Sublimated
and rectified

Aqua vite against pestilence, proved and used with great and marvelous succes
by a certain physicion of our time of Solodurn in Heluetia the year of our
Lord. 2547. In so much that scarsly every tenth of them that received it, died.
TAke the best perles, Hyacinct of the east, mother one.ii. ounces, half an
ounce of the horn of an unicorn, saffron, mirhe, Boli armon, terrae
sigillatae, zedoriae, Venetae, wode of aloes, euory, Mithridatii, triacle of
Alexandria, chosen cinnamon ben white and red, the bark of a citron and the
seeds of every one two ounces, al sorts of saunders, of every one an ounce and
a half. The little bones of ye heart of a heart.xii. of them, the kirnels of
peony, beries of juniper, of either.xl. Conserve of buglos ii. ounces. The rotes
of tormentil, common dicta^ni, inulae, astrantia, selandine, common Lybistici,
morsus diaboli, ari. Valeriane, that kind of Saxifrage which the Germans call
bibinel, angelica, of the rotes of every one of these herbs.ii. ounces.
Sage, Scabious, Rue, wild mint, penny royal, the les centauri, Wormwode, white
Rooses and Red, of every one a handful. Liquors destilled of Rosemary,
Gentian, Melissa or baulme, Betain wild Roses, sonchos or cicerbita, called
sowthistle, or gose thistle of the Dutch men, or blessed Balneo Mariae
accordinglye, and mingle them with the best old Elseter wine, or rather
with.iiii. pounds of Aqua vitae. vi. times destilled, put them in a strong
cucurbita of glass, that will hold.iiii. good ale quartes, which thou shall
claye well and let it stand in Balneo Mariae. iiii. days. Afterward, then
thou shall of perles into powder, as men do lim, and grind them upon marble
diligently, til thou can feel no roughnes in the powder. Put this powder into
some vessel, and make it with Rose water into a liquor, and what so ever
remains sharp or rough, which is not mixed with the water, grind it again,
and wash it the second time. A man may resolve the coralles into water when
they are once pund or ground, setting them in the juice of Berberies, which way
is better the^ the other. After this beat paeony the herbs thou shall cut.
Afterward put the herbs, rotes, and precious stones moystened and made liquid
with the Rose water, into a strong glasen cucurbita, that will hold six great
ale quartes, there about I ges.vi. Dutche mooses to be, which I thinck he
means by Me^suras,) and pour upon them the Aqua vitae which is dygested with
the destylled liquors in Balneo Mariae, and when the cucurbita is defended and
closed cucurbita stand for a monthe, then take the dung away by little and
litile: and the matter which it contains to be destilled, thou shall
destribute cucurbitas, and destil them, in Balneo Mariae, with so slow a fire,
that from the falling of one drop, til the falling of an other, thou maiste
tell one.ii. iii.iiii. till thou come at ten. For thou must in any wise, take heed that the bath be not to hot, when the destillacion is once ended, stur the
dregs that be left in every one of the cucurbitas with a stick moderatlye, and
pour the water that is drawn out of them in again, and destill them again
with a slow fire as before. When this destillacion is once ended, pour out all
the dregs, cucurbits, into.ii. cucurbits, of.iii. great ale quartes a piece,
and destill them in Balneo Marie gentlelye. So have thou a treasure and an
incomparable remedy against the pestilence. The use thereof is both to
preserve, and also to cure provoking a sweet after the drinking thereof. So
sone as any manne perceives him self enfected with the pestilence (so that it
be within xxiiii. hours that it enfecteth him, for after that time there is
no

After removing the clothes by little and little, and wiping the body, when the
sick is risen, let him eat sodden Barlye, or a little meal of Oats broyled,
mixte with Vinegar and Rose water or Vinegar only, which shall be mixed always
with his meat also for the space of a sennyghte. For his drink he shall take
a decoction of Barlye with raisons and Licoris, when it is well couled, let him
drink as much thereof as he list. Let him abstein from wine.iii. or.iiii.
days: after let sambucus, Eldar, or Acetosa. And if so authrax or bubo do rise
as it chances often times, then thou shall use these medicines. Cut an Onyon
on the one side, make it hollow and put triacle into it, tormentil, Dictamni
diligently broken and punde, in equal parts, and put the cappe that you cut
of the Onyon on again, fold it in moist towe, then roaste it under the ashes
by the space of.vi. hours, then punne it in a mortar, and wrynge it through a
lynnen clothe, putting

then lay the moist cloth to the place, and as often as it dries, moysten it
again. If a man drink, once a month, half an ounce of this liquor and sweat
upon it, he shall be preserved. It is very good also, if a man hold a drop or
two thereof every day in his mouth in the morning.

Vlstadius in the.xlvi. chap. describes an other aqua vitae commended both for
the pestilence and for other diseases.

An aqua vitae or quint essence, whose effect is ready Matthaeolus Senensis, in
his sixth book of his commentaries upon Dioscorides. A pound of our antidotu^
now described, (the description whereof we let pas for briefnes sake: a man may
use good triacle in the place of it, or Mithridatu^, or an other effectual
antidotum) and a pound of syrup of the barks of citron, mixed them with five
pounds of aqua vitae so often destilled, till it cum to quint essence, and put
cucurbita of glass as big again as the things do occupy, (that is of.xiiii.
pounds,) and when it is well clayed move it moderatly and softly so long till
the antidotus be holly resolved and mixed with the liquor. So let it stand a
month, moving and chafing it in like manner twys a wieke. The month being
ended power out softly by little and little the clear water which is ascended
above the antidotus which is sattled in the bottom, into an other vessel of
glass, and reseruith very well closed. proved by innumerable tryales, that if
half an ounce thereof be dronken with wine, or with any convenient water
destilled, or else alone, it restores a man infected with the bytyng or
stinging of any beast althoug he have lost both his voice and his senses, and
calls him again to the great wondering of all mem. For the most part also
the humors now infected are avoided by vomit. The same virtue has it against
poisons which a man has reciued in meats or drinks. For ye strength
Mattheolus.

Aqua vitae for the diseases of the colike. Take a great ale quart of aqua
vitae rectified, put therein half an ounce of cinnamon.ii. or.iii. nutmegges,
cloves. Andro Furnerius.

Aqua vitae devised by George Alapide. Take cinnamon cubebarum, ginger,
nutmegges, cloves, galangal, of every one an ounce, fresh sage.iiii. ounces,
wyn that is sublimated six times, made of the best of the wine, not of the
lies, as much in weight as all the rest, that is.x. ounces. Take so as a
filberd nut will hold. They say that M. Gallus the physicion of the Emperor
Charles used this, and lived. Cxxiiii. years.

A most noble water of virtues, worthy to be preferred before silver and
gold, out of a certain written book. Cloves, cinnamon, maces, gala^gal,
zedoaria, bay beries, graynes of paradise, of every one half an ounce. Penny
royal, sage, hyssop, rue, betyny, ceri folii, camphorae, serpentine or dragons
of every one half an ounce: Inniper beries, fenell aquilegiae, withy of the
mountains, the flowers of costi, the seed of apii of the herb called
paralysis castorei, of every one two drames. Destill all thies in wine for the
space of.xiiii. days, then dreyn the wyn out, and grynde the spyces, then
mixed again with wine, and let them stand.viii. days: then destyll them, and
at length cast in a few sage leaves fresh.

They asscribe the same virtues every one unto it which we mentioned before in
waters of virtues, aqua vitae

A certain kind of aqua vitae is commended in a certain book written against
the leper and pestilence: in the composicion whereof Fumetetrae, the les netle,
the leaves of bedegnar, let them be stieped in wine in Balneo Mariae, a
month: then let them be destilled, casting into them also a dram

Afterward put to destilled wyn decocted and sodden with peper, that there may
be equal porcions of both liquors, which joined together, and stieped eight
days together in Balneo Mariae, must be destilled again. He wills a
sponefull of this water to be drunk every day for the space of a month, and
the leprous places to be anointed therewith. They say it purges blood and
dissolueth the congeled blood, and changes the hoole temperature of the body:
and if a man may believe it, it cures

An aqua vitae of a certain practicioner, composed after a singular and
excellent preparation, for diverse diseases. Take crow foot, iuae moschatae,
sage, the tender crope of ebulus, betony, saint John's wurt, germander maioram,
chamepityos, organy, peniroyal, hyssop, rue, caryophyllatae, gentia^, round
aristolochia, of every one half a handful. Polypody, squina^tum or
schoenoanthu^, spike, cassiae ligneae, folii, of every one a dram. half a dram
of bay beries, chamaemall. The kernelles of peeches, balhamitae, pimpernell,
selandin, agrimony, of every one two ounces. Rosemary an ounce. Dictamni,
tormentil, scabiosus white, of every one four ounces: an ounce and a half of
the great bursied. Anissiede, fenel, serpyllum or sauery, alkekengi, iumper
beries, persely, of every one half an ounce. Sauin, cresses, of either half a
handful. Carui, cumin, water withy, of every one half a dram. Cineris
vespertilionis, tamariscus, the route of ye flower Make a powder of all these,
which shall be divided into.vi. parts, whereof thou shall put one part in Aqua
vitae thrice destilled, and let it stand to sower or to be seasoned a natural
day, then destil it, afterward stiepe an other part of the powder in this
destilled water, and destil it likewise. And so forth every one of the other
parts when they are all stiepte, destill them likewise, and keep the last
liquor. Then take nutmegges, Mace, cardamonium, folium, cinnamon, zedoarie, of
every one. Agallochu, Saunders white and red, of every one two ounces, one
ounce of the bones of hearts, hearts, one ounce of old Triacle: ginger,
amomum, cubebe, and the grains of paradise, Galangal, peper, of every
one.iiii. ounces, one ounce or more of chosen Muscke, at the least not les
then half an ounce. Pun all these and put them in the forsaide water.iii.
days, then destyll the^ again with a slow fire in Balneo Marie thrice always
pouring the water drawn forth upon y^ cardiaca: also against poyso^ gout of
the hands or fete, gutta, arthritis. It purges blud, it takes away al agues
of cold causes: the debility of holding the vrin, the obstruction and stopping
of the spleen and liver, the swelling and watery dropsy and all diseases bred of
cold causes. To conclude it is a most chosen remedy for the co^seruacion of ye
body. They give men to drink there of half a philberd full in a cup of pure
white wine.

An other. A pound of clarified honey: half a pound of Aqua vitae, iii. ounces
of ligni aloes. ii. ounces of gum Arabic, Nutmegs, Galengal, cubebae, cinnamon,
mastik, cloves, spicknard, musk, of tinea^ capitis: it heals al wounds, if
you dip a linen cloth therein and lay it upon the wound. To conclude it
co^serueth youth and reuoketh ye beuty lost.

A water of great virtue in the palsy, which a certain friend let me have the
knowledge of, as a thing known by trials and proof. Cloves, galangall,
zedoaria, nutmegs, both kinds of pepper, iumper beries and bay beries, the
bark of the Citro^ and arantii, white ginger, sage leaves, basil, rosmary,
maiora^, mint, penny royal, gentian, ye flours of sambucus, red Roses and white,
spik, lignum aloes, cardamomum, cubebae, calamus aromaticus, stichas Arabica,
germander, chamaepytis, maces, Mercury, the sede of mugwort or motherwort,
carikes passulae, dates without the stones, almonds swiet and sour, pinapples,
of every one a dram both the one.ii. drams, Scolopendra a dram and a half, half
a dram of Laureola, v. dra^s of whit honey.iii. pou^ds of triacle, sugar,
Mithridatum, of either.iiii. ounces Six pou^ds of Aqua vitae destilled iiii.
times. Let them be destilled in a double vessel, with a slow and continual
fire, til the color be changed, the^ change the receiver, and do that thrice.

Two compositions of Aqua vite out of the book of Raimundus Lullus, of waters.
IN the composed waters of life following, although Raymundus do not express
whether wine or burning water ought to be put to the medicines, that they may be
destilled together, yet we have thought good to rehers them in this place,
because Raimundus seems utterly to will these medicines to be destilled in
burning water, the^ in wine, as one that rusci, maidenheare, sperage, Rapes,
parsellye, eryngii, mill of the sun, scariolae, of every one like much mixed
them and destill them with a slow fire. (It appears that this liquor is good
to provoke urine, and against the stone.) An other.

Take cloves, Nutmegs, mastik, doronicum, zedoaria, galingal, long peper, ye
bark of citron, sage sambucus that is elder (perauenture it should be
samsuchus, that is Maioram) dill, spiknard. Wood of Aloes, cubebe, cardamonuum,
Lauendula, Mint Peniroyal, organy, calamus aromaticus, both kinds of sticas,
germander, chamepytis, of every one like much, and a little musk. Pun them and
destil them. The virtues be all one with simple Aquavite, but far more
effectual. Or the same that are attributed before to other waters of life
composed of many medicines. Then follows a water composed of many cold
medicines, not in his place (as it seems) which I made mention of before quint
essence. Afterward is placed a most perfect Aqua vite (as he calls it, that
is, because it is composed of very many things, and that most hot.) Take
Euphorbium, Serapinu^, opopanax, pyretrum, Capers, squinanthum, spodium,
bdellium, long peper, and white or black, cubebe, castoreum, zedoaria, of
every one equal portions, to the which thou shall put good Mastick, and a
little Amber, Saffron, and of the bone of a hearts heart. Also take all the
things aforsaide in Aqua vite, in so much that I suppose the book to be
corrupted by the fault of the Printer.

What medicines be mixed with Aqua vitae, without any destillation, first
within the body, then without.
MAny times instruments, time or cost fails a man, that those medicines,
whose strength he would have in his aqua vitae (as though it were by a certain
metempsy chosin, y^ is a transposinge of the souls or principal virtues) he
can not mixed them with it by destilation, which only way is in those bodies
that are called met^ora, that is things bred on hy in the firmament, moreover
in many other things mixed either by nature or by art, is easy to be
understood. But for so much as in so diverse states of men, sum for one
hinderaunce, sum for an other, they can not always follow that which is best,
if quint essence can not be made, at the least the second or the third, or as
many as may be: let the destillacions be repeted with a slow fire. for any
mixture is done better by little aqua vitae, the medicines whose strength he
desires to mixed with it: yet at the least wise let them be broken and stiept a
while in it: for it draws unto it the virtues of all things that are put in
it. There is a book of Arnoldes de villa noua, or rather of Rogerius, which I
have written, where in is declared particularly, to what diseases and
sicknesses, what medicines ought to be put to sooke aqua vitae, for every part
of the body, which he does attribute to the twelve signs of ye zodiak.

It is well known in many ages hitherto, that gentian is the best preservative
against certain most grievous diseases and poisons: but sum use to power the
powder of the same with burning water, as much more effectual, into the
throotes of beasts, whom they know or think to be hurt with poison in
their meet or drink, or else by biting or stinging: and if gentian can not be
gotten, certain sicknesses of man, specially of the bulk or breast apomeli may
be put. for both certain men count it otherwise for dainty, to have apomeli
mixed with burning water, and also a toost of breed mixed therewith, many take for
a breekfast. A man may also against diverse sicknessess, give men to drink the
water of gentia^ artificially destilled with wyn, mixed after with apomeli or
swiet hypocras.

Wormwood wyn most excellent, sum make on this wise, they power to the leaves
of wormwod,

Grien aqua vitae, Take Melissa called baulm, and balsamita dried both in the
shadow, of the first.iii. ounces, of the other two ounces, put them into.iiii.
pounds of aqua vitae destilled four times in Balneo Mariae eight days: then
use it, either alone or mixting with it other kinds of aqua vitae composed to
comfort the stomach.

The herbs must be dried in the shade, that the color may be made grien and
most beutifull. shall prove dark as the juice of any other herb. Vlstad.
lvi. chap. A man may also die it with other colors, which may increase both
the grace of ye color and the strength of the medicin, as with saffron, with
red or yallow parsnipes dried. Sum put to it in summer black sower cheries,
whereby also the taste is made more pleasant, and the heet is les (perauenture
moor) assuaged.

Sum put into burning water, mint cut and beaten, and set it in the sun four
days or five, then

Hereafter will I put the use of burning water, with other medicines without
the body.
Many mixed a little burning water with hoot oynmentes, as Martiatum, Arragon,
dialthaea, at such time as they should use them, and will them so to be
anointed upon the griefs.

A water that norysheth and restores the heat of the brayn, wherewith the head
is to be rubbed. Two ounces of aqua vite, Moschocarium, Cloves maioram, cubebe,
long peper, of every one half a dram. When they are pound mixed them, and rub
them upon the head a certain space. Sum put to it a scruple of euphorbium,
Epiphanius a practicioner: other put to other smellinge and hoot things, as
sage six vncees: rue, ginger, graynes of paradys, cinnamum, flowers ot
rosemary, the bark of de bay: a dram of spik: a dram and a half of castoreum.
And in a destilled liquor they hang mosch and amber of either of the^ a grain.
This they say is good to annoint the head, and also with the smell it puts
away the palsy, and apoplexia.

A merueylous water of the same man's, for the impostumes or botches of the
priuye members. Three yolks of eggs hard roasted and cut small, pun them in a
mortar, pour in to them ten ounces of Aqua vitae, with a scruple of Alam.ii.
Camphora, and a half of rust, all pund together when they are stiept a while,
streine the^ with strength through a linen cloth, wet a linen cloth in this
liquor and lay it upon the swelling.iii. or.iiii. times a day, thou shall
meruel at the working of it.

A water to wash the parts taken with the Palsy.
MYrrha, aloes, ladanum, right turpentin, castoreum, zedoria, Galangall,
cubaebae, Nutmegs, long peper, pyretrum, of every one.iii. drams. The little
white Dasy with the red tops, iua, Arthritica, stichas, Arabica, sage, Maioram,
mint, penye royal, the les Centaurye, Roosemarye, of enerye one half an
ounce, when they are all punde, pour them into.xii. pounds of destilled Aqua
vitae. iii. days. As I found in a certain written book: but perauenture
there is to much Aqua vitae. For to every pound thereof, vi. drams only (with
a scruple perauenture) of the species are put.

In the disease called the French pockes, sometimes the jaws and throat are
eaten with evil destillacio^s, which onles a man find remeadye for,
oftentimes the gargil is wasted, oftentimes the corruption passes to the very
bones. Therefore a man must purge them, and turn them aside. etc. There is a
marvelous water made for Aqua vitae and vinegar in a limbeck a most clear
water issues out of many virtues, but chiefly it helps where the strength of
the medicine ought to be conducted so^what diep, if therefore thou dissolve in
it bole armoniak or sphragida, and touch the parts that be freten, thou shall
both kill the cause of that contagion, and heal all the freting, Fracastorius,
in his.iii. book of contagions.

Of destilled waters composed, but with other, then with Aqua vitae.
SVche waters as are destilled of two or mooe medicines mixte together, I call
them composed. Of this sort some are used for medicine, some for smellinge,
some are invented for garnishinge, trymmynge and deckynge. There be some that
will do two of these or all. Notwithstanding we will refer every one to one
kind, that is, wherein it excels most. Again, of them that be used in
medicine, some are received into the body, other some are minystred only
without other some both ways. We will make only two Chapters, for all
though some be used both ways, yet they are moore used other within and
without. Again, of them that be received into the body, some are moore
simple, Aqua vitae composed, where the spices are sooked in pure and only Aqua
vitae, we have written seuerallye by them selves. Hear will we put the other
(as I said,) and those which they call waters of caponum, and one with certain
medicines put into swines blood.

To be sooked in wine and after to be destylled, it seems to be ordained,
chieflye for those Melissa called Baulme, Wormewode. etc. which more over by
that means, do retain more firmlye their own sauoure, the wine drawing it
and drinking it up, that it can not dispersed for the thinness, we shall
speak hear of certain things to be stieped in wine, but while they be
new, for we have entreated of.iiii. dry things stieped in wine other liquor,
and so destylled.

Betany, commonly called betany, and in dutch eerenbrey, is stiept in wine a
few days, and likewise melissa. They shall have the same virtues and
strengthes, but more effectually and more subtle, then the herbs by them
selves alone.

Melissa, that is citraria (says Lullus) let it be put in wine to be
destilled. Let a man drink a sponefull of this wine fasting. It sharpneth the
understanding and the wit, increases the memory. To a man that stutteth* lay a
linen cloth wet in this wine upon his tongue and he shall speak right, It is
most profitable against scabbednes cumming of could. It sharpeneth ye sight of
him that drinks it. It takes away duskishnes, tears of and superfluous
humors of the eyes. It is wholesome for the breast, profitable for co^coction
against evil humors that lets it. Drunken with good wine, it stireth the
appetyt. It puts away spots and frakenes of the face that is washed therewith,
if so be it a little baulm be put to it and then the face washed tnerwith, it
makes also good color. It Lazarus from increasing. It is good also for them
whose brain is perished, and for the frantik. Lullus. Melissa beaten is
stieptin wine a night. Men say this water destilled and drunke^ every day and
holden in the mouth, it cures the benumming of the senses: all so the falling
sickness, the dropsy, the quartain ague, and other diverse diseases of black
choler or fleume. It is ministered also to the strangleng of the womb, and toth
ache, Remaclus. F.

A water of the les centory, worthy to be compa red unto gold.

Take one part of gentian, two parts of ce^tory: when they are pund and sookt
in wine five days destill them. This water drunk morning and evening
preserves the body from all kinds of diseases. It puts away all
impostumes: it makes good color: It resists the pestilence, it heleth the
sick of the phthisik, it auoydeth the stuffed stomach: it breaks the stone in
the reins, it separateth and puts away the watery humors of Lullius in his
book of waters. Certain at this day stiep dry routs of ge^tian in wyn, and
destil a most effecual water therout.

The sage and penroyall of either like much, and castorium, as often as a man
drinks it, so many days it prolongeth his life until the time ordained of
God. Nether is it possible for any man to be so greatly couled, but if he
drink it with castoriu^ nyn days, he shall be perfectly made hoole. Drunken
fasting, it remoueth the disease of the belly, and all gutta, and scabbidnes, it
makes good blood and the best color in the face: It is profitable Aegidius.

A water of juniper beries stiept in wyn whiles they be new, is destilled. I
soockt dry beries in wine, whereupon I had very good and swiet lyquor when they
were destilled.

The routes of the flowr deluce beaten, ar stiept in whyt wine.ii. or.iii.
days, and then destilled.

But the routes of any herb a man will, which are used in physic or may be
used: if they be cut small and stiept a certain days in wine, they yield a
water of the same virtue and force, but more pure

Gualterus Riffius reherseth the routes that be Angelica (which sum think to
be our Alexanders) that is sown, and the other that is called water angelica,
arum, hollow aristolochia, as they call it co^munly in Germany, asaru^ or
asarabaccha, bistorta, bryonia, carlina, dragones, eryngium, hibiscus,
hirundinaria, flower deluce, inula, Sorrel, Lilies, Meu or yalowe caret,
Piony, Parsnippes, Petasita, Pencedanum, Pimpernel, or rater Saxifrage,
Polygonato^, Pyretru^, rubia or rubea, satyricu^, Scrofularia the bigger,
Symphytum the bigger, Valerian. Here whiles he asscribeth to every one his
virtues, he makes a hoole book. When as notwithstanding he bringes none other
virtues then such as be attributed to the medicines them selves alone, and
that before destillacion, which if he had touched with one word at the
beginning, it had been sufficient. And truly I marvel, seeing he wryt forth his
books with such earnestnes, and endeavored by all means, to augment his

The wyld radyshe, which communly they call the byggar, cut small and stiept
in wine a certain days, I would think it would give an effectual stilled
liquor. for it will lose easily his biting tartnes

The rout of Pyretrum fresh (or also dry) beaten and stiept in wine is
destilled, or also for touthe ache and to cause one vomit up fleume, in vinegar
Riffius teaches.

A profitable water against rottennes of the tethe. Mixte the rotes of
Pyretrum beaten small, with the best wine ye may get, and make a mixture that
may be like to Aqua vitae composed. When ye will use it, taste a sponefull
(hold it in your mouth) in the morninge or when ye will, for ye shall
perceive remeady shortly. It heals weke tieth, corrupted, holow: it pourgeth
also and clears them. It is good also for the putting away of all kind of
rottennes or uncleanness, and to avoid

A water against the falling sickness, whereof ii. or.iii. sponefull ought to
be given in the very fit, communicated unto me very latelye of a friend. The
water of Angelica which a man may stiep first in good wine a.iii. days, and
the water of Lauendula, in equal portions, mixte them and give unto the
pacient.

Of wine and milcke destilled together, it is written before amongste the
simple waters of

Certain composed waters, to be destilled other of the medicines by them
selves, or with well spryng water: out of the treatise of Rogerius. 4. cha. 6.
A Water drawn out of the leaves of hisop, leuisticus, sauery, Horhound,
inula, the flowers of flower deluce, and that trifolium which bears many
flours, about the bigness of a gaul nut, whose flowers if they be sukt, they
give a swiet juice. It dissolueth fleumaticke humors of the breast or chest, it
fineth the spettle, furthers it, and breaks it.

A water destilled of gum Arabeck, white tragacanthum, lycoris, violets,
Malowes, put in water and then destilled. It represseth the heat of the breast,
and corrects the drines.

A water of Plantaine, quinqueruia, Tormentill and Roofes, if it be drouncke
with hot wine,

A water drawn out of the leaves or flowers of white or black Iacea,
Verbafcum, Roses, sauin the houked burre, it amendeth the cold imtemperature of
the cheaste, and consumes the fleumaticke humors, and the wounds of the
cheaste coming of a cold cause, it heals them and closes them.

A water destilled of Minte, Betain, Melissa, Serpillum, Polium Penny royal,
hasta regia, of the leaves of every one: it heals the infirmities of the
head and stomach coming of a cold cause, it stauncheth the flixe of the
belly, coming of the same cause, it helps concoction.

A water of the flowers of Violets and malows alters and louseth.

Of waters of virtues or golden waters and certain other composed of many
medicines, destilled with wine.
WAters of virtues, which the Germans name golden, all are destilled with
spices and odoriferous herbs (specially sage, which seems to be a foundation
in these waters composed) put first a few days into wine: and they are in
more use to be ministered Balneo Mariae, in the sun, in chaf or chopped straw in
lime whereunto rain water must be sprinkled in a bottell.

Waters of virtue. Guatlerius Ryffius in his book of destillacions, describes
very many

And a man may in these also gather four kinds of waters differynge in
virtue, of the which I would most chiefly allow the myddle. For this is truth,
Aqua vitae comes out out more pure at the beginning of the destillacio^,
about the last end, it runs somewhat watery. Of spices and gummes, the parts
that are more moistened ascend first, the hotter and the drier follow, which
eue^ the color coming nie more and more unto red declares. Moreover they
smell of brentnes, and in taste they are les swiet and pleasant. But without the
body they are ministered effectually. etc. But a.iii. kinds of water is gathered
better of dry spices and medicines only rectified, not

With waters of virtues, some also mixte well smelling seeds, provoking vrin,
and fenel, violets parsley, saxifrage, mastik, pomum ara^tium: besides spices
and odoriferous herbs, sage, costum, rue sothernwod, serpillum, the lilly of
the valley. This is asscribed to one Arnold a Parisian.

There is without all dout a diversity both in zedoaria, galingal, long Peper,
grains of paradise, of every one.ii. drammes) put as much sage, and Lauendula,
that the weighte of them ioyntlye may counterpoys the weight of the spyces.
etc. Three or four drops of this water, they counsel to mixte with the wine
that men drink at meeles, or else morning and eueninge

This water clereth the sight (as they say) confirms the brain and goodness of
the wit: puts away palsy: makes the face whyt and bright, cle^seth the
skin: and does many other things.

Sum in the month of May or June, when sage and lauender be in their force,
take half of this (sir ounces) of the oath other twys as myche, and cut it
small. They put to it Cloves, Ginger, nutmeg, mace, grains of paradys,
cinamo^, zedoaria, galingall, rosemary, of every one half an ounce,

A marvelous water and of much virtue. Cariophyllata, ginger, rosemary in
equal portio^s, aqua vitae. It is good for the aching of the breast, for a weak
stomach, for the griefs and gnawinges of the belly. It kills worms in the
body and bowelles. If a man that is sumwhat gros, desires to be made, slender,
let him drink this: and if any lean man desire to be in better plyte, let him
drink it with sugar.

A water of virtues. Sage, Lauender, rosemary, carui, and diverse spices, when
they are cut put in a bottell of tin, which thou shall hyd all over it vnslect
lym.xiii. days and sprinckle upon the lym rain water, afterward thou shall
destill it like rose water. In the heed ache, thou shall lay a linen cloth
wet in this water, to the brows and forehead.

An other good and notable water. Sage a pound and a half nutmegs, ginger,
cloves, graynes of paradys, cinnamon, of every one an ounce and a half, let the^
be putrified in most excellent wyn,

Sum ad moreover, the flowers of borage, red roses, the barck df citron, wode
of aloes, of every one half an ounce, and in the best wyn (whose weight shall be
six tunes as much as the other) let them be sookt.xiii. days, then when the
wine is dreyned out, they beete the spices diligently in a stone mortar, and
mixed it again with the wine, and they either destill it by and by, or let it
stand yet a few days other within one: neither corrupt they afterward any
more, nor yet is the remedy any thing perceived.iii. Being sprinkled upon
spices, it conserueth their force and smell.iiii. It breeketh inward
impostumes, and purges them downward before they cum to matter.v. Likewise
outward impostumes if it be anointed upon them, it opens and breeketh them,
makes them to run out and at length heals them.vi. It cures the blemishes
or fautes of the eyes, as blerednes both it a while in his noos.xvi. It
helps the diseases of the teeth.xvii. It cures the maladies of ye heart and
breast when it is drier or moyster then it should be, or is sick with the
coughe or short fetching of breath. etc.xviii. It increases the memory, and
takes away forgetfulness in a man, that receives oftentimes by times, no, but
one drop thereof.xix. Scuruines, skailes, scabbednes, byles, wheales, and what
soever uncleanness else vexes the skin, or else the inward parts of the aqua
vitae composed, which are destilled of spyces and odoriferous herbs, etc*
stieped in burning water of the best, yea and almost unto simple aqua vitae.

An other water of virtues. Ten ounces of sage noble ye flowers of laue^der.ii.
ounces, rue, ginger, cloves, grains of paradys, nutmegs. of every one an ounce:
half an ounce of cinnamon. Galingall, long Citriu^, castorium, wode of Aloes,
grains of paradise, of every one a dram. when all these are beaten together,
let them be kept in a tinnen vessel with a pound of oil of Laurel, an ale
quart and a half of good wine.ix. days or.xiii. and in the mean seson let
them be.iii. or.iiii. tunes chafed and myxte together: at the length destill
them. Other put to it not oil of Laurel, but an ounce of the beries of Laurel,
and as much Rue, and a dram of maces. They attribut unto it the same virtues
eueri one

A certain Aqua vitae, such as is made at Constantinople in the Emperoures
court, as the same written book has. Cloves, Nutmegges, ginger, Coriander,
Galingall, long peper, iumper beries Arantia, Sage, Basilicus, Roosemary,
Amaracus, Mint, Lettis, bay leaves, penny royal, Gentian, the flours of Sambucus
or elder, white Rooses, spikenard, cardomum, Mugwort, of every like much. A
Pomgranate.ii. figs, Passul^^, almonds, dates, of every one a little. When
these are pund, mixed a part of honey and sugar. Stiepe the^ al in good wine.v.
days, and destil the^. That is the best liquor yt runs out first, the next is
weker, ye. 3. wekest. That which remains in ye botto^ ^^ke to on oyntme^t, is
profitable to mani cold diseases. The first liquor is good for all blemishes
and spots of the eyes, rednes or blud (co^geled). It confirms called gutta,
the drop, the agewe, the coughe, the womb, and the worms in the head, to
conclude it makes good color.

Vlstadius describes certain waters of life, the most of them composed with
burning water, three with wine, in the chapters.xlvi. xlix. and.lv.

Peter Andrew, Matthaeolus Senensis, teaches to cure the french diseas that
is sanguin and choleric, and but newly gotten, with water which he calls
philosophical (the.lxx. leaf of the book the disease was more grievous.

Io. Almenar, in the.iiii. chapter of his book of the way to cure the french
pockes: When the humors (says he) are once euacuated and purged, a man must
procure an alteration of the members: for the which intent, let a bath or a
stouf be made with swiet water, wherein must be boiled Mallows, Bismalua,
Melilot, Chamaemel, Roses, Sorell, Fumaria, the third day after the purgacion.
And when the sick begins to sweat, let Fumiterrae, Sorell, Inula, of every
one of them half a pound: when they are cut small, put them in.iiii. pounds of
Malmsey a day and a night: the^ put to it an ounce and a half of triacle.x. year
old or more. Let them take.iii. ounces of this water destilled, with ii. ounces of
Buglos in the beginning, as it is said. And this stouf let it be used again
every day, till vi. or.vii. days be finished, drincking this water,

A water of certain remedies for shortness of breath and hard fetchinge of a
man's wind.
CAlamint, Hyssop, Adiantum, Horhound, Scabious, Tussilago, of every one an
handful: round Aristolochia an ounce: an ounce and a Fenel rotes, persly
rotes, of either.ii. ounces.iii. ounces of the heavenly lily: half a pound of
inula campana: musterd sede and cresses, of either of them an ounce and a half:
five drams of costus.x. of spike, iiii. ounces of bay beries: an ounce and a
half of nigella: when they are beaten small, let them stand vi. days in.vi.
ale quartes of white wine: then let them be destilled with a soft fire. Thou
shall give the pacient to drink thereof in the morning.iii. ounces. Epiphanius
Empericus.

A water for the stone of the raines and blader. Sperage, Ruscum, Apium, Fenel,
Perslye, rubia of every one half an ounce: five of the siedes of diur etica,
ligusticum, lithospermo^ Ammi, Radish, seselis Maslili^sis, daucus, Saxifrage,
of every one.iii. drams: adianthum, matricaria, ceterach, scolopendrum,
trifolium, gramen, senecion (I understand cardaminam. liuerwort, the sede of
peucedanum, of every one a handful: half an ounce of the flower Deluce.vi.
drammes of Xilobalsanum, two ounces Rogerius in his fourth treatise, and.vi.
chapter, but destilled

A water for the stone, described by Epiphanius a practicioner.
SAint John's wurt, Chamaedrios, Chamepyteos, senecionis, (not erigerontem but
sisymbrium, cardamine, does he understand) the gras of sinkfoyl, scolopendrium,
helxines, verbenae, eupatorium, penny royal, rue. of every one a handful, five
routes of diuretica. Acorus, inula, rubea, asarus, tamarix, of every one.iii.
drammes. diuretica, saxifrage, lithospermon, daucus, radish, persely of
Macedonia, ammiu^, marathrum, carus, libisticus, of every one. ii drams: peeche
kernels half a dram: four of the cu^mon siedes, cold greater, cleansed, of every
one a dram and a half. Lycoris.ii. ounces: Juniper beries half an ounce. When
thies are beaten, let them stand infused in five pounds of wine, then destill
them with a slow fire. Give the sick to drinck other after bathing early in the
morning warm, from

Certain waters composed, destilled with vinegar.
OF vinegar it self destilled reed before, where we entreeted of waters
destilled in Balneo Mariae.

A water that breaks the stone in ye bladder, described by Epiphanius a
practicioner, ii saxifrage, the juice of milium of the sun, Persely, Anise, of
every half a pound: whyt vinegar eight ounces: destill a water thereof and give
it to drink fasting.

A water of Swalowes is thus made. Young Swalowes when they are beaten to
powder, mixed them with Castorio, and a little good vinegar and destill them this
water drunk of one fasting, is a true medicine of the falling sickness, what
cause so ever it cum of. And although a man have had that disease.v. years, he
shall be heeled, if he drink Lullius and Aegidius.

A water of Rogerius) the fourth treatise, the. vi chap. against the
obstructions and stuffinges of It may be drunck alone or with sugar. Take the
routes of Ruscus, Sperage, Dianthos, Hearts tung, Ceterach, Polytrichi,
Pentilidion, Liver wurt, Lumworte, G^amen, Senecion, Cretani simplicis,
Centory, Psylii: the siedes of Citrulli, Melones, Gourdes, Cucummers, Rusci,
Sperage, Smalage, Persely of Macedo. Fenell, Lenistici, Ammeos, Sileris
montani, Damei, Saxifrage, Milii solis, Xilobalsami, Pencedani or flourede
luce, Iui of the tree and of ye ground, the gum of Iui, kernels Cantharidum or
Cariarborum, Lapidis Spongis, Plumbu^, he Gootes blood, whyt vinegar
(Artichogh) the siedes of the les Tesill (perauenture the les siedes of Tesil)
Cinnamon, Spicknard, the sied of Acorus burned, Netels, Trifolii, Bre^bles of ye
sea, also land Bre^bles, of every one as much as ye list. Let thies be put in a
great pot with a Embotu^, may be set also let them be tied, and their make a
slow fire under the first pot, so yt the matter Embotu^ so y^ vapor passing by
ye Embotu^ to an other pot, in the upper mer shall be gathered together, and shall
be turned into a very clear liquor and subtle, which is received in the nether
pot. This Rogerius writes: such words as I suppose to be corrupted of the
writers or printers I thought good to note it with this sign.

Waters of Capons.
WAters of Capons, as men call them, ar

A water of a capon restoritiue and sumwhat bynding. Thou shall sieth the capon
in water according unto the art, and put to it a pound of rosewater: conserve
of roses borage, buglos, of every one an ounce. Of both kinds of coral: of
either of diarhodon abb. a dram. Small rasins without y^ curnels an ounce:
Coriander prepared half an ounce: the fregmentes of all (precious stones)
pearls, of every one an ounce and a half. Let them be destilled.

An other. Let the Capon be sod with a pound of bief til it be sufficiently
sodde: whereunto thou shall ad Malmsey, Roose water, of either half a pound:
white bread, that it may be sookte.iii. ounces: thou shall beat these without
the bief, and put to these spices following Spices electu. of precious Diarhodon
Abbatis. Diamoschu that is swiet, of every a dram. Diamargariton, spices of
confection against the Pestilence, of either two scrup.viii. leaves of pure
gold. Mixte them all with the juice or brothe and let them be destylled with a
slow fire.

Some dres this water with saffron and cinnamon. etc. for women in child bed,
which be both weak, and their flours or loosenes of their body comes not
forward. It is ministered either alone

Some also dres it without destillacion thus. They sethe very long an old
capon boiled and dressed accordingly: then they beat small the guts and the bones,
and in a tinnen or glasen vessel well stopped and set in a caudron full of sethinge
water, they sieth it for the space of.vi. hours. Some cast gold into it, as
rings or coins of gold.

A certain water with a capon or a cock or a hen soden together with diverse
comfortable medicines, Gnainerius in the chapter of curing ye hectical or
co^suming fever: not to be destiled, but sode^ only in a glase^ vessel, put in
a ketle of water.

Waters composed for diverse diseases, within ye body chiefly, whereof some are
made of medicines and iuyces, whiles they be yet new, other are infused and put
into the juices of pla^ts or waters destilled, whay, or blood.
A Water causing sleep.ii. ounces of Henbane: an ounce of the rotes of
Mandragora. vi. drams of Popy: Gith, Aumber of either of them.ii. dra^s: sedum
Darnell for the space of.ii. days, let them be destilled.

An other causing sleep. Take the seed of Darnell a pound: half a pound of the
sede of Henbane: ii. pounds of the sede of Purslan: iii. ounces of the sede or
rote of Mandrag: as much of Alkekengi, when they are pund, pour to the^ a
pound of ye juice of

A water called stony, ye third of Aegidius, because it breketh ye stone. The
sede of Pimpernel, Petroselini, Apii, Ari, (otherwis Caryophylli, Musterd sede,
leuing out Aro and the bur: also Apii, both the herb and the rote for the sede
is named before) burs, Mastiches, of eueri one like much, when they ar well
pu^d, let the^ be mixed with the blud of a linx, (otherwis a he Got and better)
and a little Vinegar poured to it, let the^ stand a few days in a vessel well
closed: and the^ at the last let them be destilled. It is good for the^ that be
troubled with the stone, what manner of stone so ever it be, red, white,
sharp, or plane: if so be it the stone be confirmed and gathered to some
strength, let the pacie^t drink of this water eueri dai for so shall it be
broken and brought into sa^d. If so be icabd heds be washed once a day with this
water, they Aegidius and Lullus.

An approved water for the sores Tutellis.
CAudae equinae, plantain, red roses, the grains of Alkeke^gi, the rotes of
holy hok, shaven or scraped licoris, of eueri one an ounce: Iuiubaru^ Sebeste^,
of either of the^.vi. dra^s: bol armoniak half an ounce: iiii. cummen seeds,
could, great cle^sed, of every one.iii. dra^s: the sede of white popy.vi. dra^s
half an ounce of cytoniorum, of the thinnest of gotes infusion or soking, and
after let them be destilled. Give the sick to drinck.iiii. ounces warm, so long
as the disease continues Epiphanius Empiricus.

An other water composed, the second amongst the waters of Aegidius: it is red
of also in ye book of Lullus of waters. Rue, Satyrion with ye hauds and
stones, Selandin, (otherwise Rue, Agrimony, Satyrion, Chelidoni) Sugar
(otherwise Tutia) and the stone called Calaminaris, al of like weight pu^d must
be destilled with a slow fire. This water excels

A water composed, the first amongste Aegidius waters.
HIssop, penny royal, Charyo. Cikory, of every one a dra^: let them be pu^d and
destilled. After take tutiae, persly of Alexan. Rue, Zedoaria, aloes, and the
stone called calaminaris, of every one a dram, when they are pund, sieth the^
in ye forsaith water till y^ third part be wasted, and the liquor streyned with
a cloth, thou shall kiep it in a glass diligently closed nine days
(otherwise.xl.) Afterward let it be given in drink every day in the morning
before day (other wise, by the space of.x. days) to the sick fasting. It is
proffitable against the falling sickness if he that takes it continue fasting
after it six hours. And truly it is a most effectual remedy. It heeleth al
resolucion of the sinews, and the members are Castorium, it is good against
all goutes, which has not taken rout yet in the members. If it be drunk ix.
days together fasting, it puttes away all manner of agues, what matter soever
it cum of (if it be drunk.ix. days every morning early. This water is also
most profitable to wash wou^des in which the sinues are cut.)

An other of Aegidius, the.ix. in number, otherwise they call it double. The
siede of Apii, the sied Apii, ginger (otherwise, The sied of Apii, white Popy,
sugar, Carioph.) of every one equal weght. Pund in a mortar, put to it
conseruatiue water, (that is destilled of persely) and destill it. This is the
chiefest remedy for the cough and breast ill at eas. If a man drink it could
fasting, and in the evening as hoot as he can. If it be drunken hoot with
Castorio, it is good against the disease called Apoplexia, it heals also the
members sick of the Palsy, if so be the Palsy be not it chereth all the
members, it drives away il humors, and strengthens the heed and the brain.

An other, the six in number amongst Aegidius waters. Gladiolus Hyssop, Sauin,
Sothernwood, (otherwys the sied of Sothernwood, leuing out Sauin, I like it
not) of every one like much, beat them together, and let it stand a certain
days, the^ destill it. This water is of greet strength. It with stands all
agues both hoot and cold. It provoke wemens flowers if it be drunk thrys, but
it is Castorio, it heeleth the palsy (if it be drunk daily very hoot)
within.iii. days. The same description find I in the book of Lullus of
waters.

A water agrinst the Pestilence, etc. of the blood of a Wether or gelded Ram,
out of a certain Duche written book.
TAke a Wether that is all white and in good plyt and well lyking: cut his
throot, receive ye blood and stur it while it is fresh and new a good space
with a stick of red Juniper: and ever in the sturring, cast away the clotes
that is gathered of of the same Juniper and the beries of Juniper that be red
likewise, to the number of.xxv. And unto thies a little of Agrimony, Rue, Pheu,
Scabious, Veronica, commonly so called, Pimpernell, Cicory, Penny royal, of
every one a handful. If so be it the mesure of the blood excied three Sextarts,
then put to it.ii. ounces of Triacle, but if it be les, according the portion of
the blood, thou shall lesson the mesure of Triacle. They must al be prepared
ready at hand that they may be put into the

Of pur ging medicines, composed destilled.
THey also are to be called composed waters, that wine, burning water or other
liquor. Certain co^positions of spices to restore the strengtes of the heart and
the spirits, are mixed with waters of capons, dressed by destillations as I said
before: also with burning waters, or rather Quint essence of wine, against the
pestilence and poisons, as we declared before. But also purging medicines,
Electuaria chiefly in the which Dacry dium and other vehement things hurtful
to the stomach are received, mixed with the liquors, specially with burning
Lullius also prayseth greetly, and certain practicioners of any acquaintance
have used it with praise. I know Hamech, and that which is of ye juice of
Roses, and gave to drink unto the weeker sort the liquor that he received by
it self: to them that were stronger, he myxt sum of the elctuary with it: and
so he said he purged sick men without any grief.

With Helleborum is a water made, that restores youth: such one saw I my
father have. But such waters vex the bodies, and make a fallible image of
youth. Cardanus.

Gold Potable or that may be dro^ken.
OF potable gold, who so list he may read much in the book of Vlstadius which
he names the heaven of philosophers: and in the book of Lullus of quint
essence. That there is virtue in gold, which comes of it made hot and
quenched in water, that may be an argument, that the water wherein a wedge of
iron or gold is slekt, is commended of Nicander Aconitum: for it seems to be
understood of water, wherein these mettalles should be quenched, when as he
names none other liquor. Quench (says he) red hat iron or the dros of iron,
or red hot gold or silver dip it in a troubled potion or drink. Where the
expositer says: Quensh iron in water and drink it, and a little after: quench
the dros of iron in honey and drinck the intinction, so calling the liquor
wherein any any thing is quenched. Dioscorides bids to quench Auicenna also
has, and Aegineta, and also Aetius, who says that a miln stone so slekt is
holsom, and that the wine should be druncke hot) with these words: and the
dros of iron, or iron it self or gold, or silver red hot quenched in wine, if
yt liquor be dronk. And trueli it seems that wine is more apt to receive ye
virtue of gold, then water. When as I on a time tasted water, wherein gold was
often quenched, I could perceive no quality of the savor or the taste to be
altered in it. Again, it brought unto quint essence does draw more strength of
the gold the^ wine: and the more if the gold be beaten into most thin plaits,
and most of all if it be bete^ into powder. But the oil that coms of gold
shall pas al these. As for gold simplely sod, as in ye brothe of capo^s, there
is no strength in it all, except a ma^s opinion ca^do any thing, as I believe
withal learned men for the most part. Of the virtues of gold, read Auicenna in
his second book. 78. cha. But because ye purest is to be chose^ for medicines, I
will Plinies words out of his. 33. book a bout thend of the.iiii. chap. of ye
purging of gould. Let gold be roasted and broyled with thrice as much in weight
of the clots or lu^ps of salt: and again with.ii. procions of salt and one of
the stonecalled schiston: so it yeldeth his strength to the things burnt with
it in an earthen vessel, it self remaining pure and uncorrupted. I conjecture
yt Plini in this place did mistake schistu^ the stone, for schistu^ an alu^:
for in an other place (the. 35. book. 15. cha.) he writes schistum, yea and
the reason taken of the virtues, makes more for Alum: for he says gold is
purged with salt only and schistu^ put unto it: but Alum has more like effect
unto salt then the stone Schistos, whereunto the old writers ascribe none other
virtue, but yt which it has co^mun with the Haematit (of which kind it is) that
is to stop blood. But Alum is taken and used in the purging of metals: also
Aqua Forti (as they call it.) Notwithstanding Plini may be excused, because the
word stoone is more common and of larger signification with him for he names
both quick silver and many other metally things, stones, wherefore he might call
the Alum Schiston by the name of Schiston. Albeit he should not have so done,
for the difference of that which is proprely called a stone Schistus. In the
same place of Plini, after the words now rehearsed is put: The rest of the ashes
(that is to say, of the salt, with the which being burnt together, ye gold
Schistum) kept in an earthen pot, and tempred with water, anointed upon the
face, it heals the disease beginning in the chin called Lichenes, or like
foul breakings out: which shall be conveniently washed away with Bean meal. It
heals also Fistulaes, and they that be called Hemorods. If so be it when it
is beaten Spuma be put to it, it amendeth corrupt and stinking biles and sores.
Decocted with honey and Melanthio, and anointed M. Varro says it heals
wartes. Here in the first words, the ashes kept and anointed no man can
doubt, but he speaks of ashes: but that which follows of decoction and
annoynting, seem to be long to the gould it self. But in my indgemente, ought
to be red so that those words decocted and anointed be referred unto the
ashes, as both the consequency of the text, and also the manner of the medicines
do require. For salt is used of phisicio^s (Diascordes and other) against
Lichenes, ringworms itches, against al manner of vucums, red infla^macions, and
tetters: and broyled or parched with honey, against running cankers. etc. The
men of our country rub children warts with salt and soute. And alum, as Plini
says, asswageth rotten sores and biles, with fat: the frettinge cankers of
biles with vinegar or burnt with as much in weight of gals, with.ii. parts of
salt (in which manner of proportion also it is mixed for to purge gold) the
diseases that sprede abroad. Moreover by the name of Spuma which signifies
foam. Plini understands Halosachne^, as also the. 31. of ye. 7. I find
nothing noted by Hermolans or Gelenius upon this place. But as gold is purged
with alum, so is also Misy, as the same Plini witnesses. 34. 12. and by an other
menes, with quick silver, read Plini. 33. 6. That it may be purged, it is sod
with leed: the same. 33. 3. An other way to pourge the same, Cardanus
describes in his.vi. book of subtilty.

Potable gould. Take the honey and combs of a ambra^ grisea^, Sperma ceti.
Agallochu^, long peper, Cariophyllos nuce moschata, sau^ders and pure gold. Let
these stand in horse do^g. 30. dais. After destil the^ in a limbek in ye bath:
then grind yt matter yt is remaining upon a stone, and pour again upon it y^
water destilled, and destill it again in ashes: This water dissolueth gold. If
the potable gold be hardened, take of it ye bigness of a pees, and put it into an
egg hard roasted, ye yelk taken out: so shall it be resolved: give

The chymistes make a lyquor of massy gould, which drink, as they say
cheereth the body. George Agricola.

It lyketh wise men, that to eat meat dressed in vessels of gould, or with the
decoction whereof plaites of gould were adjoined: and to drink wine wherein
plaites or money of gold were quenched oftentimes, procures unto the heart good
state, and has great force. Arnold of conseruing youth.

In the Quint essence of wine, gould, silver, peer Philip. Vlstad. the.ix.
chapter, and furthermore: where as who so list shall reed more of potable gould.

Wine wherein plates of gould have bien quenshed.xl. or.l. times, is used of
certain in the steed of potable gould. Arnold de villa noua.

The same in his book of wyn: Wine that has ponderosity and weight thereof to
inclyne the superfluities to the parts of expulsion, and to conserve youth. It
conserueth the virtues of the principal parts in his actions, and by his
temperatnes it louseth the urine restreined. It heeleth the falling sickness and
them that have lost their senses, it is wholesome also for lepers. Many at this
time rich men and princes will have certain parcelles of gould to be sodde with
their dishes* other use the^ in Panellis with electuaries, other in pouders:
Diacameron the fyling hoth of gould and of silver is used. Sum are wont to hold
a piece of gold in their mouth and to swalowe the spetle. It is plain that
silver kept in a man's mouth quenshed the thirst: and corrall comfort the
stomach, both holden in the mouth and hanged about the neck, so that it hang
toward the stomach: for I have tried that it lets the troubling thereof.
Other convert gould into a water that may be drunk, which way without doubt
deed and natural, not to chymisticall gould.

Elixir vitae which a certain friend of late communicated unto me by his
letters with thies words The description of this medicin was sent unto me from
Rome, which whether it is able to do so much as it promises I have not yet
tried. Que^sh gould. iii or.iiii. times in wine or ofter according to the
quantity of the wine. Then destil it in Balneo Mariae four times, and thou
shall use it in diverse diseases, as well hoot as could, adding hoot

Sum extol and praise highly the spirit or Quint essence of gould, for to
heel the defaues of ye liver.

Certain waters composed against the diseases of the eyes.
A Marvelous water to conserve ye sight, and against the blemish or spot of
the Lullius.

A water for all the diseases of the eyes that be curable, out of Aegidius and
Lullius, we have described it before amongst the waters composed for diverse
inward diseases.

A water composed for the eyes. About the beginning of May gather Selandyn,
Veruin, Rewe, Fenell, pun them severally, and take.iii. ounces of the juice of
every one of them, then mixed them, put to a little of the grien branches (as
the French men call them the Pampes) of Roses.iii. ounces of sugar candy.iiii.
ounces of the best Tutia, and as much of Dragons blood. When all thies ar pund
thou shall mixed them together and destill them in alymbeck of glass. The liquor
that runs forth, thou shall let stand.ii. or.iii. days in a receiver, and
then use it. It is of great virtue for eyes that be ill at ease, red, or have
the web in the eye.

The water of the vyn together with honey sublimated by the fire, cures the
bleerednes of the eyes specially. The munkes in Mesuen. That is Rogerius.

A water or an oyll made of Sponsa solis sharpeneth the sight, and cures any
disease of the eyes waters, emongste them that be ordained to the dying of the
hear. A water for eyes in so^mer, to preserve the sight, described by Io.
Maynardus in his Epistles the.vi. iiii. Three parts of Roses, the herbs of
Fenel and Rue, of either one part and let them be well mixte together: and
after.iii. days let a water be destilled, other in only vapor of siething
water, or in the sun, or in Balneo Mariae, as they call it, so that a handful of
the same herbs (better if they be dried, in mine opinion) be

Certain waters for the eyes out of Rogerius.
Fill a stilful of the leaves of Agrimony, Memitha, and Leuisticus cut: sprinkle
upon it a little white and clear wine, and destyll it in claied vessels. This
liquor represseth the swellinge of the eye lids of a cold cause: it dries up
the blearednes: it stops the flowinge of tears: it clears the sight:
breaks bleamishes or spots (I suppose he means corns or Pearls.) If
thou will have it stronger to break spots or perls, ad unto it Gallitricum,
and Morsum Gallinae (anagallis)

A man may get a water out of Fenell also for the same causes. For a liquor
gathered of ye rotes and leaves of Fenell sod in water, with a basen laid upon
the water while it yet sietheth, is kept in a phiall, and one drop is put in
the corner of ye eye every dai morning and evening for the forsaid causes, by
commun experience.

To break the spot or perle, mixed with the forsaid waters, myrhe, and Aloes
pund: and put a drop of the liquor streined in either corner of the eye

A water destilled of the flowers of white thorn and willow, puts away
prickinges, heates or rednes of the eyes: it stops tears coming of a hot
cause, and breaks the spots or pearls of the same cause.

A water of the leaves (flours) of Eufragia stops tears coming of a cold
cause, and makes slender the eye lids that swell of the same cause: it
breaks spots or pearls of the same cause, and Enphrag did not heat, but were
temperate, or else does coule moderatly in the first degree, and dries in the
second.

An excellent water for the debility of the sight, described by Gordonius. Take
Selandin, Fennel, Rue, water withy of the mountain, Eufrage, Veruin, red Roses
chosen, of every one a half pound, lib. s. Cloves, Long Peper, of either two
ounces. When they are bruised together destill them in a it every day in the
eyes.

An other of the same man's for Fistulaes, which it is certain, it will heal.
Two pound of good white wine destilled in the same vessel that Aqua vitae is:
the water of Rosemarye, Sage, of every one.v. pounds: Sugar.ii. pound: when
they are destilled again, put to them an ounce of Sage, and as much of
Rosemary. When they are stiepte together eyghte days, thou shall strain it
and use it.

A water for the Cancar in what part of the body so ever it be. The herb
called Cancar, which is also called Dove foot, the flowers of Quinces, the
flowers of Cerifolium, the bows or leaves of the Breer Idaea (which the
frenchmen call Frambosia) and a few white Roses, honey and white wine, and the
Alum which the French men name of glass. Let all these be destilled
together: Andreas Furnerius.

A water of a Moldwarpe, etc. for all kind of Gutta or drop, noli me tangere,
scalles of the head, the roose drop and the wolf: read afterward amongste
the trimming or deckinge waters, where the waters invented for the dyinge of
hear are rehearsed. We will refer amongste the trimmyng waters also, those
waters wherewith whelkes and little Pushes or Biles in the face, are made hoale.

Of waters of svviet sauoure.
Diverse waters are made for the only delectation of smell, to sprinckle upon
the hands, the face and hear both of their head and beard: also upon their
linen, napkins or handkerchiefs, garments, as well that they wear, as also
their bed clothes: whereunto it communicates the pleasantness of ^auour, not
only by sprinkling, but also when it is hot by the vapoure. Roose water also
comes in ure to sauces of meats: and only it, as I think of all

The Powder of the Flower Deluce, mixte with hot water, makes it to smell,
and is used of Barbers. The Flowers of Lauendula or Lauender, and much rather
of that which is communly called Spick, both grien and dry are put into
water, or wyn, or burning water in a vessel well stopped and set in the sun, that
they may infect it with their smell. But if they be yet fresh and moist, they
turn the wyn almost into vynegar, which if they be dry they do not so. The
liquor shall be made the more smelling if the flowers be dried in the sun in a
glass closed, and afterward whyt wine be put to it. If so be it a man desyer to
have a swiet Caphura, Agallochu^, or meaner things as Assadubis, Styrap, and
Stacte, Myrh, or any other spyces, chiefly cloves: or else things of les
Arentii, Bay leaves, commun swiet herbs, Rosemary, Amaracus, Basil. etc. they
shall be made much the swieter. Saffron is to strong, and stuffeth the heed.

Rosevvater with musk, Saffron, Cloves, Caphura out of Bulcasis.
WIth Musk. Put a croun of good Musk, beten in two pou^des of Rosewater, in the
little, then put it in a glass well stopped. It is a water marvelous swiet, and
convenient for a king, that their clothes may be sprinkled therewith.

With Saffron. Put half an ounce of good Saffron in two pounds of Rose water
(for the space of one day) and destill it. This water is holsom to be mixed with
medicines, also for smell and garnishing

With Cloves. Put half an ounce of Cloves (beten) in a pound and a half of Rose
water.xxiiii. hours and destill it.

With Caphura. Destill an ounce of Caphura with a pound of rosewater and use it in
medicines for kings

After the same manner is Roosed water made with Saunders, and other spices
(swiet smelling) what so ever a man will. Sum destill all thies in pure water
instead of Rosewater.

A three leued herb they call it Tribulu^ at Rome, an herb most swiet of savor,
which they destil for per fumes and to make diverse other wanton swiete
sauoures. The munkes in Mesuen.

A water of swiet savor, wherewith the strengthes of the heed, heart and
stomach are revived* four handful of the flowers of Lauendula. Roses white
and red of either two handful. Rosemary, Caryophyllata, new and fresh Cyperus,
the bark of Citranguli, of every one a handful. Mint Sage, Tym, Bay leaves or
Penny royal, of every one half a handful.iiii. ounces of Cloves. Galingall,
Nucis mosch. Calamus, Aromaticus, Ginger, Cinnamon, the flowers (I think better
the q. s. that is as much as shall suffice.). When they are pund let the^ be
put into a glass well closed for the space of eight days. afterward use them.
It is excellent to wash the hands, if thou mixed a little of it with a great deal of pure water. A man may use it also destilled, and put in a scruple of
musk. Epiphanius Empericus.

An other of the same man's, delectable with a marvelous swietnes of savor.
ziuet, Musk, of either a dram, let it be tied in a fine linen cloth and let it
be set to sooke in two pounds of Rose water a few days in the sun.

An other of the same man's of a very swiet savor. Basil, Mint, Samsuchum or
Maioram, flower deluce, Hyssop, Balsamita. (I take it to be Sisymbrium) Sauery,
Sage, Melissa, Lauender, Rosemary, of every one half a handful. Cloves,
Cinnamon, Nutmegges, of every one an ounce. The pome Citrangula (of the kind of
Citriorum, the figure of an egg. of a yeloowe wax color) iii. or.iiii. Let
them be beeten and set.iii. days in rose water, then let them be destilled
with a slow

An other of the same man's of most excellent savor. Three pounds of Rosewater,
Cloves, Cinamo^, Sau^ders, Citrinoru^, of every one.vi. dra^.ii. handful of the
flowers of Lauender.vi. dra^s of Assa dulcis, Malmsey, Aqua vitae, of either.ii.
ounces. Let it stand a month to soke in ye sun, well closed in a glass, or upon
ye top of a furnace of a stouf. Then destil it in Balneo Mariae, and at half a
dra^

It is marvelous pleasant in savor.

Waters of svviet savor of Andreas Furnerius, in his French book of the
garnishyng of man's nature.
A Water of wondrous swietnes, for the perfuming of the shietes of a bed, where
by the hooll place shall have a most plesaunt sent. Put into a little phial of
glass

An other manner of swiet water, which men call Cassoleptam, that is Capsula.
Power into sum little vessel of laton, a little Rosewater made with musk and a
little ziuet and Cloves, Agallochum styrap calamita, when they are all pund
against a fire mixed them, and perfume any clothes that ye will with the vapor
ascending there from. It is a marvelous swiet savor, which if thou will
keep, close the vessel diligently, and when thou think good, put more
Rosewater unto it, that it

An other. Thou shall put into.iiii. pounds of Roosewater, Assa dulcis,
somewhat gross beaten, Stirax, and Cloves, Camphora, Agallocum, of every one an
ounce, Musck, Siuet, of either of the^ xx. grains. Put these together in a glass
shit with a parchment, pricked through with.x. or.xii. small holes, and let the
vessel boil.iiii. hours in a kettle full with water, as though it were in
Balneo Mariae. After when it is cold, strain it through a fine linen cloth,
and keep it in a glass, in ye which

A swiet water and unknown, whereof one part mixte with.x. parts of pure water,
makes the hoole most swiet.xx. grains or there about of Musk (as the smell
thereof pleases the moore or les) Nutmegs, Cloves, Galingal, Spikenarde,
grains of paradise, Mace, Cinamo^, of every one Balneo Mariae. Thou shall keep
the water gathered thereof diligently stopped, for y^ same use that the former
serves for.

An other excellent water. Two pound of the Citri. One pound of the water of
red Roses: of Myrtus half a pound. Of musk Roses a good quantitye, and
likewise of Iasmin (that is to say of the flowers.) Of cloves half an
ounce.iii. ounces of Assa dulcis well beaten, one ounce of Vernicis. Styrax
calamita and red Styrax of either half an ounce. All these pund and mixed with
water thou shall destil them in a glasen limbeck, the head and the receiver
diligently closed with clay, with a soft fire, or in a Balneo Mariae, or in a
kettle full of siething water.

A water of most swiet savor, with ye which oil is destilled also. The last
being mixed with a hundredth times as much of pure water, does sauoure it all
with the swietnes thereof: but this with a. M times as much. A pound of Myrre
chosen, pure, new and fat beaten into small pieces: half a pound of the juice of
Rooses: when they are mixte together in a limbecke, let them be destilled in
ashes, where first thou shall separate the water with a slow fire: the^ make ye
fire bigger and separat ye oil: at last

A certain Roosewater made with Muscke, which is required and used also
inother compositio^s. Put a.xii. grains or more of Muscke in a glass that is
wide beneath, and narowe above: and so closed with a parchmente, set it in the
sun a iiii. or.v. days. Afterward, take an other glass like unto it full
of Rooses dried and beaten, stop ye mouth of it with a fine and thin cloth, other
linne^ or of hear. The^ put ye mouth of ye vessel yt contains ye roses into
ye mouth of the other, wherein the musk

Waters destilled called Cosmeticall,
DEstylled waters for garnishinge, are divided also into certain differences,
for some are for the face, to make the color of it white, ruddye, bryghte, to
put away wrinckles, to preserve and keep it from Sun burning, or to abolish
the spots and and to the chaunginge of the color in them. Other make the
tieth white.

All the use of Cosmetical and garnishing things, ought not to be taken for
dishonest and indecent for a man that is well instituted and godly mineded, for
Galen also the most famous of all phisicions, prescribes cosmeticall
medicines not a few in his work of composicion according to places: and he
declares that the use of the^ is many times profitable and honest. For the
lewdness Galen of composi medic. sec. locos, the first book. 2. chapter

Such Cosmetical waters as be simple, we will not declare hear, as be the
waters of Bean flowers, Strawberies, Dew, Gotes milk: Read before and other in
Brunsvvick or Riffius. Yea Aqua vitae has a certain cosmeticall and garnishing
virtue, as we rehearsed in his place.

Waters destilled of the leaves of the peeche tree and Willowe, of lyk weight
mixed together, do hele the red whelkes in the face, (the French men call them
rubiz) being moistened therewith.

A spyced wine for the garnishing of women, which makes the skin whyt, fine,
pure, and well colored. Put Ginger and Cinnamon in wyn and Arnold in his book of
wine.

A garnishing water, wherewith women amend their thick gross skyn, black and
skaly or skuruy, with Quick silver sod in a raw eg, etc. thou may find in
Nicolas Massa upon the french disease, in his.vi. book.ii. chapter.

A water for the bewtifying of the face. The spume of silver half a pound:
when it is beaten Caphura, Aphronitrum, oil of Tar taro, cloven Alum, of every
one an an ounce. strein it through a cors cloth, anoint the face and neck.
Epiphanius Empericus.

An other of the same man's, for the brightness of the face. Take Lily routes,
Arus, Dragons, of every one whiles they be fresh, half a pound. half
Roosewater, destill them, put to it Moschocarii, Cinnamon, of either two drames.
Wash the face therewith twyse a day.

A very good water of the same man's for the same use. Take flowers of Beenes,
bitter Almo^des, the leeues of Peeche trees, of every one.iii. ounces, Gootes
milk as much as of all the rest. When they are destilled put six or eight
whytes of eggs sod, which must be mixed with the water destilled, by and by
destil it again and mixed with it.ii. Caphura.

A french water for little moules, all scalynes and freckmes of the face. A
pound of Tartaru^, or lies of wine burnd till they be whyt: Mastick,
Tragaca^tha, of either half an ^nce. Sir drams of Camphora, iiii. whytes of eggs.
When they are pund and mixed in Rosewater, let the^ be destilled. They cure
maruelously. Epiphanius Empericus.

A water procuring unto the face a Rooselyke and fair color. Take a pynt of
Aqua vitae thrys Prasiliu^: Cloves to the number often, and as many grains of
Paradys: five Cubebas when they are all pund and sifted, heet them a little with
Aqua vitae in a vessel diligently covered, that nothing breeth out by any
means. Afterward when this mixtur is could again destill it in a le^beck of
glass, with a very slow fire, and thou shall have a good water and a clear. When
thou will use it, wiet the face and skyn of the person with a sponge moistened
therewith, for it makes without all this dying will continue a long time,
for.ii. or. iii years. If thou can not have Aqua vitae, take reed wine of
Rupella the best thou can find, about the measure of Semiloti, a dutche
wourd for half an ounce, for they call an ounce a loot, for there must be more
measure of wine, then Aqua vitae. But Aqua vitae is much better to the
preparing of this water. This water garnisheth a man's skin subtly and
maruelously. Out of the written book, the author whereof is not declared. A like
unto Gordonius. An other that takes away the wrinkles and spots of the face,
and clarifieth the skin, of whytes of eggs destilled: Reed before amongst
the simple waters destilled in Balneo Mariae.

A marvelous water that puts away Napas (little whelkes or pushes or little
teetes, sum call them Napas, I think the Italians) Lupinas acorns, kurnelles,
Porros, that is, wartes, and what euel so ever grows in any place of the body
it takes Arabic, clear Tur pintyn, of every one.iii. drams: When they are
beten mixed altogether and destil them in a lembeck. And in this water thus
destilled put half a pound of Cineris terrae and destil it again: and kiep this
water as a tresure. The author is nameles. But it seems that this liquor will be
rather an oyll then a water, and save only that ashes is added unto it, it
migth have bien well asscribed unto Balmes.

A cosmeticall water that bewtifieth the face and breeketh the stoone, is
described before about the end of the title where we entreted generally of the
virtues of liquors destilled. Reed also Rogerius, in his fourth tretise the
fifth chapter.

Certain Cosmeticall waters for the face, shall thou find also by and by, in
the waters that follow ascribed to the hears. There be also emo^gst the Balmes
hereafter, which serve to garnishing

Certain waters Destilled for the garnishing Andreas Furnerius in his French
book of the bewtifying man kind.
A Water for the brightness and whytnes of the face. The flowers of whyt Rooses,
of water Lily, Elder, Lilyes the chydes take out, of Beenes of the flowers of
every one of thies a pound. Half a pound of the water of Strawberies. Crumbs of
whyt bred Cerussa pund be put for a nights space. Let them all be destilled
in a Lembeck of glass: when the water is drawn out let it be set in the sun,
and wash the face therewith morning and evening, so that ye wype it not.

An other, that the face and the other parts of the body may retein a fair
and youthful form.ii. ounces of Aqua vitae: the water of of Been flowers,
ounces, when they are all mixed, put to them a dra^ of the whitest Tragacantha.
After this water has stand in the sun.vi. days, streine it through a fair
linen cloth. The use of it is in the morning so that it be not wipte of.

An other for the brightness and beautye of the face. A water of the whites of
eggs new laid, made by a sponge with like measure of the ^ice of Limons,
destill it as rosewater. Put unto this water afterward, about.ii. ounces of
communly,

An other which Isabella of Aragonia duches of Millen used, knede the flour of
whete Mele, with a Sextarium almooste a pint.xx. ounces of Gotes Camphora,
Sugar, Alum, white coral, of every ii. drammes. When all these are pund, let
them be mixed with the moist things, and destylled in a thereof, and most
profitable to put away all vexacions growing in the face. It makes the beauty
of the face as excellent as is possible to be made.

An other to beautifye the face. The leaves of Roosemary, white Tartary, mixed
them with whit wine, and use the water drawn out of it by a limbecke, as ye
would do the former medicines for the same effect.

An other for the same. Set the flowers of beans in good white wine a day
or.ii. in a glass bottell, Cerussa. And you shall see it shortly work.

An other that takes away al manner of spots. Put into a glass like much of
Cristall and Coral, with water of Limones so much that it may cover them and
be a fingers breadth above them. Stop this vessel and put it in some cold
place in the earth as in a wine seller a few days. Then

An other marvelous for the same purpoose. them as is before rehearsed, then
sprinckle an ounce of Salt (otherwise salt Gemmae) beaten, in a glass and put
the snailes there upon: then sprinkle other Salt upon them again, and
snailes upon that, and so shall you do continuallye layinge salt upon
Snailes, and Snailes upon salt, till the third part of the vessel be
filled. Then pour unto them so much of the juice of Snailes, that it stand
above the salt and Snailes, two fingers thick, and destyll them: use this
Gordonius.

An other not destilled. Twelve Snailes, cut

After this follows a destylled water of a young Storke of the same effect,
and operation, which I described amongste the simple Medicinal waters.

An other manner very good and secreate, (or unknown.) Six new laid Eggs,
half a pound of Malmsey, a young Pigion not yet holelye of vnskimmed
milcke.viii. Arantia Poma: oil of Tartaro. iii. ounces, an ounce of Cerussa.
Let the^ be beaten that may be beaten, and mixte altogether, that they may be
destilled with a slow fire. The use of this water is like the other before. It
makes a fair skin, fine, tender as is possible.

A washinge or Kings water which abolysheth all spots. Take water of clear
Turpintine, as much as can be gotten out of.ii. pounds of it: put therein
half an ounce of Masticke, Tragacantha. When they are pund mixte them with the
water, and destyll them, keep the water. Then mealte Swines grease of a male
Hog, vnsaulted, and strain it through a double lynnen cloth. Then take white
Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon, Euphorbium, Spiknarde, Camphora, of every one two
ounces, three Nutmegges, when all these are pund, myxt with the strayned Swines
grease: put unto these two ounces of quycke (la feuille ou de lauenre, as it is
written in French) of quick silver (de couppelle.) When all is mixte
together, destill them, and keep the water. Afterward take vi. ounces of the
water of the forsaid Turpentin, and of the latter water twice so much, mixed
them: and when you will use them wash the face first with a decoction of
Cerussa and wipe it.

Then pour about.vi. drops of this water mixed together into the palm of the
hand, and where thou will anoint, covering the place anointed or wet with a
linen cloth till it be dried. A marvelous effect and operacion shall follow
thereupon.

An other of Snailes.xxx. white Snailes.ii. pound of gootes milk.iii. ounces of
swynes greece, or else of a young Kid: a dram of Camphora pund, let them be
destilled in a lymbeck of glass.

An other. Take six ounces of the crumbs of the whytest breed, and wash it.ii.
pounds of milk,

The water also of the whytes of eggs destilstilled is thought good.

An other that purifieth the face, two ounces of Mirh, white Frankencence,
Mastich, of either half an ounce. Gynger white.ii. drams: one dram of Camphora:
a pound or a pound and a half of whytes of eggs. When all is diligently mixed,
let them be put in the belly of a young hen and wellyking,

Put to also Asses milk or Gootes milk about iii. Sextares (that is.ii.
pyntes and a half.lx. ounces. Destill thies in a lembeck of glass.

That the face may shine elegantly.xxx. new laid eggs, stiep them in vinegar
the sharpest you can get for the space of.iii. days and night: then boor them
through with a pyn, that the humor with in them may run al out. Destill all this
in a Rosestill,

A water clarifying the face. Take the rout of Dragons made cleen and cut in to
thin roundles, stiep them.ix. days in white wine, so that every day half a
pound or more fresh wyn be powered unto them, then take the call of fat that is
about the goutes in a kides belly, taken in May, to the number of six: rys
beeten and sod in.iii. pounds of black nightshad: and a pound of the meel of
rys: half a pound of the water of wild plums or bullies, blau^shed Beenes to
sees in the same water: Arabic, Sarcocolla, Tragacantha, Borage, Camphora, of
every one two drams: shiepes milk six pounds: Venice Turpentin.ii. ounces:
water of the flowers of water Lily. Let thies be destilled together in a
lembeck with a small fire. The water destilled thereof, let it be set in the sun,
and

An other that takes away the spots of the skin and whitteneth it. An ounce of
Borage, half a dram of Camphora, three drams of co^mun Alum, Gum Arabic, and
Tragacantha, of either of them half an ounce: Sarcocolla, Assa dulcis, of
either.ii. drames.iiii. ounces of Cerussa. Pun all thies mixed them and put them
into half a pound of Dragons water and as much of water of flowers of Lily:
together with water of the flowers of Broum, of ounces. When they are mixed,
destill them in a lembeck of glass.

To make the face clear and youthlyke, that it seem like to the age of
almost.xv. years. New laid hens eggs.xii. without the sheles: an ounce of
Cinnamon, a pound of Asses milk, wash the face with that water destilled by a
lembeck.

Certain cosmeticall things, out of the Antidotorium of Gordonius.
TAke the routes of Lily, the routes of Drago^s Arum blanushed Cicer, Rys,
Amylum, Cerussa washed, french Soop, of every one.ii. ounces. Let them be put
in a new pot covered, then sod or decocted in a furnace, and beten. Then take
Tragacantha, Gum Arabic, of every one an ounce, put them in water of flowers of
Beenes. Then temper Porcellanas in water of Limons, till they may be mollified:
put to half an ounce of Borax. Al thies with a very little of swines grees, must
be mixte

An other, Lemons cut into.iii. or mo parts, let them be sodde in whyt wine,
wherewith let the face be washed.

An other to make ye apple of the chieck ruddy (ye like also we described
before.) Take Alum Brasill, the grains wherewith the Peeche is made reed, let
them ve pund with the water of wine destilled. Therewith let the place be very
much anointed, which ye list to make reed. If so be it ye ad a little water
of salt Ammoniack destilled, the color should be the faster and abide the
longer. Yet take heed of this water (Ammoniack) because it fretteth every body,
and if ye list to use it, take but a very little lest it corrupt the medicine.

Whosoever requires mo liquors, specially destilled, for the purity of the face
and brigthnes, let him reed Rogerius in his.iiii. treatise the.v. cha. where he
describes the water of Beenes and Limons, whose use is either by it self or
with a certain composition. etc. Also the water composed with Bryonia and
Dragons: and simple, of the herb of strawberies, of hasta regia, of herba
Muscata, of the flowers of Nigellae, etc.

Waters for the dying of
SPonsa solis beeten (otherwise the siedes of Solsosium beeten) put it in milk
of a woman that nurceth a boy, ten (otherwise.xl.) days, and then make an oil.
This oyll sod with leued gold, seething it gentely by the space of one day, is
marvelous: for if a man it shall be plain and clear, that it shall seem
angellike continuinge for the space of.v. days. It clears the sight also,
and cures any disease of ye eyes within ten (otherwise. iiii) days: and al
kind of tothache within.iii. days: and if the jaws be well rubbed with it,
the worms fall out and die. Aegidius, amongst whose waters this is ye fourth.
If a man drinck of this water.ix. days, he is heled of the Palsy, what cause
so ever it come of, although it have endured the space of.iiii. years. Lullius
in his book of waters. It appears that this water is not made by destillacion
but by expression, that is, wringing out only, as I shall declare amongst oil
of seeds.

A water destilled of larde, that the hears may be made long and yellow and
shininge, and the face more elegant. Scrape larde as much as ye will and shave
it very small: then beat it in a marble mortar, til it be like paste knoden.
Of this destylled in a limbeck, thou shall gather a white liquor

A water destilled of honye makes the hears fair and long. Read here after
where we shall speak of simple quint essences: and amongste waters that be
destilled in Rosestilles.

A whitening water. etc. of a Mouldwarpe: the vi. amongste Aegidius waters.
Bring a Moule into powder with brimstone and the juice of Selandine put to it,
let it stand a certain days, afterward any beast what so ever it be and it
shall be made white. If thou mixte water, otherwise (the word water is left
out) aloes and wax, annoint the place diseased and thou shall heal al manner
of Gutta: and as they call it nolime tangere, if thou lay a plaster made
thereof upon the soore. Likewise it heals the skalles of the head anointed
therewith, and cures the guttam rosaceam laid upon it in manner of a
plaster. But mixed with the stone called Calaminaris and Aloes, it heals
Lupum perfitelye, laying a plaster of it thervpo^ twice a day, if also the
superfluities be washed with the same mixture. It must in no wise be taken
inwardly within the body.

A water that dies a Griene color. A pound of cuperoos (that is to say
Vitriolum.) Half a pound of Smerillum. Destil them and anoint Epiphanius
Empericus. The water of Capparorum, Capers destilled, makes grene hears.
Cardanus.

A water commodious for purging the tethe. Ammoniak, Salt Gemmae of every one
three ounces: Sugar Alum an ounce and a half. Let them be destilled, or
soked.viii. days in two pound of water, and strained, rub and wash the
tethe therewith. Epiphanius Empericus. Other.ii. like, for the same purpose
shall thou find after, next to the descripcion of Aqua fortis.

How waters of herbs, flowers, and rotes be destilled by descencion, that is
downwarde.

A way to destill svviete waters, and effectual, out of Flowers and
Herbs by descencion or goinge downwarde.
TAke an earthen vessel, upon the which strain or spread a thin and fine
linen cloth and upon it sprynckle Rooses, (for so the Roosecake will prove
marvelous swiet) or coueslops, or other Flowers or Herbs. Then must ye have
Cardanus.

Fresh Rooses laid upon a linen cloth strained upon a Basin, if they take a
vessel full of hoate coals, they destyll much water and swiet Syluius. In my
mind this kind of destillacion is commodious for all such things as be
cold, or ought to coule, chieflye if they lack smell, as the most part of
binding things: and more also, such as be cold and moist to. Yea also we shall
have much water and in shorter time, and with les cost by this way, nether is
there any ieoperdy that they should fume out. But a man must give diligente
head least the vessel laid upon be to little hot, least the water taste of
burning.

If.ii. vrinals be set together, the upper full of Roses and set in the sun
(with a linen clothe betwixt,) a most swiet water destilleth into the
nether. Syluius.

Roose water, Moschata, how it is made by the sun by descencion, we prescribed
before in ye Chapter of swiet waters.

The liquor of yelow violet flowers, that destilleth by it self into a vial of
glass, amendeth the eye Alexander Benedictus.

Take the tender buddes of Fennel before they flourish or go abroad, full of
juice with the leaves. Put these in a Phiall of glass, but fill it not up:
turn it up side down and put the mouth of it into

Scillae whiles they be fresh and new, the utter a vessel full of hooles in
the bottom, covered above and well closed with clay. The bottom of this pot is
put into another, put under it in a pit of the earth, and the joining of the
pots is compassed with clay cloos. Then make they a fire about the upper part of
the pot by the space of one night (.x. hours or more. So the water runs in
to the nether pot, which mixed with meel or breed, it kills mys quickly that
taste of it: the sooner if thou mixed a little Litharge or whyt Leed. Bulcasis in
his Syluius out of him.

Sumtimes certain waters and oils ar made by descencion, like as of Roseny
tries when they are burnt pitche. Syluius. But of Oils which are made by
descention we will speak hereafter. Certain are made by a middle way between a
discention and ascension, as Oyll of Coperos, by a Cucurbita laid along
overthwart upon the side.

Destillation in Ashes, or Sand
IN Ashes are both waters and oils destilled. Waters with a most gentle and
soft heet, which thou shall discern by touching with thy hand both the ashes
and also the vessels of destillacion. And perauenture there is no difference,
for the destillacion of any kind of waters, in Balneo Mariae or in Ashes, if
so be it thou observe the measure of ye fire. For Balneo Mariae, the water that
ye stillatory is put in, may be skalding hoot: the ashes may not be to hoot,
that is when herbs, roots, flowers or any liquors ar destilled to derive a
water of the^. Men think them to be made so much the swieter and les smelling
of any fyrines and brenning, being destilled in such ashes because the thing
is done more softly and with more leysur, so that the heed or lid be not hoot,
and sumtymes between the falling of the drops, a man may tell swiftly til he cum
at fifty. But the Oils have nied of a gretter fire Quintessence.

The destillacion by ashes is easy and ready, if an earthen or brazen vessel,
diep enough, and able to receive the Cucurbita or body of the still, be filled
with fine ashes and sifted or fined sand, so full of every side is sufficient
to be one foot long, the height six fingars or there about. All thies shall
we strengthen every where with clay (and pieces of shelles mixed together) that
the heet may the better be kept in.ii. breething hooles left in the corners.
But this manner is for upon a soden and only miet for one vessel. I bielded once
a more laborious furnace on this sort. In a corner of the house I raised a
foundation of brick and lyme, a foot and a halfhy. Upon the foundacio^ or
harth,

This round place above the plait was filled with ashes, in ye ashes round about
was there set about five stilles of glass, that at one time and with one fire
many waters or Oils might be destilled together. Round about the furnace was
well fensed with wrought claye with very salt water, wherewith sum Horse
dounge was myxt.

This kind of furnace is surely very commodious, because it niedeth little fire,
which also it self in this form endures very long: that it is almost
enough to see to the fire morning and evening. But it must be made only of
cooles, which are put in to the furnace with a little fire shouell, only that
they may be gotten in at the little door hansumly: the edges of this fire shouel
must be a little turned up, that it may hold the cooles ye better. There is nied
also of long iron fyershouel (as the furnace shall require) turned in at the end
according to a streigth corner, and there in the end to be sumwhat made brother,
wherewith the cooles within may be Gentian, Juniper beries, and Aqua vitae is
sumtimes repeted, in which I have observed this, that the better part always
and the purest issues out first, and what so ever is flegmatyck (or deed
water, as sum call it, which is unprofitable, hurtful, and almost stinking)
follows last: which is well perceived and known in a glass heed for the
still: For while the purer matter, that is, the fyry and aerie substance
issues, no fleume comes once, and tokens of the water following by straikes
appear manifestly, as ye see them, remove the receiving vessel, and what so
ever remains in the Cucurbita or belly of the still, pour it out as good for
nothing: and begin a new destillation of fresh and that must be repeted, until
no fleume appear any more, which chaunseth lightly in the fourth or fifthe
destillation. Afterward there needs no more destillation, but circulacion,
that the liquor be rectified, as they term quint essence.

Things destilled in the vapor of hot water, retein more perfitly the virtues
and qualities of of plants, but because they have some coruption in them, they
can not be kept long. Those things longar which by the heat of ashes or dros
of metal beaten to powder are destilled in vessels of stone or glass, how many
so ever they be, upon a long or round furnace covered with slates or tiles
which may hold the hie sands compassed with Syluius.

Vlstadius prescribes a certain destillation in ashes with so soft a fire,
that thou maiste number one.ii. iii. between one drop and an other.

Any kind of fruit thou will, when it is well ripe cut small and beaten,
thou shall destill it in sand with a slow fire. Vlstadius.

A certain way to make water by and by.

WAter is made also vppn a sodein, whiles the juice is made hot or skalding, a
glasen cup is set upon it, in the which the fume passes into drops: and the
drops gathered thereupon are driven together into water. By this means
Vinegar is easilye turned into water. This is wholesome for spots and
blemishes in the eyes, and for the web, to put them away: specially if Rue be
sod in white Vinegar. Cardanus.

Some are put resinam larigenam in a trene vessel, whose bottom must be made
by a tornar as thin as is possible, so that a man may see through it, so in a
hot place the purer part and the thinner destilleth.

Of rosaries, that is to say instruments wherewith a destilled liquor may be
gotten out of Roses and other medicines, fire being put under (for the most
part without any
FIre in destillacion does more procure the sauoure of adustion and brentnesse
unto the water that is to be destilled, then do cooles or water, which thing
to avoid put sand in the pan in commun Rosaries: or rather see that sand be
betwixt the fire and the pan, and also about the pan, and that pan: for
it is made also of brass. The joining together of the pan and the lembecke
thou shall fense with clay, that is to say with a lynnen clout perieted or
closed with clay and hansumlye laid about it: and the receiuinge vessel with
the nose of the lembecke likewise. Brunsvvick. Some now a days make these
Rosarie pans of bras, and upon the sand they lay the herbs that be to be
destilled: and round about the pan (and within it also except I be deceived)
they fill a void space Balneo Mariae, or in ashes.

Vinegar is made white with destillation, as well for other uses of Chymistes
and Phisycions, as also to be mixte with Sirrupe of Vinnegar, Bulcasis words.
Build an Atanor like unto that wherein Roosewater is destylled, and ever take
a stillatorye vessel of glass or of earth glased: fill three parts of it
with good Vinegar, that the fourth part of the Vessel above may be emptye,
least when it doothe seethe the Vinegar be spilte and run over. Then cover
the vessel with some Vessel upon it, as ye know, having a noose, as the
manner is in rosewater, and make a the Vinegar shall not become so white. The
vinegar that is destilled must be of white wine, and very sharp. So shall
thou gather a white and pure liquor, which thou shall keep in store. After y^
same manner may wine be destilled. This writes Bulcasis. I destilled it once in
glasen vessels in ashes, which I keep yet hitherto certain years, like to
Vinegar not destilled both in sauoure and taste, differing only in the color
and substance, where in it is like to pure water to see Bulcasis seems to be
of this opinion, that vinegar should be destilled with fire or water, not in a
Balneo Mariae, but in that manner that he makes the first and second in
destillinge of Rooses, that is, without water with fire of wood or rather of
cooles. I have destilled very excellentlye in ashes. Pearls, eg shells, stone
of the rains and bladder are dissolved with strong vinegar, specially when it
is destilled or with the juice of limo^s: so is also both kind of corals, and
they afterward praecipitatum and sublimatum and cinabrium, and they return
into quick silver. Syluius. The Chymistes say metals are resolved with vinegar
destilled: also with man's urine destilled.

The leaves of hemp turned into meal, because they pearse the head, make
drink which will make a man pleasauntlye drounke. Cardan. It seems water
should be poured to it, and when they are made dowe together, then to be
Rosestil, or like instrument where the fire is put under without any men, and
perauentur the destillacion should be twys or thrys repeted. I would say the
same of Ootes water, whereof likewise Cardanus writes: The Moscouites (says
he) because they lack wyn, use water destilled of Ootes which enflameth and
makes a man drunken no les then wine. For Ootes being of a more gros
substance, it must niedes when it is destilled make hoot, becum more subtle
and sharp, and draweny

The like may be done of any drinck that makes drunken, as Ale, Bier, Curmus
and Meed, specially when it is old, and that which is sodde with Mill.

Honey while it is a destilling is wont to rise up and run over, when it is made
hoot. But this is avoided, when a man destilleth in a co^mun Rosestill, by
putting upon it within the pan a wooden sieve (made with horse hear) so that it
touch the honey. Cucurbita or body of glass, mixed with it pure and well washed
sand, and make a slow fire. The first water is cast away, but the second is
kept which has a goulden color, and a little before the end reed. The use of
this water is for women to their hear, that they may grow, be soft and yelow
being moystened therewith specially in the sun. It amendeth the shedding of the
hear. It heeleth swelled and blered eyes, and puts away their watery cootes
and their duskishnes: and full of wheales. It heeleth notably the places that be
burned, specially them that be soft and ten der, so that no skar or blemysh
shall remain. The latter water that is redish, purges corrupt mattier in roten
byles, if they be washed therewith, and lynnen clothes moystened therein be
laid upon them, and when it has purged them, it rayseth the flesh also.
Ryffius. Reed Vlstadins..

Of oils destilled, and first generally then particularly.
Of oils of Plants, Flowers, Herbs, Gums, Rolines, Siedes, Barks, Woods.
Of those oils composed which they call Balsama.
Of oils of Beasts.
Of oils of Metalles.
Oils which are made in Chymisticall vessels either by descencion or by
ascencion, sum be simple, sum compound: of thies sum are composed of many, as
certain

Also certain are made of pla^tes or their parts, Flowers, Routes, Siedes,
Barks, Rosines, Gums, Drops. Sum of beestes, or of sum parts things or such
like as Antimonium, Leed, Am ber. We will speak of every of them by thies three
latter places. Of other kinds of oils which are made by any other manner, as
by expression, infusion. etc. we shall entreat after.

Like as oil Benedict is destilled by sublimacio^ of hoot burning till stones
quenshed in oyll, even so of Ladanu^, wax, liquors, gums, rosins, boones,
marowes, and other abou^ding with fat humors may oil be gotten by sublimating.
Syluius.

An oily nature seems to be in all mixed things or co^pounded by nature
whatsoever they be, wha^ as it is in salt also the most dry body that may be,
as Cardanus writes. (There is also in salt a fatnes, which we may maruaill at,
Plin.) but in sum more, in sum les. For it is an oily and fat humor that is in
mixed things, not that watery and ea^y to be dried, but an aerie which also is
hoot. Boeth kind of elements have the moisture in the^ that belongs to
their kind. This liquor in certain Griekes call them opus: teeres, gumes,
rosins, Elaeomel: but also in deed bodies, as in fat metally things, brimston,
quick silver, also in diverse kinds of pitch, Naphtha, aumber, ambra, and
P^^r^l^on, which has his name because it flows and runnethout of stones.
But most manifestly in beests, both by other parts of the^, and also chiely ye
fat marow, blud and in the^ yt have no blud, sum fat humor of ye nature of blud.
in the massy parts both of beestes and plants, in all such chiefly siemeth
it to be which have thriedes or veins manifestly, by the which they draw
nourisheme^t. For unto nourishment swiet things are most of all ordained,
which by a moderat heet are turned easily into a fatnes, ye y^ very fat
things them self are sumwhat swiet. And the abundance of fat juice is tried
and found most in those things which are nourished with many swiet things.
Notwithstanding fat things Gnaiacum because it sinketh in water, abounds
therewith. Thinner and lyghter woods convert and turn the fat juice in to Gum
or Rosyn, wherefore they have les plenty thereof: such as be Gnaiacum, the
walnut try, the Ash.

Moreover the very ashes show that Oyll is in all woods: for the ashes of
every one have their fatnes, which it leeueth in lie. So durable is the aerie
fatnes and yet more the fyery, as when earth is burned, the water goes out in
vapors, the other remain, part in the ashes, part in the Sout: although in
both those also sum substance of earth remains. But thies things perteine to
Philosophers.

How oil must be drawn out of spices, as Cloves, Nutmegs, Saffron, Mace,
and other.
MOysting mesurably in Aqua vitae rectified and circulated, any kind of spice
what ye will beaten and broken somewhat gross, and when they are stiept
together, at the last destil them with a very slow fire. And when as the Aqua
vitae once drawn out clean, the oil begins to still, the^ cucutbita and
put it in a little bag well knit and tied with a thread: and in a pres for ye
purpose pres it out, both ye iron plates of the pres well made hot first. The
oil pressed out so must ye destil, rectify and circulate: that the pure oil
may be separated from the grosser matter. The dregs afterward may be digested
or putrified again with the Aqua vitae first separated from them (and be
destilled again.) And this waisemeth to be the most commodious and most
Ryffius: but we have translated it as well as we might, somewhat darker then
it should be.

How oil is drawn out of vvodes and other like, as Cloves by destillacion
out of Cardan.
THe things beaten are put in a vessel of glass A. and are destilled with as
easy a fire as may water put round about the Vessel, it shall be much the
better. A head of glass. B, is set upon the top of the vessel, and is
cloosed with claye least it brethe out, whereunto a pipe. C. is adjoined as
the fashion is: to yt an other pipe of glass D. is joined, so compassed with
claye that nothing can breethe out. This pipe passes through a trene
Vessel. E. which ye must have alwais full of very cold water, drawinge out by
the spigotte so much water as has gotten any heat and putting in other water
again late and new drawn D. is made coule, and the fumes are not burnt, but
pass into water or into oil, and being turned by that crooked part of the
pipe which stretches beyond the vessel with water, fall droppinge into the
vessel.

Therefore as I did once see it, at the first a troubled matter runs out,
caryinge forth the more subtle substance of the thing: after that a more
clear water comes out, at the last oil, which declares the sauoure
rather of a thing burnt, then of that thing wheroute it ran. In this manner
the destillacion of waters also (of herbs and flowers) may be done: but that
way is far better which is by descencion downwarde etc. Some put Musk about.
F. and other precious smellinge things, and the water that rettineth the
smelles not only of the own proper matter, but also of the Musk and of other
things that be put to it.

Of destillation by descencion or going downewarde. Vlstadius in his.xix.
Chapter teaches of this way of destillinge universally: and specially or
seuerallye of oils of Juniper sticks, of the yelkes of Eggs, Nutmegges, and
Benedicto: where through I will go about to declare the matter moore
clearelye and more shortly. He teaches to make a furnace meet for this
destillacion, like to such a Chunney as is used to be made amongste the
Germans, of brickes vnbrente of a Cubit and a halfhie, on every

This furnace shall be meet also for an other use, that is to seal with the
seal of Hermes, as they call it: when the mouth of a Glasen Cucurbita being
put into the hoole of the furnace, the length a hand breadth, that is.iiii.
fingers, and if any more about it be open, that being stopped with claye, as soon
as it is red hot, it is nipte together with a pair of tongues likewise red
hot. When thou will destyll therefore in this furnace, take a Cucurbita of
the best earth: or if not, of Coper or Latin: syll it unto the third part
with the matter that is to be destilled, and shitte it with a very thin iron
lidde of iron plate full of little Cucurbita of glass (for the puttinge in and
taking out whereof, and that thou may see when the hoole matter is
destilled, the foore part of the furnace must Cucurbita must be joined, (but
not with clay.) Then let a fire be made above about the vessel that co^teineth
the matter on every side. But the fire at the first must be little, and as
far of from the vessel as is possible: afterward by little and little to
make it bigger and nearer the vessel.

Ye must understand that of every matter, at the first water destilleth,
moore or less according to the difference of the matter.

When it has left running, and now the oyll has begun to destill, thou shall
empty the Cucurbita of glass that stands underneath, and set it under aagain:
and continue in encreesing the fire, and to make it ever nerer and nerer the
vessel, until no more oil destille. For then by and by the fire must be
removed far of that the upper Cucurbita may be couled. Then take away the
nether that is the receiver, and keep the oyll. But as I said, a little fire is
required at the first, and is to be encreesed Cucurbita, burn it, breeke it, or
infect the oyll with sum vnplesaunt Benedict, thou shall increase the fire only
at the end of the destillacion: and thou may prepare such a place for the
destillacion: Dig a pit in the earth, long, brood and diep, accordining to the
measure of the pot that is to be put into it. Let the pot be glased, washed
with water, and upon the mouth of it let a thin iron plate be put, bored
through with many holes, so that the plate be a fingar thicknes within the brim
of the pot: upon this set an other the mouths of them be joined together, and
all well clayed, then let a fire be made about the upper pot, which shall be
hool without the pit save ye mouth. But this second way is not so commodious as
the first: because the water can not be separated from the oil: nor easily
known when the hooll matter is destilled, except it be known by use and
custom. The furnace may also be made in a stiep hill: as the same Vlstadius
shows: I let that pas that I be not to long.

Oil of the leeues of Citrum, or Orange, Arantia, or Limons when it is
destilled, first the water is gotten out (then the oyll) and both ought to be
kept severally: the oyll is very swiet and good. It is made on this wise. Take
the leeues of any of the foresaid tries which so ever ye will, when they are cut
beet them in a mortar, and as ye destill them receive the water: and when ye
see any drop of diverse color swym upon the water, the receyuer being changed,
encrees the fire and gather Ambra, hoot Styrax, Ladanum, Cinnamon, Benzoum: not
the substance of them, but the fume or smoke only: for they put thies into
Rose water upon the fire, and with the vapor of them they season the leaves.
When thies are so diligently certain spices ar stiept, as Cloves, Galangal, Put
megges. etc. for the space of one day, and the powder of the leaves moistened
therewith, they destill it it ashes with a slow fire, till the watery liquor be
separated: then they encrees the fire and receive the oyll, which is of a
wonderful pleasant and swiet savor. Furner.

A certain practicioner showed me, that the oyll is separated co^modiously from
herbs and routes in this manner. Put the herbs or routes in Turpentyn Larigna,
rosin washed (eigth or nine times) till it wax white, and let it stand in hoote
sand q. s. Then destill them with a slow fire, and the Turpintyn shall run out
first* by and by at the beginning: or if it move but a little, being shaken
together it shall then run out hoolly, first in a color white as milk,
afterward yelowe. Thou shall perceive by the taste when the liquor that thou
desire begins to run out: when the color is changed, thou shall change
also the receiver, that

Such destilled oils as be to be ministered with in the body, al must be mixed
with sum liquor, wyn Meed, or Syrup with sum destilled water, or other
medicine: As we shall declare also hereafter among the balsameles. And this is
it oils as unto spirits or souls, sum body ought to be added.

Of oils of flovvers.
OYll of Saffron is prepared thus: Thy matter is digested by sprinckling Aqua
vitae upon it, and when the Aqua vitae is drawn out by destillacion, the other
liquor is wrong out with a pres, as it is written Ryffius.

Oil of Spick, out of the French book of Furnerius. Set the herb (the flowers
rather) of Spik or Lauendar a while in the sun, then draw out the water in a
le^beck. This set in the sun in summer in a very hoote place brings forth an
oil in the superficial or upper part of it, which being separated now and
then from the water, thou shall reserve. For it both smells most swietly,
and is

An other way of the same man's. Thou shall stiep in a glass the flowers of Spick
well rypened in as much as thou think good of Oyll of swiet Almondes, in
horse dong.xl. days. Then destill them with a slow fire: at last rectify them
in the sun, the vessel diligently stopped. But if there be any smell of adustion
or brentnes, make.ii. or.iii. little hooles in the cover. So shall it remain
purged

The third way of the same man's. Fill a glass with the flowers of Spike
well ripened, shit it, and every day put as much to it as ye can. Do this
continually for the space of.viii. days: then stop the vessel and putrifye it
in horse donge iii. months. At the length destill it a lembek with great
diligence, and when the oil is drawn out set it in the sun, so that thou
seperat always that is clearer and reserve it Some as soon as the matter is
drawn forth from the fire (so is it in Furnerius.

The same oil Ryffius says is made, as oil of Roosemary, the flowers being
cut and stiept in old wine, then destilled, so that the spirits of the
lembecke be couled. etc. Read before in the oil of Roosemary. Some sell this
oil of Spike commonly and name it Balm, with tables wherein the virtues of it
are described. It is very hot and dry. I knew a woman which received into her
ieopardy: but therewith she avoided many worms. It is mixte with many
things, chieflye for the smelles sake. One drop of it chafed with a great
quantitye of water, makes it all swiete smellinge. Phisicians also mixte it
with Oils and hot oyntmentes, both because of the sauoure, that it may
increase the pleasantness of things that be somewhat swiet of them selves,
and to conserve them, or else to hide and cloak an evil smell: for it
ouercometh all smells, and perauenture

Oil of Roosemarye that is in stied of Balm. Take a Phiall full of the
flowers of Roosemary: burye it in sand (shitte with a double cerecloth, or
with wax and a cover so that it may brethe, Atnold: with a double linen, and
then also with wax to be closed, Hollerius:) til the middle of the vessel:
and let it stand so a month or more, until it heateth them for the most
part, and heals them sometimes. It resists salsfleem. Fistulaes and
Cancars that give not place to other medicines, it heals them throughlye.
Aqua vitae destilled of wine, wherein Rosemary is decocted and sod, does the
same things. Lullius. I would not sethe the Roosemary: for the strength of the
wine and quintessence does fume out in vapors: but I would stepe them in a
vessel closed, or putrify them: then first in Balneo Mariae, afterward in
Arnold de villa noua, which in his book of wine, (where he writes of the
oil also of Rosemarye the very same things, which we rehearsed now out of
Lullius, if so be they be Lullius words.) Of tentimes (says he) have I tried
that Aqua vitae, made of wine wherein Rosmary has been mollified, cures
salsfleum, scabs, cankar, and the fistula, which cannot be healed otherwise.
But this Verbascum not by destillatio^.

Oil of Rosemarye should be made of flowers cropped of with the tops of the
tender buddes or bows wherein they are sprung, pund and stiepte or putrified in
very good old wine. They ought to be destilled with a slow fire, so y^ the
spirits of the lembek be now and the^ couled, afterward to be circulated, till
yt all the gros matter be separated from the subtle as much as is possible:
Gualterus Ryffius. It may be destilled, as I conjecture, either in a Cucurbita,
specially somewhat short, with a limbeck: or in a crooked still with a
receiver of a diverse figure and fashion, or rather in two crooked stils, whereof
the one may be the receiver, or else in brazen vessels which the Apothecaries
call bladdars as water of Cinnamon, or burninge water.

In like manner be oils destilled, as the same man teaches of Vernix or Gum
of Juniper: of the flowers of Spike or Lauender, of Anes seeds and many other
seeds.

The.iiii. essence or fire, of Selandin, which is like a liquor of oil. etc.
how it is prepared and to what use, read before, where we have entreated of
quint essence. It is possible also to draw out.ii. manner of oils, an aerie and
afyerye out of the most herbs and other medicines, after the same manner it
is prescribed there in Selandine.

Oil of Rue. Cardanus in his second book of subtlety, writes that there be
certain poysones which slay with the only touching. Against these Lullius:
but that whereof Cardanus makes Rue it self, that is of the extreme tops of
the bows thereof which florishe.

Of oils of siedes and fruits,
OYll of Cloves did I taste once in Italy wonderful swiet and strong: how it
should be drawn out, we declared before with Catdanus words, where we write
generally of drawing out of oils: also another Ryffius (that is) the same way
yt ye may out of what spyce a man will, which stiept in burning water, they
destill the^ till the burning water be separated, and as soon as the oil
begins to run, the matter taken out of the Cucurbita is pressed. etc. as
before it is written out of Ryffius, who describes also particularly the
virtues of this Oyll.

Oil of Nutmegges how it may be gotten out, fee before where as we entreated
general of the Ryffius, who describes the virtues of either of them severally.

Oyll of Anis sied is drawn out (as out of other dry things which be in the
kind of plants) the siedes well beeten stieped in the best wine, then
destilled by little and little by ascencion, so that the spirits in the Lembeck
be continually refrigerated The virtues of it Ryffius rekoneth, we leave them
out as also of other for the most part, where no peculiar effect or working is
attributed to the waters and oils, yea the same ar agreeable to this medicines
also wherout they be drawn, or ever they be destilled, saving that by
destilling they are made more subtle and more effectual or stronger operacion.

Oils of the beries of Juniper and of the beries of Bays, are made one way:
that is pund, Cardan, to be gotten out of woods and cloves: or else as out of
spyces, by Ryffius description. I think it makes no great matter, so be that
the spirits which be carried about the lembeck, may be couled commodiously in
it and in the noos.

The virtues of thies oils Ryffius rekoneth Agyrtae or iugleres also ar wont
with us to sell oil of Iunipers, with tables imprinted co^teining the rehearsal
of the virtues thereof. This emongst other heeleth them that be sick of a
tercian as I am infourmed.

Sum make oyll of wheet pressing it out between two iron plates reed hoot:
other think it to be nothing worth thatis made thus, and that it should be
made as oyll of Juniper, that is of the sticks of Juniper by descencion or
dounwarde. Mesue says that wheet after it be husked is destilled in a vessel
of sublimacio^, as the Philosophers oyll. It cures ring worms, and ruggednes
of the skin which springs of drynes, it mollifieth and moysteneth, and other
infections, also of the skin it remedieth them. It is described also by Rasus
in his Antidotarium. Look within emo^gst the oils not destilled. There might
be made also of Barley and such both by sublimacion, and also by descencion.
Monachi upon Mesue.

Oils of Musk ben, (that is Balanus my repsica,) Fnrnerius calls Retraban
or retraha, of most precious smell. Like as of Almondes, so shall thou press
out an oyll of the fruits of Ben (which are found about Genua ple^teously
enough, of the same price almost that Almondes be) thou shall let it stand, and
put a good quantity of musk into it, and so in a glass well stopped, thou shall
set it in a ketle that it may sees a while, then receive the oyll by
destillacion, which shall be most swiet and most odoriferous.

Certain oils of siedes which I found in a book of Waters of Raimund
Lullius.
THis oils I thought good to write severally, because I doubt whether the
author would have them made by destillacio^ or simpely by pressing out: in
every one he adds thies words and let an oyll be drawn out after the manner
of the to signify, simpely by the pressing out of the siedes in a pres, as the
commun people is wont to do, so is oyll to be gathered, specially when as he
would have it drawn out of the same dried in the sun. Notwithstanding it is
out of all doubt, that the same things destilled accordingly, should be far
moore effectual: But for destilling, the liquor wherein the siedes pund or
stiept ougth to be left with them and putrification to go before. etc.

Stiep the siedes of Sponsa solis in woman's

Oyll of the siedes of Rue. Mixed the siedes of Rue pund with leued gould, and
put it in vynegar a day. Then dry it lightly by the sun and draw out an oyll
after the manner of the lay men. It is precious and resists poisons, so that
they shall avoid by vomit, if so be it a man drink of it the second time, the
other humors also that be infected wound and cure be had accordingly. Also
being druncke fasting and puts away the Gutta or drop and all scabbednes:
and the dropsy sprunge of a cold cause, if it be taken but two days. To
conclude it stirs up and restores all sliepy and benumbed members, (taken
with the Palsy, being anointed upon.)

Ruberta (if it be right written, perauenture of the color he so calls it:
I would rather read Sperma,) that is oil of Nasturtium (I would rather
Nasturtium, as in other in the same place, before and after the oil) moystened
in sharp vinegar, dry it in the sun, and draw out the oil after the manner
of the lay people.

This mixed with Aloes and oil of bays, cures all scabbednes and the drop,
the places being anointed. Drunken with Aloes and cooles of an elm, it
heals the Tercian and quartaine, and all breches in the body. Soden with a
ptisan and drunken, it stauncheth the bloudye flux and binds

Oil of the seeds of Pimpernell. Put seeds in read wine a few days, dry
them, punne them and make an Oil after the lay manner. This oil drunk
fasting, dissolueth, breaks and expels the sand (and any stone of the
bladder, yea if it be finished (gathered to y^ form of a stone) what matter so
ever it be of. It lighteneth the wearied members of a man's body. These

Of oil of the beries of Juniper, destilling first by ascencion, then by
descencion as I learned of my friends.
TAke a pint or a quarte full of the Bearies of Juniper, when they are beaten
stiepe them two days in well spring water: then put those beries together
with the water wherein they were sooked into a Cucurbita or bladder, as they call
it, Alsatia, about iiii. ounces of oil. Other to separate the Oil from the
water, put it into a drincking glass that has the foot taken away either by
coming with a wire of iron read hot, or else by chance so that a little
hoole in the bottom be left for the oil the hoole is stopte, and then the
oil may be poured out into ye vessel where it shall be kept. So^e destill it in
like manner, but they move the matter oftentimes in the still, least it be
burned. And they say spices beaten, as Cloves and cinnamon may be rightlye
destilled likewise. Some, as I hear say, destill in a crooked vessel not of
glass, but of Copper, tinned in the inside: which is put into a long pipe of
coper, as they do for burning water.

An other way of preparing the same by descencion

Then being well beaten, thou shall put them Aqua vitae,) specially the
arthritical parts and joints, this juice is easelye conserved, neither is it
corrupted lightlye, it is also swiete and effectual or strong. Some get out
the waterye humor not by a pres, but separate it in a commun furnace, (Balneo
Mariae.) The reast of the matter well dried and beaten, put it in a Cucurbita
that is hable to receive a galon, but thou shall not fill it up. In it (shit
with the clay of wisdom least any thing brethe out) shall thou putrify the
matter, about.xxviii. days in horse donge: or if it be winter (in Germany) nigh
unto the furnace, for to putrifye it in horse donge a and make it sure with clay
(and the hooll also of the bottom shall thou fill every where with clay) then
let down that part of the vessel by the hooll in the middle of the furnace so
far, that the nether vessel also (that is) the receiver may be put with in the
nether skirt of the plate, and fensed with clay. The clay ought to be tempered
with salt water and flox: this) sum call clay of wisdom. The manner of the
furnace is this: In the midst must a floor or chamber be made with a hooll, as
I said: above Cucurbita is sand laid almost til the third part of the
Cucurbita: above the sand, cooles burning, more then the third part of the
Cucurbita, nether needs it to put away the ashes: the rest of the Cucurbita,
the fourth part perauenture, or little les then the third part must be above
empty and at liberty. It so be thou feer that the upper Cucurbita perauenture
shall not be able to abide the force of the fire, thou shall pariet it with
clay, at the least wife in that part that the cooles oyll certainly drawn out
by descretion in a glass, siemeth to me to be les infected with ye faut of
adustion or brentnes. Hitherto although me thinks I have described the matter
plain enough as my friend rehearsed unto me, yet will I ad sum figure, that I may
lay the thing before the eyes most clearly: A. is the Cucurbita containing
the beries: B. the cooles: C. the sand: D. ye plate E. the floor whereupon the
sand lies. F. the Cucurbita, that receives: G. the round wreeth of straw
whereupon ye receiver is set.

Oyll of the nuttes kernels of the pyn tree for the polishing and putting
Syluius.

Of oils of gums, teeres or liquors, thickened or congeled, and rosines.
OYll of Mirh. Look before emongst the swiet waters of Furnerius, where we
have described one which is made with one part of Mirh, and the half part of ye
juice of Roses, most odoriferous.

Liquors thikned by nature, and gums as they call them, of a hoot and dry
temperatur, that they may be prepared unto destillacion, when they are pund,
put them in a vessel well stopped (wyn also, except I be deceived, may be a little
sprinkled upon it) and dig it in a could and moist place so diep as a man is
hy, without putting to it any hoot matter, and it must be left a good long
space: notwithstanding it should sooner be resolved if thou put to Caphura also,
seeing they contein a fat liquor and whyt, that which by destillacion is drawn
from them, do easily savor of the injury of the fire and faut of brentnes,
that although they be destilled in vessels very mien, yet issues forth a
licour full of dregs, gros, brent, and of an vnplesaunt as power forth any gums
or teeres.) Thies for the most part writes Ryffius in his first book of
destillacion.

The same Ryffius in the treatise of the same work of oils prescribes no
peculiar way to draw out oil of gums: but sends men unto his first koke. He
describes severally the virtues of oils of Ammoniacum, Belzoum, Camphora,
Cloves, Euphorbium, Galbanum, Ladanum, Myrh, Opopanax, Sarcocolla, Sagapenum,
Stirax liquid and Calamita. In the only oyll of Mastick he wills the Mastick
when it is pund, to be resolved with old wine (and to be degested) then
destilled. And the gum of Juniper likewise to be resolved and stiept in wine,
because of the drynes of the substance thereof, and afterward to be destilled.

Oil of Belzoum. Thou shall water a pound of Belzoum or more groos beeten, with
burning water: and in a crouked still with a receiver set under thou shall
destill it in ashes, with a slow fire Furnerius.

Oyll of Styrax out of ye same. Thou shall beete somewhat groos Styrax Calamita
that which is full of juice and fat, and water it with the best Aqua vitae:
then destill it in a crouked still as the oyll before, and kiep the water by it
self. This oyll excels with a marvelous fragra^t and swiet savor

Oyll of Camphora. Look before in the wawater of camphora, amongste the simple
waters destilled.

Of oil of Turpentine or larigna resina.
PVt.iiii. pound of Turpentin Rosin or of larix in a larg crooked still or
cucurbita of glass, and destilling it, get out an oil, so that the cucurbita or
crooked still be put in sand, first of al with the water shall an oil issue
Valerius Cordus. More of oil of Turpentin, and of the preparinge of it and of
the hertues thereof writes Ryffius, which I for shortness sake let pas. This is
chiefly tobe taken head of, that in the destilling, it sieth not, as in honey
also: for they rise and swel quickly these liquors when they are made hot:
wherefore at the first the fire must be made very light and scle^der Benedict yt
by the same means of the oil incresed. The description following makes with
me, which I found in a certain written book. Take pure sand, or little white
and clear flintes and put them over the fire in a vessel till they wax red
hot, then quench them in turpentin, that they may drink well, and that sand
quenched destil it in a lembeck. Some commend oil of turpentin for the grief of
the stone. Also those, oil of Turpentyn, of a pound of Turpentyn, an ounce of
old tile slates, (or as Albucasis says, new tile slates because they may
drink the more oil) and Mastik and Styrax, of either an ounce. The tyles made
red hot are slekt in oil: when they are quenched and pund they are mixte with
the other in a lembeck of glass. Three liquors run out, whereof y^ third is the
best. Iac. Hollerius amongst oils without smell for could greues.

Otherwise out of a written book. In a cucurbita half full of Turpintyn, put a
handful of glass pund, and.ii. sponges of the quantity of.ii. fingers
cucurbita, and let the fire be continued.xxiiii. hours: when the first
destillacion is finished, destill it again, renewing y^ glass, the cucurbita and
the sponges. To put away skars, or rather to assuage and mollify them, oil of
Turpentin does chiefli profit, except those that remain after warts. For they
that commend this oil for the putting away the marks of wartes, they are
deceived. Brasalonus.

Oil of Tartarum sublimated. Put Tartarum beten in a vessel (a cucurbita of
glass parieted with claye, or an earthen cucurbita) and when it is put inalembek
of glass destil it. First of all water will run forth, then oil, which thou
shall receive by it self increasing the fire by little and little til it leave
running. The dutch written book: Certain practicioners commend the spirit or
quintessence of Tartarum against inward impostumes and kings evil.

Oiles of barks.
Oil of Cinnamon is made, as we declared before out of Cardanus, how oils be
drawn out of woods and like things, as Cloves: where is also described the
instruments. Or else as we described out of Ryffius of the drawing out of oils
of all kinds of spices. Cinnamo^ may be stiept about viii. days in burninge
water.vi. times destilled, and the^ be destilled, as I was informed of a fre^d.
Here will I rehearse also the way to make water (as they call it) of Cinnamon:
for in the destillation or rather longer, an other showed us he had seen in
the destillacion of this water: but peraue^ture it shall be les nied of such a
long one, when no great plenty of water is destilled.) It may also be
destilled in a Cucurbita of glass parieted with clay, after the manner of Aqua
fortis, and perauenture it would be best that way. Put a pound of the best
Cinnamon pund not sifted, in the bottom of a still warely, least the powder s^ir
abroad or cleue to the sides, and by and by pour to it a.iii. pintes of freash
and put linne^ clouthes dipped in could water about the pype, and about the cover
likewise if it be too hoot. For it skilleth much that thies parts be couled
that both more plenty of water and also better may run out. This water of
Cinnamon I have seen my self and tasted, very plesaunt and swiet in savor and
in taste. The liquor which I saw was sharp, almost of the color of milck and
troubled: whereupon certain sumwhat red drops of oyll did swim, which were les
swiet then the water, Cardanus writes generally, of liquors of swiet woode^
things as Cloves. etc. This liquor restores the strength excellently: the
other virtues thereof Ryffius describes: but every man may know the^
manifestly by the nature of cinnamon it self.

In like manner is the oyll of the husk of Nutmegges which they call Mace,
prepared, which also is described by Ryffius.

An oyll marvelous swiet smelling, wherewith Furnerius. Thou shall take in the
month of May the.iii. parts of the second barks of the tree of Almon (so is
it red says Furnerius in the book out of which he writ it, but doubted
whether it ought to be understood an Elm or a Limon a kind of Orenges) and
the fatter parts of the flowers of the same tree (Les espis de la fleur qui
sont grasses,) in like weight, dry them in the sun. That kind of this tree is
thought best that the third part of the beries of Juniper new, and destill
them dounwarde, with a little fire at the first, then greater and greater
increasing it till all the Oyll be cumd down into the receiver, which should be
of glass and closed with clay. Afterward thou shall set it in the Sun, with the
mouth of the vessel open a while, or shit with a parchement pricked through
with a few hooles, till the smell of adustion and brentnes brethe out. Sum to
encrees the smell, put to it Belzoum, Spick narde, Agallochum, the shauings of
Cypres, Styrax, Ambra,, Mosch and destill all together, repeting also the
destillacion the second time.

Of oils that are drawn out of Woods.
Oils of wood are all destilled by descencion (as they call it) dounward. Of
the preparing of oyll of the wood of Juniper, Vlstadius, where we entreted of
destillacion dounward generally. He that desires more, specially perteyning to
the virtues, let him search in the duche bouke of Ryffius, who writes that
oyll is gotten out of Guaiacum also after the same manner utterly: and also out
of the wood of Rosemary. I will ad here that I found in a certain dutche book.

The wood of Juniper to make oyll thereof ought to be cut in ye beginning of
May, or harvest, which is grien or fresh, the barck being red. When y^ barck
is taken of, thou shall dry it diligently in an oven straight after the bred is
taken out, then cut in pieces with an ax, put it in a pot that has the botom
full of hooles, and set hansumly in a pot uneath it. The upper pot thou shall
fill with ye chips of Juniper and also of that whyt Popler which they call
trembling, with a part of the whyt stones whereof lyme is made: after when thou
have fensed the cover well with clay, put it into the nether and Brasauolus
commends the same against the pestilence. It puts away cold causes, and
represeth the typum of the quartain. Being anointed from the navel of women to
privy Rogerius.

Oyll destilled of the sticks of Juniper most dry, in two earthen vessels
with the mouths joined together, or also in a lembeck of glass, if it be holden
in y^ mouth, it takes away maruelously the touth ach sprung of a could reum,
and likewise it is good against all oher grieves coming of could humors, as
the griefs of the synewes, the conuulsion or cramp of the joints, the palsy,
and like, Matthaeolus. Oil of Juniper (says Mesues) helps the infections of
the skyn, crieping diseases, the cancar, angry byles, such as in sommens legs
the late writers call the deed evil. Fill a glased vessel with a narrow
mouth, with the small chippes of Juniper: ioyn a thin plate of iro^ boored
full of hooles after the manner of a meell sieve, to the hooll mouth: daub the
same with the mouth both of the said vessel and of the lesser, Mesues as
Siluius interprets him. In the same place Siluius in the commentaries. By
this art (says he) oil is made of the kurnelles of Pynaples to put away the
wrinkles of wemens skins, of the wood Gnaiacum, and stronger of Lignum sanctum
for the grieves of the Spanishe disease as byles (unto which oyll of Juniper
also and of Broum, and of ash and of like, is holsum) and of other woods,
specially that be fat and full of juice as fruits beries and seeds. The biggar
vessel also may be of metal, or if it be of glass or ston, let it be well
fensed all over with clay of wisdom, an erthen vessel because it is spongi
and not so cloos, when the oyll seeks to breeth out it would give it way:
therefore let it be glased within, the nether only in the circuit but somewhat
more thik, it may be also of metal: it may be at length of earth, so be that it
be glased and oyled as they call it: else that most thin oil would run out here
and there by the pores of the vessel: much les may that oil be received safe in
the pit within the ground having the sides walled with potters earth, (which
notwithstanding Mesues commanded.) Take this withal, that it shall not be
nedeful to dig the lesser vessel within the ground, if thou canste find a
means Syluius.

Oil of ash tree helps them that be sick of the spleen, besides that it can
do all that oil of Juniper can, and is made after the same manner Mesues. Where
again Syluius says. That oil anointed upon the left side under the short ribs,
and drunken, delivers mightily the obstructions and stoppings of the spleen:
it mollifieth also and digesteth.

This oil (says Rogerius) represseth the cold greues of the joints: it
heals a wound and brings skin where it lacks: it delivers from the
white morphew, and blackeneth it.

Io. Manardus in his epistles. 16. 4. giving counsel for ye health of the
cardinal Campegius sick of ye gout: I praise (says he) both the manner and the
use of the foam of the decoction of lignum sanctum or of Iudicum to the place
where the grief is. But I think the oil of the same wod, destilled after y^
manner more effectual, anointing the places therewith yt swel and where the grefe
is. They be wont also of the shauings of raw wode, sodden in some noble wine,
putting unto it old oil, to prepare an ointment which is very good to be
anointed upon the places where the grefe is.

Take ye wode cut like bordes, therwt fill a new erthe^ vessel, with a cover
of the same matter board through with little holes: yt diligently claid let an other
empty erthe^ pot digd in the earth up to the mouth, Andreas Mat in his book of
the frensh disease.

A man may also, as I hard of a friend, destil guaiacu^ after the same way that
Aqua fortis is destilled, best in an erthen vessel glased yt will abide the
fire, such as they make at Haganoa. This oil is good for the fauts of ye
joints through the frensh pocks, if it be anointed upon the places with the best
burning water. Oil of the wode guaiacu^, and more mightilye of lygnum sanctum,
is wholesome for the spanish diseases and biles. Sylu. A certain practicioner
even so also yet is the best oil destilled of.

Take the wod of iuy dried, and the beries and gum also if you may have it.
When they are cut in pieces let the^ be put in an erthen vessel bored through in
the bottom in.ii. or.iii. places: and then let an other pot be set under it.
Set the^ in the earth, and join the botto^ of the upper unto the mouth of the
nether with clay or paste: and the upper pot must stand hollye above the ground.
At length make a fire on every side, and the oil shall destill black into the
nether Rogerius.

The preparing of oil of capuistu^ that is smoked because it is made by
descencion, like as the oil of woods, I have rehearsed it in this place out of
the first book of Aetius, where he entreats of oils: from whence Nicholas
Alexandrinus also borrowed it in his treatise of oils. Vngues aromatici that be
black (melancho, Fuchsius the expositor of Nicolas reads Megalco^, that is
great) thus Masculu^, styrax bdellium pure Costus, of every one. v dra^s (of
every one.ii. ounces and a half, says Nicolas which I like better).v. sextaris
that is about. iiii pints of the best swiet oil, (ii. and a half says Nich.)
Hypni as much as need requires. The costus cut in pieces so^what gros, and
likewise ye styrax and bdelliu^ mixed together, put the^ into an erthe^ vessel
(a new one: Nycolas) without eres, ye mouth whereof you shall stop with the hypne^,
and without you shall defense it with the slips of aspalathus or some odoriferus
thing ha^somli of the other vessel that contains the spices agreing aptly
with the mouth, into which thou shall put.v. sextaries of sweet oil.
Afterward dig the ground and bury the earthen pot that holds the oil unto
the neck, lest it wax red hot after with the fire that shall be made about it:
then turn ye other vessel with spices and the mouth downward upon ye head of
it, and soioyn y^ mouths of the^ both, yt they may be closed together most
exactly. Then close ye hole vessel round about with clay, on every side where the
mouths are joined together, by and by thou shall kindle a fire putting under
coals about ye earthen vessel, and blowing. When the fire is kindled let the
spices being consumed, yt being set on fire theimai se^d out their vapor by the
mouth of ye erthe^ vessel into ye oil set under: For ye which cause it is
called capnisto^ y^ is smoked. The second day after remove away the oil, and
put it in a glass to keep. Women use this whose flours are stopped, anointing the
nether part of their belly and loins therewith. It is convenient tenesimus, if
it be received in wol (hot as Nicolas adds) folded together and laid to the
lower part of the belly and loins. The same seems to be called capnelaeu^ or
smoked oil: but the author of Kiranidum expounds it naphtha, in his.iiii.
book where he makes mention of the fish Ecleneis or Remora.

I have seen also of paper roled together in manner of a hod, and set on fire
over a dish of tin, holden at the very extreme top with a pair of sheeres (or
tongues) certain drops of black oil run out, which are praised for the spots or
whytneses of ye eyes.

Of true Balm, and antibalm, that is Oils composed by art, which are used
in steed of the true Balm both within and without the body.
BAlsamum is a word used almost in Syrian word without dout: for in only Syria
and in one only garden did it ones grow. Panag ye hebrew word in the.xxvii.
of Ezechiel, David Kimhi after certain does erpound it a proper place of
Iudaea: other Apharsamon, that is Balsamum. The later writers of the Jews wryt
Palsamon: Mycander Balsamo^ bycans of the verse. Opobalsamon is a liquor:
Carpobalsamon a sied, which sum call also Casamum: Xylobalsamum, bows or the
wood. I imagined once that it was called Balsamum of the excellency, because
it was most precious and most noble of all spyces: for Boal signifies lord
and master with the Hebrews and Sam spyce. Balsamon, is an aromaticall
flower, Varinus. And in died it is reason, that as the thing it self is proper
to Syria, so the etimology and interpretacio^ of the word should be taken of
the same tongue. Peraue^ture Belsuin also (other writ it Beniuin, other
Belzoum) a liquor of most swiet savor has the same Origin of his name. Not
same only with the Hebrews but also Bosem signifies a swiet smell ling spyce,
whereupon the Germans may seem to have called Mosch Bisem.

Balsamum or Balm sum in our age think it is lost, the juice of it was of the
color of gould, it he led wounds, and took away wrinkles, and kept the faces
of deed men from corruption: it brake also the stone in the reins, it did put
away the spots Aconitum, Hemloke, and the shaking of very fevers, and in all
thies things the virtues of Balm excelled. But now there is another kind of
Balm brought out of Spain, of a red color te^ding toward blak, weighty,
sauouring sumwhat of adustio^ or brentnes, and by and by it stryketh and
perceth the heed, and the tongue also sharply, but sumwhat long first as
peper. And it also heeleth new wounds more quikly then any other thing: and
takes away Goacomax, of the form of a Pomgranat tree and in bigness almost
like: but it has a lief a little biggar and a thinner barck as though it were
dry, the wood of it burns like a torche, the fruit is as the clusters of
grapes, but the kurnelles are sumwhat biggar, of a wyny color, which together
do yield that kind of oyll, Cardanus.

Certain merchants affirm that the gardeines of Balm were destroyed, what
time as Zelimus the Turck, the predecessor of Solomon, wan Chayrum, when the
Turks killing the gardeners, did not forthwith put other in their places the
year of our Lord. 1516. Moreover they say there is a Balm tree of an
indifferent bigness laid to keep to be compared unto many thousands of Ducates,
with the most famous man of our time, Lucullus, May. Antony Fuggerus: Joan.
Agricola in his commentaries upon Galen, of the diseased places.iiii. ix.

Antibalsama. Dioscorides prescribes certain notes and tokens of the true
Balm. In the collection and table of those medicines that may be used one in
steed of another, which is joined with Galenus works, and in the end also of
Aeginetas books, we reed: In the steed of ye liquor of Balm, Mirh that
destilleth, that is liquid and runninge Stacte. In the same place is red also:
In the steed of Opobalsamu^ the liquor of Myrti: but it seems it should be
more rightly ye liquor of Mirh. Auicenna in his second book in the chapt. of
oil: In steed of Balm (says he) is liquid Mirh used, or else like weight of the
oil Adhii, or Aldadi, or Dadi as Bellunensis translated it. Rasis in the latter
end of his Antidotarie separated, in oil Benedict or of tylstons: It is of
like force (says he) yt oil of Balm: but it is more subtle and hoter and more
Monaci upon Mesuen. And a little after, in the tretis quid pro quo, what for
what, which is imprinted with the books of the sun of Mesue, it is red. In
the stead of Balm, Turpintyn destilled, or oyll of Bays, or the gum of Iuy is
put. But what Dadi is, I can not easily say: it is described of Auicen the.
213. chapt. Bellunensis nether there nor in the gloses expounds what it is.
It is a grain (says Auicenna) like unto barley longar, more strait and cloos
together, more massy, bitter, could, declyning to heet, and dry CiTum or
Ladanum, for it is could also, so measurably yt it has a warm heet, according
to Galenus mind: it byndeth, stops ye belly, and dries in the second degree:
that is hooter that grows in hooter places, and the same mollifieth meanly
and dissolved, and concokteth or digesteth. Furthermore in Antiballomenis
Graecis, Propolis to be used in the steed of Tragopogona, that is Ladanum: and
Auicenna, in the resolving (says he) of hardnesses, ii. third parts in weight
of kur, that is Propolis, and the half of the weight of abhel. Dioscorides
says that Ladanum is mixed with medicines without smell: Auicenna, that it is
good for the griefs of the fundament and hemrodes. Now that Auicenna has,
that Dadi is like unto barley, but longar, straiter. etc. I plainly suppose it
to be corrupt out of Dioscorides, who makes Ladon that is the bushe of
Ladanu^, like unto Cisthum, with longer leaves only and more black. Last of all
the names Ladon and Dadi do not much disagree nor be far unlike.

Oil made of the flours of Rosemary (after the same manner as it is made of the
flours of Verbascus) may be used instead of balm, and a drop of it put into
water, does likewise go to the botto^e: Arnold de Villa noua. They put this
also emongst other to be a toke^ of true balm, y^ it will gather milk into
courds: I going about to try on a time, whether Ryffius oil of cloves. In ye
greek Antiballominis it is red yt the rotes of white violets Xylobalsanu^. The
Antiballomena or rehearsal of things y^ may be used one for another, which was
once imprinted with Mesues works declare in this wise. In sted of Xylobalsam, the
wod of iuy or Leucoradix. For carpobalsa^, the fruit of iuy or Xylobalsamu^ in
like weight. The same: and for balm it self, the gum of iuy. But peraue^ture
in all these ye expositer or tra^slater was deceived, when as no writer ever
compared iuy in any wise with balin: therefore I thought Arabik tongue to have erred,
or rather the Arabians them selves, confounding Cisson, that is iuy and Cisthum
together: for Ladanum is the juice of Cisthum, which Auicenna did put instead
of Balm.

In the Antiballomenis asscribed unto Galen I find these also: for the liquor
of balm, ye liquor of Carpasus: and for the liquor of Carpasus, the liquor of
Myrtus: and for the liquor of willow, the liquor of black iuye, which the
Arabians leuing certain things or changing them, translated them into Cassia
called Balsamodes because of the smell. Sisymbrium a kind of wild mint, growing
ni waters and for the most part so^what red, ye late writers many of the^ call
it Balsamita. There is an other Balsamina as the Ligures about ye river of Poo
call it: The Thuscans or Florentins call it the apple of Ieru salem, with the
leaves of the white vine, ye flower of the Cucumer, the fruit atboth ends round
and sharp like to a little cucumer. etc. the apple with ripenes Lentil, most
red, wheroute oil is pressed chief for wounds. Some season the apple first in
oil and set it in the sun a few days, then they bery it in horse dong or in the
earth so long til it be clean putrified: so they affirm it will get the
virtue of balm in closing of wounds, and thereupon has it gotten the name of
Balsamina: Ruellius out of Her molaus. Brasauolus calls this oil of Cochirs:
and and sharp husk, Cochia or Momordica. The oil (says he) is prepared diverse
ways, both by infusion and being digd under the earth many years, and by
seathing: and it is made of Echinus, of the leaves severally and of the seeds.
That which is hid in the earth, helps the greues of Hemrods. Generally, that
oil asswageth all greues, who so desires to know mo and very marvelous
effects of this oil and herb, let him read Matthaeolus Senensis commentaries
on Dioscorides the.iiii. book

Balsamaeleon, that is the oil of balm, of a plant a cubit high or.ii. cubits,
like unto wild Rue, by the bark whereof toward the East, being scarified rased
and wounded fat tears destill, that is the fatnes of the balm. Other do beat
in a mortar the slips of this plant in the beginning of Vere, sethe it in
water, press them in a press, and call it oil Mesues, Syluius translating
him. Where Syluius also in his scoles says: let Xylobalsamum and Carpobalsamum
most new be stiept one day in old oil: after let ye oil be drawn out by the art
of chemists, it shall be of no small estimacio^: or set Xylobalsamum new be putin
old oil and set The virtues of this oil so much praised of al me^ and nothing
spoken of Mesue, it is meruel, for it heteth moysteneth, extenuateth and makes
slender, digesteth, scoureth, closes. This virtue of closinge she wed unto the
old writers, makes it at this day precious. Opobalsamum is most rare and
gesen: and therefore most precious. Wherefore Petrus of Abanus, Guilielmus
Placectinus, Bartolemaeus Montaguanus, composed an oil of balm, nothing
inferior in virtues to balm. Other put the leaves and sede, and wode of this
plant in oil and set it Opobalsamum: This says Syluius.

The Egiptians make a counter^aite kind of Opobalsamum, of ye bark new most
swiet smelling heating it in oil of Almondes, of a singular smell when it is
fresh mixed: Alexan. Benedictus.

The oil that they call communlye Balsaminum raises up suddenly them that be
fallen of the falling ficknesse, being heide to their nose that they may
Balsamum.

Of balmes made by Art.
THe commun intentand purpose of all Balsams or balmes, to speak of their
virtue, seems to be, to close and heal wounds and biles, and that in a short
space, and to avoid and turn away the evil Symptomata or diseases which the
sores would otherwise parts: hereupon it is that all of them have Turpintyn
Rosin, sum also other rosins, as the rosin of Pyn tree, Mastik: here upon also
gums ar added Frankensence, Elemi, gum of Iuy, Bdellium, Sarcocolla, Mumy, etc.
Unto sum diverse spyces are put to smell the swieter: whereupon they are made apt
for the moo uses, and miet for diverse diseases even within the body also, as to
those also, unto which moreover diverse plants or their parts are added. They
are destilled the most part of the^ They do al season the vrin with their smell.
They must all be received within the body mixed with sum liquor, chiefly wine,
so that to a sponful of liquor, one drop of the oil or.ii. at the most be put.
The dregs remaining in the bottom are good for nothing, saving that they may
be used in steed of Colophonia or Scammonium. I same of late a practicioner
destilling I can not tell what kind of Balsam in a pan, with ashes laid upon
slates, as I described before in the mention of destillation Cucurbita of glass
so diep set in the ashes, that they were not above the matter contained in the
vessel. The vessel was full to the middle, able to receive, if it had been
filled up perauenture, iiii. pounds: he continued this labor.iiii. or.v. days
and nights also, never abating the fire. He separated only.ii. liquors, ye
first whyt, which was more plentiful and in gretter abundaunce: then a
redish, which was yielded lesser by the.iii. part. The clay wherewith the
Cucurbita, the lembeck it was good to chronicall agues, for the most part he
mixed with it sum spyces, as Ginger and Sugar with wine and the drop of the
oyll, that the sick should les perceive that he dronk only a drop of the oyll:
sumtymes he would mixed nothing else with the wine but one drop of this oyll,
specially to amend the defaut of a stinking breeth. Sumtymes he gave it in
water, other times he dropped it into a shyue of breed: sumtymes to phlegmatic
and gros men, with a sauce made of musterd and

An oyll devised by William de Saliceto, a Placentin, which is in the fifth
book of his Practice, in the chapter of Oils, and supplyeth the place of balm
as he says. Carpobalsamum, Mirh, the nut of Inde, of every one half an ounce,
ii. drams of Hypericon or saint John's wurt. When they are all beeten sumwhat
groos, let them stand in.iiii. ounces of old oyll six months: and be destille
d.

An other moore noble of the same man's which is put in steed of Balm. A pound
and a half of oyll, Myrh, Xylobalsamum, Opoponax, Bdellium Aloes,
Carpobalsamum, Ammoniack, Serapinum, the nut of Inde, Hypericon, Mace, gum
Arabic, Tragacantha, of every one an ounce: broken till sherdes that never
touched water* red hoot and quenshed in three ounces of common oyll, vii. ounces
of cleen and clear Turpintyn. All pund and knoden together in a mortar, destil
them like Rose water. This water is proffitable against ye stoon, being mixed
with medicines against ye same. Hardnesses and skares it makes them even and
is used in every thing in steed of Balm.

An other of the same man's more noble. Myrh Carpobalsamum, the nut of Inde, of
every one half an ounce. Hypericon or saint John's wurt a drame (otherwise two
drames.) When they are pund sumwhat groos, let them be mixed with five ounces of
oyll, and an ounce and an half of Turpintyn. In the end put to five grains of
Musk, and. iii of Ambra, and an ounce of oyll of till stones, and let them be
destilled as before. It has the same virtues that Balm has and may be used in
all things in steed of it. This Nic. Stokker also an excellent if mifrend sent
me the description of it right when it was ready pressed, he adds at length
the Musk and Ambra, with oil of tile stones, and destilled them not as I think.
He has the former description in Luminari Maiore, as also the next following
of Montaguana.

A balm composed of Bartolomeus Montaguana out of his Antidotarie the first
chapter which is of oyntmentes. Turpentin a pound: white frankensence. iiii,
ounces: as much of bay beries: gum Elemi. vi. ounces: Mastik: Galangal, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Zedoaria, Nutmeg, Cubebae, Lignum Aloes well beaten, of every one an
ounce. Let all be destilled together, first with a slow fire: and first shall
run out a water called of Balm. Then when the fire is increased thou shall
gather an other water by it self. And do so the third time. The^ shall destil
forth balm in all trials. It shall be the stronger the oftener it is destilled.

Balm of Peter Aponensis in his addicion unto Mesues in the treatise of
oyntinges (for the diseases of the heart.) Mirrh elect, Aloes Hepaticae,
Spieaenardi, Sanguis Draconis, Frankense^ce, Mumiae, Opopanax, Serapinum,
Crocus, Mastik, Gum Arabik, liquid Styrax, of every one two ounces, two
ounces and a half of Ladanum elect, or Castoreum: half a dram of Muscke.
Turpentyn as much as the weighte of all the reaste break them that be to be
broken and when they are all mixte with the Turpentyne, destyll water of
Rooses. These says Peter, as the munkes that write upon Mesuen, said they
write it out of written books, far truer then in the Printed books, and it
is had in Luminare maiore. Aponensis says, we find no mention made by the
old writers of the annoyntinge of the back bone, perauenture not because they
were ignorant in so profitable and commendable a thing, but be cause they
would keep it secreate. For this is an excellent help, preseruinge the
subject of life Nucha, and it springs of the brain. etc. Therefore things
anointed with this shall thou comfort the cloking substance (that is the cauls
and cotes of the brain) and the spiritual substance and sinues, and all the
bones helping also the Palsy and all the diseases of the sinnewes, also the
panting and trembling of the heart, and manifest werines, and it is the chiefest
medicin of all other in the swifte comforting of the

When thou will comfort bodies that be extenuated and brought low, thou
shall mixte Roose water with it, and annoynte it upon the lower mansions, and
from the Nucha unto the raines. somewhat warm, an hour before the fit, leaving
upon it the token of it with Pecia, thou shall put away the shakinge of
wandering Agues, and of any simple agues. But quartaines and wanderinge Agues
it helps at the beginnninge of the course (this place and they which follow
seem unto some to be corrupted in the printed books) in the swoundinge or
debilitie, annoyntinge the extreme parts of the back boon: that the
instrumente for the purpoose may speak with voice, Aponensis.

The same manne wills to mixte this composicion in the steed of true
Opobalsamum, with Triacle, Mithridatium, Diacurcuma, Aurea Alexandrina. This
Oil (says he) Epiphanius Empiricus to all diseases of the sinews,
annoynting twice a day therewith the Nucha, the back and inynts, for it is
plain by manifest proves, specially in a cold matter. The same man commands
to still this oil in Balneo Mariae, which I like not.

There is an other composicion of Wiliima Pla centinus, which I find in the
bigger Luminarie in Diacurcuma or Diacrocu, in this wise. Take Turpentin.ii.
pounds: commun oil.iii. pound: oil of bays.xvi. onnces, Cinnamon.iii. ounces:
Euphorbium, Serapinum, Galbanum Aromatik, Opopanax, ofeuery one an ounce,
Franken sense, Mastike of either ii. ounces. Let such be bete^ as should: and the^
destilled.

These and certain other diverse balmes does Ryffius also in his book of
destillation describe.

A quickeninge water and one that procures youth unto an old man, out of the
book of Lullius of waters. Turpentyne a pound: honye half a pound: Aqua
vitae thryse or four times destilled Lignum Aloes welbeaten, Sa^dali
mustatelli, of either.iii. drams, gum Arabeck (perauenture a dram): Nutmegs,
Ambra, ofether.ii. drams. When they are all pund destill them with a slow
fire, till ye have the first water clear. And when the second begins to
run out, whithe shall be like to a burning cole, increase the fire by and by and
keep that by it self. The^ encrese the fire again, and gather the third, which
shall be black and thick like honey, til all the liquor be run out. Of The first is
called mother of Balm, the second oyll of Balm, the third Balm artificial. The
first is ministered in drink, with warm wine. The second and the third ar good
to remove maladies which newly gnawe the flesh of man's body. The first drunk
with warm whyt wine, purges the stomach from al il humors: and withholdeth
the water that it cum not at the heart or principal parts, as it is plain by
often experiment. A fine lynnen clooth moystened in this water and thrust into
the Bombase, dipped lightly is this water, is very good to put in the ears
against any kind of deafnes. Being anointed it cures the rednes of the face:
the palsy of the tongue, and all cold diseases. The second and third water Noli
me tangere: against the kings il and also the disseases of the neck and
throot. Also against the fistula and the ill disease called Malus morbus,
specially if it be yet but new: for by washing it and wetting and often laing a
linne^ cloth moystened therein upon it, it is made hool. They help also if a
ma^be beten with stones, or clubes or a staf. No poison can approach ny unto
them, and a spyder touched therewith dies. They be anointed upon most
proffitably against all palsyes. They strengthen all the

In the same Lullius a marvelous water is made in this wise. Cloves,
Nutmegges, Ginger, Zedoaria, Galangal, both sorts of Peper, Juniper beries,
the pills or barck of Citri or Ore^ges, Basilicum, Roosemary, Maioram, round
Mint, Bay beries, Penny royal, Gentian, Calamint, ye flowers of Elder, Roses,
Ammens, Spick nard, wood of Aloes, Cubebae, (here seems somewhat to be left
out) as well wyld as domekical or growing in gardines, Cardamomum, Cinnamo^,
Calami aromatici, Stichados, Chamaedryos, Chamaepity os, Melissae, Mastick,
Olibani, Aloes hepaticae, Anis siedes and flowers, she siedes of Mug wurt, of
every one an ounce. Put unto thies dry fat swiet Almondes, of every one an ounce.
Whyt old honey half a pound. After twys as much Sugar as all the forsaid be. All
thies shall thou put into Aqua vitae. v. or.vi. times destilled in a le^bek of
glass, ye Aqua vitae shall be as much as thrys ye weight of all the speces
besides. After thou have lest them stand.ii. days, thou shall destill the^
with a slow fire. The first water is most clear and precious. The second
differs in color, and must be received in an other vessel: it is whyt, good
towhit Aqua vitae of the same weight. And ye first water shall run forth
odoriferous and marvelous, which thou shall receive by it self: then an other
of the color of safron, the third at length like blood.

The virtues of the first and of the second water are thies. If the one of the^
be poured in to a wou^d whiles it is new, there needs none other remedy: But
within a natural day and a half at the most it shall be made hool, so be that
it be no deed wound. All ill soores or byles, Old, roten Cankred, Fistula,
Lupus, Noli me tangere, and like to them, let them be washed with either of thies
waters, and they shall be heeled within a few days. One drop only dropped upon
a Carbuncle quensheth carnosity bred upon it, drop one drop of thies waters
upon it every third day, and within nine days it shall be hool, except it be
utterly destroyed. A drop of them drunk with a little good wine breketh the
stone in the reins or in the bladdar, or in the yard stopped and that within
two hours, and delivers from the grief. If deed flesh be washed away
therewith, the place is shortly made hool. If a woman be sick of her womb or
belly, let her drink a little of them with sum juice. If a man have any

The third and bloody water, which surnamed holy and blessed, is so excellent
in virtues, that if one use half a sponefull of it.xv. days, he Astma or
disease of short wind, the dropsy, palsy, Ischia or Sciatica, the swounding,
the falling sickness, the drop in the joints called the gout, ye consuming
fever, the strangury, and many other diseases, and that within two months. It
recouereth youth unto old men: a man that lies a dying, out of all hope of the
physicions, it restores him, if one drop of it let fall into his mouth, be
swalowed, so that it may cum to the heart. If so be quantitye of a wheat corn
of this liquor with a sponefull of water of borage, destilled like Rosewater,
after the year is ended, he shall seem as though he were made new, in his
flesh, blud, and hole body, both in form and strength.

An other Artificial balm, out of the same book of Lullius of waters. Turpentyn
a pound and a half: Galbani two ounces, Aloes Cicotrinae, Mastik, Cloves,
Galangall. Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cubebarum, of every one an ounce: gum of Iuy

There third liquor will suffer no venom: is an utter ennemy and destruction to
spiders and Serpents. Two or.iii. drops let drop into any venomous bitinge,
do make it hole straight. If thou draw a circle with this liquor and shit a
venomous beast therein, it shall dye there rather then go out of it. To he
short, it does the same things all that Triacle does, but more effectually
all things. Being poured or put upon any impostume, within.ix. days it
heals them, and likewise a Noli me tangere. All diseases bred of fleume and
cold humors, it heals them, if a linne^ cloth dipped in it be laid upon the
place where the grief is. It puts away utterly the Palsy, and all tremblinge
of members: it strengthens meruelouslye the sinews. It is hoter then the
first and second. If a man put a drop of it in his hand, it perceth streighte
without grefe. To conclude, it does many other things and all diseases risen of
a cold cause, it heals

A water strengtheuing the memory. Flowers of Roosemarye, Borrage, Camomell,
Violettes, Rooses, of every one an ounce: Stichadis, Baye leaves, Samsuchi,
Sage, of every one.ii. ounces. When they are all cut small, thou shall soke
them in the best wine, and destill them by a lembecke. After the liquor is
destilled, thou shall mixed with it a pound of Turpintyne.viii. ounces of
Olibanum, Mastik, Bdelli, Anacatdorum, of enerye one with the other and destill
them again. Then add unto them again, Nutmegs, Mace, Galangall, Cubebarum,
Cardamomi, of every one an ounce: Agallochi, Amber, Musk, of every one.ii.
ounces (if the written book be true,) when they are beaten and mixte let them
stand.v. days, and destill them the third time, increasing the fire til the
oil seace droppinge.

Certain waters of life, to be reckened amongst Balmes, shall thou find in
Vlstadius book called Caelum Philosophorum, the.xliiii. lii^. chap.

A balm of an uncertain author. Turpentin. half a pound, Frankensence.ii.
ounces: wood of Aloes, Saffron, of either of them an ounce, Mastik, Cloves,
Mace, Galangall, Cinnamon, Zedoariae, Cubebarum, Nutmegges, of every one half
an ounce: Gum of Iuy or Elemi. vi. ounces, slating tiles quenched in oil
accordingli, such as never water touched.iii. ounces. Pu^d those that ought to
be pund: first will water issue forth, secondly

Balm artificial (says Matthaeolus Senensis, in his commentaries upon
Dioscorides, which I tried and found of maruelus strength against very many
diseases) have I made and composed in this wise. Take rosin Larignae, the teres
of firtre pure and liquide (some call it oil of fire, the Germans Bulhartz) of
either a pound: Manuae Thurus, Ladani, of either of them.viii. ounces: Spike a
dram mastik, Galangal, cloves, Casiae odorate, zedoariae Cubebarum, Agallochi,
of every one iii. ounces, Gum Elemi. vi. ounces: Aloes hepaticae, Castorei,
date stones, Storacis Calamitae, Myrrhae, Belzoi of every one an ounce. Beat
such as be to be pund and when they are mixed with the liquors destil them
artificially. First will a most subtle clear water run out, which burns
meruelousli, called the water of Balm. Then will follow a yelow oil, subtle,
which they call oil of balm, at the last balm artificial, red. The first water
which as I have tried, helps cold stomakes meruelouslye, and consumes

An other. Take Turpentin.ii. pound. Galbani, gum of Iuy, of either half a
pound. Roses, bedegar, Rosemary that is grene.iiii. ounces. Take the gums and
beat them gross: pour the^ into the water of Roses. After take the Turpentyn
and pour the^

An other called the mother of Balm. Take Turpentyn a pound: oil of
bays.vi. ounces Galbani, Gum Elemi, of either.vi. ounces, gum of Iuy.ii.
ounces, Olibani. ii. ounces, wod of Aloes one dram: Mastik, Myrrh, Aloes,
Laudani, Castorei. Rasae (Resinae) of the pyn tree, of every one.ii. drams, the
gum of Olive tries a pound. Cloves, Galangal, Cumin, Cinnamon, Nutmegges,
Zedoariae, Cubebarum, of every one.iii. drams. Tormentillae, Dictamni albi, of
every one six drames. When they are all mixed, let them be destilled by a
lembeck of glass.

An other of Dorustetterus an excellent physicio^ emonst the Germans. Take
Xilobalsami an ounce. Opopanacis, Rosin of the Pyn try, Bdellii, Galbani,
Ammoniaci, Mastick, Sarcocollae, Gummi Elemi, Olibani, Mirh, Benzoi, of every
one half an ounce. Oyll Benedict, of Bays, Ladani puri, of an ounce and a
half. Carpobalsami, (or in the steed of it, Balm of the description of
William Placentinus) of either of them half an ounce. Sangu^^is Draconis. ii.
drams. Castorei, Spicknard, Galangal, Cubebarum, Cinnamon, Cardamomi, Grains of
Paradys, the barks or piles of Citri Orenges, of every one a dram. Oil of
Turpintyn as much as the weight of all the rest. When they are stiept Balneo
Mariae. (I would think better in ashes.)

Of Balmes that be used with out the body.
AL they before are used both within and without the body: but they that
follow, are used without only, or chiefly.

Balm is shortly thus made. Turpin Saffron.ii. drams. When they are mixed destil
the^.

Balm or oyll Benedict for wounds, palsy, etc. Oil of Turpintyn a pound. Oyll
of Bays two ounces. Galbani, Gummi Elemi, of either six drams. Gum of Iuy,
Frankencence, Mastick, wood of Aloes, Olibani, of every one two drams. Aloes
Myrrhae, Landani, Cactorei, of every one.iii. dra^s. Let all be beeten and
powered into the Turpintyn and oyll and so stand.iii. days. Afterward take
Galangal, Cinnamon, Nutmegges, Zedoariae, Cubebarum, of every one half an ounce.
Dicta^ni, Consolidae minoris, of either.iii. drames. When thies are pund, put
them in.iiii. ounces of aqua vitae for.iii. days. Mixed all and destil them in
ashes, continuing the fire without ceassing day and night til it be finished:
and change the receiver according to y^ changing of ye color of yt which is
destilled.

A Balm for skares. etc. If by the means of a struck (says Lullius about the
end of the second book of Quintessence) any great syne remayn in the Gummi,
Cyperi, Carpobalsami, of every one.ii. ounces. Saffro^an ounce. Turpintyn.ii.
pound. Oyll of Olives of the eldest.iiii. ounces. Pun the^ that be to be pund,
and sift them, and mixed them with the Turpintyn and Carpobalsamo, and together
with the oyll destill them with a slow fire. The destilled liquor pressed vynes.
Afterward thou shall use it, as true Balm, whose tokens and properties to
know it by it has every one, and may be sold in steed of it.

A marvelous water or oyll for strumes and swellings of the throote, whereupon
men are said to have swollen throotes. Oyll of Baies.vi. ounces. Olibani,
Mastick, Gummi Arabici, pure and clear Turpintyn of every one three ounces. Mixed
them in a mortar and destill them in a Lembeck. Afterward, put to ashes to the
water drawn (De la cendre Gallice) except it should be redd De la Cedre, that
we may understand the C^der fry. Then destill it again, and this second
liquor keep it like Balm. The swelling being anointed therewith oftentimes in
the day, ass^^ageth by little and little.

An artificial Balm, not to be destilled, but sod only, out of the French
book of Andreas Furnerius. Olibani, Galbani, oyll of white Poppy, oyll of
bitter Almondes, clear Turpintyn, of every one (Vng quarteron, Gallice: but
this quantity seems to much.) Oil of Olives.ii. pounds. Thou shall heet the
Oil in a leeden kettle upon the fire and when it shall begin to sieth, put in
the Galbanum piece meell, and over a slow fire stur it softly now and then:
then put to the Mastick and the Olibanum, and stur it till they be melted by
little and little. Afterward the Pitche and Turpintyn, (but he left out the Pitch
before) with a slow fire fire, and put to the other two oils, and mixed the^ by
stirring, and again set them to the fire a little. At length put in the grienes
of the bras, mixed them thoroughly and streyne them through a new clooth into an
other vessel leeded also. When thou will use the forsaid oyll, thou must see
before that no sinew, or vein almost be cut. Then purginge the soor diligently
and making it cleen, thou shall make warm a little of this oyll in a vessel or
spoun of bras, and lay it upon so hoot as the sick may abide

Sum mixed Turpintyn and certain gumes together in a Cucurbita of glass, and let
it sieth softly,

Oyll also of Hyperico^ is compared of sum unto Balm: which because it is not
destilled, I will describe it hereafter.

A water that brings out boones, and preserves that the wounds chance not
to root. Turpintyn pure and white, but unwashed, Zopissae, honey, of every one a
pound: Half a pound of Rosin

A water of Epiphanius composed for Fistulaes with Turpintyn, certain gummes
and spices. etc It is rehearsed befoore, in the second order amongste the
waters composed for certain outward byly diseases. And again an other like
unto it in the third order.

Of oils of the parts of beasts, or excrementes.
OF the bones and marowes may an oil Syluius.

Oil of the yelkes of eggs may be destilled in a lembeck, like as the oil of
Philosophers, Mesuae, Syluius. Look before where we entreated of the
destillacion of oils by desce^cion downward generally out of Vlstadius.

Oil of man's ordure or donge: look before in the order of man's dong. Of the
liquor of man's blood, look before in quint tessence.

Of the destillinge of honye* we have written before amongste the waters that
be destilled in Roosestilles. etc. The last liquor that runs here out, is
somewhat thick, (that I judge,) it may be called an oil.

Oils destilled may also be mixte together one with an oteer, as in this
medicine of Epiphanius Empiricus, praised for frakens and all kind of
ruggedness and spots of the face. An ounce and a half of virgins milcke.
Water of Rooses with a little brimstone, an ounce. Oils of Tartaro, of wheat,
of yelkes or Eggs, of every one half an ounce: a scrupul of Caphurae.
Although the seoyles are not wont to be made by destillacion: yet oil of
wheat and of the yelkes of eggs, are better made destilled.

Of oils of metals, tile stones, Gagate, Aumber.
WAters and oils, secreate by the singular Syluius. This virtue of pearsinge
seems to pertain chieflye unto oils drawn out of metalles, in the which
also is a greater force

I understand that Vinegar is chieflye used to be destild, for the drawing out
of oils out of Metalies, as Antimoni, Lead, Cerussa. Other use other sharp
and most hot liquors for that purpose, as sharply, burning water, urine
destilled, Aqua Forti.

Lullius in the fifth Canon of his first book of quintessence, when he had
taught to draw out the.iiii. elements out of plants, he added. And make
them to resolve with our Menstrue (I suppose he means our Urine) under
dounge for the space of a weke: the Menstruum must be sharp with some Vegetable
and strong quickenynge things which we shall declare hereafter in the
Questionary. After the metalles shall be dissolved set them to be destilled in
a fire of the first degree, and the Menstruum shall issue forth, and the lime
or powder of ye metal shall remain in the bottom. After this reiterat and
repete it again upon the dregs Menstruum as much as the weight of the metal,
and set it to putrifyinge for the space of a month and a half: and after this
destill it as thou did of the Vegetable or quickening things, but every time
put new Menstruum upon the dregs. Other diverse opinions of Philosophers in the
drawing out of the elements out of mineral things, we shall declare in the
third book: This says he.

I suppose it to be a commone thing unto all Cardanus signifieih and an other
certain author writes, that the drops oil of Vitriol or Coproos to be
ponderous and weighty.

Oil destilled of Orpment or Mysi (or Vitriol of Rom.) anointed upon ye
arteries and region of the heart, I suppose is hable to save a man infected with
poison, be it never so sharp and strong, and do kill a man only with
touching: Cardanus.

And a little after, but sense we are fallen into nor far from the purpose to
inquere this how oil may be made which being anointed upon the Arteriis,
makes the venom to break out by vomit or purgacion, or sweat, or urine, It
is sure, it must be of metal, which must be most strong. I saw such once
and by the waighte only I coniectured that it was without al doubt of metal,
It must also be of the nature of Venom: for by the immoderate heat, as it
is said, it vanquisheth first the evil infection conceived Laser or Assa
Foeetida. Therefore those things that must drive out the poysone, ought to be
metally poisons, but not most bitter: and most hot and discussing or expelling,
also in a manner contrary to the poisons. The matter therefore Mysi and Orpment,
and the juice of Laser or Assa foetida, and Gentian, and of the fat of venomous
serpents, and Aconitum. If so be it that in any land moo of these (foresaid
virtues, as to discus, expel, and resist poysones. etc. be to be gotten, the
oil extracted by the force of fire shall be best of all. And a little after.
But oil that only by anoyntinge of the Arteries does thruste out the
poysone, I would not call it the best in this sense drink, Triacle or Milk
or sum other excellent medicin, ye also it should be the more auaylable. That
dare I be bold to say, that the anointing of the arteries, and the things
ministered outwardly, are better and of more strength then those things that are
drunck, save only for this that the poison remains yet in the stomach. For
unto such (poisons newly taken, that they be not yet gone out of the stomach)
they that provoke strong vomities are most excellent, as Milk, Lie, Oyll,
water of Nucis vomicae or spewing nut. Therefore in venomous bytinges, in
stingings in oyntmentes that be venomous, in the drinking of venom which is
now already perced to the midrif or nether parts of the chest, the helps that
be ministered outwardly are more auailable and of greater strength. etc. Thies
out of Cardane have I written the more at large, that thereby also ye reason
migth be the more evident of that marvelous oil of Scorpions. etc. Which
because it is made without destillacion,

Oyll of Antimonium is most proffitable to all ill soores and byles, as I my
self dotry with good succes. But the Antimonium is purged first, oftentimes
melted and made liquid with the fire. Far from this does the oyll of Antimonium
which chymistes use, wherwithall they endeavor to set the color of gould upon
silver: Matthaeolus upon Diosc.

Oyll of Antimonium how it is made for soore byles and fistulas. I writ before
out of Vlstadius, Quintessence. But certain practicioners also make oyll of
Antimonium to diverse diseases within the body, which they extol with
marvelous and great praises. They make it after this sort, as I here. Antimonii
half a pound, whyt Tartari Calcionated as much: let the^ be beaten and melted
or dissolved in a gouldsmithes Tigillo (crucibulo) upon cooles: when they are
melted let them be powered out into sum earthen pot, where they shall be sturred
and mixed together: and when they are becum into a hard lump, let them Hyppocras
as they call it) in a moist place (in a hoot and moist place) as in a wine
celler, the colender hanging: for so shall the oyll destill out by little and
little which of sum because of the bloody color is called Rubedo Antimanii,
and likewise it is made of certain Gouldsmithes for a certain painting I can
not tell what. But for the remedies of man's body it ought to be prepared with
Quintessence of wyn Antimonium: and let them be sturde diligently in body, and
mixed, and then destilled in ashes three or iiii. times, till the breath lose all the evil smell. The dregs must always be mixed and sturd about when you powrest
i^ again the destilled water upon the^, or when thou powrest to them new
Quintessence, for I am not sure which way it ought to be done. Sum in the
beginning do stregthway mixed reed Antimoniu^ and Tartaru^ calcionated to be
melted together. But I wryt althies not as certain: but as I noted the^ by the
way as I hard them recited certain years ago of a certain practicioner. I know
that certain chymistes and goldsmithes search for ye oil or Quint essence of ye
Antimoniu^ as a most perfect treasur. Thies destil first sharp lie composed of
vnslect lyme and ashes Clauellatas by a Filtru^: and is this lie they sieth the
Antimoniu^ subtly and fynly beten, for the space of.v. hours, and again
destil this lie when it is cold, by a Filtru^: and that of ye Antimoniu^
Antimoniu^ put in a Cucurbita or body, most sharp red vinegar destilled, so
that it be above it iii. or.iiii. fingars thick: they set it in a hoot place a
few days, and every day they shake and* mixed it, x. or.xx. times: then they
power ye vinegar lightly into an other glass, so yt nothing be troubled. This do
^hey repete.v. or.vi. times (ever pouring new vinegar upon the Antimoniu^
remaining in ye Cucurbita quintessence of Antimoniu^, is of a color of blud.
With this they die Mercury, and say it is an incomparable treasure, a chief
mystery of ye chymistical art: as we translated out of a certain written doutch
book. A reed oyll is gotten out of Antimoniu^, very sharp, smelling lyk
brimston, and it reteineth ye virtue of y^ Antiminium, because of the grosnes
of the substance proffitable Cardanus.

Hooll Lyme unbroken, let it be slekt in co^mun oyll, and destill it in a
lembeck of glass, there shall issue forth an oyll good for a boon that is
corrupt: Syluius. Put a hot piece of quick Lyme into commun oyll, till the Lyme
becum powder, then let it be destilled in a lembeck of glass, and oyll of Lyme
shall issue, which is the first that was described by Leonard of Praedapalea
Patauinus, Ion. Iacobus de Manliis.

Oyll of Cerussa: Look before where we intreted of Quintessence out of
Vlstadius.

Oyll of Gagates or ieet, called Sacratum or holy, most holsum for them that
be possessed of spirits, that have the falling sickness, the palsy, the cramp,
the stifnes of sinews, the gout, or be chooked in their womb, it helps also
co^ceiuing. It is made of Ieet stones after the manner of oyll of Juniper (by
descention) or else by sublimacion (as oyll of tyle stones) Mesues of Iac.
Syluius interpretacion: out of whose notes we have subscribed thies words:
Seeing Bitumen is far lighter cost then Ieet, Bitumen, forasmuch as it is as it
were the fat of the earth, and is burned in steed of oyll of them that dwell
about the place of Asphaltita or deed sea, or else in other places where Bitumen
is. Forthermore he douteth whether it can heel the falling sickness, seeing the
falling sickness does the more appeer with ye foul stinking, smell of the
Bitumen. But me thinks it with it by attenuating, digesting, drying, which
virtues boothe it has them befoore, and that not feablelye: and also much
moore the liquor destilled thereof perfourmeth these things.

Nether does it not help this diese therefore, because it is likely that the same
should be vttred and appear with the perfume of that bituminous smell, as with
the perfume of Myrrh, Galbanum, and horns, houfs, and the skins of a she or he
got. For Phisicions use the horns and houfes of diverse bestes Bitumen)
specially white, holden to the nosthrils of one sick of the falling evil, with
coals in a spone and the Amber upon them, and by and by Mosch or Ambra will do
also. But that Mesuae writes of men possessed with devils (says Syluius) is
supersticious, and against the faith of a Christen man. Brimston and iet are
molten at the fire as al other liquors. The same.

Oil of philosophers (which some have named oil of wisdom, and of perfect
mastership, and divine and holy) by all the old writers consent, is most
effectuous to secreat diseases, and tha^ not to a few means of the subtelnes
of the substance, it digesteth and consumes al excremental and superfluous
expelled matter. Therefore it is very wholesome for the falling sickness, palsy,
turning sickness, for getfulnes, and for the cold diseases of the spleen, rains,
bladder, womb, sinews, al joints, and other sinewy parts. But one sort is
natural or mineral and an other of the sea, that runs out of Isles and rocks
(called Naphtha) of the which kind, that which is somewhat white is counted
the best: the (alchichil) or old claret, and as much as is possible let them
sok in the oil. Dry them by the^ selves in cases (caczobis. The Munks upon
Mesuen: where also is red shortly after, Caczola for a Cucurbita or body of a
Bulcasis) which stopped very exactly, set it up and keep it: for the elder it is
the stronger: Mesue as Syluius tra^slateth him, whose words also I have written
here out of his annotacio^s. Oil (says he) of tiles is so subtle, that more
subtle, more hot and more effectuous in cold diseases, the^ is oil of balm. It
provoke vrin, it breaks the stone, kills worms: it is holsom for the
singing of the ears coming of a gros wind for the palsi, the cra^p (spasmo
cynico) the sciatica or ach in the hukle bones, the gout in the knees, fete and
the greues of the other joints, being drunk or anointed upon ye place: but let
it be drunk mixte with a little portion of some water convenient for the disease.
The making of this oil is described also Rasis in his Antidotari or
preservative and by Bulcasis in his book entitled Seruitor: whereas Bulcasis
prefers new tiles, yt never yet touched water, because they drink in ye oil
better: and he bids divide the^ into pieces of an inche bigness, and putreth
the^ so in a vessel of glass, or glased, well claied yt the third part thereof
remain empty. The fire must be made soft at ye first, but so yt it touch ye
bottom, and encresed by little and little. First shall a water issue forth
afterward an oil (read Bulcasis) which must be gathered guaiacu^ and many other
things. Oil also of Chamaemel, and Nard also, which is called Benet or blessed
of Mesuae: but this (of tiles) is ye chief, and of so^e is called petroleu^ or
oil of stones. These Sylu. This is a stinking oil, but it perceth passingli.
Io. Iac. de Ma^liis. Read certain things before, where we have entreted generally
of ye destillatio^ of oils by desce^cion, out of Vlst. Bull. bideth to dip in
the pieces every one of an i^che bigness (a dram, Rasis) made read hot, in
most old oil, and when they are quenched to take them out of y^ oil and
when they are al so^what gross beaten, to put them into one or mo stillatory
vessels: which he calls belies, so that.ii. parts of ye vessel or more be
filled. He bids also to take heed that ye fire come not nie to this oil
(while it is destilled) because it will easily be set on fire, and hardly be put
out. Afterward again new pieces of tiles, dressed as before, to be destilled,
til oil enough be gathered: which he bids to be kept in a vessel with a
narow mouth: most diligently stopte with wax Rasis describe.

The oil that they call commonly Balsamyn (of spik) raises up suddenly them
that lie in the falling Alexander Benet.

This oil is made also with certain other things mixed with it, as I found in a
certain written book, the words whereof I will rehers here. Take and break into
little pieces red tiles very old or new, but yt never touched water, and they
being made red hot quench them in oil of olives, or else, y^ is better, in oil
of baies, by and by make the^ red hot again, and theiwer que^shed, if any of it
be left, if not, put new unto it to the measur of a fingar. Afterward put to it
Castorei, and Spicknard, or in the steed of it rue, of either of them one part:
Costi two parts. When thies are punned, mixed them with the tyles in a
Cucurbita or belly, which thou shall dig in horse dong about. rx. days. At
length thou shall destill it, increasing the fire by little and little. The
first liquor is good, the second better, but the third of a red color is best.
This oyll is good against Cynical Cramp, being anointed thereupon or drunke^,
also the Sciatica, and the griefs Ammoniack, dissolueth in short space the
impostumes and hardnesses of the splien. It is of force against the falling
sickness and the obstruction or stopping of the nose, being put into ye
noosthrilles. It heateth the brain, confirms the memory, asswageth touth
ache. Being put into ye womb, it provoke the flowers. It brings out the
child newly conceived either dead or alive. It opens the mouth of the veins,
and dissolueth the lunges from gros humors. A few drops of it drunken with
syrop of Rooses, helps them that draw their breeth peinfully. It consumes
marvelously the water descending down to the eyes, that is to say the disease
called Suffusion. If fishers anoint their nets therewith, they shall entyse
innumerable fishes. Iron moystened therein and put to the fire shall burn
streigth way. It kills wornes whersoeuer they be. Being made hoot in an egg
shell or other vessel, may be dropped Rasis in Antidotary attribute and Benet,
that is, that which is destilled of only tyles and oil. That is counted the
best (says Rasis) that is very red, of a strong smell, and of a subtle
substance.

Oil of leed: Look before, whereas we have reher sed Vlstadius words of
Quinessence.

Amber by an artificial means of siething is turned into an oil of his oun
color. Ge. Agricola In died it is possible to make oil of Amber, after the
same manner as of Iet, whereof we have written The Germains call them by a co^mun
name Agstein, giving only the difference of black unto Iet. Cardan supposes
that Camphora also is of ye same kind, only because yt this, that the perfume
of Amber received in a moist cloth, gives afterward the smell of Camphora in
it: which notwithstanding did not appear so to me as I did prove it for a
trial.

Brimston anointed and dru^ck takes away scabbednes, leprosy and the french
pockes. But with Card. But his books of ye french disease, I suppose are not
yet cum forth in print. Salt co^teineth an oyll in it if it be mixed with the lyme
or clay called Bitumen. Whereupon Arrianus declares, emongst the Ichthiophagi,
the men that live only by fyshe, in his history of Ind, how they make an oyll
of salt. That may be an argument also that the Olive tries delight in the Sea
Bitume^ mixed with it. Car.

For the making of oil of Brimston, a man must chose out yt which is pure and
never touched the fire, chiefly alive and of an ashy color.) This oil is made
many ways at Rome, by sublymacio^ and desce^cion. etc. It is good for many
things, and chiefly for fistulas, and for ye healing of ye wheels of ye
moutes excels most of all. For take and wet the end of a fether or other
like thing, as some young and tender spring of a try or herb, and touch the
wheels once or twyse only therewith, and by and by they shall be killed and
healed. The Munkes upon Mesue.

Take a vessel of glass (as Maithaeolus Senen. writes in his book of the
French evil) not much unlike to a little bell, daubed with potters claye, hang
it the space of a cubit from the ground, by a wire of bras or iron, under ye
which thou shall set

Brimstone that never came ny the fire, or most yelowe, whiles it is brent,
gives a thick smoke to be received in a bell of glass or of stoone. Wherein
through the gros vapor an oyll gathered together destilleth into a large plain
vessel, in ye mids whereof the brimstone builded upon a little vessel is brent.
Other beating the brimstone consume the fyry substance of if, with Aqua vitae
set on fire, and after devil that which remains, like unto oyll of
Philosophers. Other sieth yelowe Brimstone pound, with a slow fire, with.ii.
ounces of odoriferous wine, til the wine be consumed, (as it is red in Luminari
maiore.) Syluius.

Put one part of quick brimston into.ii. parts parts of oil of Lynsied, beat
them well and diligently together, and let them stand in horse dong ii. dais in
a vessel well shut, and it shall be clear and fair.

But all these oils seem to be prepared only for this purpose that they may be
ministered without the body: I here say that there be certain practicioners
Syluius makes mencio^, is first consumed by Aqua vitae set on fire, then
destild by sublimacion, it may be more safly ministered with in the body then
the other.

Oil of Vitriol or copros is desired of chemists and likewise of physicians,
and as a most secret matter is hid. I will put here some descriptions

Make the Vitriol in to lime, as thou know, then pour burning water unto it,
so that it excede the Vitriol a little: then separate the burning water by
destillacion in a phiall or in a crooked still, or out, urge the spirits of the
Vitriol by little and little, increasing the fire more and more, til al ye
spirits be over passed. This liquor destilled put it again into some one of
the.iii. manner of vessels aforsaid, and destil it in a kettle full of water,
until whatso ever watery thing is in it, be separated, which thou shall endeavor
to bring to pas by all the wit thou have, that the watrines be clean gotten
out, either by a le^bek, (with a nose) or a blind lembek, whose nether skirt
have a hollow gutter or circle either by it self, or with waters convenient for
every disease. This oil I have tasted my self, it is swiet, pleasant, and
strong, in color (if I remember well) somewhat white.

An other way. Take.iiii. pounds of Vitriol of Rome, dry it in an earthen
vessel till it wax red, after when it is beaten put it into a belly of glass
diligently defenced with clay (as the manner is for Aqua fortis) and first
destilit with a soft fire, encresing the degree of the fire by little and little,
until Acetosae, somewhat warm, putting unto it half a dram of spices
Diamargariton, which is cold if it may be gotten.

An other way to make oil of Vitriol against in rabble diseases. Put as much
Vitriol of Rome as ye will in a belly to wax red, with such a fire as is used to
Aqua fortis, for ye space of.xxiiii. hours, as long as the water comes forth
without spirits, and more if it be not made red, ever kepinge the same fire.
When as it is now becomed red, take away ye head (lembek) and the receiver, and
keep the water for secret uses to be spoken of. After beat ye Vitriol and put
it in a belly with.v. parts of quintesse^ce of wine, that the Vitriol may be
soked: The belly Aqua fortis is made. So shall run out first the Aqua vitae, and
at length the fire increased, oil of Vitriol shall follow. Then thou shall
separate the Aqua vitae from the oil, putting a head to the belly wherein both are
contained, and setting a receiver without, with a fire of Aqua fortis. morning,
and forbid them to receive any meet before.iiii. hours be past. Against a
continual ague give.viii. drops, with half an ounce of Rose water, in the
morning as is said and likewise also against other diseases, Dosin, that is the
quantity of the receite, unto strong men thou may give.viii. drops, to men
of mien strength five, to such as be weak iiii. etc. In this oyll if thou
dissolve Marchasit, it shall chaung silver, and tinge it in all degries.

An other way for the same, that it may be the Crucibulorum glased within as
much Vitrioll of Rome as thou will: and destill it in a furnace, as is before
said, with a fire of Aqua fortis and there shall run out a white water of
Vitriol: After when it cease, thou shall encreas the fire, and a grien water
shall follow, which when it has left thou shall make a most strong and
vehement fire, both above and beneth, and a red oil shall issue out. Change
ever the receiver according to liquors in one vessel, and separate the waters
afterward from the oil by destilling them, and the oyll shall remain in the
belly. This separation is made ye belly standing upright (with a head and a
receiver) the first destillacion of ye oil, the belly lying ouerth warth, as it
is said. If thou dip a little dry woul or bombase in water of Vitriol of Rome,
and there with thouch any kind of diseases of ye mouth, thou shall easily heal
them: Out of a written book of a certain friend: he seems here to mean that
water yt Vitriol, which is more precious and pure, and is kept to be ministered
and given to drink against inward diseases.

Of the virtues of oil of Vitriol, out of ye same written book. Drinck Malmsy
with a little oyll of Vitriol, continually for the space of.v. or.viii. dais, it
riddeth a man from all obstructions, it purges the blood, and drives away the
stone. It heals the il scab, if it be drunck with water of fumitory,
Myrobalana condite. It renews a man with water of endive. It heals all
manner of griefs of the head, with water of Maioram, or Buglos, or Melissa:
also the turnsicknes, if it be contained any space. With water of Agresta it
heals al manner of diseases, the body being first purged. It restores the
memory with the water of Acorus or Fenell. It mouith a man to sleep, with the
sied of Letis or Popy. It is good for melancolyck persons with water of Bublos
or Borage. It cures with water of wyld rewe. It purges the body with Aqua
vitae. It heals ye palsy with water of wyld mint, or sage, and Hyssop, the
cramp with water of Sage: the sickness of quaking with water of Basilicus, and
diverse inward diseases with water of Trifolium, all feebleness of the eyes with
water of Fenell: the reum from the head with water of Lily, ye catar with water
of Adiantu^ and Hyssop, and the cough, also the disease of the side with water
of Pla^tain the Pleuresis with water of maiden hear, the feebleness Diarhodon. It
stinteth ye flux of the belly with the water of Plantain: the co lyck with water
of Rewe. With water of wormwod it resistith venomous bytings. It heals al
manner of impostumes and dropsy, continuing it. It is good for the limes that be
resolved, if it be Tamarindis: with water of Radish and and sea bremble, it
expels the stoone, and opens the stoppinges of theines. It heals all
agues with water of Agresta, and certain kinds of leprosy, continuing the use of
it. This is the true potable gold, and the true Sela^dyn or Chelidonia, and
more also in weigth it gives not place to gold, and it has the same and as
many virtues as potable gould. A little of it with a little water of Roses drunk,
restores ye

An other manner of oyll of Vitriol, which a certain old man a practicioner in
Heluetia used, mixting.ii. or.iii. drops with Triacle, and bidding the^ to
sweet after they had drunck it, in a bed.iiii. or. v hours, so that they put
not out so much as a fingar, by the which medicine I know many too be cured
of him from diseases hard to be cured. etc. When he died I saw the oyll which
me thougth was of sumwhat a white color or duskish, perauenture because of the
little pieces of silver that Vitriol, or as much as ye list in a large earthen
vessel glased, and fenced without every where round Vitriol many enough from
above in the very vessel, and leave it so til the Vitriol be clean brought to
lime, that no moisture or vapor at all remain in it, and that now it have
gotten a redish or yelowish color, nor any vapor or spirits seem to ascend
from it any more. For except ye Vitriol be very dry, oil effectual and strong
enough should not be drawn out of it, but mixed with a certain white fleum. When
as therefore it is sufficiently brought into lime, put away the fire, and
when the vessel is couled by little and little, take Vitriol as well as ye ca^
with a knife or otherwise: although it is no hard matter to get it out of a
glased vessel. The Vitriol taken out, break it small, and put the pieces into an
erthen belly, which the potter, as be spoken, has made of ye best earth, and
wonderfully well baked, so strong that it may be able to abide a vehemente fire
in a with clay, and yt, ii. or.iii. fold, yt is, first dried and parieted
again, and again. The form of the furnace shall be in this sort. This furnace
shall be butlded. 4 square, and in the top a little imbosed and vaulted round in
the midst of ye top of ye arch shall be made a hole or smoking vent, so larg, y^
eueri hour or as often as nead shall require, coals may be put conveniently into
ye furnace by it, with a long iron fire shouel, to put in the coals ge^tlely and
charily wtall yt they may slide down about the belly in such wise yt it be not
hurt. In the. 4. corners also above must be left holes or spirits should brethe
out. This clai must be suffered to be dried, before ye begin the business.
Moreover there must yet.ii. holes be made in the ii. contrary sides of the
furnace (not in yt side yt the belly looks out at, nether in the contrary, but
in the other two. These also must have their stopples to shut the^ with al, yt
the heat may be kept in. The use of these holes, yt the coals which are put in
at the top of ye valt may be hadso^ly disposed with some iron pro^g for the
purpose put in at ye holes, and ordered in such wise yt his full strength, and
this is a token of perfection. Therefore thou shall let the fire to go out and
the furnace once couled, take away the receiver, and turning it in thy hands,
and inclining it now to one side, now to an other, gather all the drops
together that cleue unto the sides, and the oil or lyquor so gathered, pour it
into a vessel of the best Venice glass: for it is danger least the commun
glass should be eaten through of it, for it consumes and eteth like Aqua fortis,
This liquor that practicioner Haganovv perauenture, or Colen or Acon: for there
men say the best and strongest

Of the burninge or broylinge of Chalcanthum, that is Vitriol, and his kinds.
Bulcasis, writes in a manner the same things in his third book of the
preparacion of medicines, which we have declared afoore in his preparacion for
the making of Vitriol Zimor, also he teaches to prepare after the same manner.
But emongst diverse ways of this oil of Vitriol, I like that best which I
described last. For the liquor that is destilled that way is the sharpest of
all, and also the tartest, in so much that it may be called vinegar of metal,
as me thinks: Wherefore of certain it is highly commended for the quenshing of
thirst in somer time, one drop of it put into a draught of wine, like as I
found in a certain doutch written book, where as this also is added: Vitriolum
is

An other way out of the same book. Stiep Vitriol in Aqua fortis, which may
draw out all the fatnes thereof, from the which if thou separate the Aqua
fortis by destillacion, an oyll shall remain. But perauentur this way is to
dangerous that a liquor so destilled should be received within the body. But
without the body and to the wheels or

I remember I have red in sum place in Lullius in his work of Quintessence,
where he makes mention of oil or Quintessence of Vitriol. But in what sort it
should be made, I could never yet find in any book that went abroad: so
greatly have they all kept secret this thing as a marvelous mystery. For the
description which I will declare here after out of the book of Nicolas Massa
upon the disease of Naples, can not be received within ye body.

When the Chalcanthum, that is the Vitriol, or Mysis that is Vitriol of Rome is
brent an oyll most sharp and hot is drawn out of it by the force of the
fire, in vessels of glass wherewith if a man touch wartes when they are cut or
wounded, they will go away. The same if a man taste it, it strikes the tongue
like as it were a hot iron. Yet the use of it is to dry byles within that be
out of hoope of recovery, where as they be not much filthy, as it chau^ceth in
certain that be diseased of Phthoe corrupcion and matter without grief. It
serves also to cut Cardanus. The same coniectur we write before, that oil of
Mysis or arsnick anointed without may seem to deliver from poyso^. The spirit
or Quintesseuce of Vitriol is praised of certain practicioners against the
falling sickness and Apoplexia or benumming of senses.

Shomakers inck lowseth the belly, both in honey and meed drunck to the weight of
a dram, and also in wine, specially the oyll thereof. George Agricola, Vitriol
does kill not only men but tries: wherefore it must be made in sum out syd or
place where no man dwells. Albucasis and other show the way of making it,
Brassauolus (In mine opinion not the oil, but ye smoke of Vitriol whiles it is
brent with fire and prepared unto destillacio^ is so hurtful.) And again, of
Chalcanthu^, yt is vitriol oil is made so burning, that we use it for
pote^tiall fire: for it is of a caustical, you is a burning nature, and with a
knief anoited with Olives. Whiles ye oylis preparing, ye must take heed of the
smoke: because it does not only kyl men but also the tries that be nigh, it
dries the^ up. The trial whereof Fra^ciscus de Mo^te the notable bone setter
whose tries of his archard every one died with the smoke of Vitriol whiles he
prepared the oyll thereof.

The oil of Vitriol is marvelous, burning like a hot iro^ without grief, and
is made in this manner, xxx. ounces of Vitriol of Rome or of Cypres, Salnitrum,
Bocia clayed for the fire of an alchymists furnace, and by the fire thou shall
have the oil incresed in the receiver: which is a marvelous Cauterium or
burning thing, and has no pere in any operacion, and chiefly in taking away of
wens and great wartes. But the receiver must be great, if thou will make the
forsaid oil: Nicolas Massa in Naples, and Thomas Philologus, who takes.xx.
drames of Vitriol, but of Alum and salt of either. xxiiii A water of diverse
metals (out of a certain dutch book) for the leprosi, spots and dunnes of the
eyes. The filing of silver coper, stiele, gould, of every one as much as ye
can get: the first day put it in vryn whiles it is warm made by a boy or
wenche that is a maid, the next day in the crumbs of hot bread: the third in a
white of an egg: the fourth in the milk of a Then put all thies into a still
and destill them with a little fire, and kipe it. For the virtue of it is
incomparable. It is good against the leprosy, and all the spots in the face, and
it procures unto the face a youthful brightness, it makes also cleernes of ye
sight thies shall thou reed otherwise in the Addicions upon the Breuiarium or
Bridgment of Arnold de Villa Nona. 1. 18.

Of Aqua fortis and such like.
E described a little before a certain water like Aqua fortis, destilled of
Vitriol, Sal Nitrum, and Alum against great wartes. etc. But the commun Aqua
fortis also, and the simple oil of Vitriol, if a man put a drop of them in to a
wen or warte first cut, they take it away: of the which thing I made a trial
in my self upon a sied wart on my fyngars end, wherinto when I had first cut
it with a razer, I Aqua fortis, and although it went not away by and by, yet
within a few wekes is was gone Aqua fortis or to separate metalles is thus made.
One part of Sal nitrum, liquid or molten Alum (that they call roche.iii.
parts: sand half a part, when they are dried diligently and purged with the
fire, let them be destilled in a vessel of glass. It is gathered by it self,
that which issues out first, at length when the glass looks like a safro^
color, increase the fire and an other follows: and yet if thou take it in
water of the fountain or well, it is yet so sharp that never the les it
dissolueth silver, and separateth it from Goulde. It is separated in this wise.
Take a little quantity of ye water drawn out, and put into it the weight of. xii
grains of very pure silver* and set it upon ashes til the silver be dissolved.
This shall send down into the bottom of the vessel, grounds like unto fine
lime, which taken away the pure water that remains, put it to the hole water
from the which Aqua fortis but of another manner of making.) But seeing it
vanishes away easili and consumes, it shall be kept in a glass diligently shut.
To a man that imagines how great strengthes it has, which taking Ammoniak
and Nitrum, with Chalcanthum (yt is coproos) and Alum molten in equal porcions,
putting unto them at last one fourth part of roust: this made It yet a man ad
and put to a little of the obstracite stone, called Smiris wherewith they polishe
precious stones, thou shall have more plenty of water and better, because it
will not be burned. These things therefore received and found true by trials,
let us see what should be cause that this water becomes so strong: for
manifest experience techeth, that the drier part attenuated and fined by the
force of the fire, receives a firye and a fretting or gnawing strength. But
why burns not Chalcanthum by the force of the fire, for as much as it
turns the driest part into humor, it is most sharp, and strikes the tongue
like fire. Cardan. Let no man think that this liquor pertains Chalcanthum
or Coproos an ounce of Aqua fortis: mixed it with an ounce and a half of
Roosewater, soores of the throat, palace, jaws and lips, let them be touched
twice a day with a little Cotton tide to the top of a stick and moistened in
this liquor: Thom. Philologus.

Certain diverse manners of Aqua fortis, maiste thou read after, where we shall
write of Mercury sublimated. Burning water, that a candle man burn in the
very water. Put a sextar or.xx. ounces of the eldest wine, in a pot wide
above and

A water to whitten the tethe which Isabella of Arragonia, the Duches of
Millen did use. A pound of Salt purged and beaten: an ounce of Gla^sye or Isly
Alum, let them be destilled in a lembecke, Mixed an ounce of this water with an
ounce of Plantaine water, and with a little wode wouldipte therein rub the
teethe, and they shall become Furnerius.

An other like out of the same book. Sall Ammo niak, Sall Gemmae of either. iii
ounces, Sugar Alum an ounce and a half, commone Salt, an ounce. When they are
beaten destil them in a lembecke of glass: and with the liquor drawn out
thereof rub the tethe with a stone, and after wash the mouth with a little white
wine. Read before in the end of the Cosmeticall waters, the same description,
but without common salt, the use whereof is declared without destillacion.

Aqua Angelica of a marvelous virtue against blearednesse, Cankar, and burninge
with fire. Three ounces of vn^lekt lime and half a pound of rain water, let
them stand together in a vessel of glass or tin a.iii. days. Then
mirtinge them stir them together, and let them settle again a.xxiii. hours or
more in a vessel well covered. Afterward strain them tenderly through a
linen clothe till it be clear. Then put to it.x. drawmes of Sall Ammoniak
the whitest thou can Filtrum. This water heals the clothe or spot (La Toil
in French, that is the web) of the eyes, three drops thrice a day dropped
into them, continuinge till the eye be made hoole. It takes away also the
tears of the eyes, the redness and blearednesse, also the Cankar and burning
if it be rightlye steines of cloth both silk and woullen, if they be washed in
it a little warmed. Furnerius.

Man's vrin destilled, chymistes use it to resolve goulde: printers for their
inck that they use to print books with all.

Diverse waters, wonderfully drying, sharp, fretting, for healing of the
whelkes of the french pockes without anointing, may thou read in Nicolas
Massa, in his.vi. book, the.ii. chapt. of the French pockes.

A certain burning water with orpment. etc. destilled, is described of Rogerius
a Surgion.

Of the lyquors of precious stones.
CArdan in his second book of subtlety, serching a water which put in by a
Syringe or Spoute might break the stoones of the bladder, supposes such a
one might be received Tecolithos, or the stones of creuisses. etc. as we have
rehearsed before, in the tretize of y^ virtues of destilled liquors generally. I
if I may ad co^iectur to coniectur, I would destill either thies or other stones
or glass, with the juice of Parietary.

Certain chymistes, do praise highly the spirit or Quintessence of berill,
against the stoone of the reins or bladdar.

Of cirtain massy things, as quicksiluer precipitated or killed, and the same
and arsn^ck sublimated.
LEt us ad here certain massy and hooll medicines, which also be sublimated or
sod in glass vessels at the fire, although it be almost besides our matter,
when as we purposed to entreat only in this book, ofliquors separated from a
grosser substance. Yet because they be a few medicines and sublimated (that is
they are prepared and made with like in Car. writes in his fifth book of
Subtlety. Take Alum, Calcanthum (that is coproos) of either like much: put
thereto salt as much as one of them and half as much, destil this together in
glass vessels. Put a pound of this water (yt is of aqua for it is co^munly
called).iii. pound of quick silver into a it and keep it in vessels of glass.
This emongst all other yt eat the flesh without grief, and dry up putrefying
sores, if it be rightly made is the best, nether serves it to any other
purpose yt I know: Thies things writes he. Perles are dissolved with strong
vinegar, specially being destilled, or with the juice of limo^s. etc.
precipitated, and sublimated, and Cinna briu^, and they return into
quicksiluer: Syluius.

A way to make red powder, yt is quicksiluer calcionated and precipitated, out
of Marianus ye surgeo^. Aqua fortis. iiii. ounces of quicksiluer, mixed the^
together in a belly or cucurbita of glass well claied, and with a head upon it, y^
nose end whereof shall be put within a receiver, let them be destilled with a
moderat fire (increasing it by little and little. But aqua fortis that separateth
gold from silver is made thus. Sal nitru^, roche Alu^, Vitriol of Rome, of eve
ry one.ii. pou^des: let the^ be mixed in a mortar, ever beating and grinding
with the pestil til they be well mixed. Then put the powder sumwhat groos into a
Praecipitatu^ an ounce and a half, rosed honey.ii. ounces, mixed them diligently.
With this medicine without doubt thou shall dry and cle^se a filthy sore and
roten (whereupon the flesh shall after begin to bread) where as other clensing
things, as those made of ye juice Apiu^, or of ye juice of Cynoglos shall do no
good.

Nicolas Massa in his book of the French disease, calls Mercurium
praecipitatum, Angelical powder, because of the marvelous and as it were a
divine operacion of it in the French pockes, which he his self has not seldom
tried. This medicin (says he) dries, with a certain gentle eating of the soft
and superfluous flesh, and that without grief, removing also the evil secret
quality of the soores, and chiefly of the disease of Naples. It digesteth any
matter, and purges it, and lets the Corrosio of gnawyng and the canker: it
dissolueth groos matter, hard and raw, after ye opening of gummes. And no
medicine is to be compared with this in this disease. For if thou continue in
the use of it, it leads unto the perfect breding of the skin, as I have
oftentimes tried: and it is excellent in the evil sores of the yard. It is
made in this wise. But a pound of quick silver in a little belly of glass, and
power as much Aqua fortis unto it. Then put the belly in a pot and ashes in
Mercurium calcionated red. Grynde this, and if any part of the quick silver
remain with it, put the said powder in a cleen vessel of bras at the fire,
and be consumed. This powder may thou use to all the forsaid diseases and
specially to the sores of the yard, and of other places, where rottennes and
much il matter lets the knitting or heling up: and in fistulaes dissolve it
with wine, and cast it in by a brazen pipe, for it works meruelously.

Moreover water to separate gold from silver is thus made. Two pounds of
Vitriol of Rome Roche Alum.xvi. ounces: Sal Nitrum a pound: let them be put in
a crooked belly (writhe^ bakward)

But this angelical powder had I of a certain old Alcumist, and I made it
before Johannes de Vigo ever made any mention of it. Thus far Massa: and
part Thom. Philologus out of him.

Of the making and commodities of this read powder, read Johannes de Vigo in
his fifte book of Additionum: where he bids that the vessels rereceiuer
shall be thrice as big as the bealye, the xxxviii. leaf. b. And that white
found with this powder, is silver sublimated from the red: like as is what so
ever is yelowe or of a Saffron color. And also in his book entitled
Capiosa, the. Clxiii. lefe. a.

Powder of Mercury (says Matthaeolus Senensis, in his book of the way to
heal the French disease) is made in this manner. Take.iiii. pou^ds of water,
wherewith gould is separated from silver: Acetosae, of either ii. ounces, the
next morrow early take the waters from thence and put new unto it, and set it to
the fire in a vessel of bras or earth: when they are hot, cease not to stur them
about with an iron or woden spattle or s^is until al become powder and that
when thou list make such a recept against ye french disease as well that is
Flegmatike as Melancoly. Take electuarii Conciliatoris (this is made of diverse
cordial medicines, and spices, precious stones, pearls, gould, silver,
Camphora, Ambra, Mosch: and is described of him, Differentia. 196) half a
scruple, perls, hyacincts, of either.v. grains: the powder of Praecipitatum. v.
grains: powder of D^amuscum, Diamargariton, of either half a scrupull: Make.v.
pills (let the^ be gilded, Thom, Philologus Terrae Sigillatae and Boli Armeniae
of every.iii. grains,) let these be taken of the pacie^t an hour before day:
and let him keep his bed.v. hours. Shortly, believe me, shall the french pocks
be avoided with this receipt. For the fleum and blak choler also shall vanish
away both by vomit and downwardes. Besides this there are very many kinds of
diseases that we have cured with such a powder. For it puts not away only
matter and rotten flesh being strawed upon, but also without Tuneci, which
they call Carduum Benedictum, or with an electuarye of precious stones, if it be
not yet confirmed and stablished in the body, it drives it away meruelouslye.
Many also that be Limphatici, that is, mad, or Melancolike, whom they
believed commonly to be resorted unto of Devils, we have cured them with ye
same. What make I mani words almost dead of the quartain, putting unto it
Saccharum Buglossatum or triacle, or Mithridatium, some digestion made, an hour
before the fit, in.v. or vii. grains weight, according to the age and stre^ght
of the body of the diseased. Yea also it is holso^ to be ministered amongst the
griefs of the yard and great guts: for we have cured some that avoided their
dung by their mouth: leaninge to the moniments and sayings of Paulus Aegineta,
that says, how certain phisitio^s have ministered in that disease Athesin, did
prepare Mercurium praecipitatum with gould, and sold it like gold, which had
such virtue, to eat out gnawinge or grief. Se those that we shall declare
about the end of those that follow next after.

How Praecipitatum is made, which is a remedy against all diseases growing of
the rottennes of humors, out of a certain written book. Make a water of equal
porcions of Vitriol of Rome and Sal Nitrum, with a head and receiver, in the
which thou shall put the sixt-part of the weighte of raw Mercury, yt is to
say, if there be. 3. pou^ds of Vitriol and Sal nitrum, put.vi. ounces of Mercury.
Afterward suffer the water with his spirits to descend in to the receiver.
Then avoid all that is in the receiver into a clean belly and that is claied:
under the which put a head with a receiver, and destill it again: and when the
water is in the receiver, put it again in the belly in the which the Mercury
remained. Thou shall repete this till the Mercury wax red. Then when it is red
wash it with Cordial waters, as Borage and Balm and such like. Mercury so
prepared shall thou give to sick men within their bodies, in this manner. If the
body be very strong, give.x. grains if it be mean.viii. weakes, five: if it be
a child, consider diligently what is necessary to be done. But utterly mixed it
with triacle: so shall thou give it to him that is infected with poison,
droysy, pestilence or taken with other infirmity. If a sound man once a
year, or every third year, as it shall seem Praecipitatum with a dew
digestion of the humors, that is with a preparacion of purgacion, he shall
prevent many diseases. Note that in the stead of Mercury thou may use Amal
gama made of six parts of quick silver and of one part of gold and so shall
thou work greatter wonders. (This Amalgama must be made red like as Mercury
alone with Aqua fortis: although Mattheolus Senensis, as we declared a little
before, wry teth that the powder Mercurial may be made of Aqua fortis.) And
mark that thou may heal wounds with the first or second Praecipitatum,
which thou shall use thus: Put of it about the wound and within. And this is a
great secret. And know that in.iiii. destillacions thou shall bring this to
pas: which done, put it in a clean belly in the fire, that the spirits (that
is of the Hydrargyri that is the quick silver sublimated mixed with the
Praecipitatum) as much as is possible may depart, then make as is above
specified.

Of the sublimacion of quick silver, thou shall read Bulcasis in his third
book of his work that he calls Seruitor. But of the use of it in burninges
and seerynges, and for the French diseas, read Nicolaus Massa the sixte book,
the second chapter, and of the same book the fourth, how it is to be ordered
to seerynges, both otherwise, and that the seeryng or burning be done with none
or little grief. Certain use it at this day for the ill and angry skabes, and
ring worms or tettares. etc.

Quick silver (says Cardan) is sublimated in this manner. Put Quick silver and
Shomakers inck of either like weight, and with most sharp white vynegar mixed
it so long, till the quick silver be seen no more: then in a vessel of glass
parieted with clay sieth it till it grow together. If any do run abroad and
cum not together, break it again in a mortar with vinegar put to it, and sieth
it yet again. They use quick silver so excoct for painting faces. But it makes
the tieth fall out and briedeth a stinking breath. But for the use of silver and
for the art of Goldsmythes, it is proffitable not in few things. Of the
sublimation of Mercury, Marchasyt, Magnesiae, and Tutiae, look in Geber Summae
perfectionis, 1. 4. 45. and so forth. Also of the sublimacion of Brimstone and
arsnick. 43. chapter. Sublimatum, Praecipitatum, and Cinabrium are dissolved
with strong vinegar, specially destilled, and return into quic silver.
Syluius.

Auicenna makes mention of Arsnick sublimated. Arsnick or Orpment (says
Albertns Magnus in his book of Metalles) is of the kind of Stones, of a
Citriny color and reed, the which stone the chymici call one of the spirits.
It has the nature of Brymstone in heating and drying. Being calcinated with
the fire it waxes black, and by and by with sublimation it becummeth most
white. If it be sublimated three or four times it purchases such strength,
that it will

The medicines that ought to be used to a ca^cre exulcerated, ougth to be of a
very strong operation. Among other the best and safest help in this disease
Guido a Cauliaco says, is arsnik sublimated whose notable virtues we have
already made mention of oftentimes before, and hereafter will we celebrate and
bring it into renoune yet more. This kills) says Theodoricus) the cankar,
the wolf, Esthiomenum (that is, Sphacelum, or Syderatio blasting) noli me
tangere, the Fistula, and al such sore and wurst diseases, it kills the^ and
routeth them out the first day. But a man must have a great consideracion and
take diligent head to the places nigh about, whiles it is ministered and laid
Carcynoma or eating cankar, with Bol Armena, and other like. But also the
Arsmik sublimatum must be ministered in dew manner or just quantity (which a
rational physicion defines only by an artificial conjecture) etc. Io,
Tagautius in his institucions of

Zenzifar, that is Zinabrium, how it is made by sublimacion, look in Bulcasis
and Cardan, the fifth book de Subtilitate. The calcionating of orpme^t that it
may get a red color: in Joan. de Vigo in his Antidotary, the. 163. lief.

Tartarum, that is the dried lies of wine, how it is sharpened, that it may
have marvelous virtues for certain medicines (by the destillacion of burning
water). Lullius teaches in his second Quintessence.

A certain practicioner told me that he did dres and prepare the stoone called
Cyanence, that is, Lazulus in such wise, that it might bring up more stronglye
and more safely black choler from melancholy men and those that were mad. And
first if I remember me well he said it must be calcionated, then sublimated:
or first that the best Aqua vitae should be destilled upon it, put in a
Cucurbita or bellye, then sublimated, and be sprinkled or watered with Aqua
vitae. vi. times destilled,

Salt that it may be more pure to be put to medicines or meats, after it is
mixed with water let it be destilled by a Filtrum, and again let it be sod till
the water be consumed. The same purged in a gouldsmithes Crucibulo with a
great fire is molten and fused. When it is so molten, let it be mixed with
Salt Alcalis (or in stead of it with the white gall of glass (for there is
black also) which some call the norishmente of glass, other Zoza as Sal Gemmae.
When these are beaten they use them for Chrysocolla, or also they put a little
of Chrysocolla unto it. But this mixture has to much sharpnes, and consumes
some of ye gold. Wherefore they use it only to courser works, but to finer they
use only Borax. There be so^e that mixed Borax, commun salt molten and salt
Alcalis together in equal porcions, and in secreate matters count it for
Borax. But these are besides the matters perteining to physic.

Soot how it is gathered of pitche and butter, thou shall read in Dioscorides
and Bulcasis.

Of certain other not Alchymisticall or not destilled or sublimated medicines,
but cunninglye and wittilye prepared by other and diverse ways.
THe medicines that we have hitherto described are all comprehended under the
name of lyquors Corollarium or addicion which are not very common, nor to be
met with every where. But no man ought to look hear for a full or exact and
general way of composition at our hands: when as we shall teach only a few,
and such as shall come to mind by the way, and all these as it were by
matters besides our necessary purpose. diverse kinds and ways of making and
preparing of medicines, let him goo to the books of Iac. Siluius and other of
thies matters.

Of diverse Oils.
I Se the most part of odoriferous and precious oils to be sod in a double
vessel It is an easy matter to pres out an oil that shall be like the plant in
savor and Dioscorides the flours were poured into pure oil.iiii. dais, and were
set out in the sun, then the oil being pressed out, most diligently, as much
more of the new flours was added, and again it was set out in the hot Sun,

The second way it stands in pressinge out, in some things without any help
of Art, as Myrobalano, in other that be dry and odoriferous by their own
accord, as the Nutmeg, that is light stiept in wine and pres out with a pres.
So may a man draw oil out of spices. But they that be odoriferous, and lack
the substance of oils, as flours, upon Almondes and under them, and lay in
order the leaves of Almondes and of the flours by course, and keep them so
long pressed together, till the smell of the flowers may be vanished away, then
put them away and in their steed lay other flours after the same sort, and
do this so often (for there is not one way in all) till the Almonds have gotten
a very great smell, then have them to the pres. A man must first blaunch them
and parch them a little at the fire. By this means the oil

The third way is by destillacion (whereof it is said before.) Cardan.

Unto the most part of oils that be to be sod and made by fire, they put some
wine, by the which means they smell les of adustion and bre^tnes, and they be
sod til the wine be consumed. But flowers and such as be of a sclender
substance, it is Hyperico^ or S. Ihons wurt.

Iasminum is made of.ii. ounces of flours of Iasmin oil, which afterward is
sod with a slow fire.

Oil of swiet Almondes, hooll Cloves being added thereunto, let it be set in
the sun.viii. days, it shall be marvelous swiet smelling. But thou shall reed
diverse ways in Mesue, and in the annotacions of Syluius upon the same, of the
pressing out of oyll of Almondes, which also may be applied to diverse other
fruits and siedes from the which oyll is pressed out. We use the oyll of
Almondes am. (that is bitter) instead of oyll of ye Brassauolus.

I am wont to make an oyll of siedes and the reed codes of Capsicum, or
Cardamomu^ Arabicu^: other of the codes thereof alone, put in oyll, which is
wont to be used in place of oyll of Peper, or also of Euphorbium, if it be put
in in more abundance, for it is far more vehement then Peper. With us (they
call it reed Peper, sum of the co^mun people call it Siliquastrum, but not
ryghtly) but few of Cardan: which I praise not. Nether was the^ ever any man
said that fire was venomous, burn it never so much: when it has no venomous
quality besides. I have my self used both the siedes of this Capsicum and the
codes, without harm in potage but in a small quantity.

An oil of the kirnels of cheries cleanses ye face, takes away spots and
frakenes: it is good also for the gout, and the stone of the reins and
bladder. It is made as oil of swiet Almondes. Furne.

Oyll of hay is thus made. Let the hay be set on Rogerius.

Oil of whete is made between two iron plates moderatly made hot (or as Rasis
has, between a marble and a thick plate of iron,) but much better as I hear,
by destillacion: it is commended Furnerius and other. Sum say also that it is
good for fistulas, and the chames or chinkes of the skin: Mat. Read before
emo^gst ye oils destilled.

Oyll of Iuy beries, drawn out like as out of Bay beries, is good against the
gout of a could cause, or of obstructio^ or stopping: and it restores the
astonished members and taken with the palsy. Roge.

A marvelous oil of Hypericon or saint John's wurt. Three ounces of the tops of
Hypericon are in sufficient, afterward sieth it in a double vessel well stopped,
and pres it out strongly. Likewise stiep new Hypericon, sieth it and press it,
put to it.iii. ounces of Turpintyn, six ounces of old oyll, a scrupull of
Saffron. Sieth it till the wine be consumed. This oyll (says Syluius) no man
knows who was the author of it: Yet Galen writes that Tart or harsch wine,
wherein the leeues of Androsaenni or Ascyri (which are kinds of Hypericon) are
sold, does cloose great wounds: and as sum Hypericon hot, dry and of subtle
parts, is wholesome for them to drink that be diseased with ache in the hippes or
Sciatica. Of the which, and the virtues of other mixed here, thou may
gather, y^ which oil strengthens, digesteth and sclendereth. For it is
composed of contrary substaunces. Sylui. upon Mesuen. Brassa. puts the same
discriptio^ in Examine simplice. 519. chap. Sum (says he) put simpely the
flowers into a glased vessel, y^ the oil may be gotten out by it self with the
strength Syl. Thus prepared in a glased or glass vessel, they keep it. But
thies things are clearly expounded of Mesue and newer authors. Thies Brassauo.
Sum put to it worms or bowels of the earth, and let it stand a month or more
in a wine cellar in a pot stopped with clay or past, the^ they sieth it by little
and little in y^ same about That is the best that is streined first. The color
of the oil is almost red, the taste is sumwhat sour. The use of it is for
wounds, prickinges and all kinds of offensions and the swellings that cum
thereupon. Sum use them to the grievous soores of the legs.

An other composition of oil of Hypericon, which heals any wound great or
small within.xxiiii. hours, out of a certain book imprinted in french without
an author. A handful of Hypericon: Co^mun Axungia, that is swynes grees,
clarified and streined. Turpintyn of Venice the third part of a pound. A dram
of saf fron. Cut all small and fine and mixed them in a great phiall of glass,
which when thou have stopped diligently with wax and otherwise, set it in dong
two foot diep or more, in a place that the morning sun beemes and evening may
cum to it. At the length when the year is gone about, take out the phial, in
the which thou shall find an oyll like

An oyll is made also of Juniper beries, by expression, as of other siedes.
Brassauo.

An oyll of the beries of Bays and Juniper, stepped in wine, is beaten out with
a miln, weary profitable for the^ that have grief in the hukle boon, and cold
diseases of the joints: Iac. Hollerius.

Oil of Baies. The beries of Baies grene and beten, let them be sod in oil and
streined. An other sieth them and strain them. Otherwise, set the beries beaten
in wine, and when they are stiept.iii. days, let them be pressed out in a pres.
Or else fresh and ripe beaten, let the^ be put in a sak, and the oil drawn out.
It is wholesome against the colic, the disease of the great guts and the
Sciatica: Rogerius.

Oil out of the Myrepsical Nutte, pressed with an Anuil and a red hot iron is
gotten out. Iac. Hollerius.

Oils to assuage griefs are made of certain Calen dulae (Mary goldes)
Rosemary, Maioram and other. Iac. Hollerius.

Oil of Nutmegs. Cut them in smalpeces, and when they have stand.iii. dais
infused in Malm sye, dry them in the shadow.ii. days, then warm them
moderatly in a fryinge pan: and thou shall sprinkle them in the mean season
with Rosewater, and pres them out in a pres Cardan.

I hear say some do not stiep them in wine, but a finger may suffer, and so put
in a little bag must they be by and by tied, and pressed in a little press of
wod, with a little lake or gutter of wod, having a spout enclining downward, the
little bag put there in. etc. They yeilde for the most part, the.viii. part of
the weight of the nuts, so that one ounce of the nuts give a dram of oil, if
the nuts be sufficiently moystie. A man may warm ye same matter again and pres
it as before: but the second time yeldeth very little oil and not so good. It is
better therefore to two extreme irons or ends whereof, consisted of. ii hollow
half spheres, so that when they were pressed together they might hold a Nutmegge,
or a little les, as occasion of the pressing served. The one of the half
spheres was bored through with.iiii. or v. little holes, that the oil might
run out, when the ends of the tongues moderatly made hot were pressed together. I
found also this descripcion in a certain written book. Take.ii. pounds of
Nutmegs. Three ounces of Malmesy, wherewith the Nutmegs

There be many ways to make oil of Rooses. It is made either with oil and ripe
Roses, or both of them unripe, or the one ripe, the other unripe and so there
is.iiii. diverse ways. Some in stead of Rasis in his Antidotario seperato
puts.iii. ways. First. Take a pound of co^mun oil washed, wherein thou
shall put the fourth part of Grene Rooses in a glased vessel (of glass
rather) which thou shall set in the sun for the space of.iii. days (ye.xl. as
Aegi neta has). Then strain it and put it in a glass. This way is better
then the other. The second: Take oil and Roses as before, and hang the vessel
in a well so that it may be touched of the water: and keep it. The third: Oil
and Roses as before, put them in a glass anointed within with honye, which stopped
thou shall let it diep in ye earth, where it shall not be touched nether with
water nor other moisture. ii, months. This oil will be better smellinge then the
other: These writes Rasis out of Aegineta as it appears. Aegineta bids
in the xx. chap. of the seventh book, unto a Sextarium or wine pint of oil
Omphacinum (made of olives not fully ripe) to put.iii. ounces of red Roses the
nails Mesuae in the. 411. chapt. describes.iiii. ways. First that fresh and
new red roses be set in the sun.vii. days, then let them be sod in a double
vessel.iii. hours: then (the Rose leaves wrong out) let other be put in, and
let them be set in the sun and sod as before. Which when thou have done thrice,
put to the oil water of infusion of Rooses, Syluius tra^slateth it, as much as
the oil is, which I like not so well.) So when it is set in the sun.xl.
days, strain it and set it long again in the Sun. The second, mixting
with the oil washed the juice of Roses, and the water of their infusion, and the
leaves beaten together: then setting it in the sun with swiet Almondes
blaunshed, and exactly beaten in a mortar, leaves of Roses be beaten again,
the^ make them in little lumpes or caakes, and keep them in a hot air.xxiiii.
hours. Then beat the^ again and kneed them in the mortar very exactly,
pouring unto it a little hot water of infusion of Roses. At length prees out
the oyll with a press, and put in a glass covered set it to su^. The fourth, y^
it be made with Sesamum blaunshed after the same manner as with Almondes. But
Almondes are Sesama for ripe. Thies has Mesue, where Syluius had it. The first
composition (says he) of the.iiii. now rehearsed, is used of many: but of the
Parisians, the composition of Nicolas, which shall be declared in his
Antidotary. And again, I hear that oyll of Roses is is made most
odoriferous, by putrefying the roses one month in dung in a vessel well
stopped. After the same manner of commun Mastick, and Roses incarnate and Musk
Roses and such like, Cardanus out of Symeon. There be sum that when the Rooses
are beeten, and sod in only water, say there swimmeth a certain fat foom,
which may be streined or gathered me, that the leaves of Roses new should be
sod in water til they be thick as honey almost, then crushed with a spoon, that
the oyll or foom may enter in to it: but sum water will be mixed also with it,
wherefore when it is gathered in a glass, it is set in the sun and ye oil swiming
above in ye top is separated.

Oyll of the flowers of Elder purges and makes smouth the skin, strengthens
the sinews, and helps the griefs of them. Furnerius.

Oil of Spick most wholesome for the^ that have Antidotary of Arnold de Villa
noua.

Oyll of the flowers of Verbascum is made, by settin them in the sun in a glass
(as also of the flowers of Rosemary) most commended and praised for the gout
of the fiet and of other griefs, specially hot.

Oil of violets is made as oyll of Roses, but of grien oy^l, or oyll of
Almondes or Sasamin: Mesue. Paulus Aegineta makes this oyll of purple Violeth
or Leucoio that is yelowe: or he sets them in the sun covering the vessel
exactly that it breath not through, only ten days, the Violettes in the mean
season thrys changed, and at length he adds dry Violettes.

Of oyll of Tartarum, that is the dry Lies of wine.
OYll of Tartarum devised by Peter Argil lata, serves to cleanse the face and
to smouth it. Tartarum cleaving to the sides of the vessel, white rather then
red made into powder, is stepped in vinegar, after it is folded in a linen
cloothe, then let it be put in Tow moystened with water under the ashes:
after that let it be laid in a dish hielding towad the one side.iii. days:
then shall a certain humor sumwhat red destill.

Nicolas way to make oil of Tartarum cleaning Tartaru^ that is of good wine
beaten, folded in a linen cloth, moysten it well with strong white vynegar:
sieth it under hot ashes (burn it) til it wax black, beet it again, keep it in
a vessel lying on the one side enclyned eight days, in a cold place, til it
be resolueed into oil, which if it do not, pres it out and keep it. The same
ways does Mesues make oils of eggs. It were better, when ye Tartaru^ is
calcinated and put it in a Hippocras bag, as they call it, and into a vessel
set under it. Syluius. I find an other certain manner in Furnerius in a French
book of decking, where as he bids to take Tartaru^ burned and calcinated,
as much as can be taken at two handfulles and tied strait in a linen clout
to be burnt and calcinated in a furnace of Glass, Lyme or Brick: the^ to be
powered into a good quantity of water with as much Alum as a nut and to be
much sturred about: then when thou have let rest.xxiiii. hours, streine this
water (casting

Sum put Tartarum to be calcinated in a new pot in a potters oven, and when
the vessels are all baked then take it out. But I think it should

An other way. Take equal porcions of Tantarum Salnitrum pund, burn them in a
larg pot: then grind or break them with a hot iron and put them in a little
bag in a wine celer, that they may destill.

An other. Beat Tartarum and Nitrum in equal parts, mixed them and burn them
that the Nitrum may be consumed. The Tartarum that remains: put in a bladder
(that is a glass like a bladder) hang it in hot water, and it shallbe streighte
resolved into oil. An other. Tartarum well washte from the dregs and very well
dried shall Filtrum: then let it gather into a Iellye: when it is so,
calcinat it again that it may wax more white. So at length shall thou hang
it in a little bag, as an Hippocras bag in a moist place: lay on some
broad thing for a cover, that no unclean thing fall into it, and setting a
glased pot under it.

Some destill it in a lembeek of glass (that is to say in ashes) from whence a
water runs first, then the fire increased by little and little, the oil.

The use. It is good for all scabs and Ringwormes, it makes the skin white,
clear and youthlike. I have seen it used to runninge soores of the head: to
the which I thinck that is better where with Nitrum is burned together. It makes
coper also and silver white, and puts away spots and steins in linne^
clothes. It is put to colors to make the^ ink, of the color of the bresill
wode and other. Rogerius also. 4. 9: teaches to make oil of Tartarum. This
(says he) cleanses cloths and spots remaining after birth of a melancoly
cause, and purges the face.

Of oils of the yelkes of eggs, worms, and Scorpions.
Oil of eggs, out of Rasis. Put the yelks of eggs in an iron kettel upon the
coals till Mesues) is proved with much experience to purge the skin, to heal
thoroughly tetters, ringwormes and other faults of the skin, to bread hear, to
sores boyles and fistulaes. Thirty eg yolks or there about hard roasted,
crummed with the hands, let them be parched in an earthen frying pan or
skellet leaden with Mesues. Whereas Syluius in his annotacions says. It takes
away meruelously the foulnes of the skin, and skars, specially that be left in
burnte places, for the most part it smells somewhat strong, yet at the last
destilled by sublimacion, les. It increases hear, as Serapion says in his
Antidotarie.

Oil of eggs of Nicolas fashion. Frye sodden yolks of eggs with a slow fire
made of coals in an iron skellet, continually sturringe them with an iron
rod, till they be well roasted, press them Syluius) to frye the yelkes raw,
and move them continually with a spone, til they being roasted, and pressed with a
spone, give an oil in a vessel hielding, which put in a glass reserved good a
great while. Out of xx. yolks thou shall draw out in.ii. hours.iiii.
ounces or there about.

Matthaeolus wrytinge upon Dioscorides, prayseth this oil for the roughnes of
ye skin, for ringwormes,

In a wound upon the brain pan, pour in Abhomeron, Abynzoar teaches,
which we have also tried with good succes: Marianus Sa^ctus.

An oil for the sores or boyles of children.xvi. yolks of eggs sod: an vure of
Mirrh.iiii. grains of black Helleborus, let them be mixte together with an iron
spone in an iron skellet set upon a few coals, then pres the yelks, and get out
the oil, till it begin to be clear without skin: put yt oil in a glass and keep
it for thine use: anoint the sores twice a day, and the scabs shall fall away
by their own Alexander Benedictus in his.xxx. book of experimentes.

I have seen this oil made.ii. ways: first, frying the yelks in a frying pan
til they wax red and yield an oil: secondly, siething them much longer, til
they appear blak, and all the moisture gone out of them: for at length they
yield an oil fodenlye: which is separated with a spone removing y^ frying pan
from the fire streightway, and pressing ye yolks with the spone: this some men
think to be

This oil makes skars subtle, dissolueth Tetters and ringwormes: Rogerius. But
Brassauolus writes that the Apothecaries do falsely attribute unto this oil the
virtue to put away skars, to the intent they may get eggs from folishe
people. Thou shall read more of the virtues thereof in the Antidotary of
Arnold. Some tie the yolckes so fried in a linen cloth, and pres them in apres

Oyll of worms or bowels of the earth is commended for the asswaging of
griefs, specially of the sinews and joints, also if they cum of the french
diseases. It is made, the worms purged from their earthy excrementes, either by
styping these excrementes through the fingars, or rather by letting them stand
alive in sum vessel where hay is, to crepe: then sod with a little wine in oil
and strayned: or set in the sun before they be sod. Sum sieth them in water and
gather the fatnes that swymmeth

Sum get out the peth of biggar elder pypes and somewhat strong, and put the
worms into the^ pouring in also oil: and so stopped, they let them stand in a
furnace for the space of half an hour: then they take away the oil and keep
it.

Oil of Scorpions (says Mesues) breaks the stone of the reins and bladdar,
and expels it, being anointed upon the loins, the privy parts where here
is, and betwien the tuel beneath and the Aristolochia gentian, Cyperi, the
barks of the rotes of Capers, of every one an ounce, let them be set to sun in
a Sextar of oyll of bitter Almondes, xx. days in a glass stopped: then put in the
Scorpions from ten till.xv. in to the oyll: stop the glass and set them in the
sun again a month. He that as he cummeth out of the bathe, in the.iii.
forsaid parts, and let a little portion of it be put in at the yard every
hour. It is marvelous. Sum had rather used the first, sum ye latter as more
effectual and better wurking. Thies Mesues. But Siluius in his annotacions
says, it is prepared also now with old oyll putting to simple medicines good
against poison: and it becummeth an oil of marvelous virtues against al poisons
and pestilence. I know a man with the help of this, that seteth Syluius.

In the secrets of Variguanus, we reed that certain have been presently and
out of hand delivered oyll of Scorpions.

Oyll of Scorpions whose operacion is marvelous against poisons specially of
Serpents and other beats, and peculiarly against Napellum, is written by
Matthaeolus Senensis in his sixth book of his comme^taries upon Dioscorides
imprinted in Italian, from whence we have translated it into Latin. This oyll
(says he) anointed upon the pulsing veins, where they appear most, as of
the temples, hands and fiet, and in Hypericon or saint John's wurt fresh, (with
the herb and flowers.) Put the oyll into a belly of glay, twyse as big as for
the measur thereof, and when the Hypericon is a little beaten put it in upon it.
Then the vessel being stopped, set it in most fine sand up to the midst where
it may be made hot the hool day of the sun, for the space of ten or twelve
days. After thou shall put it in Balneo Marie four and twenty hours. Then
pres out the oyll from the herb and put to Hyperici, Chamedryos, Calaminthae,
Cardui sancti, of every one a handful moderatly beeten: and put them again
into the bath for.iii. days. Afterward thou shall streine them and pres them:
and putting to them.iii. handfuls of flowers of Hypericon well picked from the
stalks, and well beeten, set it again.iii. days in Balneo Mariae, and pres it
out as before. This shall thou repete.iii. or.iiii. times, till the oyll have
gotten a color as red as Hypericon, or the husks like to the corns of barley,
wherein the seeds ly hid, in such plenty that it may be equal with the three
handfulles: beat thies sprinkling upon them a little white wine, and power it
into the said oyll. then bery it in sand in the sun eight days, and straight
after in the bath for.iii. days. Streine and pres it as before. And do this
three or.iiii. times putting in new tenderlynges of Hypericon, till a very sad
or dark reed Scordium, Calamint,, the les Centaury, Carduum sanctum, Veruin,
Dictamnum Creticum, of every one half a handful. When they are beaten, put
them into oyll: and put them in a bath for two days. Strein them and pres
them as before. Then take Zedoariae, the root of white Dictamni, Gentian,
Tormentillae, Aristolochiae root, of every one three drams: of fresh Scordium a
handful. When they are beaten together, power them in and let them again, put
into the oil Styracis Calamitae, Belzoi or Laserpitii, of either.vi. drammes:
the bearies of Juniper.iiii. drams: Nigellae. iii. drams: odoriferous Casiae.
ix. drammes, white Saunders.iiii. drams: Scoenanthi, Cuperis of either a dram
and a half, when they are beaten pour them in, and put them into the bath.iii.
days, strain and pres. After, take.xxx. live Scorpions, gathered in the
Caniculer days, and put them in a belly of glass upon hot ashes, and when thou
see them sweat Rhabarbi Electissimi, commun Mirh, Aloes Hepaticae, of every
one.iii. drams, Spiknard.ii. drams, one dram of Saffron: Triacle elect,
Mithridatii perfecti, of either half an ounce. When they are beaten pour
Napellum, wherewith those.ii. thieves of Cor^ica were infected, whose history we
recited in ye fourth book, where we made mention of Aconitum, to which place I
send the reader. These writes Matt.

Cardanus thinks that the oil which should be anointed without the body
against poisons, upon metal, as of orpment or drawn out of Myssi, see before
in the beginning of the tretise of oils destilled of metally things.

Of oil of Serpents or black Edders, also of oil of frogs, read Mesuae. etc.

Oil of Castoreum is composed with many other spices, and hot gums. etc. as
Syluius describes upon Mesuen: it may also be made simple and single, and for
the hard and Massy part of Castorei the fattines cleauinge to it to be added,
or rather both, as I counsel.

Brimston is made hot in oenostagmate (I understand burning water) till a
certain skin swim above (they call it an oil) which a man must take in a
shell, sometimes the water must be changed, till oil enough be gathered,
wherewith they say Hydargiron, that is quick Silver sunken in a body is
entised out, if it be anointed streighte way when a man comes out of the
bathes. Iac. Hollerius. See befoore amongste the destilled oils.

Of fomentations and perfumes*
FOmenta are called of the Greeks Pyriamata, all things that be laid hot to
the body without, either to assuage the grief, or to draw out the matter,
both otherwise, and also to dissolve swellings: this perauenture is done by
dri fomenta^ions rather, now the one now the other both dry and moist by
course, as in gouty greues either in the feet or other joints, where as it is
ieopardy least the more subtle part of the matter drawn out, the groser be
left behind and made more hard. Moist fomentacions seem to prepare the matter
for the dry, to extenuate and make sclender, to mollefy, to digest, to make
them vapor out: some perauenture do none of these, according to the diversity
of the matter. But dry fomentacions do dry and Filtrum, that is a shred of
woollen cloth. Bladders or like things full of hot water or oil. Cataplasmata
also may be numbered amongste these, which are ministered hot, that is to say
herbs sod, and Milium, Salt, Sand, bran, Otes made hot in a kettle, and
sturred about, are put into a linen clothe or bag. Celsus in some places
commends the juice of hot Salt, and in an other place he says it is most
wholesome to make fomentacions with moist Salt. You shall, as he expounds
put a little bag into hot water, and lay it hot to the place diseased:
putting into the bag now and then an iron s^ise hot, and sprinkling water
lightly upon it: therefore you shall have.ii. slices redi, that while the one
slis is put into the bag the other may be heated in the fire. In the disease of
the neck called Tetanus, which is the stifnes of the sinnewes (says Celsus)
it is necessary to have a moist and warm fomentacion. Therefore the most
part of men do pour often upon the necks much hot things. That procures
presently ease, but it makes the sinews more apt to receive cold: which ought
to Paronychia or whitflow, or ilgnawing sore upon her out, and many medicines
used in vain, she laid unto it a fomentacion of the mos of a walnut tree sod
in wine, so that she held the sore place a pretty while in that vapor: then
bound part of the mos hot thereupon, and was by and by made hoole. A fire brand
also brent, foulded in a moist cloth is instead of a hot fomentacion in
Celsus. I have put Caret or Cumin sede beaten in a bag moystened with burning
water hot, unto the navel of them that were sick of the colic, and have had
often a pype. Hyppocrates describes a peculiar vessel for this purpose. Let
them put out their head the while, which are to weak for to abide it, or such
as it is to be feared lest they swound or chance into over great thirst. etc.
Sum in bathes power water or wine, simple or mixte with medicines upon reed
hot tyle stones or dros of iron, or stones. Sweet in bed is provoked with hot
tyle stones foulded in moist linen clothes and put in to the bed, or with
tinnen bottelles filled with Celsus. Sum put hot ashes, or burning cooles
rather in a vessel Matricaria. be laid unto by course. Celsus wills men in
sum place to lay about the places diseased wull perfumed with the smoock of
brymston. Hereunto may be referred all such things as Fuchsius and other wryt
of fomentacions, apposicions, embroches, little bags and insessions. The greek
word aeonein signifies the water upon and power upon, whether it be done
because of fomentacion, that is with heat, or other cause. Galen does praise ye
perfume of the fire stone or miln stone sprinkled with vine Cinabrio that is
made of quitksiluer, sum also with orpme^t and Marchasita. etc shall thou find
in Nic. Mass. and certain other which have taught ye heeling of this disease.
The leeues dry of Tussilago made in perfumes so ye smok may be drawn in at the
mouth upon, does help ye congh and Orthopnaeu^, and breaks the impostumes in
the breast. The same operacion also has the rout Dioscorides.

Of certain juices.
THe juices of certain herbs wrong and pressed out, are sod at fire or dried in
the sun, as Bulcasis teaches severally of the juice of Hamsig, Plantain,
Lettis, Singrien, Purselan, Rostrum Purcinum, or hogs snout, Scariola, Fenel,
Smalage, Volubili, Sorrel, and other.

A marvelous way to draw out the juice out of black Elleborum, which sum use
as a secret would not hyde, lest I should seem to be sorry that our posterity
should have any excellent knowledge. who found this way first I can not say I
learned it of certain my most secret friends I mean that black Elleborum
which communly all men in Germany name in like manner, like unto Consiligo,
very many keep it in their garde^s: but that which grows upon the
mountains, to be found in our country Heluetia is best. A man may try the
same way in Colocynthida Esula, Laureola, etc. Elleborum cleen and washed, set
infused in the same first a night or more, small cut. Thou shall take heed both
in this and in the other decoctions that thou skim away diligently all the foom
that swymmeth above, as venomous. This water shall thou keep and again power
other unto it warm, and heet it a while moderatly, changing the water so often
til the routes retein none or very little bitterness any more: which shall cum
to pas when thou have Filtrum or through a brush: and at length sieth all with
a slow fire, or with burnt cooles rather, so that they boil not, yet let them
be always at the point of boiling, until they be as thick as honey in an
earthen pot glased, or of bras tinned, the pot covered or little open. When as
now a little water remains, about the end of the siething, stur it about
gently now and then with same time for a pound of rotes of Elleborum, thou shall
put.ii. drammes of Mastik pund, and cease not to stir it, other continuallye,
or by little distaunces, til the juice seem out and out sufficiently thickened,
which will chance suddenly for the most part: and that the matter may be
the les burnt, the nere unto the end and to the thickning the juice is, so
much urge it with les fire: nor be not weary of the time: for thou shall have a
most excellent and exquisite medicine against diverse Asarum or Asaraba^cha,
and Cloves, but stronger, ye burning as it seems to the taster: yet is not
burning in deed, that is because of the tenuitie and sclendernes of the
parts, as I would have tried. It is ministered an hour after supper, in the
mou^tenance of a pease, in all diseases whereunto Elleborus is conueniente, and
where it is good to lose Elleborum alone, but infused and decocted with other
diverse medicines, as I shall declare by and by. taken grene or dry. But a man
must take a pound at the least of the rotes. Lullius and other (Cardan) have
made mention of the quintessence of Elleborum, where unto I think this juice
to be nothing inferior. This truly is worthy to be wondered at, that the
juice so long decocted is not only nothing weaker but also much stronger:
for it seems, (that I may speak of conjecture) that one part of this juice
to be ten times and more stronger then Elleborus it self, and yet nothing
Mastik is added at the last, specially for more hard and grievous diseases,
where necessity requires extreme medicines: and for Frantic persons and
otherwise mad and dotinge, which when Acatia and of Berberies in Bulcasis.
For the straininge of it only is decocted, not that which is depressed out:
also the juice of Galbanus and Licoris: but the water in them

Other juices are made all by expression, and aresod til they gather into a
Ielly, as of S^landine, Poppy, Wormwod, nightshade, Vinae Acerbae, Memithae,
Agremony, Hypocisthidis, the barks of the rotes of Mandrag. The same Bulcasis
also, wills to put to a little gum to certain juices that be pressed out which
are sod by them selves at the fire, that the parts of the^ may better cleue
together, as the juice of wormwod and gasid, that is Eupatorium or nightshade:
also of Centaury, and Mastik is mixed with ye juice of Elleborus, not only for
this cause, but also to amend the venomous virtue thereof and contrary to the
stomak. Moreover in certain other medicines, where a man list to increase the
strength and virtue of any medicin which is to be left and laid away in some
liquor, we chaung not the liquor, but the medicin: that is ever when the first
is strained, putting in new medicin into the same liquor, as in many decoctions
Elleborus we do contrary: For keeping the same rotes of the Elleborus, we
change often the liquor. I may tell the cause, because ye rote of Elleborus
above all other things, has most strong virtues, not in ye superficial and
other parts only, but in ye hole substance imprinted vehemently and fastly:
wherefore it may be also kept most long of al other. I my self used it, when it
was.x. years old, in his full strength. And certain common Practicioners
bid men in a part of it has sooked a night and the next day is strained,
and the rotes to be dried again: for they are nothing or very little weaker
therewith although they be somewhat often repeated to the same use and dried
again. But of Elleborus it self and what we have tried and experimented thereof,
perauenture we shall once have an other place and occasion to write of.

Pills of blak Elleborus, or rather of his juice, is to be taken every seventh
day in the curing of the Matthaeolus cou^selith. Three drams of the roots of
black Veratrum or Elleborus fresh and new: Dauci or yelow-Caret, Anisi, Peper,
of every one a dram.vi. grains of Mosth. ii scrupuls of Epithy mii or the
harder time: let all these be lightlye beaten: then when they have stand to
soke a day and a night, v. pounds of Malmsye (hear seems to be some fault of
the printer, for it is to great a measure of wine) let them be mightilye pressed
out. Take.iii. Cochiarum, Aurearum, of every one. ii drams and a half, knede
them together, and then let them be dried. Moreover when they are dry and made
again in powder, thou shall stiepe them again in the same Malmsy, as
before.iiii. times. The pills thereof, must be taken at one time, to the
weight of one dram.

Our juice composed and made of Elleborus. Two pounds of Black Elleborus
new cut: stiep them a night in a good quantity of water. The next day after
sieth them an hour and a half with a slow fire, or.ii. hours, power it out
straining it, and put in to it other water warm (which shall be ready in a chafer
by the fyr for this purpose. Repete this seven times or more. Then castyng away
the routes, take the hooll water streined or destilled by a Filtrum, and sieth
it by little and little and when as yet a little of it shall remain, power unto
it this decoction: Seven handful of Betain, Anisi. iii. ounces, stiep the^ in
water and sieth them till the consumpcion and wasting of the third part: pres
it out, strain it twys or thrys, at the length put to five ounces of Agaricum
elect cut small: flower deluce two ounces and a half: Cinnamon six drams, Ginger
half an ounce: sieth them to the half, pres them out and strain the water as
before. Then power this decoction to the decoction of the Elleborus boiling
moderatly: and let them be ^od together to the thicknes of honey. Scammonium:
thies dissolved together in a little of the decoction of Elleborus, that it may
be like the substance of honey, not much before the end of the decotion power
it in, (when the juice shall be moderatly thyck, or begins to be thick) and
thou shall stur it about till the juice be consumed. Thou shall try now and
then a drop of the juice, let it fall upon a tinnen ^rencher, and when it
shall be so thick that it the trencher on the one side or lifts it up, then is
the juice perfect. But by the space of an hour or more before the end thou
shall now and then stur it about with a slow fire, lest it burn too. Of this
decoction I had almost.xi. ounces of juice: I thinck I should have had skarsly
ye fourth part, if I had sod Elleborum alone. This juice have I used already
sumtymes: for I ministered it unto a young man sik of the falling evil, with
good succes, who now of long time God be thanked, is well: but Ascarides or
little round worms breeding in the long gut, many medicines tried in vain, was
restored with this juice once received, and a few days after taking hearts
horn burnt. Pills of the bigness of a pees, from.ii. to five may be ministered
after supper, that is from half a scrupull or there about to a hool. But a man
may try thies better in after sopper, ye next day I felt no small grief about my
stomak, I avoided su^tymes downward, but I vomited not. A man may more safly
give it to the^ yt be sufficiently full of flesh or fat, of a moist stomach, and
a stomach of moo exquisite sense.

Again of the juice of black Elleborus: and of the drawing out of the virtues
out of purging medicines and certain other, as I learned of a certin friend.
THis drawing out was invented for delicate Elleborus. iiii. pound of blak
true Ellebo. new and fresh, let the^ be straight ways washed: the^ cut small
power upon the^ this manner of streining, ye juice of Buglos, Borrage, of
either.ii. pounds: let the^ be purified strained most diligently, y^ they may
be as pure as gold, and let the^ be laid or set up for a time. The^ take fenel
roots Cichori, sperage, persely, of every.iiii. vnc. Iuiuba ru^, sebesten, of
either.ii. ounces. Melon siedes, cucumer siedes, gourd siedes, citrul siedes, of
every an ounce, sieth the^ according to art in. 16. pou^ds of rain water. Unto
this straining power ye forsaide.iiii. pou^des of juice: let the^ boyll a little
at y^ fire: afterward put in y^ cut and beaten Ellebo. and sieth the^ lightly
by little and little till yt the roots appear above, the^ pres the^ out again,
strain the^ through a filtru^, sieth this straini^g to ye thiknes of honey with
from half a scrupul to a hool or further. It is ministered to louse ye belly,
folded or molded in a little moystned dow unleavened, mixed with a drop or two of
oyll of Anis.

The extraction of Rhabarbari. Cut a pound of the pieces of Rhabarbarum elect
small, and beat it sumwhat gros, and power to it ye clarified juices of Borage
and Buglos, of either two pounds, let them stand.xxiiii. hours. Afterward
sieth them at a slow fire, till the Rhabarbarum appear and Balneo Mariae till
it be thick lest it should put to which is better, as likewise in a double
vessel. In purging give it to be swalowed down mixed with a drop of oyll of
Cinnamon and Anis, and foulded in unleavened dow, making a trial Rhabarbarum by
it self does not purge greatly, do sharpen the hooll extraction with a little of
the best Dacrydium, which hurts not.

An extractio^ of pills. Take any lump or mas that y^uo will of pills composed
most diligently, and of the best medicines: when it is broken into little
pieces, stiep it eight days in rain water juice of Borage, juice of Fenell,
in equal porcions, as much as suffiseth. Then sieth it in a glasen double
most clean wullen clothe, that will lose none of his hears, and sieth it
again in a bath and double vessel diligently to a convenient thicknes, and
frame little pills whereof thou shall give.ii. scruples or there about. A matter
drawn out in this wise is most pure, very tender and melts easily in a man's
hand. In like manner may also the virtues of other purging medicines be drawn
out. But head must be taken, that ever softening and slippery juices be mixed
therewith in the decoction,

A description of a purging Electuari extracted, which a certain excellent
Physician at Norinberg did use.xiii. drammes of Colocynthidis, blak Elleborus,
senae Alexandrinae, of either an ounce, of most white Agaricum an ounce:
Rhabarbarum Electum half an ounce, or if the Rhabarbarum be not very good, an
ounce: xiiii. drams of Dacrydium: Turbirh, (if I read right) Stichas Ara. of
either Lignum Aloes, Mastik, red Mirrh, Asarum, spiknard, Styrax liquid, of
every.v. scrupuls. Pour altogether and digest or putrify the^, as they call
it.x. days or.xiiii. in warm Aqua vitae thrice destilled. The juice pressed out
thereof shall be joined and mixed with.iii. ounces of prepared Aloes. But the Aloes
did he prepare in this wise. About apou^d of Aloes is put into a basen, caudron
or pot, putting thereto vinegar made with Rosewater, and Roosewater of the
vinegar of Roses, then of the water of Roses. Let them boil together with a
slow fire.ii. or.iii. boylinges: then strain them pressing them strongly.
When it is strained, let it boil again with a slow fire to the thicknes of
Aloes sturring it continuallye with a slise. When it is could, let it be kept
for use. The species or particulers rehearsed are first cut small, then beaten,
infused in Aqua vitae, as much as is sufficient, they are let stand in the
infusion warm in Balneo Mariae or sand.xiiii. days, sturring and chafinge
them in Diacy donion of the said medicin. If there remain yet any moisture let
it be put upon burning coals in some vessel as much as is sufficient.

Of the juice of the Flour Deluce and Rape. etc.
OVre Flower Deluce is more strong in operation in the dropsy, as seems me,
then the Florentines: of the which opinion a friend of mine also a very well
lear^ed Physician is, who of late sent me these his experimentes and trialles
of the juice of the root of Flower Deluce and Rape. Take a hens of the Flower
Deluce in place, and mixte it diligently with the yolke: and when thou have a
little warmed it in the ashes, give it for a mornings draught, which shall
avoid downward above mesure the dropsy water.

This also (says he) have I emongst my secrets for them that be sick of the
dropsy and can not sweet: take the juice of a round Rape beaten in a mortar and
pressed out, seasoned with Sugar or cinnamon, that it taste something else then the
Rape,

The juice of Purslan, Singreen or Houslike, Cotyledonis, and of other likewise
that be slimye and Clammy, because of the clammines can not be pressed out
alone: The herb well punde with Omphacium is pressed out. Other when they are
punde heat them at a flow fire. Other beat them and let them stand in a cold
place, as a wine celler, put in a basket of wikars, to destill down into
Syluius, in whom thou shall read moore of the preparinge and preserving of
juices, in his book of the preparacio^ of simples.

Of Lignum sanctum and any other, we draw out tears, which is moore
precious then the wood it self, in this wise. The Lignum is cut in pieces,
the thicknes of a finger, which are put in the fire: thereby is gathered what
tere so ever is in the Ligno. Cardanus.

Milk is gathered of Esula and Selandin, cuttinge the highest bows, and laid
hielding in a vessel, pressing (milking or sliping* the^ one by one. The
liquor so gathered shall thou dry in the su^ne. But the juice is gathered when
the herbs are punde and pressed out: Bulcasis.

Gummes that be purginge and other, (if any refuse to swalowe in the form of
pills) put them in boylinge water, let them be dissolved, strain them: and
put in oil of swiet Almonds, and give it in drink with rob.

Put any strong purginge medicine in water or wine: Then in the same liquor
stiepe dry prunes, or dry Figs, or Rasins till they swel, then wash them
in wine. These fruits received within the body do maruelouslye and without
grefe loose the bealye: Arnold in his book of wine. Sieth.iiii. ounces of
Passularium with water of Violets half an hour, lift them through a sieve: the^
sprinkle in.ii. drams of Scammonium, let them be dried. Then when thou will
give.xxx. or.xl. Panatella. Epiphanius Empericus.

Some stuff a fat Goose with medicines, with well lykinge Kitlinges chopte
small, with Salt, and roastinge it softlye upon a broche, gather the liquor
that drops therout, to annoynte goutie members therewith. Io. Goenrotus. I
hard say how a certain practicioner roosted a gose stufte with Mise, chopte
small, and ministered the liquor gathered there of to the annoynting of the
crooked vunche upon the back.

Of decocted things.
WE call decoctions liquors, water, wine, or vinegar: in the which any medicines
be sod at the fire, and then streined. etc. of the which for shortness sake at
this present we will speak nothing, saving that we will admonish, that when
they are beaten or chopped they ought to be first stiept which should be sod and
decocted in a vessel diligently stopped and cloosed.

A decoction in vinegar against the pestilence. Sieth two handful of the
biggar Salandin, the herb and root together, in.iiii. pound and a half of the
best vinegar, upon cooles in a glased pot with a cover the mouth whereof shall be
fensed with clay of other. And of late I red almost ye very same medicine in a
certain book of a certain practicioner, written in french, and a few years
past when the pestilence was here, a certain friend of mine sent unto me a like
description. Many would have the Selandine sod in the vinegar, but other put
other things to: sum, as I said, Rue only: other also Sage noble, Rosemary,
the leeues of flower deluce, not the root, Zedoaria and sieth it in a pot well
covered: thereof they give a few drops

Otherwise.. Wormwood, Rewe, the yonglinges Selandin. iii. parts. Sieth the^
in white vinegar q. s. that is as much as is sufficient in a pot clayed, till
the third part be consumed, let it be given as soon as ama^ is infected, and
after let him sweet.

Otherwise.. A pound of the roots of Sela^dine, Brimstone, Saffron,
Turmentill, an ounce, Triacle.ii. ounces: pimpernel, Gentian, of every an ounce
and a half: Pilosella or mous ear, with the root and all. Rewe, of either an
handful, Sage with.ii. quartes of whyt vinegar til the third part be consumed.
In this decoction dissolve electuary of an eg (or triacle) to the quantity of
a been let it be given to the pacient as thou know.

Of made wine, and mixed with medicines.
LAst of all we will teach and declare here certain things of made and
counterfeit wynes, yet not of all of purpose, Dioscorides, Aetius in his last
book, and to the book of Arnold Villa nouani of wynes. Wynes mixed with
medicines are made diverse ways: first siething the medicines with the wine
while it is must and new, for the most part to the consumpcion of the third
part, skumming in the mean season and straining afterward. Sum sieth the wine
alone: other till ye Zedoaria, with Inula, also with Borrage and Melissa, in
Arnold. Sum sieth a little new must and when it is couled, they power it upon
the herbs in the vessel. Secondly putting the wine, before it be hot, that
by the heet of it in the vessel, the virtue of the medicin may be mixed with it:
So the most men with us prepare wine of wormwood, and they let it stand a
hooll winter in the vessels, ever filling the vessels again, if they draw any
thing out of it, in the beginning of vere they take the herbs out: sum leave
them in all summer also, but yet it is easily corrupted, waxes hoor and moldy,
and sower specially if the vessel be not full. Sum set a plate of iron tinned
boored Cariophyllata dry be put to, y^ wine shall be preserved the lo^gar. Other
sieth simpely with wine the medicine whose virtue they would have to pas in the
wine, at any time of the Inula. etc. Wine may also be mixed and streined with
the juices of herbs clarified: or hanged in a little bag in it a few days, to
be pressed out and when it is strained to be mixte with the wine, and new
medicines to be put into the bag, etc. for if the matter be pressed out often
and new put to, the wine shall be the stronger, and we shall fill the vessel
now and then for that that is drawn out: for if not, the wine will become
every foot weaker.

Wines medicined (as we have said) may be made, leauinge the medicines put in
a bag, or Arnold in his book of wine. Such as a man list to sethe, it should
be best to sethe it in a double vesselor in Baln. Ma.

Aromaticall made wines or with spices may be kept for.iii. or.iiii. days
clear, afterward they are troubled. Plinius teaches the confections of wines
of diverse simple medicines. 14. 16.

Wine of Wormwode how it is made, I have Wormwode: other mixte with it other
diverse herbs, specially hot: as Hyssop, Rue, Sage, Cardnus Benedictus, Penny
royal, Costus Hortensis, Phyllitides, the flowers of Eldar, the Barks of
Ash. I make sometimes in a glass forthwith, putting the leaves of Wormwode dry,
into Malmsy and burninge water, thrice destilled of either like much. This may
be long kept: a little of it put to a great deal of wine, does season it holly
with the quality of Wormwode. It is good for a cold stomach, Arnoldus in his
book of wines. A better way of making it says he, that the Wormwod grene or
dry be beaten, and that the wine warm be straind upon it certain times, til
it receive the savor and virtue of it, and to season it with Sugar or Honye:
this way to make this wine is better then other, because all the strength of
the Wormwod is in the superficial Galangal or Anise may also be added, or any
other thing as a man thinks good. Wine of Mugwort is made in the same manner
that wormwode wine is.

Wine of the kirnels of Alkckengi or Haliacacabus, is made the same way,
straining the wine up on them beaten, for one Dosis, of it thou shall take
from.v. to.x. it brings out stony matter from the Arnold in his book of wine)
whereof I my self also made a trial of late, straining together Anise, the rote
of Carlina, the kirnels of Peches, and y^ little stones of crabs, whereupon the
vrin holden now of long space, followed within an hour. Some put the grains
of Haliacacabus hole into new wine in a little vessel, that they may sieth
together, and keep it for their use.

Wine of Betain is good for the griefs of the stomach. Alexan. Benedictus,

Wine of Buglos of the rotes of Buglos stieped in wine, is maruelouslye
commended of Arnold against the diseases of Melancholy, with a story of a
certain woman healed with the drincking thereof, which through anger, became
oftentimes a fool. Wine of Buglos, wherein the rotes of Buglos well washed have been a day and a night or the syrup of it, it brings mirth and is good for
melancholical persons. Certain me^ have been cured by the use of that wine from
madness, and the Arnold, of the co^seruacion of youth, the.iii. chap. An other
wine composed with the rotes and flowers of Buglos, with Sena or without it,
shall thou read in Arnold in his book of wine, with this title. A marvelous
wine for Melancholik persons and cardiacal. etc Wine of borage is made, if in
new wine y^ flours of borage be put til the perfect fining: or else if Dia
borraginatum or conserve of Borage be dissolved in new wine, and kept for the
use: Arnoldus in his

A composition of wine against burnt humors, and for Choleric persons and
Frenticke, inducinge mirthe. Take a pound of the rotes of Buglos made clean:
Red Rooses. Flowers of Violets, Borrage and Buglos, of every a pound and a
half: Been white and read, of either an ounce. When they are beaten together
put them in a bag, and the bag in a vessel conteininge.iii. burdens of good
wine (new I suppose) fresh and newlye pressed out white and clearest that may
Arnold, of the co^seruacion of health.

Wine made with Inula. The Roots of Inula cut small as herbs to the pot,
sethe them in a new earthen pot glased in.ii. pintes or more of Inula
together with the new wine wherein they sodde, and when as yet they have sodde
a little while together, ye shall set it down from the fire and keep it.

An other way. When the new swite wine is skimmed and sodde to the
consumpcion of the put in y^ roots of Inula. (for.xxv. congies or there about,
which is about.xv. galons of our measur, take.ix. ounces:) and when the must or
new wine has yet a little boiled, take it of and when it is cold kiep it, and
hang the roots of the Inula (the very same that were separated in the
streining of the wine) in a bag within the vessel. The roots should be
gathered in October in the spring of the moon, or in the beginning of summer,
and to be dried in the sun. This did I translate out of a certain Dioscorides,
which names this wine Nectarite.

Wine Arceuthite. For.xx. congies or there about of must, take half a fourth
deell of Juniper beries (a fourth deel we call of the measure of Heluetia, but
that varieth also, the fourth part.) First thou shall straw the bottom of the
vessel with thin chipes of hewed ash, lest the beries may stop ye entrance of
the tap: then straw the half part of the beries in upon that: thirdly the
rest of the chipes, furthly

Our contrymen make wine in summer, with ye Visula, putting them hool into the
vessel, leuing the fourth part empty, pouring in upon them white old wine,
which in short space will have a reed color, and sooner if all the stalks be
cleen taken away, more slowly if they be so cut that part of them be left in,
but yet thus, they keep the color lo^gest. But they are wont when they have
drawn any wine out, to fill the vessel again by and by. It strengthens the
heart and stomach, asswageth thirst, couleth, dries, byndeth. Other put them
not in holl but

Wine of wild Plums Bulies or Sloos, is made in the like manner in heruest,
when they shall be now sufficiently tender and ripe enough.

Wine Raspoticium (dutche men call it rappis) Raspish wine, that is, which
biteth the tung with a certain sharp bi^ding, it provoke appetite byndyng the
hears of the stomach. It helps the body dissolved with heat, chiefly in
summer it is proffitable for Choleric and Sanguine persons: it is made in
this wise. Some sower grapes together with the ripe are put in the wine pres to
be pressed out together. Or yt is better, let the grapes be kept and brooken
together with Raspaciis, and put into the vessel with the Must: That Must or
new wine, by the juice of this Raspacia (Scapos French men call grappes, our
co^trymen rappen, whereupon the wine takes the name) or kirnels in the grapes
which are sower, does get a certain ponticitie or taste like wormwood and
bynding: Arnoldus de Villa Noua. In our country they make it otherwise, they
fill the wine vessels with holl clusters well rypet, and power old wyn in to
them, and as often as they draw any wine out of it, they fill it again. Sum
put in clusters and Sage leeues in course. It refreshes the stomach, asswageth
thirste. Nicolaus My repsus in the letter D. the. 85. Chapter, describes the
making of a certain Dysentericall drink with good Raspe, or pure Marathratum,
that is wine made Elelisphacatum wine, that is wyn made with Sage. Fuchsius
says, for Rhaspe, perauenture ought to be reed Rhoites or Rhodites In the
same author, the first preservative is made with good reed wine or Rhaspe: and
likewise the last preservative. I understand that to be Rapysh wine, which
always is made with Sage. etc. and reed always.

Sum put spices also to the Raspish wine, as Galangal five ounces. Cinnamon,
Cloves, of either two drammes, Zedoaria half an ounce, Coriander iii. ounces,
make sumwhat a gros powder thereof.

Wine of small raisins, which Arnold calls honied, is made siething* the
Rasins in wine (in must) till it wax swiet, which is put furthwith in to a
vessel, and the small rasins beaten are cast in to the same, which go to the
bottom into ye dregs.

But the same Arnold, describes an other also very excellent, which he calls
Passulatu or made of small Raisins, the Raisins sodde with Cinnamon Must not
much, which afterward is powered to the other Must put in the vessel already.

Of Aromaticall vvynes that is made of Spices.
ARomaticall wynes are wont to be made two ways, either hanging the spices only
in a little bag, within the vessel which is let stand in a wine celler: or also
putting Mulsum or Melitum, they call it communly Claret and Nectar and
Melicratium but improperly, with white wine. If they put to sugar for honey,
with reed wine, they call it Hippocras. There are made at the Apothecaries thies
spyced and aromatical wynes for the honey be put to.vii. drams of spices:
and.iiii. pou^des of white odoriferous wine. Or to.vi. drams of spices, half a
pound of most pure Sugar.iiii. pounds of red wine, or les: other put to much
more sugar, and spices also. Sometimes half a dram of saffron or much les is
put to, to couloure it, specially unto Mulsa, that is such as are made with
honey. But before ye wine be streined, it should be let stand in a hot place or
in a stoue with ye spices infused, certain hours.xxiiii. at the most.

Wine called Hippocras is of the kind of made wines, after an easy way:
most acceptable to the French men, specially on this side the Alps.
Cinnamon, Sugar and Carpesium are beaten and bruised in a bag, through it the
wine is poured, that in passinge through, it may drink and soke those
qualities. This is brought forth in principal feasts, with Escharite pane in
stead of banketing dishes, the which fashion, but with an other kind of wine,
we read, was peculier to the Athenians. Hermolaus Barbarus Corollarii. libr. 5.
in the chapter of the Grape of oenanthe.

An other. The inner barks of Cinnamon. vi drammes: half an ounce of white
Ginger hoole* Nutmegges elect.ii. drammes, Cloves, grains of paradise, of
either a dram: Cardamomum, Pepper, Calamus Aromaticus, Coriander prepared, of
every one a scrupull, mixte them and beat them somewhat groose. Eight pounds
of wine, clarified honye.xxvi. ounces, mixte all, and strain spiced wines with
Almond milk.

An other for Cardiacall persons, described by Alexander Benedict, in his tenth
book. Take a pint of Austere and hard wine odoriferous, white ^uger half a
pound, cinnamon, Ginger, of every one half an ounce, Galangall, a dram.

An other of the same man's for weakness of the stomach. Take Cinnamon half
an ounce, white Ginger two drammes, Cloves, long Pepper, Nutmegge, of every
one two scrupulles,

An other. Take an ounce of Cinnamon, half an ounce of Ginger: Galangal two
drams Cloves a dram: Grains of Paradise two drammes: white Sugar viii.
ounces: of the best wine. q. s.

An other. Cinnamon an ounce and a half: Ginger half an ounce: Cloves.ii.
drammes, Grames of Paradise, Galangall, of either a dram Sugar a pound and a
half: Red wine.ii. measures, (that is.viii. pounds,) mixte them, and it will
become Hippocras.

An other. An ounce of inner Cinnamone: White Ginger half an ounce, Grains of
Paradise three drammes: Clooues. Moschocaryi, of either.ii. drammes: Maces,
Galangall, of either a dram and a half, white Ginger half an o^nce, Grains
of Paradise.iii. drams: Clooues, Moschocaryi, of either two drammes, Macis,
galangall, of either a dram and a half: long Peper a dram: Spiknard, Folii,
of either half a dram, make a powder thereof. To every ounce of these put.ii.
pounds of wine, with a pound of Sugar, and Tornsoll (so called a kind of
Purple wull,) to color it. q. s.

An other that seems to be ordained for the defaultes Cardamomum, Flower
Deluce, of every a dram and a half, Sugar most white.iii. ounces, when every
one are diligently pund, let them be infused with these that follow. Take
Malmsye.ix. ounces, a pound of water of Borage, Rosewater an ounce and a half,
water of Melissa. iii. ounces after Filter bag: and it shall become clear
Hippocras.

Hippocras Laxatiue. A wine against the Quartaine, Quotidian, and bastard
Tertian, i^ concocteth and prepares the humors and leads the same by and
by out by the siege. Take a pound of Esula: Epithy mi. vi. dra^s, Polipodii,
cinamo^, small rasins, of every.iiii. dra^s, Mastik, gin. Zedoria, cloves, of
every one an once. Sugar as much as needs: Arnold.

Nectar in Arnold. For a pint of wine, take Ginger elect scraped, Cloves,
Cinnamon scraped, of every.ii. drammes, grains of Paradise, a dram. Let it be
made wine, or Grekish, which is better: and in stead of honye put Sugar, with
a gran of Musk, and it is most noble. A syrrup or Iulep is made of wine to
conserve health and youth, puttinge into.iii. pounds of good wine, two pounds
of Sugar. Let it be made a Sirup, the use whereof is with water. It may stand in
stead Arnold in the book of conseruacions of youth.

Wine made with Sugar decocted, is good for old persons, cold and feable,
and in whom the natural moisture and heat are diminished: for it norysheth,
and breeds blood, and fills the principal parts with spirits. Take the
best wine of Vernacia, or Grekish, or like unto them.iii. pou^des: a pound of
white Sugar Caffetini. Let the^ be sodde with a soft fire in manner of Syrrup,
Rabi Moysses in his book of the manner of diet for old men and such as are in
recovering their health, does approve and allow.

Of svviet vvines spiced.
OF wine made with sugar and spices it is already Mulsa or wynes made with
honey and spices. A man may in all the forsaid composicions, both in steed of
Sugar put honey, and in steed of reed wine, white: in those that follow
contrary wise. So of Hippocras wine, may thou make claret or clear: and of
clear, Hippocras. Sum make no difference of the color of the wine.

The honey ought always to be sod first with a little water and to Diosc.
Alchandicu^ is a wine sod with spices and sugar Ebenesis.

The spices of claret. Ginger, Gala^gal, of either an ounce, Cinnamon two ounces,
Cloves.ii. drams: Grains of paradis, long Peper, of either a dram, Honey a pound
and a half: Sugar.ii. pounds.

White wine.xvi. pounds. Other make it with only Honey, adding a little Spike
and nutmegges

The claret that Philip Vlstadius in his Coelo Philosophorum describes, the.
57. chapt.. the best white wine.iiii. pounds: white hard sugar iiii. ounces,
Cinnamon an ounce, Coriander prepared.iii. drams, Cloves.ii. drams, Grains of
paradis, white Ginger, of either a dram and a half, long Peper.ii. scrupuls,
Zedoaria half a dram. Al most fine bete^ and streined shall be kept in a tinnen
vessel.

A wine for them that wax old, proffitable for them that be melancholic and
phlegmatic in Hiera picra, saving that it is not bitter, and louseth not the
belly. Take Spike, Cinnamon, Carpobalsamum, Xylobalsamu^, Ginger, Gallangall,
Calamus aroma. Macis, Asarum, Myrtilla, of every one a dram, Mastick.ii. drams,
Licoris, small Arnold in his book of wine.

An other.. Ginger.ii. drams, Cinnamo^ half an ounce, Cloves a dram, whyt
wine.iii. mesures, that is.xii. pound, an ounce of honey, white Sugar

An other laxatiue.. Galangall six drames: Cinnamon an ounce, Turbit, Esula,
Pills, Hermol dactyla, of every a dram and a half. Beat it and make it claret
with honey and sugar.

An other.. Ginger.ii. ounces, cinnamon, iiii. cloves.ii. Galangal, as much,
Grains of paradis one. Every one fiuly beaten and sifted, must be mixted: Then
keep by it self an ounce of easterly saffro^ well beaten. When y^ wilt make thy
claret, make hoot over the fire.ii. pounds of honey in a new ear Hydromel, or
Apomel, yt is, drinck made of honey, as it is co^munly made, yt they may leave
their strength yt yet remains in the^, in it. This wine if it be for ye use
of any woman or delicate person, in steed of honey take sugar, out of a dutch
book written.

An other, preserving wine in time of pestilence. Take of the best wine. a
measur.iiii. pounds, half an un. of Angelica, Bole Armeniae a dra^: nutmegs ii.
dra^s, Galangal, long peper, coriander, of every

Certain composicions of Nectar of claret, out of a certain book written in
Latin, when a man would have a greater quantity thereof to be kept in his
celler in a barill or vessel of wood. Lotum, as it appears, is a name of
certain mesure of wine, in Spain perauenture.

Claret or good Nectar shall thou make in this wise. Cinnamon a pound,
Galangall, Ginger, Cardamom. Grains of Paradis, Cloves, Cubebae, Macis, of
every an ounce: Long peper, and black Schenoanthum, of every one.iii. dra^s,
Saffron a dram: Let all be beten very small and mixed. So have thou spices for
half a horse lood, yt is for one barell, (peraue^tur a. 128. pounds. The nectar
shall thou make thus. Put all the wine in the vessel, then put the spices in
sum linen cloth large enough, and let the clothe with spices into ye barill
wherein thou will make thy nectar, in such sort that the sides of the cloth may
hang over the Lignum Aloes of the best, Foliu^, and in the stead of honey put
sugar finely beaten in a mortar, then dissolved in the wine.

An other very good wine with ye same species, but in other weight. Take.xii.
ounces and a half of cinnamon, ginger, galangal, grains of paradise, cloves,
cubebae, macis, Cardamomu^, of every.ii. dra^s: long peper a scrupul:
spikenard, Schoenanthu^, nutmegs, of every a scrupul and a half: saffron to ye
weighte of a (Deranii) of Turona or a little more. Mixed al these together when
they are most small Lotu^ Nectar of the city Burgens. Then take a pound of honey
with a pint of springwater sod to the consu^pcio^ of the water, and set it aside
to cole. The^ take about a Lotum, of good wine and when the juice with the
forsaid spices is put into the vessel, streining the wine through it, pour it
in by little and little, and the honey also mixed first with a little of the wine
shall be poured in by little and little, so that the juice be not pressed together.
If so be it ye will make it more preous, Agallochum of the best Folium of
either.ii. grains, and a little Musk. Otherwise: hang the species in a bag with in
the wine mixed with honey or sugar, and after.ii. or.iii. dais take it out and
pres it well. But the former way is better and finer.

Three ways to make Nectar, whereof the first.ii. are called Gratia Dei, the
third Manus Dei, out of a written book.
TAke cinnamon.ix. drams: ginger.iiii. drams nutmegs, long Peper of either.iii.
dra^s: Gala^gal, grains of paradise, Maris or Folii, cubebae of eueri.ii.
dra^s: cloves a dra^, spiknard a hole scrupul: saffron a half: sugar a pound or
a pint of honey, yt has boiled in a little water til the water be consumed, well
skimmed. Mixed them in a Lotum and a half of wine. Some ad Cardamomum, and Carui

To the same.. Aristolochia round, cinnamo^, of either an ounce, Ginger half an
ounce, Galangall, grains of Paradise, Cloves, Cubebae, Macis, Nutmegs, of
every.ii. drams: long pepper. iii drams: spiknard a scrupul: Saffron a half,
Sugar a pound: wine a Lotum. If it be for the rich, ad Agallochum of the
best.ii. grains, and musk half a grain. Or according to other.. Cinnamon
elect.ii. ounces: Ginger one: grains of Paradise, Cubebae Cardamom of either a
dram: Spiknard, Schoenan thum, Calamus aro. of every a scrupul. When they are
pund mixed them together, with.iii. pounds of honey, and a Lotum of wine, as is
said.

A drink named Manus Dei.. Cinnamon an ounce and a half, Ginger.iii. drams:
Cardamomu^ ii. drams, Folium, Galangal, of either a dra^, spiknard, Carui, of
either half a dram: long Pepper or Cloves, Nutmegs, Maces, Grains of paradise,
of every.ii. drams, clarified honey a pint: a Burge^s Lotum of good wine. And if
thou can in stead of honey, put a pound of Sugar. If this drink be rightly
made, it shall be profitable against many diseases, specially cold, and in old
men, and them that be somewhat weak and feeble unto copulacion. It shall be
convenient for Fleumaticke and Melancholik persons meruelously, that not
without a cause it may be called Manus Dei, that is the hand Saxifrage and of
the stone called Lynx be added

Spices for Zedoartical wine.. Zedoaria, cinnamon of either half an ounce,
Galangall.ii. dra^s mixed them and make them into powder.

For the wine that is surnamed of Scapa or Rappish.. Zedoaria half an ounce:
Coriander.iii.

Otherwise, spices for Zedoartical wine, which shall be enough for a mesure of
wine that is called communlye at at Straszborovv. Cinnamone.iii. ounces, cloves,
nutmegs, grains of pa. Cardamom of every half an ounce: Zedoariae. vi. drams:
Cubebae, long Peper, of either a.ii. drams. Beat them somewhat gross, mixed them
for a bag.

For the same: cinnamon.ii. ounces: ginger half Cardamom, Cubebae, Zedoria, of
every one a dram: Galangal grains of paradise, of either a dram and a half.
When they are beaten somewhat gross mixed them for a little bag.

Of spiced vvines with burning water.
THat burning water does drink in easily all ye odor and virtue both of other
medicines and also of spices, if they stand to stiep in it a few hours, Arnold
in the descripcion of simple Aqua ardens or burning water. The confection or
making of the wine which they call commonly Hippocras. Put into (the name of the
mesure is not expressed) of burning water, destilled.iii. or.iiii. times or
more.ii. ounces of Cinnamon, Ginger half an ounce, grains of paradise, Furnerius.

A way to make Malmsy.. Galangall of the Let al thies sumwhat gross beten
stand. 24. hours in a vessel of wood well covered infused in water. Then hang
them in a linne^ cloth by a thried into a vessel of a soom as they call it,
(which is about the bigness of a hogshead) or half a Soom of clear wyn.iii.
days. And thou shall have wine so good and strong as is the very natural
Malmsy or Traminuum: A dutche written book.

A wine that tastes like Rhetish wine. In a vessel of glass or of earth
glased, hang a linen

After the some manner is the taste of Muscatello wine made: take a Nutmeg with a
little Macis: mixed them beaten as is before said.

Cloued wine. Beat half a dram of Cloves with a little Cinnamo^ and tie it in a
linen cloth, as is aforsaid. The taste of Elseter wine: bynd sugar ca^^y
vessel well stopped, and when thou will use it, wringe out a linne^ cloth dipped
in this liquor, into ye pot. All thies have we borrowed out of a dutch book
written.

Of certain other Aromatical vvynes, specially such as are made by hanging a
little bag in the vessel.
CLoued wine is made hanging the cloves in a little bag within the vessel with
must. It dries Arnold in his book of wine.

After the same manner any spyces (and medicines) both cold and dry, may be
hanged in a little bag and put Must, which we would have seasoned with their
virtues and quality: In the same place.

An aromatical wine is made to co^serue youth, if spyces be put in a linen bag
vnbeten, but cut in to parts, so that the substance of the spyces be
wandering in the little bag, and let it be put in the wine, the mouth of the
wine diligently closed. Arnoldus of the conservation of youth.

An other way of aromaticall wine, for the confirming of the temperature, and
youth. Cubebae, iii. drams, let them boyll in a little bag in.iii. pound of good
wine, till the co^sumpcion of ye third part: put to Sugar, and thereof morning
and evening give an ounce or other about at every time to drink. Or else let
it be made like claret: Arnoldus in the same place.

Saffrond wine brings mirthe, and takes away Melancholines: Arnold in his
book of conseruing youth, the.iii. chapt. The manner of making it teaches he
in the second tretise of the same book,

Of Artificial vv^nes which resem* ble the taste of strange wynes, because of
the spyoes hanged in a little bag within the vessel.
HOw diverse Aromaticall wynes be made and a counterfeit taste of certain strange
wynes with burning water and spyces, it is showed before: Here will we ad how
witty men may inuitate certain strange wines without burning water: not to
the intent coue tous men may learn disceit thereby, but that physicions may both
gratify sumtymes and proffit also the sick specially such as be sumwhat
delicate. We have taken al y^ follow out of a dutch written book.

Grekish wine is thus made. Ginger, gala^gal, of either half a pound, grains of
paradis, cloves, iii. vnc. hang the^ in a little bag in a vessel of wine of a
mean bigness, a pype. Malmsy.. moshe, Agallochu^ of either a dram: cinnamo^,
Cardamo^, (if I read right) cloves, of either.ii. dra^s: half an ounce of sugar
ca^dy.

Wine of Romania.. Succi, lycoris, cinnamo^, of either.ii. drams, anis a dram,
macis half a dram, sugar.iii. drams. Muscatello wine.. Polypodiu^, ly coris,
anis, of every one.ii. dra^s, nutmegs.iii. dra^s, calamus aromatic, one dram.
Red Muscatello shall thou make thus. The slowers of Sambucus, iiii. vnc. Must.
All such things ar thought to make ye smell of Muscatello, that do resemble
Musk in their own odor, and such things as are surnamed of Musk, as the
nutmeg, and the bark of it that is called Macis, also the flowers of Sambucus
or elder chiefly, and Coriander. Many also hang the herb called Sclar^a, in
wine, the flowers with the leeues: whose savor is vehement and not unpleasant
yet sum think it to be vnholsum, and to grieve the head. But such compositions

FINIS.

